Madden (Receiver) v Mining Standards International Pty Ltd [2025] FCAFC 142 (17 October 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Madden (Receiver) v Mining Standards
International Pty Ltd
[2025] FCAFC 142
Appeal from:
Application for leave to appeal:
Mining Standards International Pty Ltd
v Atlantic Nickel Mineracao Ltda
[2024] FCA 666
File numbers:
QUD 370 of 2024
QUD 373 of 2024
Judgment of:
BANKS-SMITH, KENNETT AND WHEATLEY
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
primary judge erred in refusing to permanently stay proceeding as an abuse of
process of the Court – whether
leave to appeal should be granted –
where proceeding overlaps in part with proceeding determined by Supreme Court of
Australia and by subsequent declaration made by Court of Appeal –
application of correctness standard and principles relevant
to stay for abuse of
process – risk of findings inconsistent with declaration – staged
litigation – leave granted
and appeal allowed
Legislation:
Evidence Act 1995
Federal Court of Australia Act
Cases cited:
Aavelaid v Dental Board of New South Wales
(Unreported, NSWCA, 16 October 1998)
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
(2000) 203 CLR 172
Aon Risk Services Australia Limited v Australian National University
[2009] HCA 27
(2009) 239 CLR 175
Arthur Andersen Corporate Finance Pty Ltd v Buzzle Operation Pty Ltd (In
[2009] NSWCA 104
Australia Bay Seafoods Pty Ltd v Northern Territory of Australia
[2022] FCAFC 180
(2022) 295 FCR 443
Baulderstone Hornibrook Engineering Pty Ltd v Gordian Runoff Ltd
[2008] NSWCA 243
Ballard v The King
[2024] VCCA 26
Braham v ACN 101 482 580 Pty Ltd
[2018] VSC 575
Champerslife Pty Ltd v Manojlovski
[2010] NSWCA 33
75 NSWLR 245
Decor Corporation Pty Ltd v Dart Industries Inc
(1991) 33 FCR 397
Fairfield Pastoral Holdings as the trustee of
the Piney Ridge Trust v Van Niekerk
[2023] FCA 1185
Fairfield Pastoral
Holdings as the trustee of the Piney Ridge Trust v Van Niekerk
[2025] FCAFC
GLJ v The Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of
[2023] HCA 32
(2023) 280 CLR 442
Henderson v Henderson
[1843] EngR 917
(1843) 67 ER 313
Henley v Bloom
[2010] EWCA Civ 202
[2010] 1 WLR 1770
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Johnson v Gore Wood & Co (a firm)
[2002] 2 AC 1
Lacey v Attorney-General of Queensland
[2011] HCA 10
(2011) 242 CLR
Lantrak Holdings Pty Ltd v Yammine
[2023] FCAFC 156
Manson v Vooght
[1998] EWCA Civ 1665
[1999] BPIR 376
Mining Standards International Pty Ltd v Atlantic Nickel Mineracao Ltda
[2024] FCA 666
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
(2018) 264 CLR 541
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia
; (2001) 205 CLR 507
Mirabela Nickel Ltd (in liquidation) (receivers and managers appointed)
v Mining Standards International Pty Ltd [No 5]
[2023] WASC 62
Mirabela Nickel Ltd (in liquidation) (receivers and managers appointed)
v Mining Standards International Pty Ltd
[2020] WASC 4
Mirabela Nickel Ltd (in liquidation) (receivers and managers appointed)
v Mining Standards International Pty Ltd
[2025] WASCA 82
National Disability Insurance Agency v Warwick
[2025] FCAFC
Northern Land Council v Quall (No 3)
[2021] FCAFC 2
Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR
Re Mirabela Nickel Ltd (receivers and managers appointed) (in liq); Ex
Parte Madden
[2018] WASC 335
Robinson v Deep Investments Pty Ltd
[2018] FCAFC 232
Snowy Mountains Organic Dairy Products Pty Ltd v Wholefoods Pty Ltd
[2008] VSC 405
Solak v Registrar of Titles
[2011] VSCA 279
Stuart v Goldberg Linde (a firm)
[2008] EWHC 2325
[2008] 1 WLR 823
Timbercorp Finance Pty Ltd (in liq) v Collins
[2016] HCA 44
259 CLR 212
Tomlinson v Ramsey Food Processing Pty Limited
[2015] HCA 28
(2015) 256 CLR 507
UBS AG v Tyne
[2018] HCA 45
(2018) 265 CLR 77
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR 531
Wong v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCAFC 242
General Division
National Practice Area:
Commercial and Corporations
Commercial Contracts, Banking, Finance and Insurance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submissions:
27 June and 9 July 2025 (applicants)
4 July 2025 (respondent)
Date of hearing:
24-25 March 2025
For QUD 370 of 2024:
Counsel for the Applicants:
Mr SK Dharmananda SC with Mr SCM Wong
and Mr A Hanna
Solicitor for the Applicants:
Clayton Utz
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr M Stewart KC with Mr M Doyle and Mr T Jackson
Solicitor for the Respondent:
For QUD 373 of 2024:
Counsel for the Applicants:
Mr PW Collinson KC with Mr M Hickey KC
Solicitor for the Applicants:
King & Wood Mallesons
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr M Stewart KC with Mr M Doyle and Mr T Jackson
Solicitor for the Respondent:
QUD 370 of 2024
MARTIN MADDEN, SCOTT DAVID HARRY LANGDON AND
RICHARD SCOTT TUCKER AS JOINT AND SEVERAL RECEIVERS MIRABELA NICKEL LTD (IN
LIQUIDATION)
(RECEIVERS AND MANAGERS APPOINTED)
MARTIN MADDEN, SCOTT DAVID HARRY LANGDON AND RICHARD SCOTT
TUCKER AS JOINT AND SEVERAL RECEIVERS MIRABELA INVESTMENTS PTY LTD
LIQUIDATION) (RECEIVERS AND MANAGERS APPOINTED)
MINING STANDARDS INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD
609 749 635)
BANKS-SMITH, KENNETT AND WHEATLEY JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
applicants be granted leave to appeal from orders 1 and 2 of the orders of the
primary judge made 24 June 2024.
appeal be allowed.
1 and 2 of the orders of the primary judge be set aside and in lieu it be
ordered that the proceeding be permanently stayed.
respondent pay the applicants' costs of the application for leave to appeal and
the appeal.
party seeking to be heard on an alternative order to that in order 4 is to file
and serve written submissions not exceeding five
pages within seven days of the
date of these orders.
submissions are filed and served pursuant to order 5, the other parties may file
reply submissions not exceeding five pages within
seven days of being served
with such submissions.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
QUD 373 of 2024
ATLANTIC NICKEL MINERACAO LTDA
(CNPJ 74.127.010/0001-29)
MINING STANDARDS INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD (ACN 609 749
ORDER MADE BY:
BANKS-SMITH, KENNETT AND WHEATLEY JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
applicant be granted leave to appeal from orders 1 and 2 of the orders of the
primary judge made 24 June 2024.
appeal be allowed.
1 and 2 of the orders of the primary judge be set aside and in lieu it be
ordered that the proceeding be permanently stayed.
respondent pay the applicant's costs of the application for leave to appeal and
the appeal.
party seeking to be heard on an alternative order to that in order 4 is to file
and serve written submissions not exceeding five
pages within seven days of the
date of these orders.
submissions are filed and served pursuant to order 5, the other party may file
reply submissions not exceeding five pages within
seven days of being served
with such submissions.
Note: Entry of orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
appeal raises for consideration the question of whether a proceeding commenced
in this Court arising from a terminated
Sale Agreement
permanently stayed as an abuse of the process of the Court, having regard to
litigation about the termination which has
already proceeded to judgment (at
first instance and on appeal) in the Supreme Court of Western Australia.
primary judge refused an application to stay the proceeding in this Court. The
applicants seek leave to appeal from that interlocutory
decision and seek orders
on the appeal to the effect that the proceeding be stayed.
as will become apparent, the procedural and factual background to this matter is
somewhat complex, the issue on the appeal
distils to whether the current
proceeding in this Court is an abuse of process and should be stayed having
(a) whether the current proceeding gives rise to a risk of inconsistent findings
with the decision of another court;
(b) whether the current proceeding is in effect an attempt by the respondent to
relitigate matters about the termination upon which
it has failed;
(c) whether the respondent, having chosen not to prosecute certain claims in the
Supreme Court about the termination, may nevertheless
raise them directly or
indirectly in the subsequent Federal Court proceeding; and
(d) whether the respondent may fairly decide when and which claims to pursue or
preserve, based on its own forensic position, including
its financial capacity
and litigation funding arrangements.
summary, on 3 March 2023 Hill J in the Supreme Court proceeding found that the
termination of the Sale Agreement by
termination notice
22 November 2017 was invalid:
Mirabela Nickel Ltd (in liquidation)
(receivers and managers appointed) v Mining Standards International Pty Ltd [No
[2023] WASC 62
Mirabela Trial
). An appeal from
her Honour's orders was heard by the Court of Appeal (on 16 and 17 May
2024), but the outcome remained reserved
at the time judgment on the stay
application was delivered by the primary judge in this Court (24 June 2024)
and at the time of the
hearing of this appeal (24 and 25 March 2025).
30 May 2025 the Court of Appeal delivered its judgment, allowing (in part) an
appeal from the judgment of Hill J:
Mirabela Nickel Ltd (in liquidation)
(receivers and managers appointed) v Mining Standards International Pty Ltd
[2025] WASCA 82
Mirabela Appeal
). Relevantly, it declared that
the Sale Agreement was validly terminated by the termination notice
declaration
extent to which this declaration, made after the decision of the primary judge,
is to be taken into account directs attention
to the nature of the leave
application and appeal.
Nature of the appeal
the decision is interlocutory, leave to appeal is required:
Holdings Pty Ltd v Yammine
[2023] FCAFC 156
, [95]-[107].
Leave will be given if the decision is attended with sufficient doubt to warrant
it being reconsidered by the Full
Court, and where substantial injustice would
result if leave were refused, supposing the decision to be wrong:
Corporation Pty Ltd v Dart Industries Inc
[1991] FCA 844
(1991) 33 FCR 397
at 398-400 (Sheppard, Burchett and Heerey JJ).
leave is granted, the nature of an appeal brought under
Federal Court of Australia Act
(Cth) is a rehearing:
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia
[2001] HCA 17
; (2001) 205
CLR 507; and
Australia Bay Seafoods Pty Ltd v Northern Territory of
[2022] FCAFC 180
(2022) 295 FCR 443
Charlesworth and O'Bryan JJ).
court entertaining an appeal by way of rehearing can exercise its appellate
part of the primary judge:
Lacey v Attorney-General of Queensland
[2011] HCA 10
(2011) 242 CLR 573
(French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ);
National Disability Insurance Agency v
[2025] FCAFC
(Colvin, Jackson and Stellios JJ).
in contrast to an appeal in the strict sense, in the case of an appeal by
rehearing an appellate court can substitute its
own decision based on the facts
and the law as they then stand:
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
203 CLR 172
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
caution is required in considering this statement of principle, as discussed in
at [101]‑[116].
was concerned with the
question of whether error was established or required where the primary judge
had correctly applied the legislative
provision in force at the time of
judgment, but prior to the appeal the provision had been amended such that, had
it been applied,
a different result would have ensued. Having determined that
the amended legislation was not intended to operate retrospectively,
no error on
the part of the primary judge was established. Accordingly, the pre-condition
to disturbing the orders below was not
met: at [112].
to a subsequent change in facts or new evidence, the Court has power under
s 27 of the
Federal Court Act
to receive further evidence, subject
to certain well-known constraints, such as its relevance to the outcome and
whether it is evidence
that could have been adduced at the time of the trial.
The power is remedial and its primary purpose 'is to empower the Court to
receive further evidence to ensure that proceedings do not miscarry':
Northern Land Council v Quall (No 3)
[2021] FCAFC 2
(Griffiths and White JJ).
standard of appellate review in respect of a decision whether to permanently
stay a proceeding is the 'correctness standard' explained
[1979] HCA 9
(1970) 142 CLR 531
at 552, rather than the
standard which applies to a decision involving an exercise of discretion
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
at 505). So much was confirmed in
GLJ v The Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of
[2023] HCA 32
(2023) 280 CLR 442
Ballard v The King
[2024] VCCA 26 at [46]. That is, the appellate court is required to decide
the case for itself, recognising any advantages enjoyed
by the primary judge.
If the appellate court considers the decision of the primary judge was wrong,
'they must discharge their duty
and give effect to their own judgment'
Warren v Coombes
The subsequent Court of Appeal declaration
regard to those principles, a question is the manner in which the declaration is
to be treated on this appeal. The parties
filed supplementary submissions in
which it was assumed we would take the declaration into account.
consider that is the appropriate course. The effect of the declaration is that
(subject to any further appeal) the Court of Appeal
declared the rights of the
parties as at the date the termination notice was issued. It does not effect a
change in the legal position.
The declaration is a circumstance we would take
into account, having regard to the scope and purpose of s 27 of the
Federal Court Act
, in order to determine to the correctness standard
whether there was error on the part of the primary judge.
declaration by the Court of Appeal is not sufficient in itself to establish
legal error on the part of the primary judge, because
the position as determined
by Hill J was not treated by the primary judge as something set in stone or
necessarily correct. His
Honour was aware of the appeal and had regard to the
consequences that might flow from the appeal succeeding. However, the
declaration
constitutes the realisation of the risk of inconsistent judgments
which confirms that such risk was a matter of great significance
in the context
of whether the proceeding in this Court constitutes an abuse of process.
and while we acknowledge the constraints of
Evidence Act
(Cth), in that a decision of Hill J or the Court of Appeal is not
admissible to prove the existence of facts in issue in that proceeding,
declaration is a matter the Court must appropriately take into account in
considering the abuse of process contentions that are
central to this
Nickel Mineração Ltda (
Atlantic Nickel
) is a Brazilian
mining company (Atlantic Nickel was previously identified as MMB in the various
proceedings, but we will use its
current name). Two Australian companies,
Mirabela Nickel Ltd and Mirabela Investments Pty Ltd (
shares (known as quotas) in Atlantic Nickel. On 28 October 2015 Mr Martin
Madden, Mr Scott Langdon and Mr Richard Tucker
were appointed as
receivers and managers of the property of the Sellers (
including the quotas and certain loans owed by Atlantic Nickel, and as agents of
the Sellers.
1 November 2017 the Sellers and the Receivers entered into the Sale Agreement
with Mining Standards International Pty Ltd (
) under which MSI was to
purchase the quotas and loans for an amount of USD50 million.
Sale Agreement provided that failing satisfaction of a condition precedent, a
party who had complied with its obligations to provide
all reasonable assistance
requested by the buyer to satisfy the conditions precedent was entitled to
terminate the Sale Agreement.
Relevantly,
a finance condition precedent was not satisfied by 5.00 pm AWST on 22
November 2017. Late in the evening of 22 November
2017 the Sellers and
Receivers sent the termination notice to MSI, purporting to terminate the Sale
disputed that it was obliged to satisfy the finance condition precedent by 22
November 2017 and so disputed the validity of the
termination notice. It
contended that the Sale Agreement remained on foot.
27 November 2017 the Sellers entered into a contract to sell the quotas and
loans to a third party, known as
Capital Advisory LLP. That sale
was completed in July 2018.
since proceeded on a number of fronts.
Five relevant proceedings ensue
on 3 August 2018 the Receivers sought directions in the Western Australian
Supreme Court under
Corporations Act
justified in defending proceedings that MSI had
threatened to bring against the
Sellers and the Receivers (
WA Directions Proceeding
). Directions were
made by Vaughan J, largely as sought, on 5 November 2018:
Mirabela Nickel Ltd
(receivers and managers appointed) (in liq); Ex
Parte Madden
[2018] WASC 335.
on 23 October 2018 MSI commenced proceedings in the WA Supreme Court seeking
leave for the proposed service overseas of a
draft writ and statement of claim
Draft Writ Proceeding
). The Draft Writ Proceeding named Atlantic
Nickel, the Sellers, the Receivers, Appian and others as defendants. On 8
November 2018
orders were made by Master Sanderson granting MSI leave as
requested, but as it transpired the writ and statement of claim were not
on 8 May 2019 the Receivers and Sellers instituted a substantive proceeding in
the WA Supreme Court seeking a declaration that
the Sale Agreement had been
validly terminated (
WA Proceeding
). This proceeding confronted the
dispute as to the lawfulness of the termination of the Sale Agreement.
trial of the WA Proceeding was conducted over five days in December 2020 by
Hill J and, as noted, judgment (
Mirabela Trial
) was delivered on 3 March
2023. In short, her Honour found that the Sale Agreement was entered into
on 10 November 2017 when executed
by the last party (Atlantic Nickel); the
finance condition period expired 14 days later on 24 November 2017; there was no
agreement varying the time for compliance to 22 November 2017; and the
termination notice dated 22 November 2017 was therefore invalid.
on 1 November 2021 and while Hill J's decision remained reserved, MSI commenced
proceedings in this Court against Atlantic
Nickel alleging breach of contract
and unconscionable conduct in relation to the performance of the Sale Agreement
Federal Court Proceeding
). Atlantic Nickel joined the Receivers in the
Federal Court Proceeding by cross‑claim, seeking compensation, an
and contribution.
the appeal from her Honour's decision was heard by the Court of Appeal in May
2024, with judgment (
Mirabela Appeal
) delivered on 30 May 2025. As
noted, the Receivers' appeal was allowed in part. The Court of Appeal declared
that the notice of
termination validly terminated the Sale Agreement as between
the Sellers and MSI. Those parties had agreed to modify the time for
to 22 November 2017 and were bound by the agreement. The fact that Atlantic
Nickel was a party to the Sale Agreement
but not the variation agreement did not
affect that outcome. The Court of Appeal observed that it had not been
contended at trial
that the exercise of the right to terminate was precluded
because of any failure to comply with the obligations to provide reasonable
assistance (
Mirabela Appeal
at [262]). The significance of this
will become apparent.
The stay applications in this Court
Nickel brought its application to stay the Federal Court Proceeding on the basis
that it is an abuse of process, having regard
to the matters the subject of the
WA Proceeding. The Receivers as cross-respondents similarly brought a stay
application. The parties
rely generally on the principles in
UBS AG v Tyne
[2018] HCA 45
(2018) 265 CLR 77
Federal Court Proceeding is docketed to the primary judge.
24 June 2024 his Honour dismissed the stay applications:
Mining Standards
International Pty Ltd v Atlantic Nickel Mineracao Ltda (No 2)
[2024] FCA 666
these applications, the Receivers (as receivers of the Sellers) (QUD 370 of
2024) and Atlantic Nickel (QUD 373 of 2024) seek leave
to appeal from the orders
dismissing their stay applications. The applications for leave to appeal and
the appeals were heard together.
we were informed that the parties to the Federal Court Proceeding are otherwise
proceeding on the basis that there will
be a trial, which is provisionally
listed for hearing in 2026. The primary judge refused an application for a stay
pending appeal.
Key terms of the Sale Agreement
is convenient to turn to the key terms of the Sale Agreement before addressing
the evidence of the relevant events.
is defined in the Sale Agreement as the 'Buyer'. Mirabela Nickel Ltd and
Mirabela Investments Pty Ltd together are defined as
the 'Sellers'. The
Receivers were a party to the Sale Agreement. Atlantic Nickel executed the Sale
Agreement some days after it
was executed by the other parties, but the fact
that Atlantic Nickel was a 'party' within the meaning of the Sale Agreement
to have been accepted (as acknowledged in
Mirabela Appeal
at [87]). References to 'Bradesco' are to a financier/lender to Atlantic
following are key clauses of the Sale Agreement:
2.1 Conditions Precedent
Unless waived by the Buyer in its absolute discretion and in writing, the
transfer of the Assets from the Sellers to the Buyer and
the provision of the
Consideration (excluding the Deposit) are subject to and conditional on the
following conditions being satisfied:
(f) execution of binding finance agreements by the Buyer for an amount equal to
the Consideration [USD50million] and satisfaction
of all conditions precedent
under the finance agreement other than obtaining the Consent and Completion
occurring under this agreement.
2.2 Reasonable endeavours to satisfy Conditions Precedent
(a) Each party must use all reasonable endeavours to ensure that each Condition
Precedent is satisfied as soon as practicable after
the date of this agreement
and in any event before the End Date.
(b) Without limiting clause 2.2(a), the Sellers and the Company must provide all
reasonable assistance requested by the Buyer to
satisfy the Conditions Precedent
or otherwise achieve Completion, including:
(i) providing all reasonable access to the business and employees of the company
during normal business hours; and
(ii) facilitating access by the Buyer to Bradesco.
2.5 Termination
A party is entitled to terminate this agreement by notice to the other parties
if it has complied with its obligations under clause
(a) the Condition Precedent is clause 2.1(f) is not satisfied by the date which
is 14 days after the date of the exchange of signed
copies of this
(b) at any time before the End Date a Condition Precedent (other than in clause
2.1(f)) has become incapable of satisfaction prior
to the End Date; or
(c) at any time on and from the End Date a Condition Precedent (other than in
clause 2.1(f)) has not been satisfied or waived before
the End Date.
is apparent, two conditions applied before a party was entitled to terminate by
notice to the other parties.
the party had to have complied with its reasonable endeavours obligation under
cl 2.2. This is central to the so-called
cl 2.2 defence
discussed further below, initially asserted by MSI but abandoned in the
WA Proceeding, and now reagitated in the Federal Court Proceeding.
cl 2.5(a) provided that the entitlement to terminate arose if the finance
condition precedent in cl 2.1(f) had not been satisfied
by the date which
is '14 days after the date of the exchange of signed copies of' the
were other pre-completion obligations, such as cl 2.6, which required the
Sellers to use reasonable endeavours to ensure that
Atlantic Nickel conducted
its business materially in the ordinary course. Clause 2.6(c) also imposed
obligations on Atlantic Nickel:
2.6 Carrying on of business
(c) Between the date of this agreement and the earlier of Completion and
termination of this agreement the Sellers and the Company
must not, and must
procure that any employees of the Company do not:
(i) provide information regarding the Assets to any potential purchaser of the
Assets other than the Buyer; or
(ii) solicit any offers for the Assets from any person other than the Buyer.
Receivers had the benefit of cl 9.1 of the Sale Agreement. Clause 9
provided exclusions and acknowledgements including a 'no
liability' clause in
relation to the Receivers. In particular MSI released the Receivers personally
from all claims arising out
of or in connection with or flowing from or related
to the Sale Agreement (cl 9.1(b)(i)); and MSI provided a corresponding
not to sue the Receivers personally (cl 9.1(b)(ii)).
the primary judge canvassed the facts and history in his reasons, in order to
evaluate the grounds of appeal it is necessary
to record some of the events and
evidence relevant to them.
The initial protest by MSI, the threatened MSI proceedings
and the first request for security
noted, the Sale Agreement was entered into on 1 November 2017. When the finance
condition precedent was not satisfied, on 22 November
2017 the Sellers and
Receivers sent the termination notice (signed by Mr Tucker).
24 November 2017 MSI (by Mr Walter Milbourne, the 'director and controlling
mind of MSI' (PJ [13])) informed the Receivers that
it alleged cl 2.2(b) of
the Sale Agreement had been breached in that reasonable assistance was not
provided, invalidating the purported
termination. Further allegations of
objectionable conduct and failure to cooperate were included in correspondence
from Russells
(MSI's solicitors) to Clayton Utz (the Receivers' solicitors)
dated 1 December 2017. That correspondence included the statement
MSI has instructed us to institute proceedings for specific performance and the
necessary injunctive relief.
Utz responded on 4 December 2017, relevantly stating that:
Should your client take any action, whether injunctive or otherwise, it will
need to provide immediate security for costs and provide
the usual undertakings
and security as to damages. I will provide you with an analysis of costs in due
December 2017 and July 2018, correspondence continued between Russells and
Clayton Utz. Russells maintained the Sale Agreement
remained on foot, continued
to assert breaches of the obligations in cl 2.2, said that MSI would
shortly issue proceedings for specific
performance in the WA Supreme Court
against the Receivers, the Sellers and Atlantic Nickel, and that Senior Counsel
had been retained.
It said MSI reserved its rights to sue for loss and damage.
Russells also informed Appian of MSI's position.
27 July 2018 Clayton Utz confirmed completion of the sale to Appian. It asked
when MSI would be instituting the anticipated proceedings.
Clayton Utz also
said that it had instructions to commence proceedings if no response was
received within 72 hours.
3 August 2018 the Receivers commenced the WA Directions Proceeding.
The funding position leading up to the WA Directions
Proceeding and the Draft Writ Proceeding
is apparent that by that time MSI had been seeking litigation funding. On 19
December 2017 a funder known as LCM Finance informed
MSI by email to
Mr Milbourne that it had discussed MSI's application 'again' and its
funding application would not be progressed
any further.
4 May 2018 and 16 May 2018, MSI by Mr Milbourne followed up on a funding
request made to
Funding. Mr Milbourne told Ironbank he had
an offer on the table, and Ironbank said that it was 'unlikely to get this one
line'. Mr Milbourne responded by saying he had 'signed earlier
this week' elsewhere when he had not heard back.
Correspondence
Litigation Funding suggests that offers of funding were made
in November 2017 and December 2017 but not progressed, and a further
made on 11 May 2018 for a 'merits review' and pursuit of a claim against
the Sellers and others. However, on 13 July 2018,
Harbour informed MSI that its
investment committee would not support reconsideration of MSI's case.
31 July 2018, Mr Stephen Russell (of Russells) spoke to a representative of
a funder known as
Capital. It is apparent that Vannin had been
provided with a copy of an opinion from senior counsel in support of funding but
work was to be done. Funding was not obtained from Vannin.
is also apparent that Mr Milbourne had approached a funder known as
Litigation Funding. By email dated 25 September 2018,
Woodsford said it was reviewing the papers, but referred to the 'proposed
of defendants' and indicated reservations about adverse costs exposure. It
seems that Woodsford did not agree to provide
summary, as at November 2018, when orders were made in both the WA Directions
Proceeding and the Draft Writ Proceeding, MSI had
sought funding for the
proceedings it anticipated it may bring against the Sellers, the Receivers and
others, but it had not secured
any funding.
The scope of MSI's claims the subject of the Draft Writ
the WA Directions Proceeding, Vaughan J recorded in his reasons (
Re Mirabela
at [57]‑[58], published on 5 November 2018) that MSI
had threatened proceedings against the Receivers, the Sellers and others.
Honour noted that shortly prior to the hearing of the Receivers' application for
directions, MSI had commenced the Draft Writ
Proceeding which was listed before
Master Sanderson, seeking leave to serve the proceeding overseas. MSI provided
Vaughan J with
a copy of the draft writ and statement of claim the subject of
its application before Master Sanderson. The draft statement of claim
Atlantic Nickel and the Receivers as proposed defendants.
Vaughan outlined in
Re Mirabela Nickel Ltd
at [68] what he saw as the
substantive issues likely to arise from MSI's threatened litigation, including
whether the Sellers were
precluded from terminating the Sale Agreement under
cl 2.5 because they had not complied with their obligation to use
endeavours to ensure satisfaction of the finance condition precedent
in accordance with cl 2.2.
Honour made orders under
Corporations Act
permitted the Receivers to distribute funds from the Appian sale, despite the
MSI claims and the Draft Writ Proceeding. An order
was also made to the effect
that the Receivers were justified in defending, and causing the Sellers to
defend, the proceedings 'to
be commenced' by MSI as set out in the draft writ:
Re Mirabela Nickel Ltd
scope of the relief claimed by MSI at that point included a declaration that the
Sale Agreement remained on foot, an injunction
preventing completion of the sale
to Appian and damages. Loss and damage were said to result from breaches of the
Sale Agreement,
being breaches of cl 2.2, the wrongful and premature
purported termination of the Sale Agreement by issuing the termination notice,
and the continuing refusal to cooperate with MSI to bring the Sale Agreement to
completion. It was pleaded that the Receivers had
induced the breaches of the
Sale Agreement by the Sellers. In the alternative to declaratory relief and
injunctions, MSI sought
exemplary damages for breach of the Sale Agreement.
the status of MSI's purported claims as at 5 November 2018 and its
knowledge of the arguments it might raise against the
Sellers, the Receivers and
Atlantic Nickel were reflected in (at least) the draft writ and statement of
claim provided to both Vaughan
J and Master Sanderson. Master Sanderson's
orders in the Draft Writ Proceeding were made only a few days later, on
8 November 2018.
The funding position between the November 2018 orders and
the commencement of the WA Proceeding (May 2019)
8 November 2018 Clayton Utz wrote to Russells. It referred to the 'imminent'
service by MSI of the writ, having regard to the
orders of Master Sanderson;
said that its clients would require 'substantial' security for costs; that
public searches of MSI had
been unable to identify assets in Australia; and
requested, on the assumption that no litigation funding had been obtained,
information
as to how MSI proposed to fund the litigation.
19 November 2018, a representative sent an email to MSI regarding litigation
funding from 'Therium'. The writer expressed concern
with moving forward,
indicating MSI's case 'will be viewed as a difficult one from a funder's
perspective'.
six months passed, and the writ was not served. MSI had not secured litigation
funding before the WA Proceeding was commenced.
The funding position after commencement of the
WA Proceeding
Receivers and Sellers commenced the WA Proceeding on 8 May 2019 seeking a
declaration that the Sale Agreement had been validly
terminated.
Capital rejected a funding application made by MSI on
the basis that Burford's Investment Committee was unlikely to approve the matter
for funding on the terms proposed. The refusal email said (emphasis
MSI currently seeks funding for its defence of a matter pending in Western
and then the prosecution of a potential subsequent claim (by
separate action)
based upon potential asserted upside from the subsequent
action (that MSI may or may not bring) ...
For the reasons noted above, we do not expect that Burford's Investment
Committee would approve this proposed matter for funding
on the terms as
currently proposed. Wishing you all the best with your case.
appears to be the first evidence that MSI was seeking litigation funding to
pursue the WA Proceeding and 'a potential subsequent
4 June 2019 the Receivers and Sellers filed their statement of claim in the
WA Proceeding.
12 June 2019 MSI secured limited litigation funding for the 'Proceeding' from
Balance REV
Ltd in the sum of $412,000 for fees and disbursements, plus
GST, reflected in a 'Litigation Funding Agreement'.
'Proceeding' was defined as CIV1806 of 2019 (being the WA Proceeding),
including any appeal.
terms of the funding agreement included an exclusive option to fund 'Further
Proceedings', defined to mean:
any further proceedings (except for the Proceedings), threatened proceedings or
dispute resolution process in connection with the
funding agreement defined 'Claim' to mean:
the claim or claims which MSI, RM [Mr Milbourne], or any entity or
individual related to MSI or RM, may have against all or any of
the Adverse
Parties or any other party in connection with Mirabela Nickel Limited and/or the
Santa Rita mine in Brazil, including
any claims asserted by MSI (or RM) in the
Proceedings.
'Adverse Parties' included the Receivers and the Sellers.
the funding agreement, MSI was not permitted to settle the WA Proceeding without
the consent of Balance REV. Further, any 'Claim
Proceeds', which included any
settlement proceeds, were to be paid into trust and distributed in accordance
with a 'priorities agreement'.
Balance REV had a stake in the Claim Proceeds
(funder shares set out in Schedule 2).
option referred to in [71] above provided that Balance REV would evaluate the
suitability of funding 'Further Proceedings' within
120 days after the
WA Proceeding had resolved and provide MSI with notice if further funding
would not be provided.
accordance with a procedural requirement of disclosure, the existence of
litigation funding was disclosed to the Supreme Court
and the parties to the
WA Proceeding on 13 June 2019.
MSI defence pleads breaches of cl 2.2 of the Sale
3 July 2019 MSI filed its defence to the statement of claim in the
WA Proceeding. It made a positive plea in its defence that
the termination
notice was invalid. It pleaded that it was issued before the expiration of
the time limit required by cl 2.5(a).
It also pleaded the cl 2.2
defence; that is, that the notice was of no effect because the Sellers and
Receivers failed to comply
with their reasonable endeavours obligation under
cl 2.2 of the Sale Agreement. It also asserted breaches of cl 2.6(c)
and unconscionable
or inequitable conduct by the Sellers.
Queries raised about overlap between draft writ and
did not file or serve the draft writ and statement of claim the subject of the
Draft Writ Proceeding despite the orders obtained
from Master Sanderson. The
potential remained for it to be served. Clayton Utz obtained access to the
draft documents via application
to the Supreme Court.
15 October 2019 Clayton Utz raised the content of the draft writ with Russells,
asking whether the matters raised in the draft
writ should be included in the
WA Proceeding, and asking for confirmation that MSI accepted that if the
Receivers obtained the relief
they sought, MSI would be estopped from bringing
the claims or similar claims contemplated by the draft writ, or it would be
from seeking to re-agitate matters relating to the validity of
termination of the Sale Agreement, by reason that it would be an abuse
process to raise any defence or matters which ought properly to have been raised
in the WA Proceeding in a subsequent proceeding.
replied on 23 October 2019, stating that the WA Proceeding 'present[s] a
valuable opportunity to have confined and important
issues determined quickly
and efficiently by the Court' and that 'the position of the parties will be
substantially clarified by
a determination of those issues and its speedy
determination is likely to advance the resolution of the dispute which exists
the parties'. Russells stated that with those matters in mind, MSI did
not intend to issue a counterclaim in the WA Proceeding and
it rejected and
'declined otherwise' to 'debate the propositions' put by Clayton Utz.
above exchange of correspondence came shortly before a pre-trial strategic
conference, listed before Hill J on 31 October 2019.
The strategic conference
the time of the strategic conference, by virtue of MSI's defence, both the
cl 2.2 reasonable endeavours obligation on the part
of the Receivers and
Sellers and the cl 2.5(a) finance condition remained in issue on the
pleadings and relevant to the validity
of the purported termination, despite the
absence of any counterclaim by MSI.
primary judge set out in detail at PJ [59]-[66] the nature of the respective
submissions made by counsel at the strategic conference
and it is not necessary
to repeat them in full. Of particular importance is the airing of the
impact of MSI's decision not to file
a counterclaim and the risk of later legal
action against the Receivers.
parties exchanged position papers in advance of the strategic conference. In
their position paper the Receivers referred to MSI's
unserved writ and statement
of claim and raised the overlap in the respective proceedings (emphasis
There is a substantial overlap of factual and legal issues between this
proceeding and the foreshadowed proceeding. Any argument
with respect to Anshun
estoppel could only be advanced after considering the judgment delivered in this
proceeding.
Even if judgment is delivered in the Receivers favour in this
proceeding, the Receivers would remain in the situation where they face
potential litigation either in the form of a proceeding concerning Anshun
estoppel or being joined in litigation between MSI and
other parties not joined
to this proceeding. The practical utility in proceeding with this litigation as
currently framed is substantially
diminished.
The Receivers' intent in
seeing an end to the disputation will not be realised in such circumstances.
[W]hat matters for present purposes is that MSI holds a continuing intention to
claim against a wider community of parties than are
presently joined to these
proceedings.
The Receivers are giving active consideration to what may be done in the
circumstances. These include...seeking orders in proceedings
in line with those
Tyne (Trustee of the Argot Trust) v UBS AG
[2019] FCA 628.
position paper did not respond to this, other than to state that the trial would
involve little dispute on the primary facts
and that the case would turn on the
interpretation to be placed on 'largely uncontroversial facts and
documents'.
followed that at the strategic conference, attention turned to a 'trial on
liability'. Senior counsel for MSI (Mr Zappia KC) proceeded
on the basis
that the trial would concern only the issue of whether the Receivers and Sellers
had validly terminated the Sale Agreement.
The Receivers submitted they may
seek to amend the statement of claim in order to 'bring in' other matters in the
absence of a counterclaim.
this context, her Honour referred to the frequently acknowledged risks of split
trials on liability and damages, and the following
exchange with Mr Zappia
proceeded (emphasis added):
This proceeding effectively will determine the issue
of liability and for that reason the utility is evident, and it's evident for
this reason: if we are successful on liability – that is, if we are able
to resist the declaration and your Honour makes findings
that the termination
was not valid, that will leave only the question of relief to be
determined.
It might leave a question of damages. In which case, presumably the receivers
probably don't become involved, because it might be
said that they weren't the
party that was obliged to provide the asset.
: Except in those circumstances if damages were sought –
I mean, even if it wasn't – even if you didn't bring the receivers
managers in, it's almost impossible to imagine that those who appointed the
receivers and managers wouldn't join them as a third
: Your Honour, we accept –
we accept that the
issue in this proceeding is one of liability and what is effectively occurring
is that there is a trial on liability
and it is of great utility because if we
fail on the question that has been raised – let's assume that your Honour
find that the termination was valid, then that is the end of our ability
to claim any relief and the court will not need to go into
that complexity
and we will not need to deal with other parties potentially not involved in this
litigation. So that is ...
: But generally speaking, I mean, in those circumstances,
where there is [a trial] on liability ahead of damages ...
Her Honour:
...that's as a result of all issues being before the court
and at that stage an application for an either preliminary issue or some
application being brought and it being accepted that it's ...
: ...appropriate to split liability from relief, taking into
account all of the comments that are made by Appeal Courts as to the
courts at first instance seeking to split liability and damage.
There is a question as to if that is still agitated, as to whether that should
either – and part of this will depend on the
question as to the identity
of the respective parties as to whether it's something that should be brought
within these proceedings,
if there is a present intention to commence
proceedings, that those proceedings should be commenced and then listed and
managed together
so that if findings are required to be made that affect both
proceedings, that they are dealt with.
And that is certainly a usual part of the appropriate case management and so
there is that question that I think it's not necessarily
a complete answer to
say, well, look, you know, we need to deal with the proceedings that have been
commenced, because part of this
is the intention, you know, and the desire of
this court and all courts to – that if there are proceedings commenced
parties that deal with an issue,
will the determination of those
proceedings bring the issue to an end, rather than it simply being, you know,
act 1 of a multi-part
production.
: All sorts of things, but in terms of any prejudice that
might be suffered by not bringing this – by not bringing all matters
before the court now, if we were successful,
we are the ones that are going
to suffer the prejudice. This is the point that your Honour made right at the
outset. If we were
then to subsequently bring a proceeding, a party would have
the right to come along and say, 'That is an abuse, because you ought
sought that relief and brought – and ventilated those issues at the first
hearing.' So we are the only party that would
suffer prejudice in that regard
and we would have reasons for saying no, there is no abuse here. It was
perfectly appropriate for
the court to determine the issue of liability, because
if it was decided against us, then the court wouldn't have to expend resources
and the parties wouldn't have to expend resources on the more complex issues of
And so we see great utility in that and - - -.
: But that might be if all of the issues were in the
proceedings and then a decision was made that liability would be determined
first. You know, one – I mean, it's slightly simplistic to say –
certainly as far as, you know, questions of issue estoppel,
I accept that that
is a matter that falls entirely on your side of the table.
: But the other thing the court has to take into account in
circumstances where the plaintiffs are receivers and managers are the
of creditors of the company, and so it's not what might otherwise – if
this was a company that wasn't in external
administration and it is simply two
companies against each other, then that may have a greater weight to say, look,
the parties have
chosen to do this, but in these circumstances there are
interests of third parties. I accept not parties to these proceedings, but
whose interests are impacted if these proceedings or the issues aren't dealt
with in a final fashion.
: ...The alternative [is] to enlarge the proceeding in
relation to matters which we don't know about yet. We don't have even a draft
amended statement of claim and it will fall into a big black hole almost
It won't be litigated for some time, more expensive and the parties and the
court which has managed the proceeding, if I may say
so with great efficiency to
date, will have lost a golden opportunity, a golden opportunity to resolve a
critical matter
that will either resolve the proceeding once and for all
or will almost certainly assist in a resolution or a potential resolution of
it outside of court and the court will have lost that
golden opportunity,
because we don't know what is planned by the amendments.
And the third matter that I – so there is great benefit to the receivers
having a trial on liability in December on this issue,
and the creditors,
because they will know where they stand one way or the other. And the third
matter is what possible amendment
can be made by my learned friend that can
necessarily ventilate all the issues he wishes to ventilate. For example, if
a claim to be brought for inducing breach of contract – that is,
a third party inducing a breach of contract, how is he able
to cure that through
an amendment? So there is that factor to be taken into account. Now, he's aware
of the other proceeding and
again, I'm putting a position that we hope doesn't
eventuate, but
if we were to be unsuccessful, the other proceeding is wholly
predicated on an invalid termination. So that falls away. Wholly predicated
Yes. The tort of inducing breach of contract is premised on a breach of
contract which is an invalid termination. So it's wholly
predicated on it.
So it's of great utility because if he [MSI] succeeds, the end of this
proceeding, the end of that proceeding, and it's an early determination
critical issue that will no doubt advance prospects of resolution.
The alternative is some large, large piece of litigation that clogs up the court
list. It won't see the light of day next year.
I'm really confident about
that, but I will be sitting here before your Honour at some stage next year and
a golden opportunity
would have been missed that the court has recognised and
accommodated the parties with ...
...So they're the matters, your Honour.
We see this as a golden opportunity,
and it will be lost for all time.
might properly be made of this exchange is addressed below.
communications between Clayton Utz and Russells at around this period included a
letter of 30 November 2019 in which Russells
relevantly said:
MSI accepts that if your clients succeed in this proceeding, that will be the
end of any litigation, certainly between the current
parties, in relation to the
MSI Asset Sale Agreement.
deposed in an affidavit of 12 May 2022 (relied on in the stay application before
the primary judge) that in the context
of MSI's decision not to bring a
counterclaim in the WA Proceeding (emphasis added):
MSI wished to keep the WA Proceeding simple for several reasons:
(ii) Given the limited relief sought by the [Receivers and Sellers], if the
conveyancing issues raised by their case were determined
against MSI (so that
the MSI Asset Sale Agreement was validly terminated), it appeared –
particularly at the time of the strategic
conference in the WA Proceeding on
31 October 2019 – that
MSI would have no claims against the
[Receivers and Sellers] or any other party
Amendment of statement of claim after strategic
Receivers and Sellers filed an amended pleading in the WA Proceeding on 9
December 2019. The amendments introduced a claim for
relief based on cl 9 of
the Sale Agreement by way of a declaration that the Receivers were released from
all claims which MSI had
articulated in its draft writ and accompanying
statement of claim. But, as matters eventuated, Russells then wrote the letter
17 December 2019 (set out below), disavowing an intention to rely on those
matters 'in that form' against the Receivers.
MSI's efforts to source funding for a
counterclaim
MSI's assertion through its solicitors by the 23 October 2019 letter that it
would not pursue a counterclaim, MSI discussed
that prospect with funders
following the strategic conference.
10 December 2019 and 11 December 2019, emails were exchanged between Russells,
MSI and Balance REV about funding in relation to
a counterclaim and having
regard to the amended statement of claim. Mr Milbourne said he was
'inclined not to press for a counterclaim
as it seems to me we can keep a narrow
trial on budget and on time for a rapid resolution'. In response, Balance
REV indicated that
'as discussed ...presently there is no appetite at [its] end
to fund any counterclaim' and that 'we have a good chance of resolving
claims as part of the current proceedings'.
Application to facilitate taking evidence from MSI's
financier dismissed
12 December 2019 the plaintiffs in the WA Proceeding (the Sellers and the
Receivers) filed a summons seeking orders that letters
of request issue to
judicial authorities in Singapore to facilitate taking evidence from
representatives of Trafigura Pte Lte, the
entity which MSI proposed would
finance the acquisition under the Sale Agreement. The application was dismissed
by Hill J on 22
January 2020. It was dismissed on the basis that it was outside
the scope of the relevant power in
Evidence Act 1906
Mirabela Nickel Ltd (in liquidation) (receivers and managers appointed)
v Mining Standards International Pty Ltd
[2020] WASC 4
Request decision
). However, her Honour usefully summarised the pleaded case
in the WA Proceeding as it stood at that time (at [18], footnotes deleted,
emphasis added):
The defendant asserts that the ASA [Sale Agreement] has not been validly
terminated by the plaintiffs on a number of grounds. First,
the plaintiffs
purported to terminate the ASA prior to the date by which the Finance Condition
was required to be satisfied. Second,
the parties had not entered into an
agreement requiring the Finance Condition to be satisfied by 22 November 2017.
Third, the plaintiffs
had agreed not to terminate the ASA without giving the
defendant adequate prior notice, which it failed to do. For this reason,
defendant contends that the plaintiffs were estopped from issuing the notice of
termination. Fourth, the plaintiffs breached
their obligations under cl 2.6(c)
of the ASA by providing information to the ultimate third party purchaser and
soliciting an offer
for the Mirabela Assets. By reason of their alleged breach
of the ASA, the defendants plead that the plaintiffs were not entitled
terminate the ASA.
Finally, it is pleaded that the plaintiffs failed to
comply with their obligations under cl 2.2 of the ASA and, as a
consequence,
were not entitled to terminate the ASA
it was understood at this point that compliance by the Sellers and Receivers
with the reasonable endeavours obligation under
cl 2.2 remained in issue in
the WA Proceeding.
The 'no proceedings' letter of 17 December 2019
continued after the strategic conference in which Clayton Utz sought
confirmation from Russells as to whether a counterclaim
would be issued and
whether MSI intended to serve the writ (relevant to Hill J's reference to
proceedings potentially being heard
Relevantly,
in a letter to Russells of 3 December 2019 Clayton Utz expressly asked the
If the Receivers succeed in this proceeding, does MSI reserve the ability to sue
other parties (such as Appian or the Noteholders)
in relation the MSI Sale
responded on 5 December 2019. They did not answer the question. They
We acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 3 December 2019. We do not believe
that this letter raises any issue not already comprehensively
canvassed in our
correspondence and therefore decline to further ventilate these matters. It
goes without saying that you should
not assume that our non-response to any of
your tendentious propositions amounts to assent.
Utz continued to seek confirmation via Russells of MSI's position.
17 December 2019 Russells informed Clayton Utz that:
In case it was not apparent to you from our previous correspondence, we confirm
that MSI does not intend to issue proceedings against
the Receivers in the form
of the draft Statement of Claim [in the Draft Writ Proceeding].
Further, absent any obligation to do so, MSI hereby irrevocably undertakes to
the Receivers that it will not institute any proceedings
in any court of
competent jurisdiction in relation to any cause of action pleaded in the [draft
Statement of Claim] without giving
to the Receivers care of your firm not less
than 21 days' notice in writing of their intention in that regard, any such
be accompanied by the draft proceedings which MSI may intend to issue.
The abandonment of the cl 2.2 defence
5 February 2020 the Receivers filed a notice of appeal in relation to Hill J's
dismissal of their application to obtain evidence
in Singapore.
6 February 2020 Russells recommended to MSI that it abandon the cl 2.2 defence,
on the condition that the appeal against the Singapore
decision be dismissed by
consent with trial dates for April 2020 allocated. Russells observed that a
successful appeal would result
in a letter of request issuing, delaying any
communications between Russells, MSI and Balance REV, Mr Milbourne said
that subject to counsel's advice, the pleading should be
... maintaining the relevant defence (which is one of five of MSI's defences and
which arises only if we are wrong about the 10+14≠22
construction defence)
is not worth the cost and delay associated with the appeal process ...
likely costs of an appeal (said to be $30,000-$50,000) were also raised as a
factor. Mr Milbourne noted that pursuing the defence
'may cost me 50k and
require a 3+ month delay for no real utility in the case prospects overall'.
Balance REV agreed with the proposed
abandonment particularly to avoid delay in
trial dates if the appeal were pursued. Another of MSI's counsel advised that
strategic sense to drop the defence based on non-compliance with
filed an amended defence abandoning the cl 2.2 claim on 12 February 2020
(para 22(b) of the defence was deleted).
abandonment of the cl 2.2 defence in February 2020 was significant. It had
the result that the WA Proceeding continued to trial
on more limited
grounds than had been anticipated at the time of the strategic conference.
provided affidavits on behalf of MSI and was cross-examined before the primary
judge as to the reasons why MSI abandoned
that part of its defence and why it
did not pursue the cl 2.2 reasonable endeavours obligation claim in the
WA Proceeding that it
now pursues in the Federal Court Proceeding.
to the affidavits, the sole reason for amending the defence to abandon a claim
under cl 2.2 was to 'preserve an early trial
WA Proceeding'.
his affidavit of 12 May 2022, Mr Russell gave evidence that in his opinion,
the appeal relating to taking evidence in Singapore
was very likely to delay the
WA Proceeding. There would be further delay should the appeal succeed, and
discovery proceedings commence
internationally. Mr Russell estimated a
delay of one to two years. He said that accordingly a decision was made to
amend MSI's
pleadings to remove any allegations in relation to cl 2.2 and
the appeal relating to evidence in Singapore was discontinued. Mr
relevantly said:
[37] I consulted counsel; and I gave advice to Mr Milbourne in respect of
this possible delay. I received instructions from Mr Milbourne
the Defence to abandon reliance on the allegations that the Receivers and the
Sellers had acted in breach of cl 2.2 of the
MSI Asset Sale Agreement so as
to disentitle them from relying on any right to terminate the agreement that may
have been available
to them. These amendments had the effect of removing the
issues to which the WA Plaintiffs contended the overseas evidence was
[39] The sole reasons for amending the Defence were to put an end to the
possible appeal and, therefore, to secure a trial of the
WA Proceedings at
the earliest possible time and without the delay caused by the appeal. It was
and remains my opinion, which I
communicated to Mr Milbourne when seeking
instructions to amend the Defence, that the defence relying on the breaches by
the WA Plaintiffs
of cl 2.2 of the MSI Asset Sale Agreement would probably
have succeeded.
a later affidavit dated 22 September 2023, Mr Russell maintained that the
'sole reason' for deleting the cl 2.2 defence was to
preserve an early
trial of the WA Proceeding. Mr Russell affirmed this under cross
examination.
also said in his oral evidence that prior to the amendment, the WA Proceeding
had been defended because of non-compliance
with cl 2.2, that being 'one of
the reasons why the purported termination was invalid'. Mr Russell agreed
that cl 2.2 was a central
element in the case brought in the Federal Court
against Atlantic Nickel.
The outcome of the WA Proceeding
trial proceeded before Hill J in December 2020. Her Honour identified ten
issues for determination (
Mirabela Trial
at [35], reference to the
'Agreement' being to the Sale Agreement):
(a) On a proper construction of the Agreement, what was the date by which the
Finance Condition was required to be satisfied? (Issue
(b) Did the parties agree to extend the date for satisfaction of the Finance
Condition until 22 November 2017? (Issue 2)
(c) Is MSI estopped from denying the date the Agreement was exchanged was
1 November 2017? (Issue 3)
(d) Did the Receivers agree to provide MSI with 24 hours' notice prior to
terminating the Agreement? If so, are the receivers estopped
from issuing the
notice of termination? (Issue 4)
(e) Did Mr Tucker on behalf of the plaintiffs make false and misleading
statements as to whether the plaintiffs intended to terminate
the Agreement and
whether they were in discussions with other parties? (Issue 5)
(f) Was the termination of the Agreement founded upon unconscionable or
inequitable conduct by the Receivers by asserting a right
to terminate under
cl 2.5 of the Agreement which they knew or must have known to be false?
(g) Were the Receivers in breach of cl 2.6 of the Agreement? If so, did this
disentitle them from exercising any right to terminate
the Agreement?
(h) Was the notice of termination issued by the Receivers on 22 November 2017
valid? (Issue 8)
(i) Did MSI elect to accept the Receivers' termination of the Agreement? (Issue
(j) Did MSI release the Receivers from any claim it might otherwise have by
reason of cl 9.1 of the Agreement? (Issue 10)
were delivered on 3 March 2023, running to some 645 paragraphs. On 19 May 2023,
orders were made dismissing the plaintiffs'
claims. Her Honour found it was not
necessary to determine issues 4, 5, 6 and 7 although her Honour made findings in
relation to
these issues (
Mirabela Trial
at [608]-[621],
[622]-[632], [633]-[644] and [635]-[643] respectively).
primary judge summarised the outcome of Hill J's decision, focusing on the scope
of claims that were determined, as follows (reference
to the 'ASA' being to the
Sale Agreement):
[87] In Hill J's very careful and thorough decision, her Honour held that: the
ASA was entered into on 10 November 2017, when the
last party executed it, such
that the Finance Condition needed to be satisfied 14 days from that date; the
time for satisfaction
of the Finance Condition was not extended by agreement
between the parties; MSI was not estopped from denying that the date on which
the ASA was executed was 1 November 2017; the ASA had not been validly
terminated; and MSI's request for repayment of the deposit
was not an acceptance
of the validity of the purported termination. In substance, the conclusion was
that the notice of termination
issued by the Sellers and the Receivers was not
efficacious.
[88] As a result of those conclusions, it was unnecessary for Hill J to deal
with a number of additional contentions which the parties
had raised. Whilst
this was recognised by her Honour, some obiter observations were made in
relation to several issues.
MSI foreshadows the commencement of new
proceedings
13 July 2021 (well before judgment was delivered by Hill J), Russells wrote
to Clayton Utz, referring to the 17 December 2019 letter
and stating:
We refer to our letter to you dated 17 December 2019, in which MSI undertook,
without admission and without the need to do so, not
to institute any
proceedings in relation to any cause of action pleaded in a certain superseded
draft Statement of Claim without
giving to the Receivers care of your firm not
less than 21 days' notice in writing of their intention in that regard.
In discharge of that undertaking, we attach a draft originating application and
statement of claim that MSI intends to institute
at the appropriate time.
to filing the originating proceeding, communications ensued between Russells and
Clayton Utz, relevantly about reference to
documents that were disclosed in the
WA Proceeding, but Russells also contended that the Receivers had no
interest in the proposed
Federal Court Proceeding.
3 November 2021 Clayton Utz wrote to Russells contending, amongst other things,
that MSI had strategically withdrawn its cl 2.2
defence in the
WA Proceeding, but it now sought to pursue substantially identical claims
in the Federal Court Proceeding. They alleged
abuse of process by way of
tactical manoeuvring as discussed in
and the risk of prejudice
to public confidence in the administration of justice through the risk of
inconsistent findings. They also
raised the prospect of an
The Federal Court Proceeding
commenced the Federal Court Proceeding on 1 November 2021.
primary judge summarised the nature of the Federal Court Proceeding initiated by
MSI against Atlantic Nickel in the period when
the decision in the
WA Proceeding remained reserved. His Honour summarised the claims in this
Court as follows:
[90] ... In general terms, MSI makes claims against Atlantic Nickel for:
(a) damages for Atlantic Nickel's breach of contract;
(b) further or alternatively, damages for inducing a breach of contract by the
Receivers and the Sellers;
(c) further or alternatively, damages under s 236 of the
Consumer Law
(being Sch 2 to the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth)) for contravention by Atlantic Nickel of s 21, namely the
prohibition against unconscionable conduct; and
(d) further or alternatively, damages under s 236 of the
Consumer Law
for loss caused by Atlantic Nickel being involved in a
contravention of s 21 by the Receivers and the Sellers.
[92] In substance, MSI's allegations are to the effect that Atlantic Nickel, the
Receivers and the Sellers failed to observe the
obligations in the ASA to
provide reasonable assistance to MSI or to act so as to give it the benefit of
the agreed terms. It is
specifically alleged that their conduct prevented MSI
from securing finance to complete the purchase and, further, that they breached
the obligation not to deal with third parties whilst the ASA was on foot. The
pleading sets out, in some length, the terms of several
letters, emails, text
messages, and telephone conversations in support of the allegations.
[93] The gravamen of the complaints made is that Atlantic Nickel breached the
ASA or induced the Receivers and the Sellers to breach
it in several respects.
The same or similar conduct is also characterised as constituting unconscionable
conduct, within the scope
of s 21 of the
Australian Consumer Law
the Receivers and, especially, Mr Tucker. It is then said that Atlantic
Nickel was a person involved in that unconscionable
conduct or that it engaged
in unconscionable conduct on its own behalf.
[94] The substance of MSI's alleged damage is its lost opportunity to complete
the ASA to acquire the Assets, and the quantum of
the damage may be around
USD745 million.
primary judge also summarised the ensuing cross-claim by Atlantic Nickel
relevantly against MSI and the Receivers:
[96] On 13 April 2023, Atlantic Nickel filed a cross-claim in the proceedings
against MSI. It also makes claims against Mr Milbourne
as the second
cross‑respondent, and the Receivers as the third and fourth
cross-respondents. In part, it seeks a declaration
that there was no binding
agreement constituted by the ASA or, alternatively, that the date for
satisfaction of the Finance Condition
was 22 November 2017. As against the
Receivers, it claims damages for breach of contract and an order that the
Receivers are liable
to MSI for any damages for unconscionable conduct, if the
cognate allegations are made good against it by MSI.
that backdrop on 9 June 2023 both Atlantic Nickel and the Receivers applied to
the primary judge for orders permanently staying
the Federal Court Proceeding.
They also filed their notices of appeal from the decision of Hill J in the
WA Proceeding on the same
MSI's attempts to obtain litigation funding for Federal
Court Proceeding
sought further litigation funding in the lead up to the commencement of the
Federal Court Proceeding.
made further contact with Vannin on 27 April 2021. It said that soon after
Appian acquired the interests in Atlantic Nickel
in July 2018, its assets were
re-valued at USD795 million (we interpolate to note that this was
apparently revealed by Appian in
September 2020: PJ [183]). MSI invited an
expression of interest to fund MSI's claim against Atlantic Nickel, noting that
Proceeding before Hill J was reserved and that 'whichever side fails
will very likely appeal'.
12 July 2021 Russells wrote to Balance REV stating they had been 'working on the
Stage 2 proceedings'.
coincides with the timing of the letter from Russells to Clayton Utz of 13 July
2021 referred to above.
REV notified MSI on 29 October 2021 that it would not fund the proposed Federal
Court Proceeding, stating relevantly:
We do not share your view that the possible impending sale of the asset for c.
$1BN necessitates the immediate commencement of the
Further Proceedings ... Even
if we did share your views on urgency, we don't consider that the benefits of
commencing now outweigh
the significant own side costs (including security for
costs) and adverse costs risks associated with commencing the Further
Proceedings.
We consider that the prudent course is to await judgment from the
SC of WA (which should be imminent), assess the findings made
in that judgment
and then make any decisions regarding next steps. This is the course that we
all envisaged at the time that litigation
funding was sought and provided for
this matter.
further brief and invitation to make a funding proposal was sent to Vannin on 31
October 2021 which was rejected on 8 November 2021.
9 November 2021 Russells wrote to Omni Bridgeway following up on a brief that
had apparently been provided.
did not obtain further funding until 31 March 2022 when it entered into a
funding agreement with Omni Bridgeway.
Overlap of subject matter of proceedings
the appeal hearing, the Court asked the parties to provide an agreed schedule of
pleadings to illustrate the alleged overlap
across the claims made by MSI in
each of the proposed statement of claim in the Draft Writ Proceeding (23 October
2018), the WA Proceeding
(fourth amended defence, particulars of defence
and rejoinder) and the Federal Court Proceeding (amended statement of claim
18 March 2022). The parties were unable to agree as to whether there was
relevant equivalence between certain parts of the pleadings,
but the task that
was undertaken provided some assistance.
schedule informed a number of matters, including (first) the knowledge of MSI as
to its potential claims against Atlantic Nickel
and the Receivers, both prior to
and at the time of the WA Proceeding, evidenced by the Draft Writ Proceeding and
the WA Proceeding
defence respectively; (second) the potential for inconsistent
findings; and (third) the extent to which the Federal Court Proceeding
allegations made by MSI about the conduct of the Receivers that reveal the
likelihood that Atlantic Nickel would have joined
the Receivers in that
proceeding, as it subsequently did.
on the schedule, six categories of overlap may be identified. The summary does
not purport to be a complete analysis of all
allegations and underlying facts,
but reveals clear themes as to the claims relied upon in both the WA Proceeding
and the Federal
Court Proceeding and the underlying conduct of the Receivers and
Sellers relied upon by MSI.
Sellers' premature termination of the Sale Agreement (cl
premature termination dispute (cl 2.5(a)) was determined in the WA
Proceeding and by the Court of Appeal and remains pleaded in
the Federal Court
Proceeding.
the Federal Court Proceeding, although MSI only sues Atlantic Nickel directly,
it maintains an allegation that the Receivers and
the Sellers breached the Sale
Agreement by purporting to terminate it under cl 2.5(a):
(a) prior to the time for compliance with the finance condition; and
(b) at a time when the Receivers and Sellers had not complied with their
cl 2.2 obligations.
Breaches of reasonable endeavours clause
Draft Writ Proceeding pleading included a claim that the Receivers and Sellers
were not entitled to, or were estopped from, issuing
a valid termination notice,
because they were in breach of their cl 2.2 obligations.
discussed above, until 12 February 2020, in its WA Proceeding defence MSI
asserted the alleged termination was invalid because
the notice was issued prior
to the time for compliance with the finance condition under cl 2.5(a) and
because the Sellers and Receivers
failed to comply with their obligations under
cl 2.2. Particulars relied upon included failure by the Receivers and
Sellers to assist
MSI to have access to Atlantic Nickel's mine site, financier,
information and documents; the Receivers and Sellers hindering MSI
obtaining such access; and the conduct of the Receivers and Sellers in
discouraging noteholders from agreeing to provide finance
to MSI and encouraging
them to await a better offer from Appian. These claims were deleted by the 12
February 2020 amendment.
Court of Appeal did not address any question of compliance with the cl 2.2
reasonable endeavours obligation as it was not in issue
at first instance (after
12 February 2020) or on appeal.
the Federal Court Proceeding, the centrality of cl 2.2 of the Sale
Agreement and the alleged involvement of the Receivers is apparent.
maintains a claim against Atlantic Nickel of breach of the cl 2.2
reasonable endeavours obligation, and asserts that prior to
the date of exchange
of counterpart Sale Agreements, Atlantic Nickel by its conduct inhibited the
ability of MSI to satisfy the finance
condition and achieve completion. The
content of Atlantic Nickel's reasonable endeavours obligation is said to be
informed by the
conduct in the preceding period of both Atlantic Nickel and the
Receivers. MSI alleges the Receivers inhibited its ability to satisfy
finance conditions of the Sale Agreement, including by breaching the obligation
in cl 2.2(b) of the Sale Agreement to provide
MSI with access to Bradesco,
and by providing advice to the noteholders that falsely represented the date for
satisfaction of the
finance condition and inducing them to authorise the
Receivers to terminate the Sale Agreement.
also pleads that the Receivers and Sellers breached the cl 2.2 obligations
by 'a campaign of pressure' on the part of the Receivers
in relation to the date
for finance approval, and inhibited the efforts of MSI to satisfy the finance
condition and to achieve completion
under the Sale Agreement. MSI pleads that
the Receivers and Sellers breached the Sale Agreement by purporting to terminate
Agreement at a time when they had not complied with their cl 2.2
obligations.
Breaches of 'no solicitation' clause (cl 2.6(c))
the Draft Writ Proceeding, MSI pleaded that after its execution, the Receivers
and Sellers repudiated the Sale Agreement by soliciting
and negotiating with
Appian and providing information to it, in breach of cl 2.6(c) of the Sale
the WA Proceeding, MSI relied on effectively the same alleged conduct by
the Sellers in pleading in its defence that the Sellers
were in breach of
the Federal Court Proceeding, MSI pleads that Atlantic Nickel breached
cl 2.6(c) by providing financial information to Appian.
It also pleads
that the Receivers breached cl 2.6(c) by providing information relevantly
to Appian about MSI's non-compliance with
the finance condition precedent and
the status of the Sale Agreement.
Allegations of inducing breach of contract
pleaded in the Draft Writ Proceeding that the Receivers procured and induced the
Sellers and Atlantic Nickel to breach the Sale
the WA Proceeding, prior to its deletion by the 12 February 2020 amendment,
MSI pleaded that the Sellers and Receivers hindered
MSI from satisfying the
finance condition precedent and asserted that they had not complied with their
cl 2.2 obligations.
the Federal Court Proceeding, MSI pleads that Atlantic Nickel induced the
alleged breaches of contract by the Receivers and Sellers
(and MSI relies on the
conduct of the Receivers relating to matters such as statements about the
contractual period for satisfaction
of the finance condition and the purported
date for valid termination, communication of the purported date to others,
communications
with Appian, and inhibiting MSI in its efforts to obtain
Allegations of unconscionable and inequitable conduct
contrary to s 21 Australian Consumer Law (ACL)
WA Proceeding included allegations that the termination of the Sale
Agreement was invalid because it was founded on unconscionable
or inequitable
behaviour in that the Sellers falsely asserted a right to terminate (including
based on an incorrect assertion as
to the date for compliance with the finance
condition precedent), and that the Receivers and Sellers falsely represented to
they had not received competing offers or were engaged in competing
the Federal Court Proceeding, MSI pleads that Atlantic Nickel engaged in a
pattern of conduct which in all the circumstances was
unconscionable and
contravened s 21 of the ACL. Although the allegation is brought against
MSI, it relies in part on the conduct
of the Receivers (see also [236]-[237]
Relief claimed
No overlap relating to relief
the WA Proceeding, MSI was a defendant and brought no counterclaim.
Claims for exemplary damages
Draft Writ Proceeding pleading included a claim for exemplary damages against
all defendants (Atlantic Nickel, the Receivers and
the Sellers), based on a
'contumelious disregard' for MSI's rights.
similar claim is made against Atlantic Nickel in the Federal Court Proceeding.
It is alleged that Atlantic Nickel, in procuring
and inducing breaches by the
Receivers and Sellers of the Sale Agreement, was high-handed, malicious and its
conduct constituted
conscious wrongdoing in circumstances of 'contumelious
disregard of MSI's rights'.
Other relief
the Draft Writ Proceeding, MSI sought a range of relief (such as specific
performance) that was not available after completion
of the Appian sale.
relief was also sought in relation to breaches by premature termination
(cl 2.5), the breaches of the reasonable endeavours
(cl 2.2) and the breaches of the no-solicitation clause (cl 2.6(c)),
together with the allegations of inducement of breach
of contract. As against
the Receivers, MSI sought damages, including exemplary damages, for procuring or
inducing breach of contract
on the part of the Sellers and Atlantic Nickel.
the Federal Court Proceeding, MSI seeks damages from Atlantic Nickel including
damages for the contraventions of s 21 of the
Australian Consumer Law
for breach of contract and for inducing the breaches of contract by the
Receivers and Sellers, including the alleged breach by
premature termination
(cl 2.5), breaches of the reasonable endeavours obligation (cl 2.2)
and breach of the no-solicitation clause
(cl 2.6(c)).
Nickel seeks contribution from the Receivers. It seeks in the prayer for
relief, and on the assumption that the allegations
in the statement of claim are
established, compensation for Atlantic Nickel's loss resulting from the
Receivers' unconscionable conduct;
an indemnity in relation to any of Atlantic
Nickel's liability to MSI; and an order for contribution having regard to the
culpability of the Receivers and Atlantic Nickel for any loss suffered
Primary judge's determination of stay application
primary judge considered the principles examined in the authorities, and in
particular the decisions in
Risk Services Australia Limited
v Australian National University
[2009] HCA 27
(2009) 239 CLR
v Ramsey Food Processing Pty Limited
(2015) 256 CLR 507
Deep Investments Pty Ltd
[2018] FCAFC 232
[99]-[120].
Honour found that:
(a) The pre-hearing conduct of the parties in the WA Proceeding was such
that all that was effectively in dispute at trial was the
efficacy of the
Receivers' purported termination of the Sale Agreement, and no party could have
proceeded on the basis that MSI had
brought all the claims it might bring for
damages arising out of the Sale Agreement: PJ [133];
(b) Atlantic Nickel was not a party to the WA Proceeding. MSI was
responding to a narrow claim brought by the Receivers and was
prepared to do so
fully. However, in that context it had no cause to litigate as against the
Receivers. At no time did it permit
the Receivers or the Sellers to believe
that all disputes concerning the Sale Agreement were to be resolved by the
WA Proceeding:
(c) Prior to the trial MSI withdrew reliance on cl 2.2 by way of the
amended defence, and did so because it was only 'conditionally
relevant' and
because it sought to advance the action: PJ [131], [137];
(d) MSI could have made a cross-claim against Atlantic Nickel in the
WA Proceeding but this would have greatly complicated and delayed
resolution of what was otherwise a five-day hearing about the Receivers'
declaratory relief. MSI's chosen course was defensible
and transparent: PJ
[138]-[140]. Although claims for damages relating to conduct which MSI said
prevented it from completing the
Sale Agreement were not wholly dependent upon
whether the Receivers validly terminated it, it was not unreasonable for MSI to
to have the Receivers' determination issue resolved as a matter of
priority: PJ [148]-[149];
(e) MSI had a general overarching reason not to bring a cross-claim in the
WA Proceeding against Atlantic Nickel or others, being
that it was not in a
financial position to do so. Mr Russell, MSI's solicitor, gave evidence to
that effect: PJ [140]-[142], [150]-[161];
(f) MSI did not have the financial resources to commence and prosecute its
claims relating to non-completion of the Sale Agreement
until about the time the
Federal Court Proceeding was commenced: PJ [162];
(g) Financial inability to commence proceedings is relevant and can in some
circumstances provide a reasonable excuse for the purposes
of the doctrine of
abuse of process.
was not concerned with a case where a
party was forced by lack of means to choose one course rather than another: PJ
[164]. There
was no deliberate holding back by MSI of a claim for forensic
advantage: PJ [169];
(h) Transparency of an intention to pursue litigation in the future lessens the
likelihood of later proceedings amounting to an abuse
of process. The Receivers
and the Sellers were alive to the possibility that the WA Proceeding would
not resolve all issues in dispute
in relation to the Sale Agreement: PJ
(i) It was not clear on the materials that it would have been apparent to MSI
that if instituted, the Receivers would be joined in
the Federal Court
Proceeding. It was not suggested that MSI knew of the nature of any
relationship between the Receivers and Atlantic
Nickel at the time that
regulated their rights and liabilities: PJ [180]-[181];
(j) The circumstances in which the parties acted evolved over time. Although
MSI was not initially (and for an ongoing period) in
a financial position to
pursue claims arising from non-completion of the Sale Agreement, facts came to
light to the effect that the
Receivers had retained some $38 million in
Australia, suggesting to MSI that perhaps the Receivers might be amenable to a
settlement.
Further, Appian, which had purchased Atlantic Nickel for around
USD65 million revealed in September 2020 that it had revalued the
present value of the mine at USD795 million. As a result, Mr Russell
considered that there were good prospects that litigation
funding might become
available. MSI's decision to issue the Federal Court Proceeding in November
2021 was therefore not 'a tactical
decision designed to thwart the efficient
administration of justice' but a product of those circumstances, and so a matter
not weigh in favour of there being an abuse: PJ [182]-[186];
(k) The risk of some inconsistency in findings is not determinative of an abuse.
A risk of inconsistent judgments is of greater concern.
Having considered the
authorities (including as to
estoppel), the task to be undertaken
was to ascertain whether MSI seeks to secure a finding in the Federal Court
Proceeding which
is inconsistent with a finding that was fundamental to the
findings which supported Hill J's reasons in the WA Proceeding: PJ
[190]-[194];
(l) Of the ten issues identified by Hill J as relevant to the
WA Proceeding, it had been necessary for her Honour to determine only
There was nothing in the scope of MSI's claims which would seek conflicting
determinations in this Court: PJ [200];
(m) Many of the alleged findings of fact made by Hill J said to give rise to a
risk of inconsistency were obiter. Obiter statements
in reasons for judgment
will not suffice to raise an issue estoppel (citing
Aavelaid v Dental Board
of New South Wales
(Unreported, NSWCA, 16 October 1998) (Mason P, Meagher
and Beazley JJA) and the authorities referred to therein). However, abuse
process is necessarily wider than issue estoppel. Re-litigation of findings in
initial proceedings that were not necessary for
its determination may be
considered an abuse, particularly if the conduct is thereby oppressive. It
would be difficult to identify
oppression unless there is re-litigation of
numerous obiter findings that substantially form the basis of the second
proceeding:
PJ [206]-[207];
(n) Because Atlantic Nickel was not a party in the WA Proceeding, the
consequence of re‑litigation against it is not the concern.
Rather, the
concern is that the Receivers, as cross-respondents, have to confront issues
they say have already been determined,
and so there remains the potential for
overlap and inconsistency: PJ [207];
(o) Consideration of Hill J's conclusions on central determinations on other
matters (such as estoppel) does not reveal that MSI's
claims in this Court seek
inconsistent determinations: PJ [208]-[214];
(p) Examination of the 'minutiae of the stay applicants' claims' as to overlap
and inconsistency rested on a comparison of the pleaded
cases, and did not
identify or articulate what the real contests of fact might be or how they were
determined in the WA Proceeding:
PJ [215]-[216];
(q) Nor were particular allegations of inconsistency either established,
relevant or related to obiter findings that were fundamental
to Hill J's
decision: PJ [217]-[232];
(r) In contrast to the circumstances of
MSI is not attempting to relitigate anything that was fundamental to Hill J's
judgment, and no relevant overlap or inconsistency
arises: PJ [237];
(s) There was no inappropriate tactical manoeuvring on the part of MSI.
Although taken alone, the apparent duplicity of MSI's conduct
in threatening to
bring the proceeding the subject of the Draft Writ Proceeding (which included
allegations of wrongful conduct)
and then failing to in fact commence them might
be seen as inappropriate tactics, the 'impersonation of an entity eager to
to protect its interest' was designed to extract a settlement at a time
when MSI was financially unable to enforce its rights by
litigation: PJ
[242]-[247];
(t) Similarly, MSI's withdrawal of a claim based on cl 2.2 of the Sale
Agreement by way of the amended defence was explicable on
the basis that MSI
wished to expedite the hearing of the WA Proceeding 'given that it had no
funds to do anything else', and such
conduct did not evidence inappropriate
tactics: PJ [253]. Nor did it attract the principles of
estoppel: PJ [256]-[268]; and
(u) Other miscellaneous allegations of abuse of process were not made out,
including: the alleged narrowing of issues before Hill
J by revocation of leave
to issue proceedings out of the jurisdiction; the bringing of the Federal Court
Proceeding in circumstances
where the joinder of the Receivers was 'inevitable';
and other specific claims of unjustifiable oppression based on re-litigating
events of the relevant three week period in 2017 when the Sale Agreement was
negotiated and terminated: PJ [269]‑[285].
primary judge concluded that whilst MSI's proceedings in this Court raise some
factual matters and issues that arose in the WA
Proceeding, none of the
circumstances warrant preventing MSI from now agitating its claims in the
Federal Court Proceeding.
Leave to appeal
should be leave to appeal. Both the refusal of a stay and the grant of a stay
have serious consequences for a party. Whilst
the submissions (and grounds)
refer at times to
and issue estoppel, there is no doubt that the
central question for determination is whether the Federal Court Proceeding is an
of process. There can be only one correct answer to that question. The
grounds of appeal indicate sufficient doubt about the decision
of the primary
judge which together with the serious consequences for either party of the
outcome justify the grant of leave.
Categories of grounds of appeal
Nickel and the Receivers cumulatively raise 11 grounds of appeal. It is
convenient to group them into six categories that
reflect common themes.
Atlantic Nickel addressed the grounds together in its submissions.
1 – Public interest not properly considered (Atlantic
Nickel ground 1)
Nickel allege that the primary judge erred by failing to find that the public
interest in the timely and efficient conduct
of civil litigation was such that,
having regard to the competing public and private interests, the conduct of MSI
was an abuse of
process in the sense explained in
2 – Likely that Receivers would be joined in Federal
Court Proceeding (Atlantic Nickel ground 2, Receivers ground 2)
appellants allege the primary judge erred in failing to find that the
commencement or continuation of the Federal Court Proceeding
was an abuse of
process in circumstances where it was likely or foreseeable that the Receivers
would be joined in that proceeding,
or the proceeding became an abuse when the
Receivers were in fact joined.
allege the primary judge erred in failing to find that the circumstances, having
regard to the position of the Receivers, constituted
inappropriate tactical
manoeuvring.
3 – Limitations on litigation funding and
impecuniosity insufficient basis to excuse finding of abuse (Atlantic Nickel
1, 3 and 4, Receivers ground 1)
appellants allege that the primary judge erred in law and in fact in holding
that the financial inability of MSI to pursue in
the WA Proceeding the
claims now pursued in the Federal Court Proceeding provided an explanation or
defence such that no abuse of
process arose. Atlantic Nickel also allege the
primary judge erred in finding both that the Receivers were aware of MSI's lack
funding and that any knowledge on the part of the Receivers in that regard
was relevant.
4 – Risk or likelihood of conflict in findings
(Atlantic Nickel ground 7, Receivers ground 3)
is alleged that the primary judge erred in finding that no abuse of process
arose out of potential inconsistencies, in circumstances
where his Honour should
have found that the commencement of the Federal Court Proceeding created a risk
or likelihood of inconsistent
findings as to substantive issues of fact by the
two courts.
5 – No proper disclosure of intention to pursue
litigation (Receivers ground 2, Atlantic Nickel grounds 5, 6)
Nickel alleges that the primary judge erred in finding that a reference by
senior counsel at a strategic conference to the
WA Proceeding resolving
questions of 'liability' was a shorthand reference to resolving the limited
question of the validity of the
termination notice, when, correctly understood,
the statement was to the effect that the WA Proceeding would likely resolve
all questions
of any liability of the Receivers and Atlantic Nickel to MSI.
Atlantic Nickel contends that the primary judge ought to have found,
by what was
said at the strategic conference and by MSI later withdrawing its defence based
on cl 2.2 of the Sale Agreement, that
MSI communicated an intention that it
did not intend to bring further claims against the Receivers or Atlantic Nickel
such breach.
Receivers refer to the tactical manoeuvring of MSI in this regard, and the
forensic decision to withdraw the cl 2.2 defence.
6 – Non-compliance with cl 2.2 barred by Anshun
estoppel (Receivers ground 4)
Receivers allege that the primary judge erred in law and in fact in finding that
MSI's claim of non-compliance with cl 2.2 in
the Federal Court Proceeding
was barred by
estoppel, when his Honour should have found that it
was so closely connected with the WA Proceeding as to have made it
unreasonable
not to have raised it in that proceeding.
leading decision on abuse of process is
. The plurality
(Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ) stated at [1] that either of two
conditions enlivens the court's power to permanently
stay proceedings as an
abuse of process, namely 'where the use of the court's procedures occasions
unjustifiable oppression to a
party, or where the use serves to bring the
administration of justice into disrepute'.
conduct rises to the level of an abuse of process is a determination that
requires consideration of all the circumstances.
It involves a merits-based
judgement, taking account of public and private interests, and it is not
possible to formulate hard and
fast rules to determine whether on particular
facts abuse is to be found:
Johnson v Gore Wood
[2002] 2 AC 1
determination of the circumstances includes taking account of the procedural law
of this Court:
at [34]. In particular, s 37M of the
Federal Court Act
, read with s 37N, requires the parties to a civil
dispute to conduct a proceeding in a manner consistent with the overarching
of the Court's civil practice and procedure provisions, which is to
facilitate the just resolution of disputes according to law and
as quickly,
inexpensively and efficiently as possible. The overarching purpose has various
objectives including the efficient use
of the judicial and administrative
resources available for the purposes of the Court, the efficient disposal of the
Court's overall
caseload and the disposal of all proceedings in a timely manner:
timely, cost-effective and efficient conduct of modern civil litigation takes
into account wider public interests than those of
the parties to the dispute:
a party has a right to bring proceedings, in doing so choices are made as to
what claims are made and how they are framed:
at [38], citing
some circumstances the bringing of a claim which should have been litigated in
an earlier proceeding will be an abuse of process,
even if no estoppel would be
or oppression may be seen by requiring a party to deal again with claims that
should have been resolved in other proceedings.
Oppression is found not only in
delay and increased costs. 'At its core is the vexation of being required to
deal again with claims
that should have been resolved in the [earlier]
proceedings':
claims 'should' have been brought is not to be determined solely by reference to
the interests of the parties to the action
– there is a public interest in
the timely and efficient administration of civil justice:
[70] (Gageler J).
staged conduct of litigation must be viewed carefully. As the plurality in
said at [59]:
For the Federal Court to lend its procedures to the staged conduct of what was
factually the one dispute prosecuted by related parties
under common control
with the attendant duplication of court resources, delay, expense and vexation,
was likely to give rise to the
perception that the administration of justice was
inefficient, careless of costs and profligate in its application of public
abuse of process may be seen even where the party seeking to make the claim or
to raise the issue in the later proceeding was neither
a party to the earlier
proceeding, nor the privy of such a party:
(plurality), [63] (Gageler J), citing
at [26]; and
courts should not be expected to indulge parties who engage in tactical
manoeuvring that impedes the just, quick and efficient
resolution of litigation:
at [45]. To do so would be to ignore the progress in the
conduct of modern litigation brought about by
also note what was said in
Stuart v Goldberg Linde (a firm)
[2008] EWHC 2325
[2008] 1 WLR
, although in the context of the
Civil Procedure Rules 1998
claimant had commenced a second proceeding in respect of the same transaction
for which he had already recovered damages.
Ultimately, the Court of Appeal was
not persuaded that an abuse of process had occurred on the facts. However, in
the course of
delivering judgment, Sir Anthony Clarke MR said
For my part, I do not think that parties should keep future claims secret merely
because a second claim might involve other issues.
The proper course is for
parties to put their cards on the table so that no one is taken by surprise
and the appropriate course
in case management terms can be considered by the
judge. In particular parties should not keep quiet in the hope of improving
position in respect of a claim arising out of similar facts or evidence in
the future. Nor should they do so simply because a second
claim may involve
other complex issues. On the contrary they should come clean so that the court
can decide whether one or more
trials is required and when. The time for such a
decision to be taken is before there is a trial of any of the issues. In this
way the underlying approach of the Civil Procedure Rules, namely that of
co-operation between the parties, robust case management
and disposing of cases,
including particular issues, justly can be forwarded and not frustrated.
Snowy Mountains Organic Dairy Products Pty Ltd v Wholefoods Pty Ltd
[2008] VSC 405
Beach J endorsed the 'force of much that is said' by Sir
Anthony Clarke MR (at [61]).
reference to 'coming clean' for the purpose of case management echoes the
approach to civil litigation endorsed by the Court of
Baulderstone
Hornibrook Engineering Pty Ltd v Gordian Runoff Ltd
[2008] NSWCA 243
‑[163] (Allsop P, Beazley and Campbell JJA), which
emphasises the need for clarity, precision, the illumination of issues and
openness in the conduct of litigation and in all aspects of engagement in the
court's processes, and the responsibility of parties
and their legal
representatives to assist the court in this regard.
Analysis of particular matters relevant to the appeal
What was the position as to litigation funding?
at least 19 December 2017 to May 2019 MSI sought litigation funding relating to
the proceedings the subject of the Draft Writ
Proceeding. The alleged breach of
the cl 2.2 reasonable endeavours obligation formed part of that threatened
proceeding, as Vaughan
J observed.
fact that the Receivers had raised the prospect of security for costs is
unsurprising, in light of MSI being a corporate entity
with an apparent absence
of assets within Australia.
is unsurprising that after such a period of time, with proceedings still
threatened but the writ unserved, on 8 May 2019 the Receivers
brought matters to
a head by issuing proceedings. After all, the Receivers no doubt had
obligations to the secured creditors and
others, and they were not in the
position of a litigant who might otherwise sit back and wait for events to
unfold. Nor could they
readily take steps to bring the receivership to an end
with threats of litigation persisting.
is also apparent from the Burford letter that, by at least 1 June 2019, MSI had
considered and sought funding of staged litigation,
seeking funding for the WA
Proceeding 'and then the prosecution of a potential subsequent claim'.
the 12 June 2019 Balance REV letter indicates, MSI secured funding for
stage 1 (the WA Proceeding) with Balance REV securing an
for funding of stage 2, being any further proceedings against the Receivers,
Sellers or any other party, 'including any claim
asserted in the WA
Proceeding'.
MSI filed its defence, it expressly invoked each of cl 2.5(a), cl 2.2 and
cl 2.6. It was able to assert those matters as defendant
without risk of a
security for costs application. Nor did the funding agreement constrain
the kinds of defences it could bring.
further communications with Balance REV in December 2019 about funding a
counterclaim in the WA Proceeding revealed that Balance
REV had no appetite to
do so, and it considered there was a good chance MSI's claims would be resolved
in the WA Proceeding. The
communications, objectively viewed, indicate that
cost, delay and utility were all relevant to the decision not to proceed with a
counterclaim. It can be accepted that costs and the inability to secure funding
for a counterclaim were significant factors in the
at least April 2021, after the trial but before Hill J's judgment, MSI sought
stage 2 funding from litigation funders. Balance
REV declined. A brief for
funding from Omni Bridgeway was sent in November 2021 and funding offered in
March 2022.
communications clearly reveal that MSI contemplated staged litigation from at
least June 2019 and raised it with potential funders.
Decisions about MSI's
approach to the litigation took into account the position of litigation funders,
as the Balance REV counterclaim
emails objectively indicate.
effect of litigation funding on when and what parts of claims might be pursued
should not be minimised. So much is revealed by
the 2-stage approach referred
to by Mr Russell with prospective litigation funders. It was (one)
mechanism by which funding for
the matters the subject of the Draft Writ
Proceeding might be obtained but in a staged manner. This was no doubt a course
to assist MSI. It also facilitated the litigation funders in
managing their own risk. Viewed alone, such forensic decisions were
MSI. However, in the context of court proceedings, such decisions cannot be
viewed alone, as we will turn to below.
What was conveyed at the strategic conference?
the date of the strategic conference, the Balance REV funding was in place. MSI
had indicated it would not file a counterclaim,
but had raised a number of
allegations of wrongdoing primarily against the Receivers in its defence.
some claims had been foreshadowed by MSI against the Receivers (and others) but
were not brought into the WA Proceeding by
its defence, Clayton Utz had
transparently raised in its position paper the issue of potential future
litigation, the risk of being
joined to such litigation and the practical
utility of the proceeding before Hill J being diminished. MSI did not engage
matters in its position paper.
Honour was astute to the risks that were foreshadowed by the nature and scope of
the defence as it then stood. Her Honour foreshadowed
the risk for the
Receivers of being joined to further proceedings. Her Honour raised the
prospect of splitting the issues of liability
and damage but with all issues
before the Court at the time of any application. Her Honour raised the
potential for other intended
proceedings being commenced and listed
this context, the dialogue with the Court included important statements by
experienced senior counsel for MSI to the effect that
it wished to proceed on
the matters then before the Court, because such a course would determine
liability and quickly, including
(if the termination were valid) claims of
inducement to breach the Sale Agreement. Extracts are highlighted at [86]
objectively, it was senior counsel's submission that if her Honour were to find
that the termination of the Sale Agreement
had been valid, then everything else
would fall away, and it would be the end of MSI's ability to claim relief and
the Court would
not need to deal with other parties or other complexities.
Relief would still be on the table if the termination was determined
invalid. Mr Russell's evidence referred to at [89] above is consistent
have utility in resolving liability, both the Receivers' and Sellers'
cl 2.2 reasonable endeavours obligation (if relied upon)
cl 2.5 finance condition precedent terms had to be addressed. There was
little point in the Court dealing with only one
or other of those issues that
affected the entitlement to issue the termination notice, if both issues
remained live.
the time of the strategic conference, MSI advanced both. It invoked each of
cl 2.5(a), cl 2.2 and cl 2.6 in its defence. Senior
submissions as to liability and utility were made in this context.
at December 2019 each of cl 2.5(a), cl 2.2 and cl 2.6 remained live in
the proceeding and were referred to by her Honour in the
Letter of Request
decision (see [93] above).
in February 2020 the cl 2.2 defence was deleted from MSI's defence.
it was deleted such that MSI would no longer seek to rely upon it, then the WA
Proceeding had utility and the task for the Court
was reduced. Whether the
termination notice validly terminated the Sale Agreement would be determined by
resolving the cl 2.5(a)
timing issue.
timing issue was resolved in both
Mirabela Trial
. Although these decisions address more than that single issue, it is
the timing issue that is central.
however, despite deleting it, MSI is now permitted to resuscitate the substance
of the cl 2.2 defence and pursue it in separate
proceedings (even if
indirectly) and argue that the termination of the Sale Agreement was invalid,
then MSI invites an inconsistent
finding on a pivotal point. A real question
would arise as to the utility and value of the time, effort and court resources
Mirabela Trial
Mirabela Appeal
What was the reason given for the withdrawal of the
cl 2.2 defence?
evidence indicates that lack of funding was a significant reason why MSI decided
not to issue a counterclaim in the WA Proceeding.
However, the position in
relation to its decision to withdraw the cl 2.2 defence is different. The
evidence emphasised that the
decision to withdraw it was to avoid delay
(acknowledged by the primary judge at [251]).
have set out Mr Russell's evidence about the reason for deleting the
cl 2.2 defence, and his evidence that it was to reduce delay
resolution of the WA Proceeding: this was the 'sole reason'. We have also
referred to counsel's advice that it made 'strategic
sense' to do so. We also
note in this regard that MSI had funding in place at the time the cl 2.2
defence was withdrawn.
the primary judge said at [156] that 'to a degree' MSI's inability to prosecute
all that it wished to due to a lack of funding
was emphasised by its withdrawal
of the cl 2.2 defence, and that 'the evidence firmly established' that it
withdrew that defence
as a consequence in part of the costs associated with
defending an appeal from Hill J's Letter of Request decision.
can be accepted that costs and delay are to some extent inter-related. However,
Mr Russell's evidence was very clear that the
cl 2.2 defence was
withdrawn to avoid delay.
submitted that the Receivers and Atlantic Nickel are bound by the primary
judge's finding (at [158]) that MSI would have caused
claims to be advanced as a
counterclaim had funding been available. That is a different point. The
context of that finding is the
counterclaim, and not the subsequent decision to
withdraw the cl 2.2 defence.
also submitted that there was a procedural fairness issue in permitting Atlantic
Nickel to depart from particular findings of
the primary judge when (in its
submission) they were not challenged by the appeal grounds. We have carefully
considered this submission,
but do not accept it. This is a rehearing, but in
any event it was apparent from the grounds of appeal (and in particular from
Nickel's written reply submissions at [5]-[6]) that the primary judge's
conclusions as to funding or delay as reasons for amending
the defence were
Mr Russell's evidence about delay, there is another delay that must be
considered. The effect of purporting to reduce the
risk of delay for the
purpose of resolving the WA Proceeding must be measured against the consequence
that (on its case) having removed
the cl 2.2 defence, the validity of the
termination would
be resolved. This consequence was known to MSI.
Even if the Receivers succeeded in the WA Proceeding
on the cl 2.5
timing issue, MSI anticipated a second stage of proceedings which inevitably
kept the cl 2.2 issue alive. Resolution
of other issues affecting the
validity of the termination would simply be deferred and delayed, not
Did MSI signal to the Receivers the prospect of future
litigation and its content?
to the strategic conference the Receivers tried on a number of occasions to seek
confirmation from MSI about the scope of litigation
it had threatened or
intended to pursue going forward. Clayton Utz raised this in its letter to
Russells of 15 October 2019. It
foreshadowed an estoppel claim if MSI
sought to raise matters in a later proceeding which should have been raised in
the WA Proceeding.
The response from Russells was that it would not be filing a
counterclaim but it declined to engage with the propositions raised
Utz raised this issue again in the position paper for the strategic conference.
MSI's position paper did not engage with
the matters raised.
the primary judge considered that MSI had made its position about further
proceedings 'pellucid' at the strategic conference,
senior counsel for MSI at
that strategic conference submitted that the liability relating to the
termination notice would be resolved
by the WA Proceeding, and as events
transpired (with the deletion of the cl 2.2 defence and the commencement of
the Federal Court
Proceeding), that is not what happened.
Objectively,
the correspondence subsequent to the strategic conference referred to indicates
that the Receivers did not consider MSI's
position was clear.
the strategic conference, Russells indicated in its letter to Clayton Utz of 30
November 2019 that the WA Proceeding would end
the current litigation 'between
the current parties'.
Utz continued to seek confirmation of MSI's position. In the letter to Russells
of 3 December 2019 Clayton Utz expressly
asked whether, if the
Receivers succeeded in the WA Proceeding, MSI reserved the ability to sue
other parties in relation to the
Sale Agreement. As noted above, Russells
responded on 5 December 2019 but did not answer the question.
letter of 17 December 2019 from Russells to Clayton Utz at first blush might be
thought to provide some indication about limiting
future litigation. But read
carefully, acknowledging (as Hill J did) the likelihood of the Receivers being
joined to any proceeding
and is not forthcoming. It speaks only of refraining from bringing proceedings
the Receivers
or bringing proceedings '
in the form of the
draft statement of claim
'. Being given 21 days' notice if a different form
of claim might issue is hardly giving an indication of intention. It discloses
nothing more than a risk that MSI might proceed against other parties in a way
that might affect the Receivers so that they may need
to prepare an injunction
or stay application at some point. Nor does MSI anticipate by the letter that
it may abandon the cl 2.2
defence, but continue to rely on it if it brought
any action in the future.
regard to the documentary evidence, the Receivers were concerned about the risk
of separate proceedings that might involve
them and sought to have all issues
introduced into the WA Proceeding by counterclaim or concurrent separate
proceedings. They knew
what was said by MSI at the strategic conference before
the trial judge about the WA Proceeding resolving liability. They were entitled
to take that into account. Even so, it is objectively apparent that they were
concerned about the potential for further litigation
which might raise matters
claimed in the Draft Writ Proceeding to be brought directly or indirectly
against them, and made those
concerns known to MSI, but MSI did not illuminate
the position for them. Atlantic Nickel submitted that MSI was not frank or
transparent
in this regard.
cl 2.2 defence was withdrawn on 12 February 2020. Despite its withdrawal,
nothing was said by Russells to Clayton Utz about any
intention to preserve the
cl 2.2 claims relating to the Receivers and Sellers and include them in
subsequent litigation.
do not consider that before or after it deleted its cl 2.2 defence, MSI
signalled to the Receivers the prospect of further litigation
against other
parties in which it would reagitate claims about the conduct of the Receivers
and Sellers, including both the cl 2.2
and cl 2.5 claims. Those were
claims that were likely to result in the Receivers' joinder. There was no such
intimation (a point
made by Gageler J about Mr Tyne's conduct in
at [76]). It was incumbent on MSI to raise such matters and seek case
management directions:
at [118]. There was a lack of
transparency in this regard. Such conduct also informs assessment of the
Receivers' position that
the cl 2.2 defence should have been included in
the hearing of the WA Proceeding, the allegation of tactical manoeuvring
assertion that the Receivers should have undertaken self-help measures
(discussed at [268] below).
also note that despite what was said at the strategic conference about the
significance of the outcome in the WA Proceeding to
questions of liability, MSI
did not await an outcome from the trial judge before instituting the Federal
Court Proceeding. No evidence
as to why this course was taken was
identified.
Abuse of process
have reached a different conclusion to that of the primary judge on whether the
Federal Court Proceeding is an abuse of process.
We have concluded that it is,
for the following reasons.
Overlap and inconsistent findings
accept that the subject matter of the WA Proceeding and the Federal Court
Proceeding do not overlap completely as in
. However, there
does not need to be a complete overlap in order for there to be an abuse of
at [327]. Risks of inconsistency and other matters
such as the vexation of a litigant may well arise even with incomplete overlap,
and in this case they do.
facts that underpin both proceedings are neither separated in time nor
at [315]. They concern a confined three-week period
preceding the issue of the termination notice.
overlap based on the respective pleadings has been summarised at [129]-[146]
above. What is apparent from that exercise is that
the content of significant
parts of the claims and impugned conduct overlap, insofar as they relate to the
premature termination of the Sale Agreement
(cl 2.5); allegations of breaches of the reasonable endeavours clause by
the Receivers
and Sellers (cl 2.2); allegations of breaches of the 'no
solicitation' clause (cl 2.6(c)); allegations against Atlantic Nickel of
inducing breaches of contract by the Sellers and Receivers; and allegations of
unconscionable and inequitable conduct that relate
to the implementation of the
Sale Agreement.
Particularly
in relation to the causes of action that plead and rely on the alleged premature
termination of the Sale Agreement, the
Court of Appeal declaration has since
crystallised the very real potential for an inconsistent finding. Although the
primary judge
was alive to the potential that an appeal might be upheld, the
declaration has since been made.
parties made a number of submissions about the effect of the Court of Appeal's
declaration on this appeal.
Nickel and the Receivers submitted that MSI seeks to relitigate an important
point as to whether the Sale Agreement was validly
terminated by the termination
notice, a point on which it has failed. The Receivers contend that so much is
apparent from (at least)
MSI's reliance in the Federal Court Proceeding on the
alleged breach by the Receivers and Sellers of cl 2.5(a) of the Sale
by premature termination; their reliance on the alleged breach by the
Receivers and Sellers by executing the Appian sale agreement;
the alleged
adoption by Atlantic Nickel of the conduct of the Receivers' and Sellers' breach
and its own repudiation of the contract
after receipt of the purported
termination notice; the Receivers' and Sellers' alleged contraventions of
s 21 of the ACL by purporting
to terminate under cl 2.5(a) before any
right of termination had arisen (asserting Mr Tucker purported to terminate
it by exercise
of the Sellers' right of termination); and MSI's claim that it
lost the opportunity to complete the Sale Agreement. The Receivers
contend that
these pleadings and relief are all inconsistent with the Court of Appeal's
decision. Notably, the Receivers submitted,
MSI pleads in the Federal Court
Proceeding that because of the alleged contravening conduct of the Receivers and
Atlantic Nickel,
it suffered loss and damage, namely the loss of the opportunity
to complete the Sale Agreement and become the owner of the relevant
assets. The
Receivers say that the value of the pleaded loss of opportunity assumes the
termination of the Sale Agreement was invalid,
contrary to the Court of Appeal's
determination.
is to be recalled that MSI seemingly maintained at the strategic conference that
if the Sale Agreement had been validly terminated,
then it has no further claim
based on inducing a breach of contract. It pursues such a claim in the Federal
Court Proceeding. MSI
approaches the Court of Appeal decision by distinguishing
conduct prior to the issue of the termination notice and the actual issue
notice. It contends that it may properly pursue claims against Atlantic Nickel
that are based on conduct of the Receivers
and Sellers that occurred prior to
the termination of the Sale Agreement, and that damages claims for the breaches
caused by such
conduct are not dependent upon whether or not the Sale Agreement
was validly terminated. It also focuses on the different parties
respective proceedings, relying on the fact it did not sue Atlantic Nickel in
the WA Proceeding; it did not rely in the WA
Proceeding on a claim the Receivers
or Sellers were precluded from terminating the Sale Agreement because of their
breaches of cl
2.2 (after amending its claim); and it does not (directly)
pursue the Receivers or the Sellers in the Federal Court Proceeding.
contends that the Court of Appeal decision does not affect its claims or this
consider the risk of a number of inconsistent findings arises and such risk has
been heightened having regard to the Court of Appeal's
declaration. Whether an
inconsistency may arise in each circumstance raised by the Receivers is not
decisive: there is clearly
a real risk of inconsistent findings that tends to
bring the administration of justice into disrepute. MSI in its submissions
to fairly acknowledge that the allegations involving the Receivers are not
limited to the circumstances of the timing of the issue
of the termination
notice, but extend the factual inquiry into the Receivers' conduct over the
relevant three-week period.
MSI also submitted in its supplementary submissions following the Court of
Appeal decision that:
The appropriate course for MSI to address inconsistencies between its case in
the Federal Court and the WASCA Decision is to amend
its pleadings in response
to the Receivers' contentions ... to bring its pleading in line with the WASCA
Decision with respect to
termination of the ASA. If, contrary to MSI's primary
contention, the Full Court were of the view that the Federal Court Proceedings
should not involve any issues as to the Receivers' compliance with cl 2.2,
then the appropriate course is for MSI to amend the [amended
statement of claim]
in respect of allegations of breach of cl 2.2 by the Receivers. MSI's
claims can otherwise continue, unaffected
by any risk of conflicting findings
with the WASCA Decision.
if MSI wished to amend its pleading after the Court of Appeal decision and ask
this Court to take such amendments into account
on the appeal, it could and
should have pursued that course. It might be that MSI is suggesting that any
stay should be in part,
rather than of the whole proceeding, or pending
amendments. However, it has not proffered any amended statement of claim, and
not address the cross-claim against the Receivers. It does not set out
precisely how its pleading might be amended in a manner that
would avoid
inconsistency or other vexing of the Receivers. It does not explain how a
cross-claim could be avoided.
are other risks of inconsistent findings that inform whether the Federal Court
Proceeding is an abuse of process, but they can
be dealt with briefly, as the
declaration has eclipsed them in terms of degree of risk.
other risks arise because although the cl 2.2 defence was withdrawn,
allegations about wrongdoing on the part of the Sellers
and Receivers during the
relevant window remained part of the WA Proceeding. They included allegations
of false and misleading statements,
unconscionable and inequitable conduct.
particular, Atlantic Nickel referred to issues 5, 6 and 7 in the WA Proceeding,
addressed in
Mirabela Trial
at [622]‑[643]. These issues were
raised as defences before Hill J to the validity of the termination, and all are
re-agitated
by the statement of claim in the Federal Court Proceeding. They
(a) that the Receivers and Sellers made false and misleading statements as to
whether they intended to terminate and were in discussions
with other parties
(b) that the alleged termination was founded upon certain unconscionable or
inequitable conduct by the Receivers and Sellers asserting
a right to terminate
under cl 2.5 which was false (issue 6); and
(c) that the Receivers were in breach of cl 2.6(c) by dealing with the Appian
purchasers (issue 7).
failed before Hill J on each of these defences. Her Honour's findings were not
determinative of the outcome. That does not mean
they are to be dismissed as
inconsequential. A trial judge will generally give careful consideration to
whether they should make
findings necessary for the disposition of the remaining
issues in a proceeding in case they are subsequently held to be wrong and
resolution becomes necessary on appeal. This increases the judicial
fact-finding and time required for the primary judgment,
but tends to minimise
the risk of remitters or re-hearings. See generally the obligations on a
primary judge as summarised by Emerton
Braham v ACN 101 482 580 Pty Ltd
[2018] VSC 575
to issue 5 (
Mirabela Trial
at [622]-[632]), Hill J was required to
consider allegations including when and whether Mr Tucker made statements
Receivers were in discussions with other parties; whether and
when Mr Tucker made misleading statements as to his intention to terminate
the Sale Agreement on any particular date or at all; the content of statements
and whether they were
misleading; the timing and content of statements about communications with
Appian. Her Honour was obliged
to make findings of fact in considering
these claims. Her finding was that Mr Tucker did not make misleading or
deceptive statements
as alleged. Similar allegations are made about
Mr Tucker's conduct in the amended statement of claim in the Federal Court
(e.g., [88], [144 I and J], [145]).
to issue 6 (
Mirabela Trial
at [633]-[634]), her Honour noted the overlap
with matters relied upon to support a claim that Mr Tucker engaged in false
and misleading
conduct and determined that for similar reasons the conduct was
not unconscionable or inequitable. Similar allegations of unconscionable
conduct are made about the conduct of the Receivers and Sellers in the amended
statement of claim in the Federal Court Proceeding
(e.g., [98], [107],
to issue 7 (
Mirabela Trial
at [635]-[643]), Hill J noted the issue was
the subject of argument and submissions. Her Honour said as to
[637] It is clear from the text of the clause that in order to terminate the
Agreement, three things were required: first, a notice
in writing to the other
parties to the Agreement; second, compliance with the obligations under cl 2.2
of the Agreement; and third,
one of the matters in (a), (b) or (c) applying.
The clause did not require compliance with any other clause of the Agreement,
[638] For these reasons, even if the Receivers were in breach of cl 2.6(c), it
did not prevent them from exercising any right to
terminate the Agreement.
considering whether the Receivers and Sellers had breached their obligations
under cl 2.6, her Honour was obliged to consider matters
such as the extent
to which the Sale Agreement permitted communications with Appian, whether
communications between the Receivers
and Appian evidenced the Receivers and
Sellers 'entreating' or 'urging' Appian to make an offer, and whether documents
provided to Appian relevantly constituted information within the
meaning of the Sale Agreement. Her Honour found that there was
no breach by the
Receivers and Sellers of the cl 2.6 obligations. Similar allegations are
made about breaches of cl 2.6 in the amended
statement of claim in the
Federal Court Proceeding (e.g., [109], [136]).
primary judge considered that findings on such issues were obiter and were
insufficient to raise an issue estoppel. However,
as the primary judge
acknowledged, the fact that findings on such issues have been made is not
irrelevant to the question of oppression.
of process is inherently broader and more flexible than estoppel:
at [25]. We also note the observation of Jackman J in
that the risk of inconsistent findings is not assessed solely by
reference to the substantive issues of fact but may extend to findings
matters of credibility of witnesses: at [327].
resources have already been utilised addressing the identified issues. More
importantly, the Receivers were obliged to deal
with each of those issues in the
WA Proceeding. Because they have been joined and because of the way those
matters are relied upon
again in the Federal Court Proceeding, the Receivers
must deal with them again. They are therefore vexed, not just in relation to
the termination notice issue the subject of the declaration, but more broadly in
relation to matters they have already addressed
in the WA Proceeding, and as to
which a Court has indicated they would have succeeded.
inevitable consequence for the Receivers in the circumstances of this case is
oppressive. To address the matters that have been
addressed or, in the case of
cl 2.2, should have been addressed in the WA Proceeding is to vex them, as
that expression is understood
in this context.
Clause 2.2 defence should have been maintained in the
WA Proceeding
consider that the cl 2.2 defence (or any counterclaim that relied upon it)
should have been maintained in the WA Proceeding, so
that all elements that
informed the validity of the termination notice (including allegations against
the Receivers and Sellers)
were dealt with:
at [43]. Clause
2.2 is a major plank of MSI's claim in the Federal Court Proceeding about the
invalidity or nature of the 'purported'
termination notice. The allegation that
there was a breach of contract by the 'purported' termination by the Receivers
and Sellers
relies on both the cl 2.5(a) finance condition and the alleged
non-compliance with the Receivers' and Sellers' obligations under
And Mr Russell conceded the centrality of cl 2.2 to the Federal Court
Proceeding (see [110] above).
asserted reason for its deletion does not counter the effect of the decision on
other parties and court resources, and reveals
evident problems. A short-term
avoidance of delay may have been a sound aspiration, but as became apparent by
the proceeding in
this Court, it was not abandoning but only deferring
consideration and resolution of the cl 2.2 issue. Contrary to the primary
finding (at [156]), as a result of the withdrawal of the cl 2.2
defence, the 'central issue in dispute' (whether the termination
was valid) was
not determined because MSI continued to assert in separate proceedings that the
Receivers and Sellers breached the
cl 2.2 reasonable endeavours
obligation.
was particularly incumbent on MSI to clarify its position in light of what was
said by its senior counsel at the strategic conference.
Given what had been
said about the trial determining liability, the withdrawal of the cl 2.2
defence conveyed the impression that
MSI abandoned reliance on (at least)
matters relating to the Receivers' and Sellers' cl 2.2 obligations. If
that were not the case,
even if MSI intended to rely on it only in separate
litigation against other parties, MSI should have disclosed that fact because
the obvious risk to the Receivers of a cross-claim. Whilst parties may
generally make decisions without disclosing their litigation
strategy, parties
(and their lawyers) remain subject to the statutory duties referred to in
, and must strive to meet the expectations of disclosure and frankness
required in the modern litigation culture.
follows that we respectfully do not agree with the primary judge's assessment of
what was conveyed at the strategic conference,
and regardless, we emphasise the
fact that the cl 2.2 defence was deleted after the strategic conference.
This step undermined much
of what was said by senior counsel at the strategic
conference about resolving liability against the Receivers.
the resolution of the cl 2.2 issues and maintaining them in the Federal
Court Proceeding gives rise to questions as to the
utility of the WA Proceeding.
A decision that parts of a claim might be excised but reagitated at a different
time is a case management
decision to be made by a court, taking into account
the allocation of the resources of the court, not a decision to be made by a
at [117]-[118];
at [80]) or because of
the interests of a litigation funder.
in resisting any suggestion of abuse of process, submitted in effect that it was
entitled to proceed in a staged manner having
regard to its financial
have referred to the statement of Lord Bingham in
Johnson v Gore Wood
interests above. To cite the passage fully (at 31,
emphasis added):
It is, however, wrong to hold that because a matter could have been raised in
earlier proceedings it should have been, so as to render
the raising of it in
later proceedings necessarily abusive. That is to adopt too dogmatic an
approach to what should in my opinion
be a broad, merits-based judgment which
takes account of the public and private interests involved and also takes
account of all
the facts of the case, focusing attention on the crucial question
whether, in all the circumstances, a party is misusing or abusing
the process of
the court by seeking to raise before it the issue which could have been raised
before. As one cannot comprehensively
list all possible forms of abuse, so one
cannot formulate any hard and fast rule to determine whether, on given facts,
abuse is to
be found or not.
Thus while I would accept that lack of funds
would not ordinarily excuse a failure to raise in earlier proceedings an issue
could and should have been raised then, I would not regard it as
necessarily irrelevant, particularly if it appears that the lack
of funds has
been caused by the party against whom it is sought to claim
primary judge found that MSI's 'then financial inability' to litigate its claims
explained its conduct, such that it did not engage
in inappropriate tactical
manoeuvring: PJ at [247]-[248].
number of matters are relevant for context. MSI attempted to obtain litigation
funding for the Draft Writ Proceeding, apparently
without success. MSI was able
to retain lawyers and bring the Draft Writ Proceeding. MSI was able to secure
litigation funding
for the defence of the WA Proceeding (initially capped at
$412,000), and had such funding in place when it filed the defence asserting
cl 2.2, cl 2.5 and cl 2.6 claims. As a defendant, no risk as to
providing security for costs in order to pursue those defences
evidence does not suggest that MSI declined to file a counterclaim solely for
financial reasons, although it was no doubt
an important aspect relevant to the
decision-making. The emails of 10 December 2019 and 11 December 2019 (at
[92] above), which
post-date Russells informing Clayton Utz that MSI did not
propose to file a counterclaim, are relevant in this regard.
is no evidence that the Receivers knew of MSI's financial position once Balance
REV was on board as funder; the notification
of funding filed in the Supreme
Court provides no detail of the terms of funding.
if one accepts that MSI made forensic decisions based on its then financial
capacity or access to litigation funding, it does
not follow that there is no
abuse of process. Forensically defensible decisions from the perspective of a
litigant do not thereby
prevail over the public interest. Instead, the correct
approach, in accordance with
, is to have regard to the proper
balance of private
public interests.
that a litigant's financial circumstances are not irrelevant, it ought not be
the case that a litigant directs
the case management
or progress of a proceeding having regard to their financial position. After
all, 'it is commonplace for litigants
to have difficulties in affording the cost
of litigation but lack of means cannot stand as an excuse for abuse of process':
Manson v Vooght
[1998] EWCA Civ 1665
[1999] BPIR 376
at 389, cited in
Johnson v Gore
it ought not be the case that a litigation funder in effect directs (by proxy)
the case management or progress of a proceeding
based on its position at any
particular time (having regard to risk appetite, strategy and so on) as to
whether it might fund a claim,
whether at all, in part, or later. There is
support for this view in
Arthur Andersen Corporate Finance Pty Ltd v Buzzle
Operation Pty Ltd (In liq)
[2009] NSWCA 104 (Ipp
JA, Tobias and McColl JJ
agreeing) at [81]-[82].
evidence in this case provides an example of the different interests and
strategies that a litigation funder may bring to bear.
Balance REV in fact
declined to endorse the issue of the Federal Court Proceeding when asked,
suggesting that the better course
was to await the outcome of the WA Proceeding
([125] above).
cultural shift in the conduct of civil litigation to which Gordon J referred in
(at [125]) obliges the courts and the wider profession to take
into account issues such as resourcing, costs and delay. Having regard
private and public interests, such obligations are unlikely to be met if limited
court resources are allocated to facilitate
a second proceeding because a party
has challenging financial circumstances and for that reason seeks to stage or
fragment proceedings
over time. The interests of other litigants must be
considered. There may be circumstances where such a course can be supported
they would be the exception.
, Mr Tyne as trustee commenced proceedings in the Federal
Court to pursue claims against UBS where the trust had discontinued claims
against UBS before the NSW Supreme Court (
at [1]-[4]).
Mr Tyne perceived forensic benefits in 'holding back' the trust's claims in
the Supreme Court having regard to costs
and the time-consuming nature of the
proceeding. Mr Tyne faced straitened financial circumstances (
at [105], [154]) but that did not assist him. The plurality found
that Mr Tyne's own interests in minimising his forensic burden
did not excuse tactical manoeuvring. The plurality observed that there would be
duplication of resources, increased costs
and delay in resolving disputes.
Gageler J stated that Mr Tyne's explanation was not unreasonable gauged
solely by the trust's interests.
However, having regard to UBS's interests and
the public interest in the timely and efficient administration of justice, it
an insufficient explanation for why the trust's claims were held in abeyance
rather than pursued in the Supreme Court so that all
relevant issues could be
determined (
at [80]). It was not appropriate that
Mr Tyne 'take upon himself' such a decision, having regard to private and
public interests
Johnson v Gore Wood
, the circumstances are distinguishable.
Mr Johnson's financial predicament was caused by the respondent's
negligence. In this case
it was not asserted that financial inability to
litigate claims was caused by any breach of duty on the part of the Receivers or
Atlantic Nickel. And regardless, accepting that financial circumstances may be
relevant, they must be considered together with all
the circumstances and having
regard to other private and public interests, consistent with
do not consider that MSI's position, to the extent it was based on financial
circumstances, the absence of litigation funding,
the terms of litigation
funding or the preferences of litigation funders, properly explained why the
cl 2.2 defence was not pursued
in the WA Proceeding, at the time that many
other contentions that related to the termination of the Sale Agreement and the
conduct of the Receivers and Sellers were maintained by MSI's defence
(as is apparent from the number and complexity of matters addressed
was not reasonable for such financial matters to direct how the litigation
proceeded when the interests of the Receivers and the
public were taken into
account. The Receivers and Sellers did not acquiesce in any staged approach:
Receivers are left vexed in that they have to deal again with matters they have
already addressed in the WA Proceeding and incur
the costs and delays in
resolution. The outcome of the forensic decisions that may have favoured MSI is
that matters that should
have been addressed in the WA Proceeding were not.
Absent a stay, there will be duplication of resources in that matters that have
already received attention in the Supreme Court (and Court of Appeal) will again
receive attention in this Court. This outcome is
not consistent with the timely
and efficient administration of justice. It is not consistent with the
overarching purpose of civil
practice and procedure set out in s 37M of the
Federal Court Act
reject MSI's contention that Atlantic Nickel's submissions on the appeal were to
the effect that 'people who can't afford to should
not litigate'. There was no
suggestion by Atlantic Nickel that parties should be shut out from access to the
court for that reason
alone. Rather, its position was that there should not be
unilateral forensic decision-making by a party (or funder), based on a
position that pertains at any particular time, which affects the case management
and fair-resolution of a trial, without
disclosure to the parties and without
seeking appropriate case management directions from the court.
the role of litigation funders should not be ignored in this assessment. It is
necessary to keep in mind who the real decision
makers are and who, apart from
the actual litigant, has an interest in the outcome of a proceeding. If the
impecuniosity of the
actual litigant at the time of the initial proceedings is
relevant to whether later proceedings constitute an abuse of process, the
positions and decisions of entities who stand behind the litigant and stand to
benefit from its success are also potentially relevant.
the extent that limited financial resources caused MSI to narrow its case and
refrain from filing a counterclaim in the WA Proceeding,
that was the
consequence of commercial decisions by its funder (Balance REV), which had a
stake in any claim proceeds and an exclusive
option to fund further proceedings.
There is no suggestion that Balance REV was constrained by a shortage of funds;
it was making
strategic decisions in its own interests. As matters transpired,
Balance REV did not fund MSI in the Federal Court Proceeding and
therefore directly involved in the proceeding alleged to constitute an abuse.
Meanwhile, the current funder (Omni Bridgeway)
appears, on the evidence, not to
have been one of those approached by MSI in its attempt to fund the WA
Proceeding. There is therefore
no individual funder who can be said to have
orchestrated the holding back of part of MSI’s claim in the WA Proceeding
the advancing of that claim later. However, it is not irrelevant that
MSI’s conduct of the WA Proceeding was determined by
the commercial
decisions of a well-resourced entity (Balance REV) to which it had contractually
bound itself. The funding agreement
between MSI and Balance REV entitled the
latter to both an option to fund further proceedings
a share of any
amount recovered in such proceedings even if it did not fund them (cl 3.6(c)).
The fact that an entity which stands
to benefit from the success of MSI’s
claims in the Federal Court Proceeding could have funded the pursuit of those
the WA Proceeding, but chose not to, diminishes the force of
MSI’s funding difficulties as an explanation for its conduct.
Other matters
'Tactical manoeuvring'
consider there was tactical manoeuvring (as that expression is used in
at [45]; and
at [327]), revealed by the statements made
at the strategic conference, the refusal to candidly inform the Receivers
whether it was
intended to pursue other claims raised in the Draft Writ
Proceeding outside of the WA Proceeding, the amendment to the defence, the
failure to inform the Receivers that despite their deletion the cl 2.2
claims were to be pursued separately, and the failure to disclose
proceedings might be pursued without awaiting the outcome of the trial in the WA
Proceeding.
is not to the point that the Receivers potentially 'could have done something'
in the WA Proceeding, such as seeking negative declarations
or, after the
cl 2.2 defence withdrawal, seeking orders permitting the amendment to the
defence on terms preventing reagitating the
matters the subject of the deleted
pleading. It is perhaps easy to assert such steps could have been taken with
the benefit of hindsight.
Given the lack of certainty as to MSI's position, and
absent appropriate disclosure or clarification of MSI's intentions, we would
accept that an obligation was imposed on the Receivers to make such an
application to the Supreme Court:
at [323]. As the plurality
An abuse of process is no less an abuse because the party adversely affected
might have, by greater diligence in its own interests,
prevented the abuse.
Relevance of MSI as a defendant
are we persuaded that the fact that MSI was a defendant, rather than a
plaintiff, in the WA Proceeding has any particular significance
circumstances of this case. MSI referred to
Henley v Bloom
[2010] EWCA
[2010] 1 WLR 1770
, in which it was said that it may be 'more difficult'
to argue an action by a claimant is an abuse where they were 'simply a
in an earlier action involving the same parties (at [33]). That may
be so, but it will depend on the particular circumstances and
involved, and leaves open for consideration the nature of the role of the
parties in the earlier action.
is important to have regard to the substance of the threatened and actual
proceedings between the parties. It was MSI that threatened
proceedings in
which the allegations about the termination of the Sale Agreement and the
conduct of the Sellers and Receivers were
made. It went so far as to draft
a statement of claim and obtain leave to serve the writ. It was only after a
period of asking
and waiting for the writ to be served that the Receivers
instituted the WA Directions Proceeding and ultimately the WA Proceeding.
WA Proceeding was in effect commenced defensively, in an attempt to resolve
claims that MSI was threatening but not acting upon.
invoked in its defence many of the matters it had pleaded in the draft statement
of claim. This was no mere 'bare denial' defence
(and nor would that have been
appropriate). It was a defence that pleaded positive allegations. MSI was
obviously entitled as a
defendant to jettison some of those allegations and run
a narrower case, but it does not follow that it was entitled to expect that
decision to have no consequences for its position in the future. In all of the
circumstances, we do not think it avails MSI to rely
on its formal status as a
defendant in the WA Proceeding to require breach of a different threshold
before its conduct might constitute
an abuse of process. The facts and
circumstances are to be considered as a whole.
Consequence for Receivers of action against Atlantic
submitted that by the Federal Court Proceeding, claims are brought against
Atlantic Nickel for the first time, and Atlantic Nickel
cannot be vexed. That
does not resolve the abuse of process claim insofar as Atlantic Nickel is
concerned. The likely consequence
of cross-claims for joint or coordinate
liability is 'an important consideration' and can constitute abuse of process in
brings the administration of justice into disrepute:
[149]-[152].
was highly likely, if not inevitable, having regard to the subject matter of the
Federal Court Proceeding, that Atlantic Nickel
would join the Receivers. MSI's
pleading against Atlantic Nickel has led to the joinder of the Receivers as
cross-respondents where
their alleged liability for contravening cl 2.2 and
cognate obligations must be determined. Indeed, MSI pleads in the Federal Court
Proceeding that the chief financial officer of Atlantic Nickel acted under the
direction of the Receivers. It is pleaded that Atlantic
Nickel allegedly acted
at the Receivers' direction in relation to the sale and termination of the Sale
a cross-claim has been brought simply confirms what was already readily
anticipated. It follows, in our view, that in all the
circumstances the
Federal Court Proceeding against Atlantic Nickel is an abuse of
Anshun estoppel
4 of the Receivers’ notice of appeal raises the question of whether, had
MSI brought a further claim directly against
it, such claim would be barred by
estoppel. Relatedly, the question arises as to whether claims
that would have been estopped can be brought indirectly against the
Receivers in
the claim brought by MSI against Atlantic Nickel.
initial question is whether MSI could advance its claim based on cl 2.2 in
light of the manner in which it conducted the WA Proceeding:
see generally
Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589
estoppel arises where the claim was so connected to the
subject matter of the first proceeding as to make it unreasonable, in the
context of that proceeding, for the claim not to have been raised in it:
at 602; and
Timbercorp Finance Pty Ltd (in liq) v Collins
[2016] HCA 44
(2016) 259 CLR 212
is a common law right which arises between parties to a proceeding as a
consequence of how the proceeding was conducted, so as
to affect the scope of
future proceedings between them:
foundation of
estoppel lies in concepts of what constitutes fair
behaviour between the parties, rather than institutional considerations
the finality of judicial determinations. What is ultimately required
is 'a value judgment to be made referable to the proper conduct
litigation':
Champerslife
Pty Ltd vManojlovski
75 NSWLR 245
(Allsop P).
'unreasonableness' of having omitted to raise a claim in the first proceeding
must flow, substantially if not wholly, from the
closeness of its connection
with the subject matter of that proceeding:
Champerslife
'special circumstances' exist, a party may be permitted to raise an issue in
subsequent proceedings despite it being unreasonable
for it not to have been
raised in earlier proceedings:
Henderson v Henderson
[1843] EngR 917
(1843) 67 ER 313
Wong v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2004] FCAFC 242
primary judge held MSI was not estopped from raising non-compliance with cl 2.2
in the Federal Court Proceeding for three reasons
(at [263]-[268]):
his Honour said that MSI’s reliance on cl 2.2 in the WA Proceeding was for
the purpose of negating the conclusion that
the Receivers had acquired a right
to terminate the Sale Agreement. In the Federal Proceeding, it is relied on
against Atlantic
Nickel more broadly to allege that Atlantic Nickel breached the
Sale Agreement, or induced the Receivers' and Sellers' breach of
Agreement or engaged in unconscionable conduct.
and related to the first, his Honour referred to the fact that Atlantic Nickel
was not a party to the WA Proceeding. His
Honour concluded that if Atlantic
Nickel was joined by way of cross-claim, MSI would have faced an application for
security for costs,
and the cross-claim would have severely delayed the
his Honour considered that MSI had removed reliance on cl 2.2 so that the
WA Proceeding could occur quickly, and without substantial
expenditure.
Receivers submitted that the subject matter of the WA Proceeding was whether the
termination of the Sale Agreement by the Receivers
was valid. The issue of
non-compliance with cl 2.2 was closely connected with that subject matter;
non-compliance would have disentitled
the Receivers from issuing a notice and so
affected the validity of the termination, even if the time for termination had
been reached.
It was necessary to pass through the gateway of cl 2.2 and
cl 2.6 in order to terminate.
those circumstances, the Receivers submitted, for MSI to have declined to pursue
an issue that could have affected the validity
of the termination was plainly
unreasonable. It abandoned the cl 2.2 defence for its own forensic reasons
and must live with its
at [327]; and
Pastoral Holdings as the trustee of the Piney Ridge Trust v Van Niekerk
[2025] FCAFC 25
. It was an issue that 'properly belonged' in the WA
Proceeding:
Fairfield Pastoral Holdings as the trustee of the Piney Ridge
Trust v Van Niekerk
[2023] FCA 1185
. As Mr Russell said
in his oral evidence, prior to the amendment, the WA Proceeding had been
defended because of non-compliance
with cl 2.2, that being 'one of the
reasons why the purported termination was invalid'.
conduct did not involve simply holding back a claim, but pleading it by way of a
positive defence and then withdrawing it for
its own purpose. For the reasons
given above at [244]-[248]], we consider it unreasonable that the cl 2.2
defence was not run in
the WA Proceeding. Nor are we satisfied that there are
special circumstances such that, despite this conclusion, MSI should be
to raise the cl 2.2 defence in a claim against the Receivers. In
the circumstances in which the cl 2.2 defence was withdrawn, we
found that a claim brought directly against the Receivers in separate
proceedings raising or relying on a breach of the
Receivers' and Sellers'
cl 2.2 obligations would be precluded by
may be occasions where a party that was not a party to the first proceeding can
estoppel: see the discussion in
Solak v Registrar of
[2011] VSCA 279
. However, it is not necessary for
Atlantic Nickel to establish that it can separately assert an
estoppel in this case in order to establish abuse of process. As discussed,
supports Atlantic Nickel's submission that MSI ought not be able
to indirectly raise the matters previously raised against the Receivers
withdrawn) by way of a claim against Atlantic Nickel. The circumstances of both
the Receivers and Atlantic Nickel may be considered
having regard to principles
of abuse of process and the position of third parties discussed in
, rather than by regard only to the more limited operation of an
estoppel. However,
does have some relevance: the
conclusion that the Receivers could rely on
estoppel as an answer
to any direct claim against them, together with the near inevitability that
Atlantic Nickel would seek to protect
its position by cross-claiming against
them, tends to confirm that the Federal Court Proceeding is an abuse of
we would have found that an
estoppel would have arisen in any
direct claim brought against the Receivers, we prefer to resolve the question
insofar as Atlantic
Nickel is concerned by reference to abuse of process
principles.
have come to the conclusion that the use of the Court's procedures to commence
the Federal Court Proceeding against Atlantic Nickel
occasions unjustifiable
oppression to the Receivers and serves to bring the administration of justice
into disrepute, enlivening
the power to grant a stay, as those conditions are
described in
at [1]. In relation to Atlantic Nickel's own
position, for the reasons given and applying the reasons in
use of the Court's procedures to commence the Federal Court Proceeding against
Atlantic Nickel serves to bring the administration
of justice into
have therefore respectfully come to a contrary conclusion to that of the primary
judge. This is in no small way because of the
subsequent event of the Court of
Appeal's declaration together with the fact that MSI pursues findings
inconsistent with that declaration.
It is also because of the consideration
that should be given to the public interest when considering the funding issue;
for transparency in relation to the cl 2.2 defence withdrawal,
being a unilateral tactical forensic decision by MSI which affected
management of a trial; the view that the cl 2.2 defence should have been
addressed in the WA Proceeding having regard to
all the circumstances,
including the importance of determining the validity of the termination of the
Sale Agreement; and the consideration
of these matters having regard to s 37M
and s 37N of the
Federal Court Act
returning to the somewhat overlapping formal categories, we would uphold the
appeal grounds referred to in categories 1, 2, 3
and 4. It is not necessary to
formally deal with the remaining categories. We have in any event addressed the
scope of what was
said at the strategic conference, the effect of the withdrawal
of the cl 2.2 defence and the
argument in the context of the
other grounds, noting that all the facts and circumstances inform the assessment
of abuse of process.
follows that there was error in failing to find that the Federal Court
Proceeding was an abuse of process. Leave to appeal is
granted, both appeals
are allowed, and there should be a stay of the proceeding QUD 355 of 2021. The
respondent should pay the applicants'
costs of both the applications for leave
to appeal and the appeals, although we will afford the parties the opportunity
to make submissions
in that regard should different costs orders be sought.
will be orders accordingly.
I certify that the preceding two hundred and
ninety five (295) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
Judgment of
the Honourable Justices Banks-Smith, Kennett and
Dated: 17 October 2025
RTF format (1.77 MB)
Signed PDF/A format