Invest Blue Pty Ltd [2025] ATP 5 (25 February 2025)
Reasons for Decision
Invest Blue Pty Ltd
Catchwords:
Decline to conduct proceedings – reducing company to less than 50
members – employee shareholders – timely application
time for making application
Corporations Act 2001
sections 231
Guidance Note 1: Unacceptable Circumstances
Takeovers Panel Procedural Guidelines 2020, 4.6
Ringers Western Limited [2024] ATP 8, Mighty Kingdom Limited [2023] ATP
14, A S P Aluminium Holdings Pty Ltd [2023] ATP 8, Webcentral
Group Limited 03
[2021] ATP 4, Molopo Energy Limited 01 & 02 [2017] ATP 10, The
President’s Club Limited 02 [2016] ATP
1, Careers Australia Group
Limited 03 [2015] ATP 1, Careers Australia Group Limited [2012] ATP 5, Austral
Coal Limited 03 [2005]
ATP 14, Taipan Resources NL 07 [2000] ATP
Interim order
IO undertaking
Declaration
Final order
Undertaking
INTRODUCTION
Panel, Teresa Dyson (sitting President), Ruth Higgins SC and Reeny Paraskeva
declined to conduct proceedings on an application
by Kanenaro Pty Ltd ATF Denaro
Family Superannuation Fund in relation to the affairs of Invest Blue Pty Ltd.
The application concerned
alleged contraventions of Chapter
in connection with Ironbark
Investment Partners Pty Ltd’s acquisition of Invest Blue Pty Ltd pursuant
to a share purchase agreement
executed and completed on 15 December 2023, and an
alleged plan to reduce the number of Invest Blue Pty Ltd’s shareholders
below 51 prior to the transaction so that the takeovers provisions in Chapter 6
no longer applied to it. The Panel considered that
there was no reasonable
prospect that it would declare the circumstances unacceptable.
these reasons, the following definitions
Kanenaro Pty Ltd ATF Denaro Family Superannuation Fund
Bare Trust Arrangements
has the meaning given in paragraph
Equity Plan Services
Equity Plan Services Pty Ltd
Federal Court Proceedings
has the meaning given in paragraph
Invest Blue
Invest Blue Pty Ltd
Invest Blue Companies
Invest Blue and Invest Blue Support
Invest Blue Support
Invest Blue Support Pty Ltd, a related body corporate of Invest Blue
Ironbark Investment Partners Pty Ltd
Merger Summary
has the meaning given in paragraph
Online Shareholder Meeting
has the meaning given in paragraph
Share Purchase Agreement
has the meaning given in paragraph
Blue is a proprietary company limited by shares which operates in the financial
services sector.
Anthony Denaro, a former employee of Invest Blue Support, is both a beneficiary
of the Denaro Family Superannuation Fund and a
director of the Applicant.
1 March 2022, the Applicant was issued 9,819 ordinary shares in Invest Blue
(which it acquired
“using approximately $220,000 of its own
). At this time, Invest Blue was an unlisted public company with
more than 50 members.
Applicant submitted that, in or around June or July 2022, an online meeting was
convened by Invest Blue with various employee
shareholders, including Mr Denaro
“dozens of other employees, possibly up to one hundred”
Shareholder Meeting
). During such meeting, two Invest
Blue directors
“spoke on behalf of Invest Blue and said that the
company needed the Employee Shareholders to move their shareholdings to a
trust so that there were less than fifty shareholders in Invest Blue... The
purported reasons given were for ASIC reporting
reasons, for administrative
convenience, and to make fundraising less cumbersome”
(as submitted by
the Applicant)
August 2022, the Applicant appointed Equity Plan Services to hold its Invest
Blue shares on trust pursuant to a bare trust deed.
19 April 2023, Invest Blue applied to convert from a public company to a
proprietary company.
August 2023, Ironbark, which already owned approximately 40% of the shares in
Invest Blue through a related body corporate, offered
to acquire all the
remaining shares in the Invest Blue Companies that it did not already own in
exchange for scrip in Ironbark (for
Invest Blue shares) and a nominal cash
amount (for Invest Blue Support shares).
connection with Ironbark’s offer, Invest Blue provided the Applicant with
an undated ‘merger summary’ setting
out (among other things) the key
terms of the proposed transaction (
Merger Summary
). Relevantly, the
Merger Summary stated that Equity Plan Services would act on behalf of
shareholders in the bare trust to execute
the Share Purchase Agreement and would
subsequently acquired all the issued shares in the Invest Blue Companies that it
did not already own (including the Applicant’s
beneficially owned Invest
Blue shares) for the consideration described above (
Ironbark Acquisition
pursuant to a share purchase agreement executed and completed on 15 December
Share Purchase Agreement
23 December 2024, Invest Blue Support commenced Federal Court proceedings
against Mr Denaro alleging that he had breached certain
post-termination
employment obligations (
Federal Court Proceedings
APPLICATION
Declaration sought
application dated 17 February 2025, the Applicant sought a declaration of
unacceptable circumstances. It submitted (among other
things) that:
(a) At the time of the Ironbark Acquisition, Invest Blue was an unlisted company
with over 50 members for the purposes of Chapter
“evidenced or
implied by”
certain materials including share certificates, registry
statements, the terms of the Share Purchase Agreement and Ironbark’s
post-merger register. Therefore, Ironbark failed to adhere to the requirements
of Chapter 6 in respect of the Ironbark Acquisition,
impacting Invest Blue
shareholders’ ability to properly assess the merits of Ironbark’s
(b) If the Panel finds that Invest Blue was not a
Chapter 6 company at the time of the Ironbark Acquisition, then steps taken by
Blue prior to the Ironbark Acquisition to establish a bare trust pursuant
to which Equity Plan Services became the registered holder
of shares in Invest
Blue on behalf of employee shareholders (
Bare Trust Arrangements
constituted unacceptable circumstances.
Orders sought
Applicant did not seek any interim orders.
Applicant sought final orders including that:
(a) any transfers of shares under the Share Purchase Agreement be declared void
and of no effect
(b) offers of and acceptances of Ironbark shares under the Share Purchase
Agreement be rescinded and
(c) any bare trusts with Equity Plan Services as trustee relating to Invest Blue
“be vested and the Invest Blue shares be transferred to the
beneficial holders”
Preliminary submissions
received preliminary submissions from Invest Blue and Ironbark.
Blue submitted (among other things) that:
(a) Immediately before the Ironbark Acquisition, it had only six members. In
support, it provided a copy of its share register as
at 14 December 2023 (the
day before the execution and completion of the Share Purchase Agreement), which
showed six registered shareholders.
(b) The decision to establish the Bare Trust Arrangements in July 2022 was not
connected to the Ironbark Acquisition. Rather, it
was motivated by a desire for
Invest Blue to transition to a proprietary company to lessen the administrative
and cost burdens associated
with being a public company, and to facilitate plans
for future growth and expansion generally. It follows that
Trust Arrangements were unconnected to the control transaction complained of,
and accordingly the Panel does not have
unacceptable circumstances as none of the criteria in
also submitted that immediately before the Ironbark Acquisition, Invest Blue
only had six members and was therefore not subject
to Chapter 6.
further submitted that the Panel has no jurisdiction to consider steps taken by
Invest Blue prior to the Ironbark Acquisition to
establish the Bare Trust
Arrangements, as
“[t]he steps taken by the Invest Blue Companies to
restructure a year before Ironbark had made an offer to acquire Invest Blue
beyond the remit of the Panel and consistent with the principles at
Act: Takeover Panel Guidance Note 1: Unacceptable Circumstances
have considered all the material presented to us in coming to our decision, but
only specifically address those matters that we
consider necessary to explain
our reasoning.
Whether Invest Blue was a Chapter 6 company
of the purposes of Chapter 6 outlined in
section 602
is to ensure that the
acquisition of control over the voting shares in a listed company, or an
unlisted company with more than 50
members, takes place in an efficient,
competitive and informed market.
did not accept the Applicant’s submission that, at the time of the
Ironbark Acquisition, Invest Blue was an unlisted company
with over 50 members
for the purposes of Chapter 6, as
“evidenced or implied by”
certain materials including share certificates, registry statements, the terms
of the Share Purchase Agreement and Ironbark’s
post-merger register.
is defined in
section 231
as follows:
“A person is a member
of a company if they:
(a) are a member of the company on its registration; or
(b) agree to become a member of the company after its registration
and their name is entered on the register of members
(c) become a member of the company under
section 167
(membership arising
from conversion of a company from one limited by guarantee to one limited by
(emphasis added).
Blue provided a copy of its share register as at 14 December 2023 (the day
before the execution and completion of the Share
Purchase Agreement) which
showed that it had six members. Accordingly, it was not a Chapter 6 company at
the time of the Ironbark
Acquisition.
noted above, Invest Blue and Ironbark submitted that the Bare Trust Arrangements
“unconnected”
to the control transaction in question and
accordingly the Panel does not have jurisdiction to make a declaration of
unacceptable
circumstances as none of the criteria in
section 657A(2)
our view, the fact that the Bare Trust Arrangements were completed and Invest
Blue was no longer a Chapter 6 company at the date
of the application does not
necessarily remove the Panel’s jurisdiction.
Careers Australia Group Limited
the Panel considered
a bid by Cirrus in relation to Careers Australia that closed 18 months prior to
the application being made. Although
the Panel decided not to conduct
proceedings, it stated the following in relation to its jurisdiction to consider
the application
(footnotes omitted):
“26. Cirrus’ bid
closed some 18 months ago. In our view, the fact that a bid has closed does not
necessarily remove the
Panel’s jurisdiction. In Qantas 02, the Panel
declined to conduct proceedings on an application to reopen a bid to allow a
late acceptance to be counted which would have taken the bidder over 50%. The
Panel considered that it had jurisdiction although
the bid was closed. The Panel
said at [14]:
The Panel’s decision not to commence proceedings was not based on
any view that it did not have jurisdiction to consider the
application.
27. Careers Australia is now 99.99% owned by Cirrus and is no longer a
Chapter 6 company, although it was at the time of the bid.
In our view, this
fact does not necessarily remove the Panel’s jurisdiction. If the view
were taken to the contrary, a curious
situation would arise that the Panel would
have jurisdiction at the beginning of a bid but not necessarily towards the end
of a successful
bid, at least in the case of an on-market or unconditional bid.
This cannot have been intended.
28. However, the fact that a bid has closed may be a factor relevant to
whether the Panel should conduct proceedings.”
consider the situation here is somewhat analogous. An interpretation that the
Panel’s jurisdiction is lost once a company
ceases to be a Chapter 6
company would lead to an unintended consequence whereby transactions and
corporate actions involving the
removal of a company from Chapter 6 escape
regulatory scrutiny after they are completed.
also note that
section 657A(2)
allows us to consider circumstances that
“have had” an effect on control or the acquisition of a substantial
or having regard to the purposes of Chapter 6, or have
“constituted” or “gave rise” to a contravention of
Chapter 6, 6A, 6B or 6C.
Alleged plan to remove Invest Blue from the ambit of Chapter
Applicant submitted that if the Panel finds that Invest Blue was not a Chapter 6
company at the time of the Ironbark Acquisition,
then the Bare Trust
Arrangements were unacceptable because “
[t]he actual reason motivating
Invest Blue (possibly at the instigation or initiative of Ironbark) to establish
the Bare Trust Arrangements
was to extinguish the Employee Shareholders as
members of the company for the purposes of Chapter 6 in connection with the
support of this, the Applicant submitted:
(a) The failure to unwind the Bare Trust Arrangements when the Ironbark
Acquisition commenced suggests that their establishment may
have been primarily
or solely intended to enable Invest Blue and/or Ironbark to avoid the operation
of Chapter 6.
(b) No advice or communication was provided to shareholders who transferred
their holdings into the bare trust to inform them that
doing so might deprive
them of their Chapter 6 rights in the event of a future change of control
transaction. As a result, those
shareholders were not in a position to make an
informed decision.
(c) There was a high degree of cooperation between Ironbark and Invest Blue in
the lead-up to the Ironbark Acquisition, and Invest
Blue acted as the chief
proponent of the transaction on behalf of Ironbark. In addition, Ironbark was a
substantial shareholder at
the time the Bare Trust Arrangements were completed
and one of its executives was a nominee director on the Invest Blue board from
29 August 2019 until 15 December 2023 (the date of the Ironbark Acquisition).
Given these circumstances, the Panel may infer that
Invest Blue’s attempt
to extinguish Chapter 6 rights was intended to facilitate Ironbark’s
acquisition without requiring
compliance with Chapter 6 requirements and
mentioned, Invest Blue submitted that the decision to establish the Bare Trust
Arrangements in July 2022 was not connected to the
Ironbark Acquisition but
rather was motivated by a desire for Invest Blue to transition to a proprietary
company to lessen the administrative
and cost burdens associated with being a
public company, and to facilitate plans for future growth and expansion
Careers Australia Group
the Panel considered
whether an offer by the majority shareholder to buy the shares of 40
shareholders under separate option arrangements
was unacceptable in
circumstances where, if those offers were accepted, and options exercised, the
number of shareholders would fall
from 88 to below 50, thus removing the company
from Chapter 6. The Panel declined to make a declaration of unacceptable
circumstances
after an undertaking was given that in effect limited the exercise
of options to such a number that the company would be left with
62 members.
However, in its reasons, the Panel acknowledged:
there will be circumstances in which removal of a company from the ambit of
Chapter 6 will clearly not be unacceptable,
for instance, if a company ends up
with 50 or fewer shareholders by coincidence; that is, as an ancillary result of
some other act.
Where there is a plan or proposal designed to cause a company to
be taken outside the ambit of Chapter 6, unacceptable circumstances
may, in our
view, arise.”
Unacceptable
circumstances may arise where there is a deliberate strategy to reduce the
number of shareholders in a company with a
view to taking the company outside
the ambit of Chapter 6 and depriving shareholders of the benefits and
protections afforded under
that Chapter.
matters initially concerned us. The Merger Summary provided to Invest Blue
shareholders around the time of its offer to acquire
the Invest Blue Companies
(presumably around August 2023) stated that a financial services firm had
“completed an extensive project over the last 10 months to determine an
independent valuation of both businesses”
. In our view, this indicated
that the Ironbark Acquisition may have been under contemplation at the time that
the Bare Trust Arrangements
were completed.
were also concerned that the only material provided by Invest Blue to Invest
Blue employee shareholders around the time of the
Applicant’s entry into
its bare trust deed with Equity Plan Services was a slide deck from the Online
Shareholder Meeting
which showed
the company’s growth strategy, its upcoming acquisition activity and its
plan for employees to take up additional
shares. While we appreciate that the
Bare Trust Arrangements may have helped facilitate these plans (as submitted by
Invest Blue),
Invest Blue did not provide us with any supporting material or
correspondence to shareholders explaining the basis for the Bare Trust
Arrangements or their potential impact.
in the circumstances, we consider it unlikely that further enquiries would lead
us to find that there was a deliberate strategy
to reduce the number of
shareholders in Invest Blue with a view to taking the company outside the ambit
of Chapter 6 and depriving
shareholders of the benefits and protections afforded
under that Chapter. In coming to this conclusion, we consider it relevant
(a) Invest Blue submitted:
(i) the decision to establish the Bare Trust Arrangements in July 2022 was not
connected to the Ironbark Acquisition but rather motivated
by a desire for
Invest Blue to transition to a proprietary company to lessen the administrative
and cost burdens associated with
being a public company, and to facilitate plans
for future growth and expansion generally and
(ii) while Invest Blue requested all employee shareholders utilise the Bare
Trust Arrangements, it did not give a direction to this
effect. The Invest Blue
register dated 14 December 2023 showed some individual shareholders declined to
utilise the Bare Trust Arrangements.
(b) Considerable time has elapsed since the
completion of the Bare Trust Arrangements and Ironbark Acquisition. It would be
no straightforward
matter to reconstruct what information was available to
Invest Blue shareholders and the full rationale for Invest Blue undertaking
Bare Trust Arrangements. In our view, the circumstances surrounding the Bare
Trust Arrangements are likely to require information
gathering and forensic
analysis that the Panel is not best equipped to undertake.
(c) The Applicant’s allegation that it was
‘misled’ in relation to the Bare Trust Arrangements may be better
with by a Court.
regard, we note the Applicant’s submission that in correspondence to
Invest Blue Support’s lawyers in connection
with the Federal Court
Proceedings, the following potential cross-claims have been referred to
“(a) breach of directors’ duties claim against the directors of
Invest Blue in connection with their Attempted Extinguishment
of Chapter 6
Rights and for failing to require Ironbark to comply with Chapter 6”
“(b) An oppression claim against Ironbark for inducing or
requiring Invest Blue to proceed with the merger in breach of the
requirements”
(d) There was limited material supporting the
Applicant’s submission that there was a deliberate strategy to deprive
shareholders
of the benefits and protections afforded under Chapter 6.
Remedies available
4.6(b) of the Panel’s Procedural Guidelines identifies
remedies available”
as a factor the Panel considers in deciding
whether to conduct proceedings.
mentioned, the Applicant sought final orders to declare void any transfers, and
to rescind the offers and acceptances, under the
Share Purchase Agreement. In
our view, these orders are apt to be unfairly prejudicial to various parties,
including the Invest Blue
Companies, Ironbark, and former Invest Blue
shareholders.
forming this view, we considered Invest Blue’s submission that
“[t]he Invest Blue Companies and Ironbark have organised their business
affairs, including carrying out merger integration activities,
for more than 14
months, on the basis of the relevant arrangements relating to the Ironbark
Acquisition”
passage of time since any relevant circumstances occurred makes it more
difficult for the Panel now to respond to those circumstances
through the
creation of new rights and obligations. As noted in Guidance Note
“The Panel aims to correct unacceptable circumstances as
quickly and as cost effectively as possible. It seeks to ensure that
transactions are decided by informed security holders who have confidence in the
integrity of Australia’s market for
We consider intervening at this stage may risk creating further uncertainty
rather than providing an effective remedy.
Timeliness and request for extension of time
the following reasons, we think the application was not timely:
(a) The Ironbark Acquisition and Bare Trust Arrangements were completed more
than 14 months and 2 years, respectively, before the
application was made.
(b) There are now limited remedies
(c) Having regard to paragraphs (a) and (b), and the fact the application was
only submitted after Invest Blue Support commenced
the Federal Court Proceedings
against Mr Denaro of the Applicant on 23 December 2024, we were concerned that
the application may
have been tactical. This concern was heightened by the
potential cross-claims in those proceedings referred to by the Applicant in
above. The Panel’s
role is to resolve material disputes, not to facilitate procedural
we considered that an extension of time under
section 657C(3)(b)
was needed to
make the application because it was not brought within two months of the date
the alleged unacceptable circumstances
Applicant submitted
“there is sufficient material available to the
Panel in the form of the ASIC company extracts to suggest that the [Ironbark
Acquisition] has not yet been completed. If so, then we do not consider that any
extension of time is required”
submitted that while part of the purchase consideration was structured with a
deferred component, completion of the Share
Purchase Agreement occurred on 15
December 2023 when all the shares in the Invest Blue Companies not already owned
by Ironbark were
transferred to Ironbark. In accordance with its completion
obligations, Ironbark also issued new shares to the sellers under the
Purchase Agreement on the same date. Invest Blue too submitted that the Ironbark
Acquisition completed on 15 December 2023.
on Ironbark and Invest Blue’s submissions, we are satisfied that the
Ironbark Acquisition completed on 15 December 2023
and the application was
therefore not made within the two-month period.
the alternative, the Applicant submitted that
“[i]n the event that the
Panel does come to the view that the merger has been completed then the
Applicant would submit that
this is clearly a case in which the Panel ought
grant an extension of time”
relevant factors to consider in deciding whether to extend time have been set
Webcentral Group Limited
“(a) the discretion to extend time should not be
exercised lightly
(b) whether the application made credible allegations of clear and serious
unacceptable circumstances, the effects of which are
(c) whether it would be undesirable for a matter to go unheard, because it
was lodged outside the two month time limit, if essential
matters supporting it
first came to light during the two months preceding the
application
(d) whether there is an adequate explanation for any delay, and whether
parties to the application or third parties will be prejudiced
Webcentral Group Limited 03
, the Applicant referred to each of these
factors as follows:
(a) While the discretion to extend time should not be exercised lightly,
“the actions undertake[n] by Invest Blue and Ironbark were calculated,
egregious and a direct attempt to circumvent their respective
obligations under
Chapter 6 and also to suppress the rights available under Chapter 6 to the
Applicant (and other Employee Shareholders)”
(b) The evidence provided by the Applicant is credible and
indicates that Invest Blue was a Chapter 6 company as a matter of law at the
time of commencement of the merger. If
Invest Blue was a Chapter 6 company at
such time then the contraventions of Chapter 6 committed by Ironbark could
hardly be more
serious and far reaching”
(c) It would be undesirable for this matter to go unheard based upon the
following matters which only came to light during the two
months preceding the
application:
(i) at the time of the execution of the Share Purchase Agreement, Mr Denaro of
the Applicant did not obtain legal advice
(ii) the Applicant’s lawyer was first provided with the Share Purchase
Agreement on 15 January 2025 and prior to receiving
legal advice the Applicant
“had no insight whatsoever that the takeovers regime may have been
(iii) the Applicant is not the only person affected by the contraventions of
Chapter 6 and it is
“very likely that other shareholders have no
awareness that the requirements of Chapter 6 may have been breached”
(d) No third parties will be prejudiced by any delay in bringing the
application.
citing the factors in
Webcentral Group Limited 03
Invest Blue
submitted that the Panel should not grant an extension of time
(a) A considerable amount of time has passed since
the Ironbark Acquisition and Bare Trust Arrangements were completed. No adequate
explanation has been provided for the delay, particularly having regard to
letters that Invest Blue provided to us dated 15 May 2024
and 25 September 2024
which indicate that the Applicant’s lawyer was closely examining the Bare
Trust Arrangements and the
Ironbark Acquisition during that period.
(b) Contrary to the Applicant’s submission that its lawyer was first
provided with the Share Purchase Agreement on 15 January
2025, the agreement was
provided to the Applicant on 12 October 2023.
(c) The Bare Trust Arrangements were unconnected to the Ironbark Acquisition.
(d) The Invest Blue Companies and Ironbark have
organised their business affairs, including carrying out merger integration
activities,
for more than 14 months, on the basis of the relevant arrangements
relating to the Ironbark Acquisition. If the Applicant is granted
an extension,
they will suffer material prejudice as a result of the delay. Moreover, every
shareholder of Ironbark will also suffer
similar reasons to those submitted by Invest Blue in paragraphs
above, Ironbark too submitted that we
should not exercise our discretion to extend time.
the circumstances, it was unlikely that we would exercise our discretion to
extend time, noting (among other things) that we should
not exercise our
discretion lightly
(a) The Ironbark Acquisition and Bare Trust Arrangements were completed more
than 14 months and 2 years, respectively, before the
application was made.
(b) Having regard to the untimeliness in bringing the
application,
we were not
persuaded there was an adequate explanation for why the Applicant did not apply
before 17 February 2025. We do not consider
the delay in the Applicant providing
the Share Purchase Agreement to its lawyer would justify an extension.
(c) We considered that there were arguments which weighed against granting an
extension, including the untimeliness in bringing the
application,
the difficulties we
would likely face in gathering
information,
the strength of the
the potential
availability of an alternative
and prejudice to parties
to the application and third
given that there is no reasonable prospect that we would make a declaration of
unacceptable circumstances, we consider that
it is unnecessary to consider the
Applicant’s request for an extension of time further.
do not consider that there is any reasonable prospect that we would make a
declaration of unacceptable circumstances. Accordingly,
we have decided not to
conduct proceedings in relation to the application under
regulation 20
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Regulations 2001
that we have decided not to conduct proceedings, we do not (and do not need to)
consider whether to make any interim or final
President of the sitting Panel
Decision dated 25
February 2025
Reasons given to parties 14 March 2025
published 20 March 2025
Pointon Partners
Invest Blue Pty Ltd
Hall & Wilcox
Ironbark Investment Partners Pty Ltd
Kardos Scanlan
Unless otherwise indicated, all
statutory references are to the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) and all terms
used in Chapter 6 or 6C have the meaning given in the relevant Chapter (as
modified by ASIC)
For example,
Invest Blue shareholders were not provided with a bidder’s statement, an
independent expert’s report or
prospectus level disclosure in relation to
the Ironbark scrip
[2012] ATP 5. See also
P Aluminium Holdings Pty Ltd
[2023] ATP 8, where the Panel considered an
application for a declaration of unacceptable circumstances concerning the
a proprietary company with more than 50 members. The claims primarily
concerned alleged contraventions of the 20% rule and alleged
attempts to avoid
the application of the takeovers provisions by reducing the number of
shareholders to 50 or below. The Panel was
not satisfied the applicant had
established that the circumstances were unacceptable but agreed with the excerpt
quoted from
Careers Australia Group Limited
in paragraph
Invest Blue referred to
this slide deck as
“a slide deck from the Invest Blue shareholder
meeting dated 27 June 2022”
. We assume that the
“shareholder
meeting dated 27 June 2022”
is the Online Shareholder Meeting referred
to in paragraph
Mighty Kingdom
[2023] ATP 14 at [73]. See also
Ringers Western Limited
[2024] ATP 8 at [34]-[35] and
Careers Australia Group Limited 03
ATP 1 at [43]-[49]
Note 1: Unacceptable Circumstances at
See paragraphs
Taipan Resources NL
[2000] ATP 18 at
Group Limited 03
Austral Coal Limited
[2005] ATP 14 at
Ibid at [19]
The President’s Club Limited 02
[2016] ATP 1 at
Molopo Energy
Limited 01 & 02
[2017] ATP 10 at
See paragraph
See paragraph
See paragraph
See paragraph
See paragraph
See paragraphs
RTF format (7.22 MB)
Signed PDF/A format