T v Investment Services Provider [2010] PrivCmrA 23 (24 December 2010)
Case Citation:
T v Investment Services Provider
[2010] PrivCmrA 23
Subject Heading:
Disclosure of personal information
National Privacy Principle 2.1 in Schedule 3 of the
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner prior to 1
November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the powers of the Privacy
Commissioner under the
were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
An enforcement body was investigating a managed investment
scheme run by an investment service provider. The complainant was an investor
the scheme.
The investment service provider became aware that the principal investigator
for the enforcement body was a close relative of the
complainant. The investment
service provider informed the enforcement body of the complainant’s
interest in the managed investment
scheme as it considered there was a material
conflict of interest between the complainant’s investment and the
role as an investigator.
The complainant alleged that the investment service provider had improperly
disclosed their information to the enforcement agency.
NPP 2.1 provides that an organisation must not use or disclose personal
information about an individual for a purpose other than the
primary purpose of
collection unless an exception in NPP 2.1(a)-(h) applies.
allows an organisation to use or disclose personal information where the
organisation reasonably believes the use or disclosure
is reasonably necessary
for one or more of the activities listed in NPP 2.1(h) by or on behalf of an
enforcement body. NPP 2.1(h)(iv)
further requires that the disclosure be
reasonably necessary for the enforcement body to prevent, detect or investigate
improper conduct or prescribed conduct.
NPP 2.1(f) allows an organisation to disclose personal information for a
secondary purpose if it has reason to suspect that unlawful
activity has been,
is being or may be engaged in, and it uses or discloses the personal information
as a necessary part of reporting
its concerns to relevant persons or
authorities.
The Commissioner investigated the matter under
section 40(1)
The investment services provider contended that the disclosure was
permitted by NPP 2.1(h)(iv). The Commissioner considered three
major elements of
NPP 2.1(h)(iv): the involvement of an enforcement body; the respondent having a
reasonable belief that the disclosure
is reasonably necessary; and the conduct
being seriously improper or prescribed.
First, the Commissioner found the body was an enforcement body because it was
defined as such in the
Second, the Commissioner noted the legislative sanctions for staff members in
relation to conflicts of interest and breaches of the
Code of Conduct. Good
investigative practice requires that an investigator must not have or be
perceived to have, any conflict of
interest in relation to the investigation.
The Commissioner accepted that a conflict could reasonably be perceived in this
Specifically, the Commissioner took the view that the investment
services provider reasonably believed that it was reasonably necessary
the enforcement body to the potential conflict of interest of the investigator
by disclosing:
the complainant’s interest in the managed investment scheme, and
that the complainant was a close relative of the investigator.
Third, the Commissioner considered whether the disclosure was to
prevent, detect or investigate seriously improper conduct. The investigation
the enforcement body had the potential to result in fines and imprisonment. The
Commissioner considered these sanctions indicated
the disclosures were to detect
and investigate seriously improper conduct.
Consequently, the Commissioner took the view that the disclosure was
authorised under NPP 2.1(h)(iv).
NPP 2.1(f) allows an organisation to disclose personal information if it has
reason to suspect that unlawful activity has been, is
being or may be engaged
in, and it uses or discloses the personal information as a necessary part of
reporting its concerns to relevant
persons or authorities.
Commonwealth legislation imposes sanctions on Australian government employees
for failure to disclose or take reasonable steps to
avoid a real or apparent
conflict of interest, in connection with their employment or the performance of
their duties. The Commissioner
took the view that the conflict in question had
the potential to be unlawful. The Commissioner also took the view that the
services provider had reason to suspect unlawful activity and the
disclosure was a necessary part of reporting its concerns to the
relevant body.
Therefore, the Commissioner took the view the disclosure was allowed under NPP
Accordingly, the Commissioner closed the complaint under
section 41(1)(a)
on the grounds that the investment services provider had
not interfered with the complainant's privacy because the disclosure was
under NPP 2.1(h) and under NPP 2.1(f).
Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner
December 2010
RTF format (146 KB)
Signed PDF/A format