Halder & Manne [2021] FamCAFC 169 (31 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Halder & Manne
[2021] FamCAFC 169
Appeal from:
Manne & Halder
[2021] FCCA 1297
Appeal number(s):
EAA 51 of 2021
File number(s):
PAC 211 of 2021
Judgment of:
AINSLIE-WALLACE J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – Where the
father contends that the primary judge erred in making an order that the child
attend a local private
school – Where the grounds of appeal were broad and
unparticularised – Where no error was established – Where the
was dismissed
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
The Appellant
No appearance
The Respondent
Litigant in person
EAA 51 of 2021
211 of 2021
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
AINSLIE-WALLACE J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The appeal EAA 51 of 2021 against the orders made by a Judge of the
Federal Circuit Court on 28 April 2021 is dismissed.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 17.02
Family Law Rules 2004
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this
judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Halder & Manne
approved by the Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
EX TEMPORE REASONS
FOR JUDGMENT
AINSLIE-WALLACE J
1 Mr Halder (“the father”) appeals from a parenting order made by
a judge of the Federal Circuit Court on 28 April 2021.
2 The appealed parenting order provides for X born in 2009 (“the
child”) to attend B Private School at C Suburb. X is
the younger child
of the father and Ms Manne (“the mother”).
3 After the parties’ separation the child (and his older sibling who is
now an adult) lived with the mother in C Suburb. The
child spent time with the
father each second weekend from after school on Friday until Saturday morning or
Sunday night and whenever
the father was free during school holidays.
4 In June 2018, the mother enrolled the child at B Private School to commence
in 2019. However, the mother did not consult the father
hearing that she had enrolled the child at B Private School, the father objected
to the child going to that school.
Accordingly it seems that the mother
considered it better for the child to finish his primary school education and
then start at
B Private School at the beginning of high school in 2021. The
father refused to sign the enrolment form to allow the child to start
school. Instead he completed an enrolment form for the child to attend D High
School. I note here that the burden of school
fees, uniform and other costs
were the mother’s burden and she at no point sought a contribution to
those school expenses from
the father.
5 The school required the father’s consent to the enrolment and it not
being given, the mother commenced parenting proceedings.
The father filed no
documents in response to the mother’s application. When the matter came
before the court, a Child Inclusive
Conference was ordered. The father did not
attend the scheduled interviews although the mother and the child were
interviewed for
the report.
6 When the matter came before the primary judge the child had already started
B Private School.
7 After noting that the child spoke positively about his father and said he
enjoys the things they do together, it became apparent
that the child was not
aware that the father wanted him to attend a different school. The primary judge
noted that the child wanted
to stay at B Private School,
saying he had made friends there and was looking
forward to school activities already planned. When it was suggested to him that
his father wanted him to go to D High School he was reportedly
“horrified” because he would have to make new friends,
get new books
and have a new timetable (at [4]).
8 The primary judge found that the child had sufficient
maturity in the circumstances to understand the effect of changing schools
wanting instead to remain at B Private School. His Honour gave the
child’s views considerable weight and clearly considered
child’s best interests to remain at B Private School.
9 The father appealed. The grounds contend that the primary judge failed to
properly consider the evidence; the decision was plainly
wrong; failed to afford
the father procedural fairness and denied him natural justice; gave inadequate
reasons and was biased. These
broad alleged grounds are unparticularised.
10 The father did not file a summary of argument as ordered nor did he attend
the appeal hearing. He did however, present a document
to the registry which is
dated 24 June 2021 which records his complaints and concerns about the court
process and results ranging
from why the court file number had been changed from
“PAC 211/2021” to “EAA 51/2021” and he complains that
the file number should not have been changed through to an apparent complaint
that 50 percent of governmental department workers
cannot send their children to
private schools and yet his son “...was prosecuted to study from year 7 to
year 12 in [B Private
School] school in the court order on 3
February 2021”.
11 In short the father’s document gives no assistance in understanding
the errors asserted in the Notice of Appeal. In those
circumstances, and having
considered the primary judge’s reasons together with the evidence before
him being the mother’s
affidavit and the Child Inclusive Report, none of
the asserted errors is apparent and I propose to dismiss the appeal.
12 The appeal will thus be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding twelve (12) numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Justice
Ainslie-Wallace
Dated: 9 September 2021
RTF format (302 KB)
Signed PDF/A format