Apple Inc [2017] ADO 7 (23 June 2017)
DESIGNS ACT 2003
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE
REGISTRAR OF DESIGNS WITH REASONS
Re: Request
for registration of design number 201511115 in the name of Apple Inc.
Adrian Richards
REPRESENTATION:
Carl Harrap and John Dower of FPA Patent Attorneys Pty Ltd
Pre-registration formalities check under
sections 39
Designs Act 2003
(Cth) – number of designs disclosed
in the application – changes in configuration will not result in
differences to pattern
and ornamentation – application found to contain
more designs than identified by the applicant – registration of the
designs refused
2 March 2015 Apple, Inc (‘the Applicant’) filed an application for
registration (‘the Application’) under
Designs Act 2003
(Cth) (‘the Act’). Details of the Application as filed which are
relevant to the discussion that follows are set out
of designs in the application
Display screen with a graphical user interface
Statement of Newness and Distinctiveness
Newness and distinctiveness is claimed in the features of pattern and/or
ornamentation of a display screen as shown in solid lines
accompanying
representations.
Representations
Accompanying
these three representations is a schedule of figures, with the following
explanatory text:
FIG. 1 Front view of a first configuration of the
display screen
FIG. 2 Front view of a second configuration of the display screen
FIG. 3 Front view of a third configuration of the display screen
The appearance of the display screen sequentially transfers between the
images shown in Figures 1 to 3.
the Application was furnished with a request for registration and was assessed
as meeting the minimum filing requirements, the
Application proceeded to a
pre-registration formalities check.
formalities check produced an adverse notice on 31 March 2015. The notice
relates to a single issue, a finding that the Application
contains three
designs, despite a claim in the Application that only one design was disclosed.
Filing fees being payable for each
design in an application, the consequence of
such a finding is a shortfall in fees. The notice therefore asked the Applicant
remove two of the designs and pay no extra fee, or pay further design
fees (equivalent to the filing fee per design) for each of
the extra designs
that the Applicant chose to retain in the Application.
Applicant replied on 27 May 2015, drawing attention to the wording in the
schedule of figures, which refer to each representation
being a different
‘configuration’ of the same display screen. The response also
referred to the
Designs Examiners’ Manual of Practice and
, which indicates that alterations in configuration will generally
not constitute more than one design. For example, it states
Changes in the configuration of the design are quite
acceptable. For example: a telephone shown with, and without the receiver on
the cradle is still showing the same design. A container shown with the lid on
and the lid beside it are also showing the same
reading the Applicant’s own reference to ‘configuration’
together with this discussion in the manual, the Applicant
suggested that no
issue existed at formalities. In the event this response did not convince the
examiner to permit the contents of
the Application to proceed to registration as
a single design, the Applicant also requested to be heard. The examiner was not
issuing a second adverse report on 29 May 2015. As a result the
Applicant was issued with an invitation to pay the fee associated
earlier hearing request.
hearing was set down for 10 November 2015 in Canberra, which I conducted as a
delegate of the Registrar of Designs. Messrs Carl
Harrap and John Dower from FPA
Patent Attorneys Pty Ltd appeared on the Applicant’s behalf.
Legislation
provisions of the Act relevant to the remaining discussion are set out
5 Definitions
, in relation to a product, means the overall appearance
of the product resulting from one or more visual features of the product.
Note: See also
has the meaning given by
visual feature
has the meaning given by
6 Definition of
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a thing that is manufactured or hand made is a
visual feature
(1) In this Act:
visual feature
, in relation to a
product, includes the shape, configuration, pattern and ornamentation of the
(2) A visual feature may, but need not, serve a functional
following are not visual features of a product:
(a) the feel of
the product;
materials used in the product;
(c) in the case
of a product that has one or more indefinite dimensions:
indefinite dimension; and
(ii) if the
product also has a pattern that repeats itself—more than one repeat of the
Formalities check—applications in respect of one design only
(1) This section applies to a design disclosed in a design application
(a) the design
is the only design disclosed in the application; and
applicant has requested that the design be registered.
(2) The Registrar must register the design if the Registrar is satisfied
(a) the design
application satisfies the formalities check specified in the regulations;
design is purportedly a common design in relation to more than one
product—that the design is a common design in
relation to each product;
Registrar is not required to refuse to register the design under
subsection 43(1).
Formalities check—applications in respect of more than one design
(1) This section applies if:
(a) more than
one design is disclosed in a design application; and
applicant has requested registration of one or more of those
(2) The Registrar must register a design requested to be registered if the
Registrar is satisfied of the following:
(a) that each
product to which the design relates belongs to the same Locarno Agreement
design requested to be registered is purportedly a common design in relation to
more than one product—that the design
is a common design in relation to
each product;
(c) that the
design application satisfies the formalities check specified in the
regulations;
(d) that the
Registrar is not required to refuse to register the design under
subsection 43(1).
formalities check mentioned in
above appears in the
Regulations 2004
(Cth), the relevant part of which is reproduced
4.05 Formalities check--applications in respect of more
than 1 design
(1) For paragraph 40(2)(c)
of the Act, the formalities check is confirmation, by the Registrar,
(g) the number of designs disclosed in the design application is the number of
designs identified, by the applicant, as being separate
designs disclosed in
application...
Submissions
Applicant’s written submissions expand on its 27 May 2015 response to the
examiner, in relation to the Application’s
arguments around
‘configuration’. At the hearing, the Applicant’s
representatives raised three other matters which
were claimed to be relevant to
the present matter, in relation to ‘kinetic art’,
‘skeuomorphism’ and a potential
inconsistency with examination
practice. I deal with each of these in turn in my discussion below.
Statement of Newness and Distinctiveness accompanying the Application claims
newness and distinctiveness certain elements of the
‘pattern and
ornamentation’ that appear in the representations, while the schedule of
figures accompanying the representations
refers to three
‘configurations’ of the display screen. In order to understand these
aspects of the Application, the
nature of each of these terms bears some
explanation.
long standing but now repealed designs legislation, in order to meet the
definition of ‘design’ therein, features
configuration, pattern or ornamentation applicable to an article’ had to
be disclosed.
This earlier
Australian designs legislation was modelled on legislation from the United
Kingdom. Being so central to the availability
of protection under their
respective designs legislation, questions of whether a feature fell within the
meaning of either ‘shape’,
‘configuration’,
‘pattern’ or ‘ornamentation’ have on a number of
occasions been considered by
courts of both of those jurisdictions.
the Act ‘design’ is no longer defined directly by features of shape,
configuration, pattern or ornamentation, but
instead by reference to
‘visual features’, which in turn has an inclusive definition. Apart
from this minor departure,
the discussions of the earlier decided cases remain
instructive (and, in many cases, binding) upon a reading of what visual features
may or may not be considered ‘shape’, ‘configuration’,
‘pattern’ or ‘ornamentation’.
In the present case, three
of these categories of visual features are explicitly referred to in the
Application, and the fourth (shape)
is readily apparent in the
representations.
The decided cases reveal that what at first blush might appear as four
categories of ‘shape, configuration, pattern and ornamentation’
be aggregated into two. Shape and configuration are the three dimensional visual
features of a product, while pattern and ornamentation
are generally those
features in two dimensions.
Shape and configuration are for all
practical purposes considered as synonymous. Each signifies something in three
dimensions; the
form in which the article itself is fashioned. "Pattern" and
"ornament" can, I think, in the majority of cases be treated as practically
synonymous. It is something which is placed on an article for its decoration.
It is substantially in two as opposed to three dimensions.
An article can exist
without any ornament upon it, whereas it can have no existence at all apart from
its shape and configuration.
As Lord Justice
Clarke’s Registered Design
, “a design applicable to a thing for
its shape can only be applied to a thing making it in that
Shape and configuration signify something in three dimensions, being the form
in which an article is itself
where pattern and ornamentation have been held to extend into the third
dimension still tend to fall within the notion of surface
decoration, such as
the ribbing on a hot water bottle.
The most relevant principle to draw from this in the present matter, however, is
that configuration is not a feature that exists
in two dimensions.
representations that show more than one shape under the guise of being one
design will always result in problems for an
applicant under the Act. At the
lower end of the scale this may simply be the result of inconsistently drawn
representations. Where
that is not the case, it is highly likely that what has
been filed is more than one design. This can be contrasted with a situation
where one fixed shape is shown in more than one configuration, as in the manual
discussion referred to by the Applicant and reproduced
above. A simple
illustration of this is an older style telephone depicted in one representation
with the receiver in its cradle,
and in another with the receiver placed beside
the base. Another example of this was offered in the Applicant’s written
submissions
in respect of registered design 331605 with the product name
‘transformable toy’, two configurations of which are reproduced
Configuration
is neither shape nor is it a feature in two dimensions. It seems a special
category of visual feature, since changes
to configuration can change the
outward appearance of a product, yet the design both conceptually and legally
will remain the same.
Differences to pattern and ornamentation align more with
differences in shape than mere changes to the configuration of that shape.
follows that a product of fixed shape but depicted with more than one pattern or
ornamentation will be a different design in each
Applicant submits that there are some changes in configuration that will also
result in changes to pattern or ornamentation. To
illustrate this point, it has
provided the following set of diagrams in respect of a
the winder on the right side of each figure turns clockwise, the numeral that
appears in the window in the bottom left corner shifts
from 7 to 8 and then 9.
While this is clearly a change in configuration which results a change in the
outward appearance of the product,
it would not be correct to see this as a
change to the pattern or ornamentation of the watch. While the window that
showed a 7 later
shows 8, but the 7 that has passed from view is still part of
the pattern and ornamentation of the watch. It is merely obscured from
particular perspective in this particular configuration. Indeed, in order for
this feature to function properly the dial upon
which these numerals appear
would have on it each day that could possibly fall within a month. The pattern
and ornamentation is therefore
fixed, but only part of that pattern and
ornamentation is visible at any one time due to changes in only
configuration.
its illustration a step further, the Applicant submits that:
another implementation the watch may incorporate an LED, LCD or other display to
show the numbers. How implementation of the design
is achieved is an irrelevant
consideration for the purposes of the design. In both cases there is a visual
feature in the form of
pattern or ornamentation that represents a different
configuration of the same design.
should be apparent from my earlier discussion, this analogy is flawed. In the
case of a watch with a physical dial, its pattern
and ornamentation have not
changed. These two dimensional features have merely moved due to a change in the
configuration of the
watch’s mechanisms. In the case of a watch
implemented with ‘an LED, LCD or other display’ a change in the
would mean that one two dimensional feature had disappeared and another
appeared in its place. Since these are changes only to two
dimensional features,
they can have nothing to do with configuration. As the Applicant’s example
of the watch shows, an understanding
of the product is necessary in order to
determine whether a change in appearance is due only to a change in
configuration or to a
more fundamental change in visual features. This is far
from an irrelevant consideration.
Applicant’s watch analogy is helpful in relation to the present matter.
While the contents of the Application do not concern
a watch, it certainly
concerns three slightly different appearances of ‘an LED, LCD or other
display’. The representations
show the screen is a fixed shape and
configuration, and therefore differences between the representations are to the
pattern and
ornamentation alone. As has been established, differences to two
dimensional features cannot be as a result of a change in configuration,
the suggestion that appears in the schedule of figures.
the hearing the Applicant’s representative referred to claims made under
(Cth) relating to, what the applicant in that
matter referred to as ‘kinetic
The claims brought
included copyright in respect of the visual appearance made as a result of
different coloured sand and water sandwiched
between two pieces of glass inside
a frame, known as ‘moving sand pictures’. In this interlocutory
matter that aspect
of the applicant’s claim was dismissed ‘because
[the creator of the object] does not directly bring about the spectacles
result from adjustments of the position of the
I suppose the
suggestion here then is that the Applicant has directly brought about the
spectacle of the transitioning images as
they are set out in the
representations. However, all that would follow from this is that the Applicant
could potentially be afforded
some protections under the
(Cth), a point that is not at issue in the present matter.
submission made at the hearing relates to the design concept of skeuomorphism.
My understanding is that this has a number
of possible meanings, but in relation
to graphical user interfaces, it can most relevantly refer to the use of shading
a three dimensional appearance of that interface on the two
dimensional plane of the screen on which it appears. A contemporary example
this is in the burgeoning field of smartwatches. Skins applied to their
graphical user interfaces are often crafted to make the
flat face of the display
screen appear as though it has the depth of a mechanical watch. The operative
term here is ‘appear’.
The mere illusion of three dimensions on a
flat surface is still a two dimensional feature.
at the hearing the Applicant’s representatives pointed out that there may
be an unjustified inconsistency in the interpretation
of representations at this
pre-registration stage and at examination. As I have recently found, it is
appropriate for the visual
features of a design to be viewed as though the
product were ‘at rest’ when the design’s newness and
distinctiveness
is assessed.
Applicant correctly points out that, should the contents of the Application be
registered as is, and then later examined, the
examiner would in effect come to
view all three representations as the same design (that is, three
representations of a blank screen).
However, it does not follow that for the
purposes of formalities only one design is disclosed in the application. At this
question is simply whether the number of designs disclosed in the
Application is the same as the number identified by the Applicant.
leaves over to examination the question of whether any of the visual features
the Applicant has elected to include in its
representations are distinguishing
features of the product. Bringing that assessment forward to formalities could
also result in
significant uncertainty. It would remain open to the Applicant at
any point between now and at examination to assert that some or
pattern and ornamentation that appears in the representations are in fact fixed
visual features. If the Applicant did
this, the examiner would not necessarily
come to view the three representations as a single design.
have found above that due to differences in pattern and ornamentation appearing
in the three representations, the Application contains
three designs. Therefore
I am not satisfied that the Application meets the requirements of reg
4.05(1)(g). The Applicant has already
had the opportunity to amend the
Application to overcome this deficiency. I refuse to register all of the designs
in the Application
that contains design number 201511115 pursuant to s 43(2) of
to s 136(d) of the Act an application for a review of this decision can be made
to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal under
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth). If an application to review the decision is made on
or before one month from this decision, the fate of the Application will
subject to a determination by the relevant body.
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and
Trade Marks and Designs Group
Designs Examiners’
Manual of Practice and Procedure
Designs Act
(1936) 53 RPC 139
, 152 (citations
Foggin v Lacey
[2003] FCAFC 147
(2003) 57 IPR 225
Cow & Co Ltd v
Cannon Rubber Manufacturers Ltd
(1959) 76 RPC 240
Komesaroff v Mickle
[1987] VicRp 60
[1987] VR 703.
RTF format (3.89 MB)
Signed PDF/A format