ELD19 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FedCFamC2G 1863 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
ELD19 v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1863
File number(s):
SYG 2920 of 2019
Judgment of:
JUDGE D HUMPHREYS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Safe Haven Enterprise
visa – Immigration Assessment Authority – whether the Authority
failed to consider an express
integer of a claim for protection and ignored
relevant country information – sole ground of judicial review has no merit
application dismissed with costs.
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
Cases cited:
Applicant WAEE v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
(2003) 236 FR 593
Djokovic v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCAFC 3
DVO16 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
NAHI v Minister for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous
[2004] FCAFC 10
Randhawa v Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
[1994] FCA 1253
(1994) 52 FCR 437
Selvadurai v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
Division 2 General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Mr Alkfaji, Alkafaji Lawyers
Counsel for the Applicant:
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Mr Tsaousidis
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Mr Wong, Minter Ellison
Solicitor for the Second Respondent:
Submitting appearance, save as to costs
SYG 2920 of 2019
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
IMMIGRATION ASSESSMENT
Second Respondent
JUDGE D HUMPHREYS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Application is dismissed.
Applicant pay the First Respondent’s costs fixed in the amount of
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or
order to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
or to record a variation to the order pursuant to
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2)
(General Federal Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE D HUMPHREYS
is an Application for judicial review of a decision of the Immigration
Assessment Authority (the Authority) dated 8 October 2019,
affirming a decision
of a delegate of the first respondent (the delegate) to refuse to grant the
applicant a Safe Haven Enterprise
visa (SHEV) (the
the reasons set out below, the Application must be dismissed.
applicant is a citizen of Iraq. He arrived in Australia as an unauthorised
maritime arrival on 8 May 2013.
29 August 2016, the Minister ‘lifted the bar’ pursuant to
Migration Act 1958
) and invited the applicant
to apply for a protection visa.
30 December 2016, the applicant lodged an application for a SHEV.
24 July 2019, the applicant attended an interview with a delegate of the first
respondent (SHEV interview).
26 August 2019, the delegate refused to grant the applicant the SHEV on the
basis that the applicant did not satisfy
29 August 2019, the delegate’s decision was referred to the Authority for
merits review.
8 October 2019, the Authority affirmed the decision not to grant the applicant
THE AUTHORITY’S DECISION
[2] of the decision, the Authority considered the material before it, given by
the Secretary under s 473CB of the
applicant’s claims for protection are summarised at [3] as follows:
Amarah, Maysan Province of Southern Iraq. He is a Sunni Muslim. He was born in
intimidation from the Shia group and the government. He was interrogated by
members of the Mahdi army on one occasion about
his affiliations with other
groups and on another occasion he was arrested by the government authorities who
accused him of working
against the government.
brothers ‘W’ was killed by unknown organisations who accused him of
working against the government and the
Shia religious affiliates, and swearing
at the Shia religious clerics.
brother, ‘Q’, was a police officer, who was also kidnapped, beaten
and terrorised and threatened with death.
His family were
accused of being supporters of Sunni organisations (such as Daesh), and accused
of hiding bombs in the backyard.
His brother
‘A’ also left Iraq and went to Russia due to fear of sectarian
His family in
Iraq relocated to a different area in about early 2019 due to the intimidation
they faced.
He fears harm
from the government and Shia organisations, such as Mahdi army, because of his
Sunni religion.
accused of being a spy to the West and harmed because of his western mentality
for having tattoos and time living in Australia.
[4], the Authority accepted that the applicant was a Sunni Muslim and a citizen
of Iraq. The Authority accepted that the applicant’s
family were still
living in Amarah, Maysan, and that he would be returning to a Shia majority area
in southern Iraq.
Authority accepted that the applicant may have been interrogated by the Mahdi
Army at a random checkpoint, noting that this was
consistent with country
information. However, it found that the incident was isolated and that the
applicant did not experience any
further problems with the Mahdi Army after that
incident [8].
Authority did not accept the applicant’s claim that he was arrested [9].
The Authority noted that his account of the arrest
was confusing. The Authority
did not accept that the applicant had been accused of hiding weapons or
explosives at the family home.
Authority considered and was willing to accept the applicant’s claim that
his brother “W” was killed in 2012
and that he was a victim of
sectarian violence [11].
Authority did not accept that the applicant’s brother “Q” had
been arrested, detained or tortured, or that he
had faced discrimination at work
[17]. The Authority noted inconsistencies and implausibility in the
applicant’s account and
the fact that Q continued to work as a police
officer, despite the applicant stating that Q was being isolated at work [15].
Authority found the applicant’s evidence of his brother’s
kidnapping and interrogation to be “quite vague”
Authority was not satisfied that the applicant’s family was accused of
hiding bombs, or that they were targeted and threatened
on account of their
Sunni religion, noting that the applicant’s evidence was vague and limited
Authority stated at [25], that it did not “accept that the applicant or
his other family members were otherwise targeted,
arrested or subject to threats
or intimidations, or his brother Q faces ongoing isolation treatment at
workplace”.
[21], the Authority accepted that the applicant’s brother,
“A”, went to Russia, but it was not satisfied that
experienced harm before his departure.
Authority at [30] had regard to the applicant’s claims that he would face
intimidation and pressure because of his tattoos
and that his westernised
mentality would be questioned. The Authority accepted that the applicant
obtained tattoos, but did not accept
that he would be harmed due to those
tattoos or on account of having returned from the West.
Authority noted that country information from DFAT, UNHCR, and the European
Asylum Support Office, as well as other sources referred
delegate’s decision, indicated that Sunnis or Sunni males from formerly IS
controlled areas could be perceived to
have affiliations with the Islamic State
Authority found that the applicant was not from a former IS controlled area, and
that DFAT country information suggested that
outside of areas recently
controlled by IS, Sunnis have faced harassment and discrimination in the form of
more intrusive inspections
at checkpoints, but otherwise faced a “low
risk” of societal violence based on their religion [27] – [28].
Authority did not accept the applicant’s assertion that sectarian violence
was still prevalent in Amarah or Maysan (in the
south) but was not reported, and
found the applicant lacked the profile of having affiliations with IS.
Authority concluded that the applicant did not meet the requirements of the
definition of refugee in
Authority found that there were not substantial grounds for believing that, as a
necessary and foreseeable consequence of being
returned from Australia to Iraq,
there was a real risk that the applicant would suffer significant harm [34]
– [36]. Therefore,
the Authority found that the applicant did not meet
Accordingly,
the Authority affirmed the decision not to grant the applicant a protection
GROUNDS OF JUDICIAL REVIEW
applicant advances two grounds of judicial review contained in an Amended
Application filed with the Court on 3 October 2025.
They are as
The decision of the second respondent Immigration Assessment Authority (the
Authority) was affected by jurisdictional error in that:
Authority failed to consider an express integer of a claim for protection from
applicant claimed to fear persecution from the Iraqi Government authorities and
Shi’ite organisation like the Mahdi Army
because they would wrongly impute
him to be a supporter of DAESH/ISIS (ie Islamic State (IS)) because he was a
young Sunni male.
Authority did not address an express integer of this claim, made in his
Protection visa application, that his profile as a young
Sunni male put him at a
higher risk of being imputed to be an IS supporter: “most young men my age
and my religious affiliation...
have this stigma of assumption that al (sic) of
us are DAESH supporters just for the fact that we were not Shiite.”
Authority did not address or cite this integer of the applicant’s claims
to fear harm as a Sunni, either in its recital
of the applicant’s claims
at IAA [3] or elsewhere in its decision, including at IAA [26].
Authority avoided consideration of this integer by limiting its consideration of
the profile of those who would be considered
to have affiliations with IS
exclusively to ‘Sunni males’ from the formerly IS controlled areas,
and without differentiation
doing so the Authority ignored important contemporaneous country information
from the UNHCR, cited by the delegate, of the profile
of persons at risk of
persecution being wrongly perceived to be IS affiliates or supporters. This
profile included Sunni Arabs who
lived in an area under IS
f. The UNHCR report cited country information thus:
“However, observers note that the ISF, affiliated forces and Kurdish
security forces regularly impute an ISIS affiliation to
individuals on the basis
of broad and discriminatory, often overlapping criteria, including:
Religious and
ethic background (Sunni Arab or Turkmen);
Sex and age
(men and boys of fighting age);
tribal background, including place of origin; and/or
Residency in a
formerly ISIS-held area at the time of ISIS control. (footnotes omitted)
Authority’s findings did not otherwise subsume the claimed integer of
increased risk to the applicant as a young Sunni man,
including because the
Authority’s conception of a profile of having affiliations with IS was
limited to Sunnis or Sunni males
from the formerly IS controlled areas.
did the authority address the claimed integer in accumulation with his other
claims of his own experience of the Mahdi Army.
applicant abandons Ground 1 of the Application filed on 11 November
THE APPLICANT’S SUBMISSIONS
one, inclusive of its particulars, alleges the decision of the Authority was
affected by jurisdictional error in that it failed
to consider an express
integer of a claim for protection from return to Iraq and ignored important
country information.
ground of review raises two issues for determination. Issue One is whether the
Authority considered and rejected the applicant’s
claim to fear
persecution from Iraqi Government authorities and Shi’ite organisations,
like the Mahdi Army, because it wrongly
assumed him to be a supporter of
DAESH/IS based on the applicant being a Sunni male. Issue Two is a question of
whether it was open
to the Authority to rely on country information of its
first issue in Ground One claims that the Authority failed to consider an
express integer of a claim for protection. The applicant
claimed to fear
persecution from the Iraqi Government authorities and Shi’ite
organisations like the Mahdi Army because they
would wrongly impute him to be a
supporter of DAESH/IS because he was a young Sunni male.
Authority did not address an express integer of this claim, made in his SHEV
application, that his profile as a
(emphasis added) Sunni male put
him at a higher risk of being imputed to be an IS supporter.
applicant raised issue with the Authority’s decision as it did not address
or cite this integer of the applicant’s
claims to fear harm as a Sunni,
either in its recital of the applicant’s claims at paragraph [3] or
elsewhere in its decision.
Authority avoided consideration of this integer by limiting its consideration of
the profile of those who would be considered
to have affiliations with IS
exclusively to ‘Sunni males’ from the formerly IS controlled areas,
and without differentiation
as to age. This is evident at paragraph [27] of its
decision, in which the Authority identifies the risk to Sunni males from the
formerly IS controlled areas but concludes its assessment of the risk of
imputation of having affiliations with IS by observing that
the applicant was
not from a former IS controlled area, as if this were an exclusive criterion for
the risk. Paragraph [27] of the
Authority’s decision is as follows:
Recent country information from DFAT (2018), the UNHCR (2019) and the European
Asylum Support Office (EASO) (2019) and other sources
as referred in the
delegate's decision indicates that Sunnis or Sunni males from the formerly
Islamic State (IS) controlled areas
could be perceived to have affiliations with
this group. The applicant is not from a former IS controlled area. DFAT states
outside areas recently controlled by IS, Sunnis have faced harassment and
discrimination in the form of more intrusive inspections
at checkpoints,
although it also assesses that in these areas Sunnis face a 'low risk' (means
that 'DFAT is aware of incidents but
has insufficient evidence to conclude they
form a pattern') of societal violence on the basis of their religion. As noted
the activities of extremist Sunni groups such as IS in the south is now
minimal and it has lost its battle in the north for nearly
two years. I do not
accept that applicant's assertion that sectarian violence is still prevalent in
in Amarah or Maysan but are not
its decision, the Authority’s only consideration of an increased risk to
the applicant because of his age as a “young
Sunni male” as opposed
to “old people” was at paragraph [20] of its decision in relation to
the claim of the special
targeting in 2010/2011 of young Sunni males by Shias
going about the neighbourhood to collect donations for Shia religious
ceremonies.
the Authority recognised and dealt with the young Sunni male integer, there was
a realistic possibility that its decision could
have been different, including
if it had regard to the UNHCR country information in particular.
second issue in Ground One alleges that the Authority ignored important country
information.
[20] of its written submissions, the applicant contends that although the
delegate did cite country information relevant to his
claim’s integer,
from a comprehensive and recent report by UNHCR, it did not recite the integer
of his Sunni claims that he
would face harm as a perceived supporter of IS
because of his young age.
Authority ignored country information from the UNHCR of the profile of persons
at risk of persecution for being wrongly perceived
to be IS affiliates or
supporters, including Sunni Arabs who had not
lived in an area under IS
control, like the applicant.
applicant accepts that the absence of an express reference to evidence in the
Authority’s reasons does not necessarily mean
that the evidence was not
considered.
applicant accepts that it is not necessary for the Authority to refer to every
piece of evidence presented to it, but rather “the
fundamental question
must be the importance of the material to the exercise of the Tribunal’s
function and thus the seriousness
of any error”. The applicant suggests
the UNHCR information was important because it directly addressed the claimed
outside the profile parameters used by the Authority.
Authority’s consideration of risk turned to the areas outside IS control,
such as the applicants’, but it did not
include an assessment of risk of
being perceived to be an IS supporter.
Subsequently,
the applicant makes the submission that the Authority’s findings did not
otherwise subsume the claimed integer
of increased risk to the applicant as a
young Sunni man, including because the Authority’s conception of a profile
affiliations with IS was limited to Sunnis or Sunni males from the
formerly IS controlled areas.
Authority’s citation of DFAT country information at paragraph [27] of its
decision, that Sunnis in areas outside IS control
“face a low risk of
societal violence on the basis of their religion” did not address the
increased risk of false imputation
of IS support that the applicant claimed he
would face as a young Sunni male. The DFAT report did not address this claim of
risk. Thus, the claimed integer of increased or particular risk was
not subsumed in the Authority’s finding at paragraph [27]
Authority’s decision, where it did not accept that unreported sectarian
violence was still prevalent in Amarah or Maysan.
Authority found that the applicant lacked a profile of having affiliations with
IS. The applicant contends that this finding could
only subsume the integer had
the Authority identified and assessed the claimed integer. The applicant claims
that, instead, the Authority’s
assessment of the profile did not extend
beyond persons who were from formerly IS controlled areas and thereby ignored
country information cited by the delegate, which was not so
Two is a mere statement that the applicant abandons Ground One of the
originating application filed on 11 November 2019.
ground does not raise a jurisdictional error.
THE FIRST RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS
the first issue in Ground One, the first respondent submits the Authority
considered and rejected the applicant’s claim for
the reasons that follow.
reference to paragraph [3] of the Authority’s Decision, it is clear the
Authority did consider the applicant’s claims,
stating “[h]
family were accused of being supporters of Sunni organisations (such as
”. On a fair and plain reading, it is apparent the Authority
considered the applicant’s claim that his family were accused
of being IS
supporters due to their Sunni religion.
was open to the Authority to make the finding it did, on the country information
before it, at paragraph [27], where it stated:
Recent country information from DFAT (2018), the UNHCR (2019) and the European
Asylum Support Office (EASO) (2019) and other sources
as referred in the
delegate’s decision indicates that Sunnis or Sunni males from the formerly
Islamic State (IS) controlled
areas could be perceived to have affiliations with
this group. The applicant is not from a former IS controlled area...
country information provides a direct and rational answer to the
applicant’s claims. The Authority had regard to and considered
Report titled “Persons Wrongly Suspected of Supporting ISIS”, the
European Asylum Support Office report titled
“Sunni Perceived to be ISIL
collaborators or sympathisers”, and the DFAT Country Information Report
for Iraq titled “Sunnis”.
There would have been no need for the
Authority to have engaged with this country information if it were
considering the applicant’s claim to be at risk due to being an
imputed IS supporter on account of being a young Sunni male.
Authority did not limit its analysis to Sunni males from formerly IS controlled
areas, contrary to the applicant’s submissions
at [27] stating “that
the Authority “avoided consideration of this integer by limiting its
consideration of the profile
of those who would be considered to have
affiliations with IS exclusively to ‘Sunni males’ from the formerly
IS controlled
areas, and without differentiation as to age”.
Authority made findings based on country information which disposed of the
applicant’s claim and did not fall into jurisdictional
error by doing
the second issue in Ground One, the first respondent opposes the
applicant’s contention that the Authority “ignored
contemporaneous
country information from the UNHCR, cited by the delegate, of the profile of
persons at risk of persecution for being
wrongly perceived to be IS affiliates
or supporters. This profile included Sunni Arabs who had not lived in an area
under IS control,
like the applicant”. Rather, the Authority did
consider the UNHCR report and Authority refers to it at several points in
its reasons.
the issue of assessment and weight given to the Authority’s choice of
country information, this was a matter for the Authority
and its preference for
DFAT’s country information was open to it.
extent the applicant relies on the delegate’s views regarding country
information is irrelevant, given the High Court decision
DVO16 v Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection
[2021] HCA 12 (DVO16).
at [22], it was made clear that the Authority is “to consider the
application for a protection visa afresh and to determine
for itself whether or
not it is satisfied that the criteria for the grant of the visa have been
met”. As such, the Authority
is to undertake a de novo consideration of
the merits of the decision referred to it, and what the delegate made of country
information
has no bearing on what the Authority makes of that information.
Authority’s findings at [27] of its decision did not limit its analysis to
areas formerly controlled by IS and does dispose
of the applicant’s claim
that sectarian violence was not prevalent in the applicant’s home area.
The first respondent
contends this is a direct rejection of such claim.
Two is not raised in the first respondent’s written submissions. However,
as stated above, this ground is a mere statement
that the applicant abandons
Ground 1 of the originating application filed on 11 November 2019.
ground does not raise any jurisdictional error in the Authority’s
CONSIDERATION
Djokovic v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCAFC 3
the task of a court conducting
judicial review was described in this manner:
... An application for judicial review is one in which the judicial branch of
government reviews, by reference to legality or lawfulness,
the decision or
decisions of the Executive branch of government, here in the form of a decision
of the Minister. The Court does
not consider the merits or wisdom the decision;
nor does it remake the decision. The task of the Court is to rule upon the
or legality of the decision by reference to the complaints made about
is well established that the Authority is not required to accept uncritically
any and all claims made by an applicant:
Randhawa v Minister for Immigration,
Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
[1994] FCA 1253
(1994) 52 FCR 437
does the Authority have to possess rebutting evidence before holding that a
particular assertion was not made out:
Selvadurai v Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs
(1994) 34 ALD 347
is well settled that the country information and the weight given to that
information is a matter for the Authority:
NAHI v Minister for Immigration
& Multicultural & Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCAFC 10.
of a tribunal or the Authority are not to be scrutinised “with an eye
finely attuned to error”. It is plainly
not necessary for the Tribunal or
Authority to refer to every piece of evidence and every contention made by an
applicant in its
written reasons. Nor is it necessarily required to provide
reasons of the kind that might be expected of a Court of law:
Applicant WAEE
v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
236 FR 593 at [46]. Further at [47], the Court said as follows:
The inference that the tribunal has failed to consider an issue may be drawn
from its failure to expressly deal with that issue in
its reasons. But that is
an inference not too readily to be drawn where the reasons are otherwise
comprehensive and the issue has
at least been identified at some point. It may
be that it is unnecessary to make a finding on a particular matter because it is
in findings of greater generality or because there is a factual premise
upon which a contention rests which has been rejected. Where,
however, there is
an issue raised by the evidence advanced on behalf of an applicant and
contentions made by the applicant and that
issue, if resolved one way, would be
dispositive of the tribunal’s review of the delegate’s decision, a
failure to deal
with it in the published reasons may raise a strong inference
that it has been overlooked.
One consists of two discrete claims. The first is that the Authority did not
consider the claim that the applicant was at a
particular risk due to his sex
and age, that being a man of fighting age. This risk factor was mentioned in the
UNHCR report of May
2019, “International Protection Considerations with
regard to People Fleeing the Republic of Iraq” at page 59.
it is to be noted that the UNHCR report was specifically considered by the
Authority at [27], [29], and [31] of its decision,
along with a DFAT Report from
2018 and a European Asylum Support Office Report of 2019.
[27], the Authority found, based on the totality of the country information
available, that the relevant risk factors related more
to Sunni males from
formerly IS controlled areas, those being in the north of Iraq. Sunnis from
outside these areas faced some harassment
and discrimination in the form of more
intrusive inspections at checkpoints, but these were considered ‘low
applicant comes from an area in southern Iraq that was never
under IS control.
[3], the Authority specifically referred to a generalised claim that the
applicant’s “family were accused of being
supporters of Sunni
organisations (such as DEASH)”, but ultimately rejected that claim.
it is true that the Authority made no specific reference to the applicant being
at a particular risk based on being a Sunni
male of fighting age, I do not
accept that this particular integer was overlooked. Rather, I accept the
respondent’s submission
that this integer was subsumed into the findings
of greater generality, that neither the applicant nor his family were at risk of
harm due to being imputed as IS or DAESH supporters on the basis of their Sunni
I accept that there is specific mention in the UNHCR report of a risk factor to
male Sunnis of fighting age, I am satisfied
that the Authority considered a
variety of country information from three different sources. That risk factor
was one of four factors
identified in the UNHCR report, the others included
family and tribal background and residency in formerly IS held areas. The
did not meet all of those criteria.
set out above, the choice of country information and the weight to be given to
it were matters for the Authority. I am not satisfied
that the Authority ignored
the UNHCR report, rather, it extracted relevant information from it and balanced
it against the other
two sources of country information. It was in the context
of a particular risk that the applicant might face in his geographical
which was of greater importance than a general risk factor of being a Sunni male
of fighting age. In this regard, I note that
prior to coming to Australia, the
applicant had only faced one instance where he had been subject to a greater
degree of interrogation
at a Mahdi Army checkpoint, but was able to proceed
without further issues.
am satisfied that the conclusion arrived at by the Authority, that the applicant
lacked a profile, even if he was a Sunni male of
fighting age, was open to it
based on the totality of the information before it and for the reasons it
sole ground of judicial review does not have any merit.
DETERMINATION
these circumstances, the Application must be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding seventy-three (73)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge D
Dated: 13 November 2025
RTF format (441 KB)
Signed PDF/A format