Somphong (Em) Thongkhamchanh v Rasier Pacific Pty Ltd [2025] FWCFB 247 (31 October 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 247
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
—Application for an unfair contract term remedy
(Em) Thongkhamchanh
Rasier Pacific Pty Ltd
JUSTICE HATCHER, PRESIDENT
VICE PRESIDENT GIBIAN
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
SYDNEY, 31 OCTOBER 2025
Application under
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) for an
order granting a remedy on the basis that a services contract contains a term
that is unfair – Driver entered
services contract to perform work through
the Uber Driver app – Questions referred to the Full Bench – Whether
application
made in accordance with the Act – Whether the Commission has
is unfair because it does not include terms providing for particular matters
– Whether the unfair contract terms contended
for by Mr Thongkhamchanh
would, in an employment relationship, relate to workplace relations matters
– Question 1 answered,
but question 2 unable to be resolved at
this stage.
Introduction
This decision deals with two questions referred to the Full Bench in
relation to the jurisdiction recently conferred on the Fair Work
) to review a contract for services on the grounds that the
contract contains one or more unfair contract terms.
The questions arose in the following way. The respondent, Rasier
Pacific Pty Ltd (
Rasier Pacific
) operates the well-known Uber Rides
platform. The applicant, Somphong Thongkhamchanh, is a driver and entered into
an agreement with
Rasier Pacific entitled ‘Driver Partner Services
Agreement (Australia)’ on 1 September 2024 (the
). Mr Thongkhamchanh provides services under the Services
Agreement, which remains on foot. The provision of services by Mr Thongkhamchanh
is facilitated through the Uber Driver app. On 9 January 2025, Mr
Thongkhamchanh filed an application under
Fair Work Act
) described as seeking an order granting
a remedy on the basis that the Services Agreement contains a term that is
On 23 January 2025, Rasier Pacific filed a response to the
application in which it objected to the application on the basis of want
application does not identify any specific clause
that is ‘unfair’
and, second, there is no term of the Services Agreement that Mr Thongkhamchanh
claims is unfair that,
in an employment relationship, relates to
‘workplace relations matters’ within the meaning of s 536JQ of
the FW Act.
Rasier Pacific sought orders that the application be dismissed for
want of jurisdiction or, in the alternative, because the application
made in accordance with the FW Act or has no reasonable prospects of success for
the purposes of s 587(1)(a) and (c).
On 3 February 2025, directions were issued by Deputy President
Saunders requesting that particulars be provided by Mr Thongkhamchanh
9 February 2025, Mr Thongkhamchanh provided particulars of his application.
Deputy President Saunders then proposed that
certain preliminary questions be
determined by a Full Bench of the Commission. The President subsequently
constituted the present
Full Bench to consider the following questions:
(a) Question 1:
To the extent that Somphong Thongkhamchanh (applicant) contends that his
services contract with the respondent is unfair because
it does not include
terms providing for particular matters, is the application within the
under Part 3A-5 of the FW Act?
(b) Question 2:
As to the unfair contract terms contended for by the applicant, would they, in
an employment relationship, relate to workplace relations
matters within the
meaning of s 536JQ of the FW Act?
Rasier Pacific filed submissions in relation to those two questions
on 1 August 2025. It contends that both questions should be answered
negative and that Mr Thongkhamchanh’s application should be dismissed for
want to jurisdiction or because it is not
made in accordance with the Act and/or
has no reasonable prospects of success. Mr Thongkhamchanh filed submissions in
relation to
the questions on 7 August and 22 August 2025. The
Transport Workers’ Union of Australia (the
) intervened in the
proceedings and filed submissions on 25 August 2025.
The material before the Full Bench is a short statement of agreed
facts and an agreed tender bundle. The tender bundle contained a
copy of the
Services Agreement entered into by Mr Thongkhamchanh and Rasier Pacific on
1 September 2024 and Mr Thongkhamchanh’s
response to the request for
particulars of his application provided on 9 February 2025. The TWU also
tendered a copy of the current
version of the ‘Uber Community
Guidelines’ which are recorded as being last modified on 17 January
2022. Mr Thongkhamchanh
provided some additional documents which the Full Bench
did not consider to be relevant to the preliminary questions and, accordingly,
were not received as evidence.
The application
Mr Thongkhamchanh’s application was filed on 9 January
2025 and used Form F91 – Application for an unfair contract term
At question 2.1, the form asks an applicant to indicate ‘[w]hich
terms of the services contract are unfair contract
terms, what workplace
relations matters do they relate to and why are they unfair?’. In answer
to that question, Mr Thongkhamchanh
set out the following:
The unfair contract term
The workplace relations matter that the term relates to
Why the term is unfair
Unfair Contract Term 1: Term: The contract does not hold Uber accountable
for ensuring that its platform functions properly, which
is essential for
fulfilling my role as a contractor.
The provision of adequate tools or facilities necessary to perform the
services under
the contract (e.g., the Uber app
functioning
correctly).
The app’s persistent malfunctions (e.g., ‘Searching for
GPS’ errors, non-functional destination filters, and diagnostic
disruptions) directly impact my ability to complete rides and earn
income. By not addressing platform malfunctions, Uber shifts the
troubleshooting and lost income entirely onto contractors.
Unfair Contract Term 2: Term: The contract permits Uber to penalize
contractors through metrics such as cancellation rates, even when
cancellations
are due to app malfunctions beyond the contractor’s control.
Performance-based metrics and their effect on platform access and earnings
App malfunctions force cancellations, negatively affecting my cancellation
rate and potentially leading to penalties, such as restricted
platform access or
reduced ride offers. The term does not consider technical failures as valid
grounds for mitigating the penalties
Unfair Contract Term 3: Term: Uber’s contract allows the company to
impose restrictions on platform access based on accusations
(e.g., failing to
report a lost item), even when such accusations are unsubstantiated or
The fairness and transparency of disciplinary actions and access to
Threats of platform restrictions based on false accusations undermine my
ability to operate effectively and create an unfair power
imbalance. There is no
clear process in the contract for challenging or appealing such decisions,
contractors vulnerable to arbitrary actions.
The particulars subsequently provided by Mr Thongkhamchanh addressed
the three unfair contract terms referred to in the application.
With respect to
the first unfair contract term (‘Lack of accountability for platform
failures’), Mr Thongkhamchanh indicated
that no explicit clause in the
Services Agreement covers Uber’s responsibility for app failures and that
‘[t]he contract
is unfair as it lacks a clause requiring Uber to ensure
its platform functions properly’ and ‘[t]his creates a significant
imbalance in obligations, as drivers depend entirely on Uber’s platform to
generate income’. With respect to the second
unfair contract term, Mr
Thongkhamchanh identified the relevant terms of the Services Agreement as being
clauses 5.4 and 7.4 and
stated that ‘Uber enforces penalties based on
performance metrics that do not account for app malfunctions or extenuating
circumstances,
disproportionately disadvantaging contractors’. With
respect to the third unfair contract term, Mr Thongkhamchanh identified
relevant terms of the Services Agreement as being clauses 15.2 and 15.3 and
stated that ‘Uber can restrict or terminate
platform access based on
unverified claims, leaving contractors without recourse or due process’.
Statutory provisions
Part 3A-5 of the FW Act is entitled ‘Unfair contract terms
of services contracts’ and was inserted into the Act by the
Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes No.
2) Act 2024
Amendment Act
). The provisions commenced on 26 August 2024.
The central provision is s 536NA which permits the Commission
to make an order in relation to a services contract if satisfied that
contains one or more unfair contract terms. The section provides:
536NA When the FWC may make an order in relation to an unfair
contract term of a services contract
(1) The FWC may make an order under this Part in relation to a services
contract if the FWC is satisfied that the services contract
includes one or more
unfair contract terms which, in an employment relationship, would relate to
workplace relations matters.
(2) The FWC may make the order only if a person has made an application under
section 536ND in relation to the services contract.
(3) The FWC must take into account fairness between the parties concerned in
deciding whether to make an order under this Division,
and the kind of order to
The key requirements for an order to be made are those set out in
s 536NA(1). It is appropriate to make some general observations
circumstances in which the Commission is able to make an order under the section
and the types of orders which may be made.
, the order able to be
made by the Commission must relate to a ‘services contract’. The
term ‘services contract’
is defined in s 15H of the FW Act in
the following terms:
15H Meaning of
services contract
General meaning
services contract
is a contract for services:
(a) that relates to the performance of work under the contract by an individual;
(b) that has the requisite constitutional connection specified in
subsection (2) or (3).
Note: Conditions or collateral arrangements relating to a
services contract may be taken to be part of the services contract: see
subsection (4).
is no issue in this matter that the Services Agreement is a contract for
services that ‘relates to the performance of
work under the contract by an
individual’ for the purposes of s 15H(1)(a). The Services Agreement
contains various provisions
with respect to the provision of
‘Transportation Services’ by Mr Thongkhamchanh, which is defined to
mean ‘on-demand
passenger transportation
Services Agreement at least ‘relates to’ the performance of work
under the Services Agreement by Mr Thongkhamchanh.
The relevant constitutional
connection is provided, for the purposes of s 15H(1)(b), by the fact that
Rasier Pacific is a party to
the contract and is a ‘constitutional
corporation’ by reason of engaging in trading
activities.
, the Commission must be satisfied that the services
contract includes one or more ‘unfair contract terms’. The
‘unfair contract terms’ is not itself defined in the FW
Act. As we will come to, Rasier Pacific contends that the fact
the Commission
must be satisfied that the relevant services contract includes ‘one or
more unfair contract terms’ supports
the conclusion that the
Commission’s jurisdiction is limited to specific terms of a service
contract that are unfair, rather
than to review the fairness of a services
contract more broadly. In that respect, Rasier Pacific refers to the object of
in s 536N which is as follows:
536N Object of Part
(1) The object of this Part is:
(a) to establish a framework for dealing with unfair contract terms of services
contracts that:
(i) balances
the needs of principals and the needs of independent contractors; and
(ii) addresses
the need for a level playing field between independent contractors and
principals by creating disincentives to the
inclusion of unfair contract terms
in services contracts; and
(iii) recognises
and protects the freedom of independent contractors to enter into services
contracts; and
(b) to establish procedures for dealing with unfair contract terms
(i) are quick,
flexible and informal; and
(ii) address
the needs of principals and independent contractors; and
(c) to provide appropriate remedies if a term of a services contract is found to
(2) The procedures and remedies referred to in
paragraphs (1)(b) and (c), and the manner of deciding on and working out
such remedies,
are intended to ensure that a ‘fair go all round’ is
accorded to both the principals and independent contractors concerned.
Note: The expression ‘fair go all round’ was used by Sheldon
re Loty and Holloway v Australian Workers’ Union
Rasier Pacific refers specifically to the object of establishing a
‘framework for dealing with unfair contract terms’
s 536N(1)(a) and of ‘creating disincentives to the inclusion of
unfair contract terms in services contracts’ in s
536N(1)(a)(ii).
the unfair contract term or terms must be terms which, in an employment
relationship, would relate to ‘workplace relations
matters’. The
expression ‘employment relationship’ is not itself defined in the FW
Act, although it is clear that
it refers to the legal relationship between an
individual who is an employee with a person who is their
536NA(1) requires a hypothetical exercise to be undertaken. This is because the
section does not operate upon a contract
between the parties to an employment
relationship but rather is concerned with a services contract, so that the
assessment required
is whether the unfair contract terms ‘would relate
to’ workplace relations matters
they were terms applying to an
employment relationship.
The expression ‘workplace relations matters’ is defined
in s 536JQ in the following terms:
536JQ What are
workplace relations matters
(1) Subject to subsection (2), for the purposes of this Chapter,
workplace relations matter
means any of the following
(a) remuneration,
allowances or other amounts payable to employees;
entitlements of employees;
(c) hours of
work of employees;
(d) enforcing
or terminating contracts of employment;
(e) making,
enforcing or terminating agreements (not being contracts of employment)
determining terms and conditions of employment;
(f) disputes
between employees and employers, or the resolution of such disputes;
(g) industrial
action by employees or employers;
(h) any other
matter that is substantially the same as a matter that relates to employees or
employers and that is dealt with by or
(i) this Act;
Work (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Act 2009
(iii) a State
or Territory industrial law;
matter is specified in regulations made for the purposes of this paragraph;
(i) any other matter specified in regulations made for the purposes of this
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), none of the following is a
workplace relations matter
(a) prevention
of discrimination or promotion of equal employment opportunity, but only if the
State or Territory law concerned is
neither a State or Territory industrial law
nor contained in such a law;
(b) superannuation;
(c) workers’
compensation;
(d) occupational
health and safety;
observance of a public holiday, except the rate of payment of an employee for
the public holiday;
(g) deductions
from wages or salaries;
(h) industrial
action affecting essential services;
(i) attendance
for service on a jury;
(j) professional
or trade regulation;
(k) consumer
protection;
(l) taxation;
(m) any other
matter specified in regulations made for the purposes of this paragraph.
application of the definition in s 536JQ in the context of s 536NA(1)
is not without difficulty. The definition in s 536JQ is
primarily utilised
in the FW Act to determine the extent to which certain State or Territory laws
are excluded from affecting the
rights, entitlements, obligations and
liabilities of a regulated worker, a regulated business or a party to a services
contract for
the purposes of s 536JP(1). There is, nonetheless, no dispute
that the definition in s 536JQ is to be applied in the context of
536NA(1). That view is supported by the Revised Explanatory Memorandum to
Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes) Bill 2023
Amendment Bill
), although, unlike in relation to other parts of the FW
Act, the definition is not expressly applied in
, s 536NB sets out matters that the Commission may
take into account in determining whether a term of a services contract is an
contract term. The section provides as follows:
536NB Matters to be considered in deciding whether a term of
a services contract is an unfair contract term
(1) In determining whether a term of a services contract is an unfair contract
term, the FWC may take into account the following
relative bargaining power of the parties to the services contract;
(b) whether the
services contract as a whole displays a significant imbalance between the rights
and obligations of the parties;
(c) whether the
contract term under consideration is reasonably necessary to protect the
legitimate interests of a party to the contract;
(d) whether the
contract term under consideration imposes a harsh, unjust or unreasonable
requirement on a party to the contract;
(e) whether the
services contract as a whole provides for a total remuneration for performing
work that is:
(i) less than
regulated workers performing the same or similar work would receive under a
minimum standards order or minimum standards
guidelines; or
(ii) less than
employees performing the same or similar work would receive;
(f) any other
matter the FWC considers relevant.
(2) The matters in paragraphs (1)(b) to (f) are to be assessed as at the
time the FWC considers the application.
Section 536NB(1) contemplates that a determination must be made as
to whether a term of the services contract is an unfair contract
matters the Commission is able to take into account in undertaking that
assessment are plainly broad and extend to any
matter the Commission considers
relevant. As we will elaborate upon below, the assessment may include
consideration of matters beyond
the terms of the services contract itself, such
as the relative bargaining power of the parties (s 536NB(1)(a)) as well as
consideration
of the services contract ‘as a whole’
(s 536NB(1)(b) and (e)).
, the orders the Commission is able to make if it is
satisfied that the services contract includes one or more unfair contract terms
are set out in s 536NC, which provides:
536NC Remedy—order to set aside etc. contract
The FWC may make an order under this section:
(a) setting aside all or part of a services contract which, in an employment
relationship, would relate to a workplace relations matter;
(b) amending or varying all or part of a services contract which, in an
employment relationship, would relate to a workplace relations
If a services contract is found to include an unfair contract term,
the orders the Commission can make are not limited to orders directed
particular term or terms. The Commission may set aside all or part of the
services contract which, in an employment relationship,
would relate to a
workplace relations matter or amend or vary all or part of the services contract
which, in an employment relationship,
would relate to a workplace relations
matter. Although the capacity to make an order is dependent on the Commission
being satisfied
that a services contract includes one or more unfair contract
terms, the remedial orders available to the Commission are potentially
in their operation.
s 536NA(2) provides that the Commission may only make an order if a person
has made an application ‘under s 536ND’ in
relation to the
services contract. Section 536ND(1) provides that a person who is party to
a services contract (or an organisation
that represents the industrial interests
of a person who is party to a services contract) may apply for an order granting
on the basis that the services contract contains a term that is unfair.
Section 536ND(2) limits the capacity to make such an application
to a person
whose annual rate of earnings, and such other amounts (if any) worked out in
relation to the person in accordance with
the regulations, is less than the
contractor high income threshold. The amount of the ‘contractor high
income threshold’
is prescribed by regulation and is adjusted
contractor high income threshold is presently $183,100.00.
new provisions in Part 3A-5 of the FW Act do not represent the first
occasion in which Commonwealth law has made provision for
proceedings to be
brought alleging that a contract involving an independent contractor is unfair.
Industrial Relations Amendment Act 1992
(Cth) introduced
ss 127A–127C into the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
Section 127A(2) initially provided for an application to be made to the
Australian Industrial Relations Commission to review
a contract for services
relating to the performance of work by an independent contractor on grounds the
contract was unfair, harsh
or against the public
127A was amended by the
Industrial Relations Reform Act 1993
confer this jurisdiction on the Industrial Relations Court of Australia. The
provisions continued in the same form in the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(Cth), although the jurisdiction was transferred to the Federal Court. Sections
127A–127C were renumbered by the
Workplace Relations Amendment (Work
Choices) Act 2005
(Cth) and became ss 832–834 of the
Relations Act 1996
Sections 832–834 of the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(Cth) were then repealed by the
Independent Contractors Act 2006
) with effect from 1 March 2007. Section 12(1) of the IC
Act now permits an application to be made to the Federal Court or the Federal
Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) to review a services contract
on grounds that the contract is unfair and/or harsh.
Section 12(2A) of the IC
Act was inserted by the Amendment Act. It provides that an application must not
be made in relation to a
services contract unless the sum of the independent
contractor’s annual rate of earnings, and any other relevant amounts, is
more than the contractor high income threshold.
the second reading speech for the Amendment Bill, the Minister expressed the
view that the existing provisions under the IC Act
were inadequate. The Minister
And we need better protections against unfair contract terms for
independent contractors.
Existing protections against unfair contract terms under the
Independent
Contractors Act
have not worked.
This bill creates a new, low-cost and efficient jurisdiction at the Fair Work
Commission for resolving disputes about unfair contract
terms in services
contracts, for independent contractors below a high-income threshold.
consequence of s 536ND(2) of the FW Act and s 12(2A) of the IC Act is
that an independent contractor whose annual rate of earnings
is below the
contractor high income threshold is able to apply to the Commission under
Part 3A-5 of the FW Act, whereas an independent
contractor whose annual
rate of earnings is above the contractor high income threshold remains able to
apply to review the relevant
services contract under the IC
however, some differences between the jurisdiction exercised by the Commission
under Part 3A-5 of the FW Act and by the
Federal Court or Federal Circuit
Court under the IC Act to which it is necessary to refer below.
An important historical precursor to the provisions now in the IC
Act, and in Part 3A-5 of the FW Act, is found in New South Wales
legislation.
Section 106
Industrial Relations Act 1996
permits the Industrial Court of New South Wales to make an order declaring
wholly or partly void, or varying, any contract
whereby a person performs work
in any industry if it ‘finds the contract is an unfair contract’.
Section 106(2)
contemplates that the Court may find that a contract was an
unfair contract at the time it was entered into or that it subsequently
an unfair contract because of any conduct of the parties, any variation of the
contract or for any other reason. The term
‘unfair contract’ is
to mean a contract that is unfair, harsh or
unconscionable, against the public interest, provides a total remuneration that
than a person performing the work would receive as an employee
performing the work, or that is designed to, or does, avoid the provisions
industrial instrument.
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(NSW) was first enacted in 1959 as s 88F of the
Industrial Arbitration
enactment of the provision was motivated by a desire to prevent the award system
being defeated by the practice of engaging contract
labour. As the majority of
the High Court observed in
Fish v Solution 6 Holdings Pty
‘[c]ontract labour, especially of milk vendors, bread carters and in
the building trades, had emerged as a means of sidestepping,
and defeating, the
prescription of employment conditions by awards made in arbitration of
The intention was to confer a comprehensive power upon the Commission to go to
the substance of an arrangement made for a person
to perform work in an industry
‘in order to put such a worker in no worse a position than if he had been
working under a contract
of employment protected by award
conditions’.
provisions were, however, broader in their application than those subsequently
enacted in federal legislation. The New South
Wales provisions were capable of
applying to contracts and arrangements involving persons who perform work as
employees and to at
least some commercial arrangements whereby work is performed
in addition to work being undertaken by an independent
contractor.
least in relation to a national system employee or national system employer, the
FW Act now operates to the exclusion of
Relations Act 1996
also excludes
Industrial Relations Act 1996
relation to a services contract that relates to the performance of work by an
independent
contractor.
With that introduction to Part 3A-5 of the FW Act and
comparable legislation, it is appropriate to address the two questions referred
to the Full Bench.
Question 1 — Failure of a services contract to
include provisions so as to make it fair
The first question is whether an application is within the
application
contends that a services contract is unfair because it does not
include terms providing for particular matters. There was ultimately
as between Mr Thongkhamchanh, Rasier Pacific and the TWU that the Commission
cannot make an order under s 536NA(1) unless
it is satisfied that the
relevant services contract includes one or more unfair contract terms. No party
contends that the Commission
can make an order under s 536NA(1) purely on
the basis that a services contract is found to be unfair because it lacks
identified provisions.
However, it is important to distinguish between the jurisdiction of
the Commission to consider an application made to it and the power
Commission to make an order in relation to a services contract under
s 536NA(1). We consider that the correct understanding
of the provisions is
as follows. Section 536ND(1) permits a party to a services contract (or a
relevant organisation) to apply for
an order granting a remedy ‘on the
basis that the services contract contains a term that is unfair’. So long
as an application
is made which seeks an order on the basis that the applicant
is a party to a services contract which contains an unfair term or terms,
Commission has jurisdiction to consider and determine the application.
If an application is made under s 536ND(1), the power of the
Commission to then make an order under s 536NA(1) is dependent upon the
Commission ultimately being satisfied that the services contract contains one or
more unfair contract terms. That requires the identification
of a particular
term or terms that the Commission finds are unfair. It is not sufficient that
the Commission forms a general view
that the services contract is unfair or
that, absent identification of any unfair contract term, the services contract
because it fails to contain particular provisions. Nor, obviously
enough, would it be sufficient to point to unfair conduct by a
party to the
services contract.
The language in Part 3A-5 is clear. Section 536NA(1) permits
the Commission to make an order if it is satisfied that the services
‘includes one or more unfair contract terms’. Section 536NB(1) sets
out matters that the Commission may take
into account ‘[i]n determining
whether a term of a services contract is an unfair contract term’. Section
536ND(1) enables
an application to be made on the basis that a services contract
‘contains a term that is unfair’. The object in ss 536N(1)(a)
and (b) refers to establishing a framework for ‘dealing with unfair
contract terms of services contracts’ and procedures
for ‘dealing
with unfair contract terms’. The consistent reference to a
‘term’ or ‘terms’ of
a services contract indicates a
clear intention that the Commission’s jurisdiction is directed at
ascertaining whether or not
there are any terms of a services contract that are
this respect, the provisions of Part 3A-5 can be contrasted with comparable
provisions in the IC Act. As we have recorded, s 12(1)
of the IC Act
provides that an application ‘may be made to the Court to review a
services contract on either or both of the
following grounds: (a) the
contract is unfair; (b) the contract is harsh’. Section 15(1) sets out
matters to which the Court
may have regard ‘[i]n reviewing a services
contract’ and s 15(3) requires the Court to record its opinion that
ground referred to in subsection 12(1) is established in relation to
the whole or a part of the services contract’. These provisions
contemplate the relevant court reviewing the fairness of a contract in whole or
in part. There is little doubt that a contract could
be found to be unfair or
harsh for the purposes of s 12(1) of the IC Act by reason of the failure of
the contract to include specified
provisions.
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(NSW) similarly involves a
consideration of whether the relevant contract is an ‘unfair
contract’. That jurisdiction permits
consideration to be given as to
whether the contract is unfair because it of its failure to include specified
provisions. In
Sydney Water Corporation Ltd v Industrial Relations Commission
Section 106(2)
states in the plainest of terms that a contract
may become unfair, so as to attract the jurisdiction of the Commission, because
post-contract conduct of the parties. But it is the ‘contract’
that is to be held unfair, and not the conduct, in the
final analysis.
Unfairness may of course stem from what the contract fails to provide, for
example as regards termination procedures.
example, a common complaint in that jurisdiction was that a contract was unfair
because it failed to provide adequate protection
against arbitrary
termination.
requires a potentially narrower inquiry as to whether a services contract
includes one or more contract terms that are unfair. However,
the fact that the
focus of s 536NA(1) is on the identification of unfair contract terms does
not suggest that the inquiry is confined
to the examination of particular terms
of a services contract in isolation. Rasier Pacific accepts, correctly in our
view, that whether
a particular term or terms are unfair must be determined
having regard to the terms of the services contract as a whole. The matters
the Commission may take into account in determining whether a term of a services
contract is an unfair term in s 536NB(1) include
whether the services
contract ‘as a whole’ displays a significant imbalance between the
rights and obligations of the
parties (s 536NB(1)(b)) and whether the
services contract ‘as a whole’ provides for a total remuneration
that is less
than what regulated workers or employees performing the same or
similar work would receive (s 536NB(1)(e)). It is also difficult
envisage how one could assess whether a contract term is ‘reasonably
necessary to protect the legitimate interests of a
party to the contract’
(s 536NB(1)(c)) or imposes a ‘harsh, unjust or unreasonable
requirement on a party to the contract’
(s 536NB(1)(d)) without
consideration of the other terms of the services contract and, indeed, the
circumstances in which it was
made and is performed. In that respect,
s 536NB(2) requires that the matters in ss 536NB(1)(b) to (f) be
assessed as at the time
the Commission considers the application, rather than
only when the contract was
it is necessary to carefully have regard to the statutory context in which the
provisions appear, some guidance may be derived
from other legislation providing
relief with respect to unfair contract terms. For example,
Australian Consumer
) provides that term of a consumer contract or small business contract
is void if: (a) the term is unfair; and (b) the contract is
a standard form
Sections 24(1)
and (2) define when a consumer contract or small
business contract is ‘unfair’ in the following terms:
24 Meaning of
(1) A term of a consumer contract or small business contract is
(a) it would cause a significant imbalance in the parties’ rights and
obligations arising under the contract; and
(b) it is not reasonably necessary in order to protect the legitimate
interests of the party who would be advantaged by the term;
(c) it would cause detriment (whether financial or otherwise) to a party if
it were to be applied or relied on.
(2) In determining whether a term of a contract is unfair under
subsection (1), a court may take into account such matters as it thinks
relevant, but must take into account the following:
(a) the extent to which the term is transparent;
(b) the contract as a whole. ...
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
) provides that a
term of a consumer contract or small business contract is void if: (a) the term
is unfair; (b) the contract is a
standard form contract; and (c) the contract is
a financial product or a contract for the supply, or possible supply, of
that are financial services. Sections 12BG(1) and (2) define when a
contract is ‘unfair’ in the same manner as ss 24(1)
provisions operate in a manner that is distinguishable from Part 3A-5. In
particular, under s 24(1) of the ACL and s 12BG(1)
of the ASIC Act, a
term of a contract is only unfair if all of the elements in subsections (a), (b)
and (c) are
contrast, s 536NB(1) lists matters that the Commission may take into
account in determining whether a term of a services contract
is an unfair
contract term. Section 536NB(1) does not set out conditions which must be
satisfied before a term of a services contract
can be found to be unfair.
Nonetheless, the provisions of the ACL and the ASIC Act share some common
elements with Part 3A-5 such
as the reference to whether there is a
significant imbalance in the parties’ rights and obligations and whether
an impugned
term is reasonably necessary in order to protect the legitimate
interests of a party in s 536NB(1)(b) and (c) of the FW Act,
and (b) of the ACL and s 12B(1)(a) and (b) of the ASIC Act.
So long as appropriate regard is given to the differing statutory context,
authorities dealing with those provisions of the ACL and the ASIC Act may
provide some assistance in applying Part 3A-5 of the FW
for present purposes, s 24(2)(b) of the ACL and s 12BG(2)(c) of the
ASIC Act require that, in determining whether a term
of a contract is unfair,
the court must take into account ‘the contract as a whole’. That
suggests a recognition that
the fairness of an individual term of a contract can
only be evaluated having regard to the contract as a whole. Given the express
references to consideration of the contract ‘as a whole’ in
ss 536NB(1)(b) and (e), the same approach is appropriate
in the context of
Part 3A-5. Consideration of the contract as a whole is inherent to an
assessment of the fairness of a term of the
considering ‘the contract as a whole’, each and every term of the
contract will not necessarily be equally relevant,
or perhaps relevant at all.
It has been said that the main requirement is to consider terms that might
reasonably be seen as tending
to counterbalance the term in
part, in the context of Part 3A-5, we consider that whether a particular
term of a services contract is unfair is likely
to require consideration of the
other rights and obligations created by the services contract.
It follows that whether a particular term or terms of a services
contract are unfair for the purposes of s 536NA(1) must be assessed
regard to the terms of the contract as a whole, including what the contract
otherwise provides or does not provide. It remains
necessary to identify a
particular term or terms that are unfair. It is not sufficient for the
Commission to simply find that a services
contract is unfair because it fails to
contain a provision of a particular description. Having said that, a complaint
that a services
contract is unfair because it does not include a particular
provision will frequently be able to be characterised as a contention
or more relevant express terms of the contract are unfair contract terms because
of something for which the contract does
not provide. A term of a services
contract might, in an appropriate case, be an unfair contract term because that
term, and the services
contract generally, fails to include elements which are
necessary to render a particular term fair in its operation or effect.
In light of this analysis of Part 3A-5 of the FW Act, we are
satisfied that Mr Thongkhamchanh’s application, read together with
particulars he has provided, may be characterised as one that seeks an order
granting a remedy on the basis that the Services
Agreement contains unfair
terms. In his particulars, Mr Thongkhamchanh has identified specific clauses of
the Services Agreement
he says are unfair at least in relation to the second and
third unfair contract terms identified in his initial application.
With respect to the first unfair contract term, Mr Thongkhamchanh
contends that the Services Agreement ‘does not hold Uber accountable
ensuring that its platform functions properly’. The particulars provided
by Mr Thongkhamchanh do not identify a particular
clause that is the subject of
that complaint and simply contends that ‘[t]he contract is unfair as it
lacks a clause requiring
Uber to ensure its platform functions properly’.
The TWU also does not identify a particular clause which is relevant to that
complaint. As framed, the particulars would not be sufficient to sustain a
finding that the Services Agreement includes one or more
unfair contract terms
for the purposes of s 536NA(1). However, as submitted by the TWU, the
contention could possibly be reframed
as a complaint that clause 3(a) of the
Services Agreement requires payment of the Services Fee in order to obtain
access to the Uber
Driver app without ensuring that Rasier Pacific has an
obligation to ensure the app operates adequately. Whether such a contention
would have merit is not a matter which must now be considered. It is at least
conceivably a claim which could be considered under
With respect to the second unfair contract term, Mr Thongkhamchanh
contends that the Services Agreement permits Rasier Pacific to
contractors through metrics such as cancellation rates, even when cancellations
occur due to app malfunctions beyond the
contractor’s control. Mr
Thongkhamchanh identifies clauses 5.4 and 7.4 as relevant terms of the Services
Agreement. Clause
5.4 provides for ‘ratings’ in the following terms:
5.4 How do ratings work?
(a) After receiving Transportation Services from you, a Rider will be
prompted by the Uber app to rate such Transportation Services,
and you will be
prompted to rate your Rider. This can also include comments or feedback, which,
along with the rating, you agree
to provide in good faith. Feedback and ratings
are Uber Data.
(b) Uber, Rasier and their Aﬃliates are not required to verify any
they include
obscenities, objectionable content or Personal Data, or if they violate Law or
the Community Guidelines.
Clause 7.4 deals with adjustments to the transportation fee:
7.4 Adjustments to the Transportation Fee
(a) Rasier Pacific is permitted to withhold payment of the Transportation Fee
(or if the Transportation Fee has already been paid,
require reimbursement of
the Transportation Fee from you to the Rider) for a particular Transportation
Service you provide to a Rider
(i) the applicable Transportation Services were not completed;
(ii) a Rider has made a complaint related to your acts or omissions and Rasier
Pacific has taken reasonable steps to verify the veracity
of the complaint;
(iii) suspected fraudulent activity or misuse of the Uber Driver App has been
(b) Rasier Pacific’s decision to withhold payment or
require reimbursement of a Transportation Fee under section 7.4(a) must
exercised in a reasonable manner.
Rasier Pacific contends that clauses 5.4 and 7.4 do not have
the effect complained of by Mr Thongkhamchanh and that the complaint
truth, that those clauses are themselves unfair. That submission appears to us
to contest the merits of the application
rather than to involve a contention
that the application does not seek a remedy on the basis that the Services
Agreement includes
a term that is said to be unfair. Rasier Pacific did not ask
the Full Bench to dismiss the application on the basis that it lacks
prospects of success other than as a consequence of its jurisdictional argument.
In any event, it could be contended at
least that clause 7.4(a)(i), in
permitting Rasier Pacific to withhold payment if the applicable Transportation
Services are not completed,
allows withholding of payment when a service is not
completed even where that occurs as a result of app malfunction. We are
that the complaint is capable of being characterised as including an
allegation that the Services Agreement contains specific unfair
With respect to the third unfair contract term, Mr Thongkhamchanh
contends that the Services Agreement allows Rasier Pacific to impose
restrictions on platform access based on accusations even when the accusations
are unsubstantiated or incorrect. The particulars
provided by Mr Thongkhamchanh
identify clauses 15.2 and 15.3 as relevant terms. Clauses 15.2 and 15.3
15.2 Termination by Rasier Pacific and Uber
(a) Subject to any requirements under applicable Law, Uber or Rasier Pacific
may, acting reasonably, terminate this Agreement in its
entirety by giving you
30 days’ prior written notice of termination, for any legitimate business,
legal or regulatory reason.
(b) Uber may also immediately restrict or remove your access to the Uber
Driver App, and provide you with written notice of the restriction
or removal,
(i) you commit a material breach of this Agreement; or
(ii) an act or omission by you, in Uber’s reasonable judgment, is: (a) in
breach of applicable Laws; (b) in violation of the
Community Guidelines or any
other Policy; or (c) creates a risk to health and safety of yourself or others,
including in relation
to fatigue.
(c) Uber may temporarily restrict your access to the Uber Driver
App if it or an Aﬃliate is investigating an alleged breach
referred to
under section 15.2(b) (including in response to complaints from Riders about
your conduct in connection with a Trip).
There may be circumstances in which
Uber is unable to provide you with information about the alleged breach whilst
an investigation
is ongoing (either by Uber and/or a third party such as the
(d) Uber may, but is not obliged to, reinstate your access to the Uber Driver
App where conduct contrary to section 15.2(b) is capable
of remedy and is
remedied by you and documentation is provided to Uber to confirm this.
15.3 Eﬀect of termination
Outstanding payment obligations and sections 1 (‘Entering
into an agreement’), 5.3(b) (‘Your account’), 7.4
(‘Adjustments to the Transportation Fee’), 7.7(d) (‘Payment
processing’), 7.9 (‘GST and other Taxes’),
(‘Ownership of intellectual property rights’), 8.3
(‘Restrictions on the use of the Uber Driver App or Uber
Data’), 8.4
(‘Uber Names, Marks or Works’), 9 (‘Privacy’), 11.2
(‘General disclaimer’),
12 (‘Indemnification’), 13
(‘Limitation of liability’), 14 (‘Insurance’) (to the
extent that
insurances are required to be maintained after the term), this
section 15.3, 16 (‘General provisions’) and 17 (‘Definitions
and interpretation’) shall survive the termination of this Agreement
In his particulars, Mr Thongkhamchanh complains that ‘Uber can
restrict or terminate platform access on unverified claims, leaving
contractors
without recourse or due process’. Clauses 15.2(b) and (c) permit
restriction or removal of access to the Uber Driver
app. Although
clause 15.3 may be irrelevant, it is tolerably clear that Mr Thongkhamchanh
wishes to contend that clause 15.2 is unfair
because it permits Rasier
Pacific to restrict access to the platform based on unverified claims. Leaving
aside the merits of that
contention, we are satisfied that is the type of claim
contemplated by Part 3A-5. In making that complaint, Mr Thongkhamchanh
a remedy on the basis that the Services Agreement contains a term that is
Question 2 — Workplace relations matters
The second question is whether the unfair contract terms contended
for by Mr Thongkhamchanh would, in an employment relationship,
workplace relations matters within the meaning of s 536JQ of the FW Act. As
earlier discussed, s 536NA(1) permits the Commission
to make an order in
relation to a services contract only if it is satisfied it includes one or more
unfair contract terms which,
in an employment relationship, would relate to
workplace relations matters.
requirement in s 536NA(1) that the unfair contract term or terms would
‘relate to’ workplace relations matters directs
attention to the
connection or association between the unfair contract term or terms and a
workplace relations matter. The phrase
‘relating to’ is commonly
understood to be one of wide
refer to a direct or indirect connection between two subject matters, and one
subject matter can ‘relate to’ another
subject matter even though
the first subject matter also relates to other things. However, the degree of
connection required between
two subject matters joined by the words
‘relating to’ is to be determined by reference to the text, context,
legislative
purpose and history of the
Rasier Pacific submits that, in the context of Chapter 3A of the FW
Act, the phrase ‘which, in an employment relationship, would
workplace relations matters’ is directed at terms which have the same
content and effect as a type of term which
would be found in a 'standard
contract of employment’ or regulated by a State or Territory industrial
law. There are a number
of difficulties with the submission. It is, with
respect, unclear what is meant by the reference to a ‘standard contract of
employment’. We infer that Rasier Pacific submits that the expression
‘workplace relations matters’ should be understood
to be limited to
terms which are commonly found in employment contracts. If that is the case, the
FW Act does so not by imposing
an implicit constraint on what can constitute a
‘workplace relations matter’, but by identifying specific
subject-matters
in s 536JQ(1).
To the extent that Rasier Pacific submits that an unfair contract
term must itself have the same content and effect as a term of an
relationship that
a workplace relations matter, we do not consider the
submission can be reconciled with the language used in ss 536NA and 536JQ
the context of those provisions. For the power to make an order under
s 536NA(1) to arise, it is not necessary that the unfair contract
itself directly provides for a ‘workplace relations matter’. The
language of s 536NA(1) indicates that it is sufficient
that the Commission
is satisfied that the services contract contains an unfair contract term that
‘relates to’ a subject
matter that falls within the definition of a
‘workplace relations matter’. The hypothetical exercise contemplated
s 536NA(1) is not consistent with understanding the subsection to
require that the relevant term of a services contract have precisely
content and effect as a term of an employment contract. Rather, the subsection
requires an assessment of whether a term
of a services contract would, in an
employment context, relate to a subject matter identified in s 536JQ(1). By
definition, a term
of a services contract will not have precisely the same
content and effect as a term of an employment contract.
Furthermore, s 536JQ(1)(h) extends the definition of a
‘workplace relations matter’ to any matter that is
‘substantially
the same as a matter that relates to employees and
employers and that is dealt with by or under... this Act’. That must at
least extend to the subjects dealt with in the National Employment Standards in
Part 2-2 and the matters about which terms may be
included in modern awards
under s 139. It may also extend to the method or frequency of payment
(being matters dealt with under s
323), the fixed-term nature of a contract
(Division 5 of Part 2-9), pay secrecy (Division 4 of Part 2-9),
disconnection from work
(Division 6 of Part 2-9), protection for engagement
in industrial activities (Division 4 of Part 3-1), or protection from
harassment (Part 3-5A), amongst others. The reference in
s 536JQ(1)(h) to a matter being ‘substantially the same’ as
matter that relates to employees and employers and is dealt with by or under the
FW Act acknowledges the matter need not be identical.
is not entirely correct to say, as Rasier Pacific does, that the purpose of
Chapter 3A is to confer on independent contractors
who have similar
characteristics to employees a range of similar protections conferred on
employees under the FW Act. The purpose
of Chapter 3A is, in a broad sense, to
‘ensure that certain independent contractors are entitled to greater
workplace protections
than they are
currently’.
Many of the protections in Chapter 3A apply to independent contractors who are
either ‘employee-like workers’ or engaged
in the road transport
industry. The phrase ‘employee-like worker’ is perhaps somewhat
misleading. It refers to a category
of independent contractor that performs
digital platform work, rather than to persons who, in all respects at least,
have characteristics
similar to those of
Part 3A-5, however, is not limited to ‘employee-like workers’
and extends in its operation to any contract for services
that relates to the
performance of work under the contract by an individual and has a relevant
constitutional
connection.
Rasier Pacific submitted that question 2 can be answered in the
negative because Mr Thongkhamchanh’s application does not identify
specific terms he alleges are unfair. That is, it submits that the failure to
specify terms said to be unfair means that the Commission
cannot be satisfied
that the Services Agreement includes one or more unfair contract terms
‘which, in an employment relationship,
would relate to workplace relations
matters’. If, contrary to its submissions, Mr Thongkhamchanh has alleged
that the Services
Agreement includes one or more unfair contract terms, Rasier
Pacific submits that it is premature for the Full Bench to determine
whether the
matters raised in the application can be said to relate to workplace relations
matters. Rasier Pacific submits that the
characterisation of any term alleged to
be unfair and whether, in an employment relationship, the term would relate to a
relations matter might be affected by evidence and should be
considered together with consideration of whether the Services Agreement
contains any unfair contract terms.
For the reasons given above, Mr Thongkhamchanh has identified terms
of the Services Agreement which he alleges are unfair. In the
circumstances, the
Full Bench should not express a concluded view as to whether the terms of the
Services Agreement identified by
Mr Thongkhamchanh are terms which, in an
employment relationship, would relate to workplace relations matters. We agree
with Rasier
Pacific that this question might be influenced by evidence. However,
given that Rasier Pacific seeks orders that Mr Thongkhamchanh’s
application be dismissed for want of jurisdiction, or because the application
was not made in accordance with the FW Act or has no
reasonable prospects of
success, it is appropriate to consider whether it is at least arguable that the
terms identified by Mr Thongkhamchanh
relate to workplace relations matters.
The first unfair contract term referred to in the application
alleges that the Services Agreement does not hold Rasier Pacific
‘accountable
for ensuring that its platform functions properly, which is
essential for fulfilling my role as a contractor’. Mr Thongkhamchanh
not identify a particular term that has this effect, although we have explained
that the complaint might be reframed to allege
unfairness in clause 3(a) of
the Services Agreement. Such a complaint is the most distant from being, in an
employment relationship,
related to a workplace relations matter. However, it is
possible that unfairness alleged by Mr Thongkhamchanh might be described
related to ‘remuneration, allowances or other payments payable to
employees’ for the purposes of s 536JQ(1)(a) because
interruptions in
platform functioning affect Mr Thongkhamchanh’s capacity to earn monies
through the performance of work. The
answer to that question is likely to be
affected by evidence. It is not possible for us to form a view about that matter
it is conceivably arguable.
second unfair contract term referred to in the application complains that the
Services Agreement permits penalisation of contractors
through metrics such as
cancellation rates even where cancellations are the result of malfunctions in
the platform. After the provision
of particulars, Mr Thongkhamchanh identified
clauses 5.4 and 7.4 as being the relevant terms. Leaving aside the merits
of the contention,
we are satisfied that Mr Thongkhamchanh at least raises an
arguable basis upon which the Commission might be satisfied that the terms
would, in an employment relationship, relate to a workplace relations matter.
Clause 7.4 specifically permits Rasier Pacific to withhold
payment of the
Transportation Fee in certain circumstances. It is strongly arguable that this
provision, in an employment relationship,
would relate to ‘remuneration,
allowances or other amounts payable to employees’ for the purposes of
s 536JQ(1)(a). To
the extent Rasier Pacific submits that the reference
‘remuneration, allowances or other amounts payable to employees’
limited to time-based payments to employees, we do not accept the submission. In
ordinary parlance, the word ‘remuneration’
means recompense or
reward for services rendered by an employee and is sufficiently broadly to
include any consideration benefiting
an employee under an employment contract
including both cash and non-cash
different meaning is to be adopted in the context of the FW
A term of a
services contract dealing with payments associated with the performance of work
by an individual under the contract is
likely to be a term that would, in an
employment relationship, relate to ‘remuneration’.
The third unfair contract term referred to in the application
alleges that the Services Agreement allows Rasier Pacific ‘to
restrictions on platform access based on accusations... even where such
accusations are unsubstantiated or incorrect’.
Mr Thongkhamchanh
identified clauses 15.2 and 15.3 as the relevant terms. Rasier Pacific
submits that restriction of access to the
Uber Driver app is not a matter which
relates to workplace relations matters because the mode of organising work
through a digital
platform differs from the conventional paradigm of mutual and
direct exchange between an employer and an employee. In our view, this
submission ignores that s 536NA(1) requires consideration of whether a term
of a services contract would relate to a workplace relations
employment relationship
. Clause 15.2 permits Rasier Pacific to terminate the
Services Agreement ‘for any legitimate business, legal or regulatory
or to restrict or remove access to the Uber Driver app if there
has been a material breach of the Services Agreement, breach of applicable
violation of the Community Guidelines or a risk to health and safety or while
investigating an alleged breach. It is at least
arguable that this provision, in
an employment relationship, would relate to ‘enforcing or terminating
contracts of employment’
for the purposes of s 536JQ(1)(d).
The answers to the questions referred to the Full Bench are as
(a) Question 1:
An application under s 536ND(1) is within the jurisdiction of the
Commission under Part 3A-5 if the applicant seeks an order granting
remedy ‘on the basis that the services contract contains a term that is
unfair’. The Commission cannot make an order
under s 536NA(1) purely
on the basis that a services contract is unfair because it does not include a
particular provision. It is
necessary for the Commission to identify a term or
terms which are unfair contract terms. However, whether a particular term is
must be assessed by reference to the whole of the services contract,
including what it otherwise provides or does not provide for.
(b) Question 2:
Question 2 cannot not be answered at this stage.
For the reasons given above, Mr Thongkhamchanh’s application
seeks an order granting a remedy on the basis that the Services
contains unfair contract terms and potentially enlivens the jurisdiction of the
Commission to make an order under s 536NA(1).
Although it is not possible
to give a definitive answer to the second question referred to the Full Bench,
Mr Thongkhamchanh has
raised an arguable case that the Services Agreement
includes one or more terms that, if found to be unfair, would relate to
relations matters in an employment relationship for the purposes of
s 536NA(1).
At this stage, there is no basis upon which Mr
Thongkhamchanh’s application should be dismissed for want of jurisdiction
because the application was not made in accordance with the FW Act or has no
reasonable prospects of success. The application will
be listed for further
programming in due course.
Appearances
S Thongkhamchanh
appeared for himself.
, of counsel, instructed by Ashurst Australia for
Rasier Pacific Pty Ltd.
, of counsel, for the Transport
Workers’ Union of Australia, intervening.
Hearing details:
Sydney (in person):
1 September.
for example cls 5.1–5.4 (Provision of Transportation Services), 6.1 (Your
licences and visas/work permits) and 7.1-7.9 (Fees
and Payments).
Work Act 2009
(Cth) (‘FW Act’) s 15H(2)(a)(i) (when read
with the definition of ‘constitutional corporation’ in
Act s 15AA. See also
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v Barker
253 CLR 169
[16] (French CJ, Bell and Keane
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing
Loopholes) Bill 2023
(Cth) [1568].
FW Act s 536NX (which falls within Chapter 3B to the Act).
Fair Work Regulations 2009
reg 1.08AA.
by the High Court in
Re Dingjan; Ex parte Wagner
(1995) 183 CLR 323.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 4 September 2023, 6238
(Tony Burke, Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations).
explained in the Revised Explanatory Memorandum to the
Fair Work Legislation
Amendment Closing Loopholes) Bill 2023
(Cth) [1700]–[1701].
Industrial Arbitration (Amendment) Act 1959
(NSW). The key
provision was later found in s 275 of the
Industrial Relations Act
225 CLR 180.
[21] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Callinan and Crennan JJ).
[1970] HCA 56
(1970) 127 CLR 157
, 169 (Menzies J).
v Solution 6 Holdings Pty Ltd
[2006] HCA 22
[114]–[115] (Kirby J).
Act ss 26(1) and (2)(e).
Independent
Contractors Act 2006
Keldote Pty Ltd v Riteway Transport Pty Ltd
[2008] FMCA 1167
316 [86] (Cameron FM);
Fabsert Pty Ltd v ABB Warehousing (NSW) Pty Ltd
[2008] FMCA 1198
, 176 IR 169 [38]–[39] (Driver FM);
International Pty Ltd v Clarius Group Ltd
[2012] FCAFC 165
207 FCR 298
IR 422 [183] (Besanko, Jagot and Bromberg JJ).
61 NSWLR 661
, 141 IR 14.
v Barclay Mowlem Construction (NSW) Ltd
(1994) 99 IR 247
Sutton v BE Australia WD Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2017] NSWSC 689
IR 311 [102] (Walton J).
Independent Contractors Act 2006
, which only permits
the Court to have regard to circumstances as they were when the contract was
Competition
and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) sch 2 (‘
Australian Consumer
Securities and Investments Commission v Auto & General Insurance Company
[2025] FCAFC 76
, 309 FCR 473 [28] (O’Bryan and Cheeseman
for example,
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v CLA Trading Pty
[2016] FCA 377
[54] (Gilmour J);
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v Auto & General Insurance Company Limited
, 309 FCR 473 [28]–[39] (O’Bryan and Cheeseman JJ).
in different contexts,
Jetstar Airways Pty Ltd v Free
[2008] VSC 539
[127] (Cavanough J);
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
v Auto & General Insurance Company Limited
[2025] FCAFC 76
, 309 FCR 473
[35] (O’Bryan and Cheeseman JJ).
General of Fair Trading v First National Bank
[2001] UKHL 52
[2002] AC 481
[17] (Lord Bingham);
Jetstar Airways Pty Ltd v Free
[2008] VSC 539
[128] (Cavanough J);
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v
CLA Trading Pty Ltd
[2016] FCA 377
[54(g)] (Gilmour J).
Ltd v Commissioner of Stamp Duties
[1961] HCA 35
105 CLR 602
, 620 (Taylor
Re Dingjan; Ex parte Wagner
[1995] HCA 16
183 CLR 323
, 354 (Toohey
J), 370 (McHugh J);
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
[1998] HCA 28
194 CLR 355
[87] (McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne
[2012] HCA 26
(2012) 246 CLR 601
[31] (French CJ);
for Home Affairs v DLZ18
[2020] HCA 43
270 CLR 372
[43] (Kiefel CJ, Bell,
Gageler, Keane and Gordon JJ).
Explanatory Memorandum,
Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes) Bill
(Cth) [36].
v Lilyvale Hotel Pty Ltd
(1995) 68 IR 112
, 116–117 (Wilcox CJ);
Oliveri v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
[2005] FCAFC 36
IR 120 [25] (Nicholson, Weinberg and Selway JJ).
Equal Remuneration Decision 2015
, 256 IR 362 [276].
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (674 KB)
Signed PDF/A format