Adani & Mehta [2025] FedCFamC2F 1140 (20 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Adani & Mehta
[2025] FedCFamC2F 1140
File number(s):
ADC 5023 of 2024
Judgment of:
JUDGE BROWN
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Property proceedings
– undefended hearing – parties married in 2004 and separated in 2015
– divorce order
made in 2017 – proceeding commenced out of time in
October 2024 – major asset of the parties interest in partnership
operating a farm – farm acquired in 2015 as a result of husband’s
capital contribution – wife left Australia shortly
after acquisition of
farm and has never worked or contributed to it -farm running at a loss –
wife agreed to extension of time
to bring proceeding but has not filed any
documents in the case – wife has failed to comply with orders to file
documents –
assessment of contributions – just and equitable –
circumstances justify one party retaining identifiable assets
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (Family Law)
rr 2.33, 2.34, 2.41, 6.06, 10.6, 10.26, 10.27
Cases cited:
Biltoft & Biltoft
[1995] FamCAFC 45
(1995) 19 Fam LR
Black & Kellner
[1992] FamCA 2
(1992) FLC 92-287
Briese & Briese
[1985] FamCA 23
(1986) FLC 91-713
Clauson v Clauson
[1995] FamCA 10
(1995) 18 Fam LR 693
Dickons v Dickons
(2012) 50 Fam LR 244
Ferraro & Ferraro
[1992] FamCA 64
(1992) 16 Fam LR 1
Fields & Smith
[2015] FamCAFC 57
(2015) FLC 93-638
Hickey & Hickey
[2003] FamCA 395
(2003) 30 Fam LR 355
Horrigan & Horrigan
[2020] FamCAFC 25
Pierce & Pierce
[1999] FamCA 74
Stanford v Stanford
(2012) 247 CLR 108
Taylor v Taylor
[1979] HCA 38
(1979) 143 CLR 1
Watson & Ling
[2013] FamCA 57
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Jordan & Fowler Family Lawyers
Solicitor for the Respondent:
No appearance
ADC 5023 of 2024
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
JUDGE BROWN
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
In full and final settlement of any claim that
either party may have against the other for settlement of property or alteration
interests in property:
wife do forthwith resign from the partnership styled "Adani & Mehta & B
& C" ("the partnership").
wife do forthwith transfer to the husband all her estate and interest in the
land described in certificate of Title Register Books:
(a) Volume ... Folio ...;
(b) Volume ... Folio ...; and
(c) Volume ... Folio ....
husband is appointed as the trustee and is permitted to sign all documents on
behalf of the wife for the purposes of:
(a) The transfer and assignment of the wife's interest in the partnership to the
husband and to give effect thereto the transfer
to the husband the wife's
interest in all assets of the partnership including but not limited to the land
and improvements thereon
comprised in:
(i) Certificate of Title Volume ... Folio ..., being Section ... contained in
the Area named Town D, Region of Town D in the State
of South Australia;
(ii) Certificate of Title Volume ... Folio ..., being Section ... contained in
the Area named Town D, Region of Town D in the State
of South Australia; and
(iii) Certificate of Title Volume ... Folio ..., being Allotment ... contained
in Deposited Plan ..., in the Area named Town D, Region
of Town D in the State
of South Australia;
and all associated irrigation rights.
the husband do indemnify the wife with respect to all liabilities of the
partnership, past, present and future.
the parties do otherwise retain the assets, liabilities and financial resources
in their respective names and possession.
Applicant is to serve a copy of this judgment and the published orders made this
day on the Respondent at her last known email
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE BROWN:
INTRODUCTION
reasons for judgment relate to matrimonial property proceedings, in which one
party has had limited involvement and the spouses
themselves have been separated
for many years, leading separate financial lives. They have no children.
general terms, it is the position of the applicant that he made a significant
contribution of capital, at the start of the parties’
marriage, which
warrants a degree of special recognition in how the court assesses each
party’s respective financial contributions
made in the marriage.
is the husband case that this was the sole contribution which enabled them to
acquire the property – a fruit farm –
which is the focus of these
proceedings, in the sense that the partnership of which the wife remains a part,
is the only identifiable
and tangible asset remaining to be subject to the
court’s order.
is the husband’s case that the wife has never taken any active role in
respect of this partnership. In addition, it is his
case that the respondent has
been afforded ample opportunity to take part in these proceedings and, in all
these circumstances, it
would be unfair to him if they cannot be resolved on an
undefended basis.
he points to the fact that the parties themselves have been separated for almost
a decade now, during which period he worked
continually on the farm, receiving
modest income and so alone of the two spouses has made significant contribution
to conserve and
maintain the farm.
these circumstances, he contends that it is just and equitable that each party
retain the property in their respective control.
What property the wife
currently has is not known to the husband as she has not disclosed her financial
affairs. However, in this
context he points to the fact that, at separation, the
wife took with her a significant amount of gold bullion.
Essentially,
the husband contends that considerations of fairness dictate that this action
should be taken into account by the court.
Given his valuation of the gold, at
present values, when put alongside the value of the partnership, this would
represent a 95/5%
division in his favour.
what are highly idiosyncratic and unusual circumstances, the husband contends
that, although his would result in him retaining
all items of property,
currently able to be earmarked by the court, given his contributions, the length
of separation and the wife’s
total lack of involvement with the farm, this
represents a just and equitable outcome.
reasons for judgment are directed to resolving these various issues, which are
not without their challenges, and so formally
ending the parties’
technical financial relationship with one another, which has had no practical
implications for a long period
applicant in the proceedings is Mr Adani (“the husband”). The
respondent to the proceedings is Ms Mehta (“the
wife”). They
married, in India, in 2004 and separated finally, in rural South Australia, in
January of 2016, when the wife
abruptly left Australia and returned to India,
taking with her an amount of gold bullion and cash in an amount of $10,000.00.
what have been characterised as the idiosyncratic circumstances of the case, it
is the position of the husband that it is just
and equitable that the court
finalise his application on an undefended basis. In practical terms, this will
entail him retaining
all of the parties’ interests in a fruit farm,
located at Town D, in the Region E area of South Australia and the remaining
water rights relating to it.
particular, it is his case that, at the commencement of the parties’
marriage, he already owned a modest rural property,
in New Zealand, which
allowed him, along with other family members, to acquire the fruit farm, which
he continues to work, in partnership
with his nephew and his nephew’s
names are Mr B and Ms C. The farm occupies three distinct titles. The wife was
also a partner in the business and a joint tenant,
in half shares with the
husband, on each of the relevant titles, whilst Mr B and Ms C hold the other
half, also as joint tenants.
is his case that his efforts, in the period since, have preserved the property
– essentially the half interest in the partnership,
which trades as B
& C and Adani & Mehta, with no assistance whatsoever from the wife. In
practical terms, the assets of the
partnership consist of:
properties constituting the orchard. These have been formally valued;
Its plant and
equipment, which has been depreciated to nil but not formally valued;
Motor Vehicle 1
valued at approximately $7,000.00;
The proceeds of
a partial sale of water rights sold in June of 2025 and held in
round terms, the husband calculates this to be an amount of $914,057.00. It does
not include the gold bullion, which he asserts
the wife retains, which he values
on the basis of current gold prices to be worth about $40,000.00. On my
calculations this would
equate to a division of around 95/5% in the
husband’s favour.
2022 conditions in the fruit industry have been difficult and the orchard, which
is at the centre of these proceedings has also
been subject to frost and hail
damage of its crop in 2022; 2023; and 2024. Further, prices have been poor for
the fruit in 2025.
income statements provided by the husband for these years (2022 – 2024)
indicate that monies received from the sale of fruit
by the partnership has
diminished from about $265,000.00 in 2022 to $92,000.00 in 2024. It is the
effect of the husband’s evidence
that the current year is no
the hearing of the matter a letter was tendered on behalf of the husband from
the partnership’s accountant, which indicates
a further loss of $78,834.00
is anticipated for the financial year ending in
will be detailed in due course, in order to keep the partnership viable, it has
been compelled to sell some of its most valuable
assets, which are the permanent
water holdings which were attached to the land, which appear to have
dramatically increased in value.
Each of the partners will need to account for
any capital gains arising from these sales in their respective personal income
the past, the orchard has provided the husband with a modest income, which he
estimates to have been between $50,000.00 and $60,000.00
per annum. However,
although he takes some of his living expenses from the business, in taxation
terms, neither he nor the partnership
have received any income for the past
three years.
the names of the respective parties indicate, they each have an Indian
background. The marriage between them was an arranged one.
Accordingly, the case
also has cultural overtones, which adds to its complexities, although the extent
of the property concerned
must be considered modest.
husband was born in India in 1963. He has had limited education and grew up on a
farm, in Region F, owned by his family. He describes
his background as
His only skills are as an agricultural worker.
Adani is close to his nephew Mr G (“Mr G”), who appears to look out
for him. Mr G is Mr B’s brother and Ms C’s
brother-in-law. The
husband has limited English and speaks Language F as his first language. I
accept his evidence that he has limited
understanding of financial matters,
which he largely leaves to his nephew to take care of, on his behalf.
the wife has taken some limited part in these proceedings, and, at one stage
instructed solicitors in them, she has not filed
any affidavit material or
formal documents in the proceedings. As a consequence, I have been provided with
little evidence regarding
her background other than she was born in India in
1964 and when the husband last knew of her, obviously over 9 years ago now, she
enjoyed good health.
1989, Mr G, who had earlier emigrated to New Zealand, sponsored the husband, who
was then single and aged in his mid-twenties,
to come and live in New Zealand.
He was able to obtain employment doing what he had always done – working
as a farm labourer.
He lived frugally and earnt a modest income.
2001, he was able to purchase a vacant block of land at City H for the sum of
NZ$130,000.00, which was financed by his saving of
mortgage advance for the remainder.
2003, the marriage between the parties was arranged by respective members of
their families. It was solemnized in India, with the
husband providing a dowry
to the wife in gold bullion valued at about $10,000.00, which she has retained.
The husband has deposed
that the value of this gold is now about $40,000.00. He
also paid for the parties’ wedding, which was expensive.
the marriage, the husband returned to New Zealand. The wife was not able to
accompany him as she did not hold the necessary
visa to live permanently in New
Zealand. A migration agent was retained by the husband to complete the necessary
visa and the wife
was able to migrate to New Zealand in 2007.
the marriage and her arrival in New Zealand, the husband has deposed that he
provided regular financial support to the wife
and her family in New Zealand. It
is also his case that the wife sent regular sums of money to her family in India
during the course
of the marriage.
the marriage, whilst the parties were living in New Zealand, the husband worked
long hours, on a full-time basis, as a farm
labourer. The wife worked 2 to 3
months each year packing fruit. The husband has asserted that whatever monies
the wife earnt were
repatriated to her family in India. The couple also
travelled to India on a number of occasions to visit family.
these circumstances, it is the husband’s contention that he must be
regarded as the couple’s main financial provider.
He concedes that the
wife was the spouse who attended to the majority of household duties and did the
cooking, although he deposes
that he provided significant assistance.
is the husband’s case that due to monies being sent regularly to the
wife’s family in India, his aspiration to build
a home on the City H land
could not be achieved. He was, however, able to reduce the mortgage on the
property for NZ$90,000.00 to
around NZ$30,000.000. It is his evidence that
during the period of the parties’ cohabitation, due to financial
constraints,
he was in a position to pay only interest on the mortgage.
2015, Mr G discovered the Town D orchard and determined that it was a good
prospect, which would suit the husband and his wife,
as well as Mr B and his
wife, given their respective backgrounds in agriculture. The husband and Mr B
took up the opportunity and
in 2015 the applicant migrated to Australia.
Initially, the wife remained in New Zealand.
purchase price of the Town D orchard was A$860,000.00. The two couples did not
have a formal partnership agreement, but it was
agreed that each couple would
contribute A$130,000.00 with the balance to be borrowed from the ANZ Bank and
secured by way of mortgage,
taken out in the names of the four partners, on the
orchard. Mr G agreed to guarantee the loan.
order to finance his (and the wife’s) purchase of the half share in the
orchard, the husband sold his vacant land at City
H recouping approximately
NZ$100,000.00 of which $70,000.00 went toward purchasing his share of the
orchard. The remaining NZ$30,000.00
was advanced to the wife to enable her to
attend the wedding of her niece in India and provide members of wife’s
family with
some money.
order to complete the purchase of the orchard, the husband borrowed a further
$30,000.00 from Mr G and another $30,000.00 from
two friends. Accordingly in
concrete financial terms, it is the husband’s case that his contributions,
as a wage earner in
interest in the partnership and the wife personally made no direct financial
contribution to the acquisition of this property, which apart from the gold
bullion retained by the wife, was the only asset of the
parties still extant as
wife came to Australia in December 2015 but stayed in the country for only a
fortnight. She left to attend her niece’s wedding.
The husband believed
she would return and the marriage between them was on-going. However, she did
not contact him, and he became
worried. He tried to communicate with her via his
in-laws. In his affidavit, he deposed what happened next as follows:
After approximately four weeks, the wife's sister-in-law informed me that the
wife had moved to England to be with a man she was
to (and eventually did)
marry. She told me that the marriage had been arranged by the wife's sister who
resided in England and who
knew the man. I don't know details of the man other
than, as I was told by the wife's sister-in-law [Ms J], he was older than the
wife and that he owned several properties in England and several in India,
including a house property and farmland.
I have not spoken with the wife since. I believe that the wife's new marriage
had been secretly arranged prior to the wife leaving
me. The events were
devastating and humiliating for me.
I consider the wife and I to have separated in January 2016 when she went to
India, but I believe that the wife had made her decision
I have indicated, the husband has provided little evidence regarding his former
wife’s current living arrangements. He understands
that Ms Mehta’s
subsequent marriage in England has broken down and she returned to live in New
Zealand, where she has formed
a new relationship.
this context and that of the proceedings generally, the husband and those
advising him are critical of the wife in that she has
failed in her obligation
to him to provide details of her current financial circumstances. She has not
filed a statement of her financial
circumstances nor completed informal
discovery of documents.
parties to proceedings, under the Act,
involving property issues are
subject to a duty to make full and frank disclosure. This process is mandated by
Rule 6.06 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2)
(Family Law) Rules 2021
It is facilitated by the requirement to file a statement of financial
circumstances and the production of a stipulated number of financial
such as tax returns and superannuation records.
the duty to provide full and frank disclosure does not arise solely under the
court’s rules but is also a fundamental
principle of common law. This duty
has been described as being
“fundamental to the whole operation of the
Family Law Act
in financial
will be detailed in due course, one of the obligations of the court, in making
orders either altering or affecting the property
or proprietorial rights of
separated spouses is to ensure that any such orders are
just and equitable
in their terms. In this context, the court is required to consider the
prospective needs of each of the parties concerned. In the
current matter, the
court simply has no evidence whatsoever regarding the wife’s current
financial situation.
marriage between the parties was dissolved in mid-2017. At this point, it is the
effect of the husband’s evidence that he
felt that he was in a worse
position financially than he had been at the time of the commencement of the
parties’ marriage
and he had been taken advantage of financially.
Certainly, he asserts that the wife had been provided with significant sums of
and bullion, which represented his liquid assets acquired in New Zealand,
largely prior to the parties’ marriage.
these circumstances and given his limited understanding of the Australian legal
system and general level of disadvantage in accessing
it, being a modest income
earner and a person who did not speak English as his first language, I can
understand why the husband did
not seek any formal orders regarding property
with his former wife. From his perspective, they could achieve little to no
for him and the wife had retained property of significant value.
in the period approaching a decade since the wife left Australia, the husband
has continued to work hard on the fruit farm
earning a modest income and living
frugally. He and the other partners seem to have serviced the mortgage secured
against the orchard,
although the major burden of running the orchard seems to
have been on the husband.
some stage, which has not been disclosed to me, Mr Adani and Ms Mehta went to
live in the United Kingdom. As with the husband,
it appears to be the case that
Mr G ensures that their interests are protected. He holds their power of
G has attended court with the husband and importantly has met his legal costs to
date, which are significant. In Mr Jordan’s
submission his client’s
exposure to legal costs, with no obvious source to meet them, is another factor
which militates in
favour of the court finalising his application, along the
lines proposed by him.
his recurrent income the husband was able to repay his friends the money lent to
him to enable the purchase of the Town D property,
whilst Mr G because of the
family ties, has been prepared to await repayment of his debt.
2018, the husband married his current wife, Ms K. She was a widow with a
daughter, L, who was born in 2010. Ms K works as a fruit
packer. In the last
financial year, she earnt
$54,678.00.
Her income supports the
HISTORY OF THE PROCEEDINGS
to the provisions of
section 44(3)
Family Law Act
any application for the
settlement of matrimonial property is required to be commenced within a period
of 12 months after the granting
of a divorce. However, the court has a
discretion to extend the time if it would occasion
concerned if leave to proceed was not granted.
the current matter, the time to bring a property settlement application, in the
absence of an extension, was around mid-2018. No
such application was brought by
either party. However, on 26 September 2022, the husband received a letter from
solicitors acting
for the wife, which enquired of him whether he was interested
in purchasing his former wife’s joint interest (held with him)
obvious reasons, it is the case that the only individuals likely to be motivated
to engage in such a purchase would be one of
the remaining partners operating
the fruit farm. The relevant solicitors – M Law Firm – proposed that
a valuation be
obtained and further indicated that if such a sale could not be
agreed, the wife would apply to the District Court to partition the
pursuant to the provisions of the
Law of Property Act 1936
husband responded through his current solicitors promptly. On his behalf it was
indicated that proceedings in this court were
likely to be more expediently
directed to resolving the controversy in question. The solicitor – Mr
Fowler – indicated
that it was difficult for him to obtain instructions
from the husband, due to
language difficulties.
Mr Fowler further indicated that Mr Adani had been unaware of the provisions
section 44(3)
of the Act and matrimonial property proceedings generally but
had been of understanding that the parties had reached an informal
agreement he
would retain the farm, which at the time of separation was not represented by
any significant level of equity.
Notwithstanding
these reservations, Mr Fowler indicated that his client was open to having the
orchard valued and thereafter engaging
in a process of mediation, involving the
parties’ respective solicitors. The proposed mediation did not eventuate.
husband’s evidence that his solicitor was unable to secure any
response to his overtures from those advising the wife. Nothing
happened during much of 2023.
Eventually,
on 1 November 2023, agreement was reached with the wife’s solicitor for
the relevant properties and the water licence
associated with them to be valued
by Mr N of O Company. The necessary inspection took place on 17 November
2023 with the resulting
report being released on 22 January 2024.
N’s report contains some cautious views about fruit growing, in Australia,
in general and the relevant properties in particular,
noting the existence of a
large glut of fruit in storage in Australia and the price per tonne of fruit
produced by the Town D orchard
had reduced since 2023. He thought it unlikely
that the fruit would be picked for the 2024 year; whilst the price for less
fruit would fall further.
these circumstances, Mr N provided the following
valuations:
Block Number
Value of land and improvements
Value of Water Licences
Section ...
$505,000.00
$495,000.00
$1,000,000.00
Section ...
$125,000.00
$205,000.00
$330,000.00
$320,000.00
$600,000.00
$920,000.00
$950,000.00
$1,300,000.00
$2,250,000.00
his report, Mr N reported that water licences are owned separate to the land and
can be transferred or sold in isolation from it.
Accordingly, the water rights
relevant in the current matter were worth more than the agricultural land at the
date of valuation.
It is also apparent that the value of the orchard, since the
date of its acquisition by the partnership in 2015 for $860,000.00 has
tripled in value. It seems to me to be a reasonable inference that the chief
factor in this increase is the increase in value
of water rights.
the sum of $2.25m, the husband and wife are the legal owners of one half of this
sum being $1.125m. At the time of the valuation,
the orchard remained subject to
the mortgage in favour of the ANZ Bank, which the husband has deposed stood at
$388,833.00. Again,
the parties’ side of this liability was 50 %, which on
my calculations results in them having a net equity in the orchard in
of $930,000.00, not taking into account the loan still owed to Mr G, which
remains at $30,000.00.
separation, again on my calculations, taking into account the mortgage loan and
other debts, the parties’ net equity in the
orchard was approximately
$130,000.00. In my view, it is incontrovertible that the very significant
increase in the value of the
parties’ share in the partnership cannot be
directly attributable to any efforts of the wife.
my view, it must be as a result of market forces, particularly in regard to the
value of water and the contributions of the husband
in reducing debt and looking
after the property through his care of the plants.
is the main thrust of Mr Jordan’s submissions made on his behalf. In
effect, after the parties’ separation, the husband
continued doing what he
had habitual done, namely he worked hard on the fruit farm and eked out a modest
living with no assistance
from the wife. In this context, Mr Jordan places
significant emphasis on the fact that it was the husband’s ownership of
vacant land in New Zealand, which enabled him (and through him the wife) to
acquires it interest in the orchard in the first place.
Full Court has recognised that, in some cases, a contribution of capital at the
start of a relevant marriage may be of such significance
that it merits
special recognition
in how the court is subsequently called up
to make its assessment of other possibly disparate and various contributions
made by the
spouses concerned during the entirety of their
how such contributions are to be assessed must be informed by what is both
appropriate and just and equitable. In some cases,
the initial contributions may
be so disproportionate to other contributions as to merit special
recognition.
effect, Mr Jordan submits that this the case in the current matter. He assets
that his client’s financial contribution in
the form of the vacant land in
City H, which provided the essential capital to acquire the Town D orchard,
which has so significantly
appreciated in value over the past decade,
axiomatically requires such special recognition, in the sense of it being so
and disproportionately superior to any contributions made by the wife,
as either a homemaker or wage earner, in New Zealand, in the
period 2007 to
2015, noting the parties did not cohabit in the initial years of their
advent of the valuation by Mr N did not seem to have any great effect in
advancing the matter. The wife was pushed to provide
discovery but did not do
so. Rather her solicitor indicated that she was
currently facing difficulties
in obtaining instructions
due to her client’s limited English and
residency overseas.
lack of progress coincided with the husband and his partners experiencing
difficulty in meeting the mortgage payments to the
ANZ Bank. These difficulties
coincided with the general crisis in the industry, marked by oversupply and
falling prices.
11 October 2024, solicitors acting for the ANZ wrote to the partners threatening
foreclosure and seeking immediate payment of approximately
$54,500.00. At this
stage, the mortgage balance was approximately $389,000.00. From the husband and
his partners’ perspective,
the only way out was a sale of some of the
water licences, which they owned.
these circumstances, given the fact that the wife was a joint proprietor of a
half share in the land and associated water licences,
the husband’s only
option to avoid a mortgagee’s sale of the orchard, which had been his sole
source of income (and indeed
the mainstay of his life) was to approach the court
for orders under the Act, which he did on 15 October 2024.
his application, he sought final orders, which can be summarised as follows:
transfer her interest in the Town D orchard to him;
She resign from
the partnership;
He indemnify her
in respect of all partnership debts;
retain assets and liabilities standing in their respective names.
an interim basis, he sought the following:
The sale of the
water licence relating to block ...;
The proceeds of
sale to be utilised to discharge the mortgage with the balance to go to the
partnership.
This application precipitated the only formal document filed on behalf of the
wife, which is a notice of address for service filed
on 5 November 2024.
case was listed for its first mention on 20 November 2024. At this stage, the
wife’s solicitor appeared on her behalf and
indicated to the court her
client’s consent to leave being granted to the husband to proceed out of
time. An order to this
effect was made and the other interim issues adjourned
for interim hearing on 11 February 2025.
the context of this hearing, the wife was directed to file answering documents
and a statement of her financial affairs by 21 January
2025. In addition, a
formal order was made for the disclosure of financial documents pursuant to rule
6.06 of the Rules. Neither
of these orders has been complied with.
seems to be the case that concerns were raised about the possible implications
of the orders sought on Mr B and Ms C, given they
had proprietary rights in the
relevant water licence and were not parties to the proceedings. In addition, it
was around this time
that the ANZ Bank issued its demand in respect of the
these circumstances, the interim hearing was adjourned until 25 March 2025 and
an order was made for the husband to file an amended
response on or before 25
February 2025 with the wife to respond on or before 18 March 2025.
husband filed an amended application on 24 February 2025 together with an
affidavit in which he deposed to the partnership’s
deteriorating financial
position and provided Mr N’s valuation report. In his amended application,
he sought a refined and
extended order in respect of the water licence in the
following terms:
86 megalitres of
irrigation rights be sold;
The proceed of
sale be paid as follows:
To discharge the
partnership mortgage;
$20,000.00 to Mr
Any balance to
the partnership;
Payment of the
costs of sale.
his affidavit, the husband deposed that the partnership owned 186.3 megalitres
of irrigation rights. He further deposed that the
partnership had accrued debts
of around $52,000.00 relating to harvesting expenses for the past year; pruning;
water; and electricity.
He anticipated expenses in excess of $115,000.00 for the
coming year relating to harvesting and pruning; chemical and fertilizer;
post replacement.
B and Ms C each filed an affidavit, sent from the United Kingdom and filed on 25
February 2025, in which they indicated their consent
to and support of the sale
of the water licence concerned. They did not seek to be joined as parties.
wife did not avail herself of the opportunity to file answering documents.
However, her solicitor consented to an order for the
sale of 86 megalitres of
water with the proceeds being used to discharge the ANZ mortgage with any
balance, after the payment of
the costs of sale, to be held in an
interest-bearing account in the names of the partners.
for a third time, the wife was directed to file her answering documents on or
before 10 April 2025 and the matter was referred
to a court-based
conciliation conference which was convened for 14 April 2025.
husband and Mr G came to Adelaide for the conciliation conference. Arrangements
were apparently made for the wife to attend electronically.
Her solicitor
attended. However, the conference did not proceed because the wife could not be
on 30 April 2025.
wife’s solicitor appeared but indicated that she was without instructions,
and she was given leave to withdraw from the
case. In these circumstances, an
order for costs was made in the husband’s favour in an amount of
$4,900.00. The case was referred
to me to ascertain its hearing status on 20
June 2025. Notice of the orders made was to be provided to the wife’s last
electronic address.
30 April 2025, Judicial Registrar Schirripa authorised the payment of $20,000.00
to Mr G from the potential proceed of sale of
water; with 50% of the remainder
to go the partnership: and the balance to be held on trust by the
husband’s solicitors.
megalitres of water was sold in June for $7,325.00 per megalitre recouping
$629,950.00. Accordingly, in raw terms, the value of
the orchard, based on Mr
N’s valuation is in the vicinity of $1,620,050.00 of which 50% is worth
on the property has been discharged.
20 June 2025, I made the following notations and subsequent orders:
A The Respondent failed to attend at the Conciliation Conference on 14 April
Respondent’s solicitors were granted leave to withdraw from acting on
their client’s behalf at the hearing on 30 April
respondent has not filed a Notice of Address for service
Applicant’s solicitors are seeking this matter proceed to an undefended
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
(1) Further consideration of this matter is adjourned to 6 August 2025 at 2.15pm
for an undefended hearing to take place at Court
with all parties to be present.
NOTICE TO THE RESPONDENT - An undefended hearing is a hearing where the Court
considers the evidence and makes Orders (including
Orders sought by the
Applicant) in the Respondent’s absence, or in the absence of the
Respondent’s evidence, based solely
on the uncontested evidence of the
(2) The Applicant is to file and serve any further Affidavit in support of the
final orders sought, to be filed on or before 24 July
(3) The Applicant is to serve a copy of today’s orders on the Respondent
at her last known email address.
of service have been filed in respect of the electronic service of the orders of
30 April 2025 and 20 June 2025. The wife
has not filed any documents in the
proceedings apart from an address for service. Implicit in the fact that her
previous solicitor
has indicated her consent to leave being given to proceed out
of time to the husband and for the sale of the water licences is the
she is aware of these proceedings and their nature.
addition, it is the husband’s case that around about the time the parties
separated and then divorced it was his understanding
that the parties had
reached an informal agreement that he would retain the wife’s interest in
the orchard. His then solicitor
sent the necessary documents to the wife in
February 2019, via her brother, but received no response.
the present time the husband has deposed that he has no personal knowledge as to
his former wife’s address. He believes that
she lives in New Zealand with
a man he only knows as
. In previous correspondence, the wife’s
former solicitor confirmed that she was living overseas. Correspondence provided
me indicates that the husband’s solicitors have been assiduous in
seeking the engagement of the wife, in these proceedings,
through the request of
information from her via her former solicitors.
the perspective of the husband’s solicitors, the best avenue to contact
the wife and provide her with documents, is via
her email address. The court is
conferred with a broad discretion in respect of issues of service under its
rules. Pursuant to Rule
2.33 the court has power to authorise how a document is
to be served and find that it has been so served.
2.41 provides that a document sent by electronic means is taken to have been
served the day after it was sent electronically.
In a matter of the current
kind, it would clearly be preferrable if there was a mechanism to ensure the
physical provision of the
order fixing the case for undefended hearing on the
accept that in the current matter that is not an objective easily achieved given
the fact that the wife is out of the country; the
husband has not engaged with
her directly for nearly a decade; the two do not have children; the only address
for service provided
by the wife is that of her former solicitors in South
Australia; and she personally has provided no other documents to the court.
to Rule 2.34 the court has authority to dispense with the personal service of a
document if reasonable steps have been taken
to serve the person concerned by
other means. In this context, the costs and practicality of personal service are
relevant considerations.
the current matter, I am satisfied that the wife is aware of these proceedings
and is likely to have been provided with both the
original application and the
amended version via her previous solicitors. This can be the only logical
explanation for her consenting
to the out of time application and the water
licence sale. In these circumstances, I am further satisfied that she has been
with notice of the undefended hearing, which is the subject of these
reasons, by electronic means.
the husband’s perspective, he wishes to finalise the proceeding on the
basis that he has day to day responsibility for
running the orchard, which
generates no profit but incurs significant costs to keep it running. In general
terms, although it may
not be an economically rational decision for him to stay
on the land as a fruit grower, in emotional terms, this is the only life
known and he only skills as an agricultural labourer.
addition, it is the submission of Mr Jordan that his client has done everything
to advance his application and has complied with
all orders in respect of the
filing of documents and appearing in court. In this context, he has incurred
significant legal costs
in the sum of $48,390.59, which he has funded from his
savings and borrowed from Mr G.
OTHER MATTERS
husband has no superannuation. It seems improbable that the costs order made in
his favour, by the court, in the amount of $4,900.00
will ever be satisfied by
the wife, given how she has approached the current proceedings.
would appear, at the present time, due to the level of income produced by the
orchard, that the husband is presently dependent
upon his current wife, Ms
K’s modest income for his financial support. This income must also support
L. Ms K owns a motor vehicle
of modest value. The two have a joint bank account,
which contains approximately $3,000.00.
orchard’s plant and equipment is old and needs replacing. The
husband’s estimates it worth to be $10,000.00. The vehicle
connection with the farm, Motor Vehicle 1 has a red book value of $3,500.00. Mr
Jordan has tabulated the value of the property
available to the husband to be
$917,358.00, which he contends his client should retain. This does not take into
account the monies
still owed to Mr G in the sum of $30,000.00.
Underpinning
his case is the inference that it would be fundamentally unfair to the husband
to compel the sale of the orchard in total
or to deprive it of some more of its
water rights, which would render it even more financially unviable because this
would deprive
him of sole means of livelihood and home.
monies remain from the sale of the water licences, which are held in the
husband’s solicitors trust account. It seems probable
that these will go
on his legal fees. I assume other monies have gone to pay partnership expenses
related to the payment of contractors
for harvesting and pruning. Of this sum
only $20,000.00 remains.
THE NATURE OF AN UNDEFENDED HEARING
is a significant thing for proceedings to be determined in the absence of
evidence from one of the parties concerned. The court
has an obligation to
ensure that the parties to proceedings before it have an opportunity to
participate in those proceedings. However,
there must be limits on such an
obligation, which cannot be indefinitely prolonged.
a person can be adversely affected by a judicial order, they must be afforded an
adequate opportunity to be
I am satisfied that Ms
Mehta has been given an adequate opportunity to appear in these proceedings and
put her position before the
court. She has not availed herself of that
opportunity.
Adani is entitled to have his application, for settlement of property determined
within a reasonable period of time, pursuant to
the applicable principles of
law. As such, he does not need Ms Mehta’s cooperation to have his
application determined. Rather,
there is an obligation, on Ms Mehta’s
part, if she wishes to be involved in the proceedings, for her to attend at
required and pursue any application put by her or on her behalf with
due diligence.
Federal Circuit Court and Family Court is a court of private law. It determines
disputes, between parties, according to law. In
this case, according to the
provisions of
of the Act, which relate to the division of property
following the breakdown of a marriage relationship.
court cannot compel a party to engage with litigation. It is however obliged to
give each party the opportunity to put evidence
before the court and, if he or
she wishes to do so, contest any evidence relied upon by the opposing party.
a party, whether by intransigence, disinterest or manipulation cannot succeed in
denying an applicant a just resolution,
according to law, to his or her
application, by choosing not to take part in proceedings because they do not
proceed in the manner
of his or her preference.
would be fundamentally unfair to the opposing party and an affront to the proper
administration of justice, which requires that
a properly instituted application
be finalised within a reasonable period of time relative to the complexity and
issues raised in
such an application.
of the Rules deals with the court’s authority to enter judgment
against a respondent if that respondent defaults in complying
with a court order
or fails to prosecute any proceedings with due diligence.
to rule 10.26 a party is in default if, among other things, he or she has failed
comply with an
order of the court in the proceedings; or
document as required; or
required to be done by these Rules; or
prosecute the
proceedings with due diligence.
am satisfied that Ms Mehta has failed to comply with numerous orders of the
court requiring her to file documents in the case. Essentially,
she has failed
to put any formal case before the court or to articulate a position in these
proceedings, having been given notice
of them. Although she has appeared,
through her solicitor, from time to time, her involvement has been characterised
by a lack of
these circumstances, pursuant to the provisions of rule 10.27(2) Mr Adani is
entitled to seek that the court enter judgment in
his favour, on whatever terms
the court considers just, on an undefended basis.
THE LEGAL PRINCIPLES APPLICABLE
deals with financial matters relating to parties who are
or have been married to one another. In particular,
section 79(1)
authorises the
court to alter the property interests of the parties to a marriage. In addition,
provides specific provisions enabling the splitting of superannuation
between spouses.
directs that the court is not to make any order for property settlement
satisfied in all the circumstances
such an order is
mechanic of the process to be followed for the division of the parties’
property is well-established by
and set out in
(2) of the Act
which prescribe a number of specific steps,
which can be summarised as follow:
the first step, I must ascertain what are the parties’ assets and
liabilities available to be divided between them. The general
rule is that those
assets are to be determined as at the date of
The husband has provided
evidence in this regard, largely in the form of the valuation by Mr N of the
the second step, I must ascertain the contributions, which each party has made
towards the matrimonial pool of assets, as I find
them following the first step.
Contributions fall into two broad categories.
first kind is contributions to the property: financial contributions and
non-financial contributions, made directly or indirectly,
by or on behalf of a
party to the marriage to the acquisition, conservation, or improvement of any of
the property.
second kind is contributions to the welfare of the family in the words of the
The contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family
constituted by the parties to the marriage and any
children of the marriage,
including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or
is clear from the authorities that this second kind of contribution must be
given appropriate weight and is not to be treated as
a token matter or as a
contribution which is inherently less valuable or important than a financial
contribution to property.
third step involves the assessment of the parties’ prospective needs, by
reference to the factors set out in
section 75(2)
Pursuant to
section 75(2)(o)
, the Court is entitled to take into account
any fact or
circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case
requires to be taken into account.
the High Court warned of the potential danger of a court
conflating its responsibilities arising under
sections 79(2)
court’s fundamental responsibility is to make a
just and equitable
order. The High Court said as follows:
The expression ‘just and equitable’ is a qualitative description of
a conclusion reached after examination of a range
of potentially competing
considerations. It does not admit of exhaustive definition. It is not possible
to chart its metes and bounds.
Accordingly,
considerations of what is
just and equitable
flavour all applications
pertaining to property settlement. What is fair is impossible to define with
certitude and must depend on
the prevailing circumstances. However, care must be
taken to avoid conflating the stipulation contained in
section 79(2)
discretionary exercise contained in
section 79(4).
It is convenient to describe
this as the fourth step.
available evidence indicates that the parties lived together, in the one
domicile, for a period of around eight years in New Zealand
between 2008 and
2015. The husband was engaged in paid employment during this period, whilst the
wife had seasonal work. The husband
concedes that she was the spouse who did the
majority of the housework and cooking.
difficult task for the court is how this contribution is to be assessed against
the husband’s other significant contributions,
both in direct dollar terms
– bringing in the capital which resulted in the acquisition of the orchard
and indirectly in maintaining
it in the decade or so after the parties had
separated. Necessarily, these are very different contributions, which have been
over different time periods, within the context of an idiosyncratic
marital relationship.
Dickons v Dickons
Full Court said as follows:
There can be little doubt that the classification of contributions by reference
to terms such as
initial contributions, contributions during the
relationship,
and post-separation contributions,
can be helpful as a
convenient means of giving coherent expression to the evidence in a
case and to giving coherence to the nature, form and extent of the
parties’ respective contributions. However, the task of
contributions is holistic and but part of a yet further holistic determination
of what orders, if any, represent justice
and equity in the particular
circumstances of this particular relationship. So much is clear from the terms
itself and, in particular,
section 79(2).
The essential task is to
assess the nature, form and extent of the contributions of all types made by
each of the parties within
the context of an analysis of their particular
relationship.
summary, contributions, within the framework of a marriage, which are different
in quality and nature must be compared, in order
to achieve a just and equitable
division of property. It has been referred to as a
Certainly, it is
not to be approached as a simple accounting or arithmetical exercise.
Percentages
are helpful in the majority of cases but, in my view, they should not be engaged
at the cost of doing what is just and
equitable. The risk implicit in their
automatic adoption being the assumption that there can never be a case, which
justice dictates
should result in one party retaining the entire asset
particular, the Full Court emphasised that:
The necessarily imprecise
wide discretion
inherent in what is required by
the section is made no more precise or coherent by attributing percentage
figures to arbitrary time
frames or categorisations of contributions within the
relationship. Indeed, we consider that doing so is contrary to the holistic
analysis required by the section and, in the usual course of events, should be
Horrigan & Horrigan
the Full Court indicated as follows:
It is well established that an assessment of contributions is not a mathematical
exercise, but rather involves the identification
and assessment of all of the
parties’ respective contributions, in a holistic way across the course of
the relationship and
in the post separation period to the point of
assessment.
consistent theme from the authorities is that the multifarious contributions
throughout a marriage and subsequently, of all types,
are to be assessed in a
holistic way. However, whilst it is all well and good to use expressions such a
which is a shorthand way of emphasising the frequent
interconnectedness of marital contributions, which can only be understood by
reference to the totality of the marriage, it must also be stressed above all
that however contributions are assessed, the overall
outcome must be a just and
equitable one.
my view, this is the nub of the husband’s case, which is essentially
taking into account his initial contribution of capital,
which requires
special recognition
by the court, along with post separation
contributions, it is just and equitable for him to retain the orchard, which is
and sole source of modest financial support (noting the current dire
financials of the partnership) given his current personal circumstances
a 63 year old, unskilled, agricultural labourer, with limited fluency in
Step One – The pool of property
accept Mr Jordan’s tabulation of the relevant pool in the following
50% interest in orchard partnership as follows:
Town D orchard and remaining water licenses
$824,000.00
Plant and equipment
Motor Vehicle 1
Partnership saving
Monies in trust from water licences sale
$914,057.00
major failing of this table is it provides no information regarding the
wife’s level of asset backing. One of the underpinnings
Jordan’s submissions is that the wife took gold bullion at separation
which he now values at $40,000.00, which is about
5% of the pool. He assesses
the case therefore as being a 95/5% case.
is uncertain whether the wife does indeed retain the gold or has disposed of it
and, if so, at what value. In my view, with due
respect, this is also a somewhat
artificial way in which to approach the unusual and idiosyncratic circumstances
of this case.
noted above, there must always be cases the circumstances of which dictate that
it is just and equitable that one party retains
the entirety of the asset pool
as calculated by the court. Such cases will be necessarily rare. The court
should not ignore the reality
of such cases by arbitrarily attempting to achieve
some notional or artificial percentage split. This seems to me to be contrary
notions of justice and equity.
Step Two – Assessment of contributions
my view, the assessment of contributions in this case, favour the husband to a
significant and indeed overwhelming degree. Without
his contribution of the
proceeds of sale of his land in New Zealand and his borrowings there would be no
orchard partnership.
the decade or so since separation, the husband has maintained and conserved that
property, which has increased markedly in value
in the period, largely it would
seem in respect in the increase in value of that most precious of commodities
– water. This
cannot be attributed in any way to the wife.
contributions the wife made to the property pool occurred in New Zealand.
Whatever were her reasons, she dramatically demonstrated
to the husband her
disinclination to be involved in the Town D property, within days of arriving
there. Yet it is the property which
remains the corpus of the relevant
matrimonial estate.
indicated above, relevant legal authorities caution the court from attempting to
compartmentalise contributions provided during
a marriage, particularly a long
one. These are issues which the Full Court considered in
...there is no requirement to attribute different percentages to different
periods in the relationship.
in this context:
...the task is to consider the contributions holistically over the whole period
from the commencement of cohabitation to trial and
the analysis requires the
court to weigh all of the contributions of all types prescribed by
section 79(4)
made by both parties across the entirety of the relationship until the time of
hearing, including the post-separation period.
Step Three – The prospective needs of the parties
am now required to consider the various matters set out in
section 75(2)
particular to consider whether any further adjustment should be made in favour
of either party. The
section 75(2)
factors are mainly, but not only, prospective
apart from her age, I know nothing of the wife’s circumstances. I do know
the husband faces a challenging financial future,
without any superannuation and
with skills in an industry in crisis, which are not easily transferable given
his background, age
and lack of English fluency.
best, the orchard will provide him with a modest income. He is likely to work as
long as he can but with no guarantee of economic
security. Overall, on the basis
of the available evidence, these factors favour the husband.
K is also an unskilled worker. Her modest income supported the family. Whether
Mr G will pursue his loan is uncertain. Legal fees
are likely to consume
whatever is left to the husband from the sale of the water licences. The
wife’s irregular engagement
with these proceedings has driven up his
costs. These are also factors which favour the husband.
CONCLUSIONS
am satisfied that in all the circumstances of this case, it is just and
equitable to make orders pursuant to
section 79(2)
of the Act. The marriage
between the parties ended with divorce in mid-2017. Since their separation in
late 2015, they have led entirely
independent lives. Accordingly, what remains
of their financial relationship with one another is notional in the extreme and
paper, the wife is part of a partnership in which she has never actively
participated and to which she has made neither direct
nor indirect
contributions. The partnership has produced a modest income for the husband but
only because of his ceaseless toil.
It now produces a loss and any increase in
its value is due to market forces which have nothing to do with either the
my view, this is one of the rare cases whose unusual circumstances justify one
party retaining all the assets identifiable by the
court. The court’s
inability to have access to a more defined asset pool and a more comprehensive
understanding of the wife’s
financial circumstances is attributable solely
to her unwillingness to engage proactively in the proceedings and to file any
documents, notwithstanding the fact that she has been given ample
opportunity to do so.
only means by which some capital can be freed up to make a nominal payment to
the wife is through the sale of some aspect of the
partnership – either
one of the blocks or the water allocated to it. What would be the implications
of this for the viability
of the partnership, already marginal, is not clear.
However, axiomatically, it cannot be positive.
the fortunes of the fruit industry will turn around is also not clear to me and
was not an issue explored in these proceedings.
However, at 62 years of age and
with no skills to allow him to subside the farm by outside work, the husband
does not have a lot
of time to wait it out.
he is stuck doing what he is doing – eking out a basic financial existence
by the only means available to him. In my
view, these factors render the
potential sale of a part of the orchard fundamentally unfair to him, given the
wife’s lack of
engagement with both it and the proceedings generally.
Essentially, I have reached the conclusion that the only fair outcome in the
case is that the husband should retain his interest in the orchard, which was
acquired through his initial contribution of capital
and maintained by him alone
in the period since.
husband has sought costs. In the idiosyncratic circumstances of this matter and
the lack of any actual payment to the wife, it
would be neither proper nor just
for such an order to be made. However, I am cognisant of the very significant
costs incurred by
the husband, which in my assessment, have been increased by
the inconsistent manner in which the wife has approached the litigation.
husband’s exposure to costs is likely to mean that any of the remaining
proceeds of the sale of the water licences, after
payment of partnership
liabilities, will go to fund his costs. This state of affairs fortifies my view
that it would not be just
and equitable, in the unusual circumstances of this
case, for the court to make an order directing the sale of any other asset of
the partnership.
all these reasons, I have reached the conclusion that it would be just and
equitable for the court to make orders in the form
proposed by the husband,
which I acknowledge have the effect of him retaining all the identifiable assets
of the marriage. I will
direct that a copy of the orders and these reasons for
judgment be provided to the wife via the only mechanism available to the
which is her email address.
these reasons, the orders of the court will be as set out at the commencement of
these reasons for
I certify that the preceding one hundred and fifty-five (155) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 20 August 2025
See husband’s affidavit
filed 24 July 2025 at Annexures E &
See Exhibit
Ibid at Annexures O &
Ibid at [31] –
Hereinafter referred to
as “the Rules”.
Per Smither J in
Briese & Briese
[1985] FamCA 23
(1986) FLC 91-713
at 75,181 cited
with approval by the Full Court in
Black & Kellner
[1992] FamCA 2
(1992) FLC 92-287
See Exhibit
Hereinafter referred to as
Pierce v Pierce
(1999) FamCA 74
(Ellis, Baker and O’Ryan
[1979] HCA 38
(1979) 143 CLR 1
, 20 (Murphy
[1992] FamCA 64
(1992) 16 Fam LR 1
Clauson v Clauson
[1995] FamCA 10
(1995) 18 Fam LR 693
Hickey & Hickey
[2003] FamCA 395
(2003) 30 Fam LR 355.
[1995] FamCAFC 45
(1995) 19 Fam LR 82.
Family Law Act
(2012) 247 CLR 108 120 [36] (French CJ, Hayne, Kiefel and Bell
Dickons v Dickons
(2012) 50 Fam LR 244 at
[2013] FamCA 57
[2020] FamCAFC 25
Fields & Smith
[2015] FamCAFC 57
(2015) FLC 93-638
& 80,153 [168].
RTF format (597 KB)
Signed PDF/A format