Badari & Ors v Minister for Housing and Homelands & Anor; Badari & Ors v Minister for Territory Families and Urban Housing & Anor [2025] HCATrans 60 (3 September 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 060
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Darwin No D1 of 2025
B e t w e e n
ASHER BADARI
First Applicant
RICANE GALAMINDA
Second Applicant
LOFTY NADJAMERREK
Third Applicant
CARMELENA TILMOUTH
Fourth Applicant
MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELANDS
First Respondent
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (HOUSING)
Second Respondent
Application for special leave to appeal
Office of the Registry
Darwin No D7 of 2025
B e t w e e n
ASHER BADARI
First Appellant
RICANE GALAMINDA
Second Appellant
LOFTY NADJAMERREK
Third Appellant
CARMELENA TILMOUTH
Fourth Appellant
MINSTER FOR TERRITORY FAMILIES AND URBAN HOUSING
First Respondent
MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELANDS
Second Respondent
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
BRISBANE ON WEDNESDAY, 3 SEPTEMBER 2025, AT 10.07 AM
High Court of Australia
____________________
MR M.L.L. ALBERT
If the Court pleases, I
appear with
MS M.A. BENN
for the applicants in D1/2025
and the appellants in D7/2025. (instructed by Australian Lawyers for Remote
Aboriginal Rights)
MR C.L. LENEHAN, SC
please the Court, I appear with
MS R.S. AMAMOO
respondents in each matter. (instructed by Solicitor for the Northern
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Lenehan.
Your Honours, I would
propose to address you first on the appeal and then the special leave
application, but I am in the Court’s
hands as to the
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, proceed in that
The Minister responsible for the
Housing Act
had been empowered for 43 years to override any
contractually agreed rent for public housing in the Northern Territory.
Since 1987,
that Minister had been empowered to do so in respect of classes of
dwellings as well as individual dwellings. That power was unused
in respect of
the homes of each of my clients and other public housing homes in their remote
Then, in the space of nine months in 2022, the
two respondent Ministers exercised the power three times: on 5 January,
and 2 September, the last of which was the only time the
power was exercised, relevantly, by the second respondent. The power in
section 23 was exercised in a way that impacted each of my clients, as it
did all public housing tenants in remote communities, a
list that varied, in
respect of the three determinations the subject of this proceeding,
between 103 and 109 different communities.
Those first three
determinations are the subject of the appeal and the fourth determination, which
was made on 3 February 2023, is
the subject of the special leave
application which I propose to deal with separately and at the end. There are
two grounds of appeal
in respect of the three determinations, both of which
depend heavily on the statutory and factual context, and in that light, I would
propose to address your Honours first on that to sketch those before
dealing with each ground then, I hope, relatively efficiently.
The group of
those impacted at a high level were public housing tenants living in about 5,000
houses. Each of those tenants, importantly,
had four key things in common. The
first was that each resided in one of 109 remote communities in the
Northern Territory. The
second – and it seems this will take
particular prominence – was that each was party to an individual
contract known
at law as a tenancy agreement under the
Residential Tenancies
with the Government Housing Corporation which, for reasons that will
become apparent, is known as Chief Executive Officer (Housing).
reason of those individual contracts, each was easily identifiable and each was
in an existing private law relationship with what
I will call CEOH, that
corporate entity, and that corporate entity was under ministerial control, being
the same Ministers who made
the determinations, and the source of that control
Housing Act
, section 17, which I do not propose to take
your Honours to but is in the joint book of authorities at page 23.
That is the second
key thing they had in common.
The third key thing,
which ordinarily would be part of the second but was not here, was that each had
agreed rent for their particular
to be separate is, as your Honours will have seen – as it
happens – the
tenancy agreement for two of the three houses that the
appellants occupy was blank as to the rent amount. So, the agreement was
recorded in the contract but it had been formed at least by conduct.
fourth and last thing that they had in common, about which I will take a few
moments, was that each was only eligible for public
housing because they
were – and I will go through each element – in their
landlord’s opinion, and I quote, “of
limited means; and not
adequately housed”. Can I invite your Honours to pull up the Housing
Regulations, which are the source
of those phrases. Your Honours will find that
in the joint book of authorities, part B, volume 2, at
This is tab 8?
Thank you, your Honour, yes, it is. There, your Honours will
see – on, I am sorry, it is page 83 – the definition
“eligible person”. There are five features of that definition we
would seek to point out. The first is that whether
a person is an eligible
person turns on:
the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer (Housing) –
corporate entity. That is to say, it requires an actual intellectual engagement
with the particular predicament of that individual.
The second feature is the
one I alluded to a moment ago, and that is, under the
Housing Act
therefore its regulations, a distinction – easily missed –
is drawn between what is called the “Chief Executive
(Housing)”, which is the body corporate sole, and the CEO, the Chief
Executive Officer. They are, as far as we are
aware, always peopled by the same
individual but they are wearing two legal hats.
So, the second feature
of the definition is to emphasise that it is the corporate entity established
under section 6 of the
Housing Act
– which I do not need
to go to, but it is in the joint book of authorities at
page 20 – as compared with the person who
Northern Territory equivalent of a departmental secretary. The
Court of Appeal below drew a distinction and relied on the
distinction
between those two legal personalities, in particular at paragraphs [57]
The third feature of the definition of “eligible
person” we would seek to point out is the use of the conjunctive
That is, “the opinion” is to be about two
things: the person being:
(a) of limited means; and
(b) not adequately housed.
Again, a highly individualised assessment by definition. The fourth is
to explore the meaning of the phrase “adequately housed”
to indicate
that that phrase was the subject of discussion in the
Court of Appeal’s decision in the
Chief Executive
Officer (Housing) v
which, as your Honours will
recall, ultimately ended up here, but not on this question. But in that
judgment – which is reported
(2022) 43 NTLR 196
– at paragraph 42, the
Court of Appeal acknowledged the overlap at law between the phrase
“adequately housed” and
“habitable”, which is the phrase
used in section 48(1)(a) of the
Residential Tenancies Act
The Court of Appeal also, we would submit correctly, referred
to the meaning of the phrase “adequately housed” as a matter
international law, including, importantly, as they cite, the United Nations
General Comment on that exact phrase – which
I do not need to go to,
but your Honours will find in the joint book of authorities at
page 1018, volume 6. We particularly rely
on what is said there at
paragraphs 7 and 8. All of that is to say that the phrase
“adequately housed” has a particular
well‑known meaning both
as a matter of Northern Territory law and international law.
last matter we would seek to emphasise about the definition of “eligible
person” is the function of that term in
the regulations. Importantly, its
function is to operate in two different time periods. The first is that it is
what I will call
a time of letting criteria – and that is revealed
where I am about to go in regulation 4 – but it is also an
criteria to the extent there is engagement with regulation 5. So,
regulation 4, which is in the joint book of authorities
– has it that:
Subject to this regulation, the Chief Executive Officer
(Housing) –
the entity:
may let a dwelling to an eligible person.
That is, the CEOH can only
let dwellings to a very particular and discrete subsection of the wider
community. The reason for that
is fairly obvious, that it is to provide
assistance because of the recognised vulnerability of such persons, with
particular priority
given – as identified in
subregulation (3) – preference is to be given to eligible
persons who are, among other things,
conditions. So, that is the time of letting criteria.
One then goes to
regulation 5, over the page, one gets to what are called “Rebates of
rent”. They are also only available
to eligible persons. Rebates, as the
regulation makes clear, can be given at any point during a period of the lease.
All of that
sets the statutory and regulatory background to what we say is the
proper conclusion reached in the analysis of this scheme by the
National University in the paper that we have put in the joint book of
authorities at page 966 to 967, where they describe
the people impacted by
these determinations as, and I quote:
among the most impoverished people in Australia –
All of that also, importantly, marries with the evidence of the
respondent’s key witness, Mr Brent Warren, whose evidence you
will find in this respect at the respondent’s book of further material at
page 432, where, when discussing these criteria in
cross examination with
me, his evidence was, and I quote:
all people who live in remote communities are eligible for public
Against that statutory backdrop, can I then move to the impacts
of the determinations, in the first instance on my clients and remote
tenants, and then on the Northern Territory. In respect of my clients and the
Northern Territory, there were both non-pecuniary
and pecuniary impacts. The
non-pecuniary impacts in respect of my clients are sourced from the
Residential Tenancies Act
and the analysis of the Court of Appeal below,
which relevantly found that the protections ordinarily given to tenants across
Northern Territory were barred on the coming into operation of a
determination under section 23 of the
Housing Act
could ask your Honours to go to the joint book of authorities at
page 104, where you should find the
Residential Tenancies Act
was at the relevant time and, importantly, the section 41 to which I made
Section 41, as your Honours will see, permits rent
increases only where there has been specific prior agreement.
the terms of section 41 with the facts of each of my clients’ cases,
the Court of Appeal quite rightly concluded that
none of my clients had agreed
at law to their rent being increased. Your Honours will find those
findings in the Court of Appeal’s
reasons at [13], [14], [39], [40]
and [50]. The effect of the exercise of the determination power, so the
Court of Appeal found,
was to deprive them of the protection against rent rises
that they had enjoyed and had arranged their financial affairs based on.
Even though section 41 practically – in the
circumstances of the particular tenancy agreements that my clients were party
– did not operate at that time, it was, in our submission, still
of value to them, and the value was in allowing them to bargain
their way to
better circumstances by agreeing to a new tenancy agreement, either in the same
community or somewhere else, in the
same house or a different house, by which
they said, for example, I will agree to a future rent increase if you agree to
the house in this way or that.
I am trying to
follow you, Mr Albert, but those references that you gave to the Court of
Appeal’s judgments did not clearly
correlate with what you had described
as the effect of the judgment.
Your Honour,
I accept that at one level, however I stand by what I said before. The way that
one gets to the position where the
agreement was not one that contained a term
that matched section 41 – it is a fairly convoluted path. One
starts by looking
at the face of the actual agreements, which are in the core
appeal book. One notices, most relevantly in respect of Mr Badari,
Galaminda and Mr Nadjamerrek, that they are not countersigned by or
on behalf of the CEO of Housing. That is step one.
is to go to section 19(4) of the
Residential Tenancies Act
says, in circumstances where it is not countersigned, the operative terms of the
tenancy agreement are those prescribed. Step
three is to go to
regulation 10 of the Residential Tenancy Regulations, which says that where
section 19(4) is engaged, one then
goes to Schedule 2 of the
regulations, which provide the prescribed terms. Then the final step is to go
clause 2(2), where the rent
term is provided, and it is that rent term
which was operative at law for each of my clients.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Albert, for the purpose of your argument, do you need to distinguish
your client in any way from any other eligible person within
the definition that
you have taken us to?
I am sorry, I missed the last
GAGELER CJ:
Do you need to distinguish your client from
any other eligible person within the definition that you have taken us
Not in our submission, no.
GAGELER CJ:
Can I ask you, Mr Albert, you
would accept, I take it, that your clients and others like them were always
subject to the possibility
of an exercise of the power under section 23 of
Housing Act
Yes, we accept that, by
reason of the fact that they were tenants of dwellings, as defined, that that
was a possibility, subject
to matters which will be dealt with in the pending
proceeding.
Do you agree with Mr Lenehan’s
submission about section 42 not being applicable in the case of a
ministerial determination under
section 23?
Court of Appeal found that section 42 does not apply where section 23
has been engaged, and we do not appeal that.
That is a slightly indirect answer, but I hope
it answers your Honour’s question.
Can I move then to section 42 briefly,
which you will find on the next page. It is, putting it at a high level, a form
of individualised
merits review in respect of rent that can be undertaken at any
time in circumstances where there is a rent rise or where there is
no rent rise
but where the house, for whatever reasons, has, for example, degraded such that
the rent has become excessive. As the
Court of Appeal found, the effect of the
exercise of the determination power was to deprive my clients and all those
caught by the
determinations of that statutory mechanism.
I understand, I think, why you are taking us to this, because this is
the statutory framework against which the determinations
power which was
available was exercised. Is it also to show that this framework had available
to it what you have described as an
individualised treatment at multiple points
in time, both in terms of financial considerations – i.e., can I pay
but secondly, individualised considerations about
particular premises itself, i.e., degraded, number of rooms,
Yes, your Honour, and can I make
one further link to a point that I have not addressed yet, and that is
that – and I will
step through the bridges – the statutory
scheme taken as a whole has, as one of its purposes, ensuring that rent
and I quote the legislation –
What legislation is
Section 3(e) of the
Residential
Tenancies Act
So, this is the objects of this
You have not
taken us to that.
is on page 95 of the materials.
Your Honour
is quite right. So, what we say – and it is to develop what
your Honour put to me – is that there is what
might be called a
statutory bridge between the
Housing Act
Residential Tenancies
. That is section 34.
Housing Act,
terms ‑ ‑ ‑
applies to . . . premises let under this Act.
Housing Act
Indeed. So, in our submission,
section 34, as I say, is a statutory bridge which says that you read
the – as the Court of
Appeal rightly accepted – as one
whole scheme. Having regard to that, one then goes to the purposes in
section 3 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
particular – and I will come to another purpose in a moment, but in
particular to section 3(e).
Then, to respond to
your Honour’s comment, what the scheme as a whole aims at is
“fair rent” in respect of those
not covered by a determination. One
has access to, as your Honour put it to me, a highly individualised both in
respect to the tenant
and in respect to the property, highly individualised
process of the kind but not limited to section 42.
The Court of
Appeal then says, well, section 42 does not apply when section 23 of
Housing Act
applies, with the result that you do not get access to
that third‑party review mechanism. But the purpose has not changed,
object of the Act has not changed. The object of the Act is exactly the same,
it is, relevantly here, “fair rent”.
At that point we would
say – and it is to seek to add to what your Honour
Justice Gordon put to me – that in circumstances
where there is
a highly individualised process in respect of dwellings not covered by a
section 23 determination. So, the Court
of Appeal found, even when they
are covered by a section 23 determination, the rent is still intended by
Parliament to be fair.
You would say, I take it, that
purpose governs the exercise of regulation 5 of the Housing Regulations for
the rebate.
Yes, is the answer to
your Honour’s question, but we would say it governs the entire
scheme, including regulation 5.
I understand
But, for our purposes, most importantly
including section 23.
I understand.
I suspect we will have a discussion about regulation 5 in due
course, but I might, with the Court’s indulgence, park that
for a minute.
So, the third‑party mechanism in section 42, in our submission,
offered four things. The first is to ensure
that rents accord with the real
value of a tenancy at any given time to achieve, quote, “fair rent”;
to offer, as Justice
Gordon put to me, individual considerations of both
the house and the tenant to be taken into account, a full form, in our
submission,
of procedural fairness.
Third, it provided a means to get a
financial remedy before the tenant expends funds on unfair rent. Lastly, it
provides a mechanism
in a default no‑cost jurisdiction, which marries
neatly with eligible persons, still eligible persons before, substantively,
section 23 determination, being of limited means. So, those are the
non‑pecuniary effects.
The pecuniary effects require some
elucidation because they are not straightforward or uniform. As
your Honours will appreciate,
the effects of each of the determinations was
to set rent at one level for what has been called an interim period, we call
one, and then to change that rent for a final rent level, which we
have called stage two.
Your Honours will find an example of
that in the determination in the appellants’ book of further material at
page 25, which
I might ask your Honours to pull up. It is same across
all the determinations, so in that sense it does not matter which, but there
at least one feature that we would seek to highlight.
Were these pecuniary impacts the subject of findings by the Court of
I think the answer to that is, no,
your Honour. We have had difficulty both at the primary judge level and
the Court of Appeal
level at having the court make findings on matters
of fact that were clearly articulated and in dispute between the parties. That
was one of them, and the only reason I emphasise that is because
your Honours may or may not have picked up that, in the fourth
determination
challenge, we have sought a declaration as to what rent was
payable by our clients at every point of time, having failed to achieve
this proceeding.
So, this is the first determination
that you have taken us to, at page 25.
your Honour. What we would ask your Honours to note is the repeated
use of the language of “class” at the end
of the chapeau in (a)
and (b), all of which then refer to “Column 1”, which,
over a couple of pages, your Honours will
see refers to the class of
“1 bedroom”, class of “2 bedroom”, class
of “3 bedroom” and class
of “4 or more
bedroom”. That, I think, will take on some significance in due
At one level, the effect of each of the subsequent
determinations, including the two other ones challenged here, all defer the time
for stage two to come into effect. Stage two is the one that is
referrable for one, two, three and four‑bedroom houses to
so‑called fixed rate of $70 per bedroom. That $70 per bedroom reference
point collapses when one gets beyond four bedrooms.
Mr Warren gave
evidence that there were houses up to nine bedrooms in remote communities in
respect of which the per bedroom rent
rate was $31.
Is this a complaint about equity?
It ultimately
becomes that, but it also becomes a complaint about, whatever the policy was, it
was not in fact what was implemented.
So, it feeds in, among other things, to
our legal unreasonableness submissions.
Mr Albert, would you have us construe these rent figures as really only
being the prima facie rent figures, or the starting point,
because of the
potential application of what is now called a safety
No, we would have you take them as they
are, as at least the legal liability of our clients, but more relevantly as the
liability that would be sought from our clients at the end of the
operation of any claimed policy.
determination cannot be exhaustive of the question of liability going forward,
because the safety net may apply in individual
cases in different ways, just
like the rebate did.
If we are to deal with the
safety net, I am content to deal with that, and I might do
want to take you out of order.
No, no, I am keen
to respond to your Honour.
I only ask that
because the model is a model where you pay the rent by the difference to the
number of bedrooms up to four, but
then the model also acknowledges that you
will need to look at the individual circumstances of individual tenants because
potential application of the safety net.
What we say about the safety net – again, can I distinguish it at a
legal level and on a factual level. At a legal level,
we essentially say two
things. The first is it tells you nothing about legal liability. Legal
liability is set by the determination
under section 23. The second legal
point is that we do not, and cannot and did not at any point understand how one
gives safety
net or the rebate policy any legal operation in light of
section 23(4) of the
Housing Act
, which expressly says:
any arrangement or agreement, or alleged arrangement or
agreement –
is by the by when a determination is
Can I ask you this: are there any
findings below as to, under the old system, how the rebate is determined or
calculated? In
particular, did the Department consult with
The answer to your question about findings
answer to your question about consultation is also no, but I can only give that
from the Bar table.
Thank you for
GAGELER CJ:
So, where were we up to?
I am not sure either, your Honour.
Not at all. Shall I perhaps address the
safety nets, now that it has come up?
GAGELER CJ:
I think that
would be a good idea.
I have addressed
your Honours on what we say is the legal position. Can I then address
your Honours on the factual position.
The factual position, the primary
source of the factual position – although one has to go on a
convoluted route to arrive back
at the start, but the primary source is what
Cabinet approved. What Cabinet approved your Honours will see articulated
in the affidavit
of Mr Warren, and the key element of it, factually, was
that the approval was for a quote‑unquote “safety net”
was Cabinet‑approved on the basis it was temporary.
I am sorry, where did you want us to look at this?
In the appellants’ book of further
materials ‑ ‑ ‑
Can we not look at the judgment?
Yes, it is reflected
in the judgment. There is a finding on this, and the finding is made by
Justice Burns and noted by the Court
of Appeal in the core appeal book at
page 75, at the top of the page.
GAGELER CJ:
What was the
legal significance of the Cabinet approval?
never been clear of that. The power is in the Minister, and only the Minister,
but it is the respondents who have sought
to give some focus to Cabinet. So, I
am afraid I do not know the answer to that. The policy, however, approved by
and in a sense, your Honour the
Chief Justice’s question, after a long journey, may amount to no
matter of significance, because
we end up at the same point.
So, Cabinet
approves a policy, as found by Justice Burns and then accepted by the Court
of Appeal, that is temporary –
25 per cent – and then you will see the
initially for up to 6 months.
So, where are
you getting all this from? I am just a bit lost. It does not appear to me to
be at the top of page 75 of the core
appeal book. Or is it the last bit of
the quote – is that what you are referring to?
It is, your Honour, yes.
last sentence necessarily mean that the Department would have to consult with
individual tenants to find out, for example,
what their total household income
Not necessarily, no.
The policy would not permit the Department to guess that figure, would
No, but they can get it from other
So, they would have to consult with someone
or something.
I mean, the answer to
your Honour’s question is Centrelink.
I do not understand that answer to that
question, Mr Albert. The reason why I asked that is it says “total
household income”
– is there not a primary person on the
would they know what the total household income is? They would not get that
from Centrelink.
On the tenancy agreement, ordinarily
there is an identification of all of the residents of the house, and that is the
which they are identified.
What happens if
the residents change? The tenancy agreement is amended, is it?
GAGELER CJ:
Can I just understand what the
legal mechanism is for implementing the safety net?
Your Honour is right to ask, and I do not know the
There must be a waiver, is there not? A
waiver of a statutory entitlement – a policy that the CEO of Housing
would waive
statutory entitlement.
All I can say is
it may be. It is difficult – if one focuses on regulation 5,
regulation 5 uses the language of “rebate”,
but in substance
regulation 5 is a waiver because it is prospective. That is where I pause
in responding to your Honour’s
question, because I think our
submission would be that regulation 5 is in fact what governs
I do not understand that. Regulation 5
may . . . grant a rebate of the whole of the rent
That might be both past and present and future,
might it not?
Yes. Yes, it could.
So, on my understanding, you say regulation 5 provides a legal
mechanism for implementing the safety net. Is that what you are saying,
something different?
No, we say it does
GAGELER CJ:
GAGELER CJ:
And why not?
did – does not or did not. At the “does not”
level – the answer to your Honour’s question
as a matter
of fact is that in order to be eligible for a rebate, whether it is called a
rebate or the safety net, there has to be
an opinion formed by the CEO of
Housing, that corporate entity, that the person is an eligible person at the
time of the rebate or
the safety net.
As a matter of fact, my
clients – so Mr Warren said – were not eligible
persons at the time. So, in respect of each
of the appellants, the answer to
your Honour’s question is that at a factual level, I put to
Mr Warren: are my clients adequately
housed? And he says yes. That
marries with there being no evidence at all of the opinion of the body corporate
in respect of my
clients or, indeed, any other remote public housing
That is the reason why we say the proper construction of the
facts is not that there has been any rental rebate but, rather, there
rent reduction under section 46 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
rent reduction does not depend on the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer
(Housing), that corporate entity. All it depends
on is an agreement between the
tenant and the landlord as to the amount of rent. So, in our submission, our
clients, marrying the
law with the evidence of Mr Warren, were not in fact
the subject of a rebate and were not in fact eligible for a
Why were they not eligible persons? If they
were eligible persons at the time they were housed, do you say they ceased to be
persons as soon as they have been provided the
No, not necessarily but that is the
significance, in our submission, of the conjunctive “not adequately
housed”. It
goes back to the point I sought to make earlier that the
“eligible person” definition has a time of letting significance
an ongoing significance to the extent one is attempting to give a rebate as
compared with a reduction.
But that would mean that
you could never give a rebate other than at the time of the
Not in our submission, because as soon
as the house is not habitable, the person is not adequately housed. So, to use
known to the Court, Ms Young did not have a door, her house was
not adequate, she was therefore eligible for rebate. Equally, if
house in the middle of the desert with no air conditioning, they are not
adequately housed.
But that is not a plausible
interpretation of a regulation, that it would only apply in relation to
dwellings that are let that
then become
inadequate.
Well, in our submission, it is
plausible when one has regard to regulation 5 as compared with
section 46 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
or section 42 of
Residential Tenancies Act
, because what you have in the statutory
scheme are a series of mechanisms to respond to the changing circumstances of
tenant or the house.
Well, can I ask you,
then, what I regret is a fairly basic question: is it part of your case that,
because of the existence of
the policy for the safety net, the tenants should
have been consulted when the new system was brought
We say they should have been consulted.
Because it is fact‑specific to each dwelling
and tenancy. Is that your case? Was that part of your
We say they should have been consulted
with or without the safety net policy, but in respect of the safety net policy,
So, as I understand your case, the safety net is
stage two, in a sense. The first stage, you say, is that before the
determination
was made you should have been afforded procedural
And that is,
in a sense, where you started at 10 o’clock this morning to identify
the statutory framework which existed before
the determination was
But then, once
the determination has been made, the safety net is an available mechanism for
which you should have been consulted.
So, am I right about that? That there is, in
effect, two stages to it.
There are, yes, but
can I deal with that second part and the facts, because this is where the facts
as they emerged do not marry
with the policy of, or intention of,
GAGELER CJ:
Can I just go back to an earlier
stage – I do not really want to dwell on this. Given the decision of
Cabinet to have this
safety net – I think you have been telling us at
least in relation to your clients, regulation 5 was not an available
but I think you are saying that section 46 remained an available
mechanism for all eligible persons affected. Is that right? Section
Residential Tenancies Act
certainly available before the determinations.
GAGELER CJ:
after the determination?
It would be available
to the same extent as regulation 5. Our primary submission is it is very
hard to give any operative effect
to either regulation 5 or section 46
Residential Tenancies Act
in light of section 23(4) of the
Housing Act
. They live or die together.
So, this is why I think you need to start with the
Housing Act
you not? You need to start to work out, in a sense, where the standard
framework, I think – about what existed before
they exercised the
power under 23 to make the determination. Am I wrong about that?
No, I do not think so. The rebate policy, the
safety net policy, is put before the Court before the respondents, not us. I
addressed you on the reasons at law why it is problematic –
legal liability, section 23(4). There is a second level at which
dealt with, and that is the factual level.
We start with Cabinet
approving something that is temporary, the significance of Cabinet’s
involvement again not clear to us,
but that policy position or position of
Cabinet is then not operationalised. This is where the discussion about the
safety net becomes
quite theoretical, because there is, on the
respondents’ own material, no policy to reflect the so‑called
safety net,
the safety net had no document purporting to implement it at
all until 2 May 2022, which was, importantly, after both the first and
the second determination.
That policy document, which is the first time
the safety net gets referenced in a policy, is so‑called rent
policy 4.01, which
you will find at the appellant book of further materials
at 238 to 239. So, that – five months after the determination,
determination, shortly after the second determination – is the
first time the safety net pops into anything that purports to
operationalised.
However – and there is a big qualification
to this – Mr Warren then gave surprising evidence that that May
wrong, that it should never have been issued, and that he had
unilaterally overridden that policy on 2 September 2022, which is
the decision of the third determination. So, the high point of the
respondents’ evidence about the existence of the safety
net policy is, on
their own evidence, low to non‑existent because Mr Warren says: no,
no, no, that policy document that was
supposed to come into operation on
2 May, on 2 September I overrode that myself.
GAGELER CJ:
Your essential point is that, with or without the safety net policy, the
making of a determination was a breach of procedural fairness.
Yes, and legally unreasonable.
GAGELER CJ:
legally reasonable.
If I might just complete the
story of the policy. So, we start with nothing, on 2 May something looks
like it is coming into effect,
it first refers to the safety net. Then, on
2 September Mr Warren says: no, no, no, ignore what came out on
2 May. Your Honours
will find that evidence at the respondents’
book of further materials at 359, 383 and 443.
Then, what Mr Warren
says is: as at 2 September 2022 – this is after the third
determination – I reinstated, and I now
say it was always operative,
a policy from 2021, which is called the rebate policy 5.02, and this is
where things get very confusing.
The rebate policy is not the
25 per cent. In fact, it does not refer to 25 per cent at
any point. Rather, the rebate policy, which
Mr Warren swears is the
operative one, gives rebates up to 23 per cent, but more often
Are there findings about all of
Where do I – I just went to your
chronology, and went to your facts in your submissions, and I do not seem to
find this set
out anywhere.
Your Honour, I
regret that that is correct.
GAGELER CJ:
We are very much in the
weeds. Do we need to get there for your argument?
No, not for us.
GAGELER CJ:
Not for us.
GAGELER CJ:
Perhaps we should stay at a plane that
is appropriate for your argument.
If the Court
pleases. Can I then return to the pecuniary impact of the
determinations.
GAGELER CJ:
was addressing your Honours on the second stage and noting the use of the
term “class”, and also then seeking to
move to a significant feature
of the determinations, which is the geographic scope of their
As your Honours will have seen, there is a difference in
the list of communities impacted by the determinations: 103 for the first
determination, 109 for the second and third determination, and only 92 for the
fourth determination. In our submission, the Court
will be aided by
appreciating how these lists varied in a geographic sense. To that end, can I
invite your Honours to go to the
appellants’ book of further
materials at ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
So, just explain why we would be aided by going to that level of detail,
Because your Honours will see that
the distinction between the lists is truly arbitrary, which goes directly to our
submissions
on legal unreasonableness, but also goes to our submissions as to
the sorts of things our clients could have said, if procedural
fairness has any
content at all.
So can I just – one way to
cut through it is if you go to the map at page 391, your point is, as I
understand it, straightforward.
That is, the communities are disparate, they
are not consistent amongst the three determinations that are before us, and that
reference to location itself, one would expect variation in rent, and by
reference to housing, even within one location, you would
expect variation in
rent because of condition, number of bedrooms and the like. Is it any more than
that? And that your clients
could have said something about each of those
issues plus their own financial position.
Your Honour, with respect, neatly distils the core, yes.
What have I omitted from that analysis of – so, as I
understand, it goes to the matters about which you might have been consulted,
and then the same kinds of facts and matters go into your unreasonableness
argument on ground 2.
They are intertwined,
without question, yes.
And what are the other facts
and matters that would go into either the first analysis or the second
The key one that I was seeking to
develop was that while what your Honour says is entirely accurate at a high
level, when one looks
at individual communities as I had proposed to do, with
Laramba being a good example, one sees very acutely and immediately the sorts
specific things that could have been said by individual tenants in particular
key thing for present
purposes – to the oscillation in the list of affected
So, your point is that they were denied
the ability to make a submission about whether they should have been identified
in the list
I see. By reference to their specific factors to
It could be the specific factors to them,
or the specific factors for their community.
And it is perhaps at that second
level that I am seeking to focus, with respect, embracing and accepting what
your Honour has said
to me a moment ago. The map that is at the
appellants’ book of further materials, this was an aide memoire that was
to the Court of Appeal. If your Honours do not have access to a
colour copy, then one has been provided, and it is necessary to
have the colour
to appreciate how it works.
This was prepared by us and what
your Honours will see is we have adopted a series of colours: yellow for
the major centres, green
for the communities that are covered by all four
determinations, and the green star are for the two communities that my clients
from. So, Gunbalanya in the centre‑top end, and Laramba in the
centre, about a third of the way up.
The orange communities were those
added between the first and the second determination, and therefore were not
covered by the first
determination, and the red communities were the ones that
were removed from the list by the fourth determination. If one starts
am clear, as a result of the agreed orders in relation to the special leave
application, they would fall away. That is,
they would remain subject to the
third determination.
Depending on how one construes
the orders, yes.
Let us leave that, I
The map on 391 covers the whole of the
Northern Territory and your Honours will appreciate that the distances
covered are vast: about
1,600 kilometres north to south, from one community to
the next; about 900 kilometres east to west.
If one goes a couple of
pages over to 394, one sees an illustration of the point I was seeking to
make a moment ago, which is a map
that is a close-up including Laramba where
Ms Tilmouth resides, her community being just to the left of centre. This
is the practical
response to the issues raised by your Honours Justice
Gordon and Justice Steward a moment ago.
The very next community that
you see – the most proximate, it seems – is Anmatjere.
Anmatjere, your Honours will see,
is orange and therefore not covered by
the first determination, just as Davenport further north was not covered by the
determination.
Any member of the community in Laramba told that this is going
to be the effect of the first determination would, fairly obviously,
something so say about that: why us and why not Anmatjere?
Equally, if
one then focuses on the red dots around Alice Springs, your Honours will
see that those communities, very proximate to
the services that come from a
major centre, are dropped off from the fourth determination but are covered by
the earlier ones. At
no point were my clients – in respect of the
first, second and third determination – told: you have the option of
for your community to be dropped off a determination. They could
well have said: well, our place is nowhere near the services of
one then goes back, just as a further illustration, to 392 – and I
will come back to this when we get to legal unreasonableness
see a map which is a close‑up around Alice Springs, showing many of the
Only two, Amoonguna and
Undoolya, in all four determinations, and two added between the first and the
second. As I say, that goes
both to procedural fairness, certainly on
materiality, but also legal unreasonableness, and I will come back to it for
that purpose.
The pecuniary effects on my clients were, in respect of
the deferring of the second stage, immediate and direct. They left in place
elevated rent for one‑, two‑ and three‑bedroom dwellings,
including the third and fourth appellants. They caused
a delay in the first
instance of 18 weeks and in the second instance of 22 weeks, by which
my clients were left at the elevated what
we have called stage one rents, which
had the direct and immediate consequence of them having legal liability in each
case of hundreds
of dollars.
They also add the effect of causing
significant rent rises from the predetermination amounts, where those
predetermination amounts
had been individually agreed. The fact of the
increase, we note, does not seem to be disputed, but the extent of it
as your Honour Justice Gleeson has noted, regrettably
there are no findings about the extent of it but we stand by our
calculations
– that Mr Bidari and Ms Galaminda had a rent
rise of over 200 per cent at a cost of about $10,000,
Mr Nadjamerrek had a rent
rise of 40 per cent at a cost of $2,132
annually, and Ms Tilmouth had a rent rise of
50 per cent – and this does not seem to
be disputed –
with an annual increase of $3,640.
Much more briefly, but in ways that
it seems may be of great significance to the position put by the respondents
now, there was also
pecuniary and non‑pecuniary impact on the Territory
itself. The non‑pecuniary impact was, on their evidence, accepted
courts below, that the new rent was administratively easier. I do not need to
go to it, but the Court of Appeal so finds
at paragraph [158],
which is at the core appeal book 168 to 169, where they
administrative convenience and ease of implementation formed part of that
justification –
That finding is consistent with Mr Warren’s evidence, which I
would seek to take the Court to, because it seems, in our submission,
evidence may have the potential to be determinative of the appeal, in light of
the way that the respondent now puts its case.
So, can I take your Honours
to appellants’ book of further material at page 144, for which
your Honours should be in the evidence
of Mr Warren. Mr Warren
identifies the intention of the reforms. They were – consistently
with the finding:
to establish a simplified and consistent scheme that is easy to administer
for government –
So, that is one part of it:
easy to understand for remote public housing tenants –
In our submission, that is moving towards a concern for the individuals
affected. But then the last words, which, as I say, seem
significance:
affordable for all parties.
GAGELER CJ:
Sorry, where are you reading from,
I am sorry, it is appellants’ book
of further material, page 144, paragraph 11.
GAGELER CJ:
That evidence was accepted, and a
finding was made to that effect by Justice Burns in the core appeal book at
page 16, paragraph
[16]. That language of being “affordable to
all parties” necessarily includes affordable for government, for the
entity CEOH, but also, in every instance, the individuals who are the
subject of the private law contractual relationship that was
being upset by the
determination.
In our submission, that language of “affordable for
all parties” shows that there was a degree of individual consideration
being given by the decision‑makers at least at the time of the first
determination. “Affordable for all parties”
also acts as a bridge
to the evidence as to the financial benefit to the Territory of these new
regimes, in respect of which –
we do not need to go to it, but we
would refer your Honours to the appellants’ book of further materials
at 232 where, under
the heading “Financial Implications”, the
CEO of the Department is told:
The new framework has been identified to generate a $9.7 million per
annum revenue increase.
Against that lengthy backdrop, can I then move specifically to the
grounds, which, hopefully, will be briefer, having done that.
Yes, very well. This will be a convenient time for us to take the
morning adjournment, Mr Albert.
Court pleases.
GAGELER CJ:
11.14 AM SHORT ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 11.30
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Albert, we are getting
to the first of your two grounds, I think.
I start by just referring to this Court’s reasoning in
Disorganized
Developments
GAGELER CJ:
do not necessarily really need to go to it and, given the concern for time at my
end at least, I do not propose to, but we seek
to have the Court say nothing new
or different from what was said there, in particular, at paragraphs [32]
and [33] and paragraph
[49] of your Honour
Justice Steward’s judgment.
I do not think
there is any difference in principle between the two of you.
No, with respect, I think that is right, and on that basis I do
not propose to take your Honours to it save to note the fairly
that the concern is with “rights or interests” and in that sense
seek to just briefly identify what we say
are the rights or interests at play
here, because, in our submission, it probably goes to the content of the
obligation. The relevant
rights or interests are, without doubt, interrelated,
but we would distinguish them in three ways.
First, there are
contractual rights arising from the tenancy agreement, both its terms and its
nature, upon which most relevantly,
in respect of rent, a person necessarily
arranges their financial affairs. The second are property rights in two senses.
the property and the money that is paid for rent and second, in the
interests acquired by reason of the lease, noting, of course,
that property
interests have been long recognised as being protected in respect of procedural
fairness, as this Court acknowledged
Disorganized Developments
at [28] and [35], and equally was the subject of emphasis in
Kioa v West
at page 518 of the joint book of authorities, in
the report at page 618.
GAGELER CJ:
So, all that has
changed is the rent, is that right? I am not sure what the property point adds
to the rent.
Well, the property point, as I say, at
least in part, is the property in the money, which is obviously part of the
rent, and then
in the alternative additional point, which I think is
your Honour’s concern, is in respect of the lease, and there our
arises because of the nature of eligible persons in respect of which it
is foreseeable that the increase in rent means that they
are not able, in a
practical sense, to maintain their interest in the property. So, that is the
indirect property interest that
we say arises.
That goes to the third
thing that we identify, which is the interest in housing or shelter being the
basic human need and something
that is unusually vulnerable for people that are,
quote, “of limited means” and not otherwise adequately housed. In
our submission, that goes to questions of livelihood which were addressed by
this Court in
, or at least mentioned at paragraph 140 of
by Justice Callinan quoting Chief Justice Gleeson,
Gaudron, Kirby and Hayne in
Sanders v Snell
The power, of
course, is the power in section 23. All I would seek to develop at this
point is to contextualise the power by reference
to the purposes of the Act and
the statutory scheme more generally which, in our submission, neatly align with
the very same rights
or interests that I have just sought to explore. The
purpose of the scheme generally, in particular, the
Housing Act
regulation, is the protection of the basic need for shelter of indigent
Territorians.
One gets to that point first by going to the joint book of
authorities, the
Housing Act,
at page 16, and looking at the short
title of the Act itself, which is concerned, so Parliament said,
with – and I quote:
the provision of housing and other accommodation for
That overall objective of the Act is achieved at
least in significant part through the CEOH, which is established by
section 6, which
is at page 20 of the joint book of authorities.
Then, on the next page of the joint book, section 15 sets the functions of
the first of which matches that, the provision – I am
to provide and to assist in the provision of residential
accommodation –
Section 16 then sets the powers of the CEOH, which include under
subsection (2)(e) the power to:
let premises –
in a general sense, “premises”
being a more general term than “dwelling”, which is a subset of
“premises”.
If one then goes to the joint book of authorities at
page 25, one finds Part 3, which has only two provisions, the second
is the one of concern in this appeal, but we would note that the
heading for that Part matches the heading of the Act more generally,
it is still
stopping place, just to situate it, is section 34, which arose in
discussion with your Honour Justice Gordon earlier, which
we rely on,
as I said before, as a statutory bridge to the objectives of the
Residential
Tenancies Act
, in particular in section 3. And we especially rely, as
mentioned earlier, on (e), but we equally rely on (d) which, in the
Residential Tenancies Act
, which your Honours will find at joint
book of authorities page 95, the objective (d) is concerned with the
provision of:
safe and habitable premises –
alongside the objective of
facilitating:
fair rent in return for providing safe and habitable
accommodation –
All of that, in our submission, gives
important statutory context for a proper reading of section 23 which, read
in that context,
is to be exercised, in our submission, in a way that promotes
the provision of housing and the rental of dwellings that are safe
and habitable
and subject of fair rent. Relevantly, for our purposes, as discussed earlier,
the rent is still to be fair even when
sections 41 and 42 are not
available for exercise for the reasons identified by the Court of
There are two features – if we can then go back to
section 23 – of section 23 which permit fairness in the
sense of being
tailored to the circumstances of either individual tenants or
individual dwellings. The first is in section 23(1), which allows
exercise of the power in respect of an individual:
dwelling or a class of dwelling.
Of any size, including very small.
The second feature is section 23(2), which permits the imposition of
conditions on any such determination,
which again could be tailored to
individual tenants or individual dwellings.
In the interests of time, I
might not go to them, but can I implore the Court in due course to visit
appellants’ book of further
materials at 171, and also the joint book
of authorities at 1004. Those are two different determinations made by the
Minister exercising
the same power which illustrate precisely the kind of
individual consideration that we say the power is open to being exercised in
respect of. The determination at 171 – the
that determination was provided to the Court a few days ago and hopefully has
reached your Honours, but we have hard copies if
need to say at this stage is the table is the same as the table that appears in
that material, and what you will see on
that table is a distinction in rent
rates that is very small – as little as $5 – one suburb to
the next. And to use,
just as an illustrative example, if one looks at the
reference to Ross in Alice Springs – Ross being an outer
you will see that the classes are very, very
One class is a one‑bedroom flat; a different class is a
one‑bedroom duplex; a different class again is a two‑bedroom
different class again two‑bedroom duplex. It goes all the way
through – relevantly for us – to five‑bedroom
houses, each of which is distinguished but, importantly for our purposes, each
“class”, so called in that determination,
is unlikely to be anything
but very small. Equally, the determination – and it is only an
example – at joint book of
authorities 1004 is a determination
made in the very early days of this power.
Again, you see bespoke
conditions being put on the determination, relevantly, by reference to very
particular features of the dwelling:
2.5 per cent rent increase if you
have a carport; 2.5 per cent if you have a covered verandah;
two per cent if you have heating;
3.5 per cent if the
standard of your house is higher than the average; five per cent
reduction if it is lower than the average; five
per cent reduction if
there is no air conditioning. Again, an illustration of how the determination
power can be – and, indeed,
was – exercised many times in
respect of very small classes and very individualised considerations.
respect of the determinations that we are concerned with, we are at the other
end of the spectrum. There are no conditions at
all and the class sizes range
from as few as about 130 – on the evidence of
Mr Warren – to the largest class being 3,066.
Your Honours
will find that evidence at the appellants’ book of further materials
at 381. The size of those classes may be
of significance later on,
depending on the position the respondents take.
But can I then return to
the ground and the two‑step inquiry for procedural fairness. On existing
authority, in our submission,
it is clear that the task is properly undertaken
in two steps. First, does the obligation of procedural fairness condition the
Second, what is the content? It seems clear now that the respondent
accepts that section 23 is conditioned by an obligation to
procedural fairness, and we take that from their outline this morning at
paragraphs 3 to 6.
In that light, I do not – unless
the Court wishes me to – propose to say very much about why it is
conditioned, save
to highlight four points very briefly. The first is there is
nothing in the text of section 23 specifically, the
Housing Act
generally or the
Residential Tenancies Act
which gets close to being the
clear words needed to displace it. We in particular rely on the language which
your Honour Justice
Edelman helpfully collated in
at paragraph 88, in that sense.
The second is that
the statutory power is broad, which this Court has found before suggests that
fairness is expected, in particular,
Disorganized Developments
paragraph [32] and in
, paragraph 25,
Chief Justice Gleeson, and paragraphs 129, 139 and 154 in
the judgment of Justice Heydon. The third is the feature
I have just
identified, that the power can be exercised in respect of one dwelling or a very
small class, with the result that, in
our submission, it is at least productive
of uncertainty if the power, at some indecipherable point, being conditioned by
fairness, reduces to nothingness by reason of the size of the
The last and perhaps most explicit – certainly
unusual – is the legislative history and, in particular, we implore
Court to give emphasis to the Amendment Act, so called, to the
from 2000, which your Honours will find in the joint book of
authorities at 80, where you see Parliament repealing and substituting
section 23 – that is the operation of section 3 of that
Amendment Act – but section 4 is explicit in engaging with
of judicial review and is explicit in excluding it in respect of the
retrospective exercise of such a power, but importantly for
our purposes, saying
nothing equivalent in respect of the prospective exercise of the power, noting
that that 2000 version of the
section 23 power is relevantly the same or
rather in the same form as was exercised on the three occasions the subject of
this appeal.
One then turns to the content of the obligation. We accept
that it is a flexible content. To use your Honour the
Chief Justice’s
words, it has a chameleon‑like quality. There
is no dispute between the parties as to that. There also seems to be no dispute
between the parties that my clients and all remote public housing tenants were
not afforded procedural fairness in any form at all
in respect of each of the
three determinations.
Do you accept that the content
of procedural fairness can vary according to its application in relation to the
same exercise of
a power? In other words, the same power exercised in relation
to, say, individuals, could have a different content of procedural
fairness to
the power exercised in relation to a class?
that as a possibility, yes, and that would be our reading of the current state
of authority, in particular, most recently
Brisbane City Council v
at paragraph [34], where they seem to say almost exactly what
your Honour has just said.
GAGELER CJ:
Does your point here
just come down to saying that the content of procedural fairness under
section 23 requires each tenant of
a dwelling that is affected to have an
opportunity to be heard – to be notified and given an opportunity to
We do not say it has to go that far, no.
We do say that that is the better view of the content, but your Honours do
not have to
accept that for the appeal to be allowed.
I do not think that is right, to be blunt. I mean, what Chief Justice has
put to you is the general proposition that requires
each tenant of a dwelling to
be notified and be heard. The way in which that obligation is done is a
different question,
with respect, that is correct and your Honour is right to point that out.
I may have misconstrued the question.
Can I ask you,
Mr Albert, what on your view is the minimum that needed to happen
Notice – public
notice – of how they proposed to implement the power. And that would
include stage one, stage two,
the identification of the classes, and
importantly, the identification of the communities to be
Does the notice need to invite the making
of submissions within a prescribed time?
Sensibly, yes.
So, that is part of the
minimum – an invitation to make
submissions.
I do not know that it needs to be
explicit, but implicitly, yes.
I do not know about
that either. I mean, you said to us, when you took us to the map, that they had
lost the opportunity to make
submissions to have themselves removed from the
subsequent determinations like they did around Alice Springs.
answering ‑ ‑ ‑
So, how can you not accept the proposition that they needed to be given that
opportunity?
No – to be clear, I am
seeking to engage with Justice Steward’s question on the minimum
content, whereas ‑ ‑
Your point is that you may not need to expressly invite a submission,
but it would be pregnant within the fact that you are giving
With respect, that is exactly
And can I ask you this question as well. That
would be notice not just to the tenants but to any representative indigenous
who – for instance, the people who were part of that SAG
In a practical sense, it is hard to imagine
how you would give notice to tenants not the representative body. So, in a
sense, I am not sure there is an answer, but no, the tenants are the
focus because they are the ones impacted.
form of the notice, you do not prescribe it?
certainly do not prescribe it. I am uncomfortably sitting between minimum
content ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes, I understand.
‑ ‑ ‑ which is what I am seeking to address
you on, and what we say should happen. So, just addressing you on minimum
Minimum, yes.
minimum content, you do not – it would have to be a notice of a form
that is noticeable.
Well, it would have to be
And that would perhaps be a notice in a
newspaper. In 2025, it would probably be more accurately and properly a
notice on Facebook,
by which this would be distributed amongst those who are
going to be impacted. But I am not here dealing with minimum content, I
dealing with how we
understand what you are saying, yes.
GAGELER CJ:
conceptually clear about this. The requirement is to give reasonable notice to
each affected tenant and a reasonable opportunity
for the affected tenant to be
heard. Now, what is reasonable in the circumstances may actually vary from
community to community.
You are talking about newspapers and
Facebook – I am not sure that they are relevant to all of these
whatever might be reasonable in the particular
circumstances of particular tenants in particular communities, you say did not
We are in the comfortable position of
saying literally nothing happened. This is why this discussion, which I am very
happy to have
and I expect, if we are successful, we will ultimately have in a
future attempt to exercise this power – there will be a discussion
situation like
Your submission is
that there is a statutory implication of procedural fairness with some
But you have
to place what the content is. I mean, just saying that there is a minimum does
not tell us what the implication is.
respect, that is right.
So, is what the
Chief Justice put to you the content of it? Reasonable notice to each
affected tenant and reasonable opportunity
for each affected tenant to be heard,
with what is reasonable in terms of both notice and reasonable opportunity to
each affected
to be heard dependent upon the circumstances?
Yes. Yes, I think we would have
has both meanings, it has notice and opportunity to be heard. The two important
elements of procedural fairness.
Yes. But I do, with
respect, embrace what Justice Steward said, that it may be
possible – but we do not say it is proper, I
am just again
oscillating between minimum content and what we would say it should
be – but the fact of the notice of the intention,
date – we intend to do this in two months – it would, to
adopt your Honour’s language, be pregnant. But
it should say: and
tell us what you have to say.
Absolutely, that is what it should say.
Do the landowners have any interest in this case?
The landowners of the?
The ultimate owners of the
premises that are tenanted. As I understood, there were some Aboriginal Land
Corporations that are the
ultimate owners.
Do they have any relevant
That is, with respect, a very difficult
question, because it would depend on the relationship. But I think the answer
probably no, because there is no because there is no evidence to
indicate any of the rent money flows to them and, as far as I am
aware, it does
not. So, in that sense, their interests are not affected in any direct sense or
GAGELER CJ:
All right. Is that
No. Can I just give
your Honours the pinpoints – I do not propose to take you to
it – where the evidence is clear
that no procedural fairness was
afforded to my clients at all.
Well, is that
I do not think
MR LENEHAN:
No notice was given, and therefore no
opportunity to be heard.
Mr Lenehan.
Thank you. Could I then move
into what is essentially prophylactic reply on the point that is put against
GAGELER CJ:
not leave those for reply?
I am in the
Court’s hands. My hesitance, with great
respect ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
ahead, but just do it efficiently, please.
hesitance, with great respect, is that the scheme I propose to put, I think in
fairness, Mr Lenehan should have an opportunity
GAGELER CJ:
attempt to be brief. The point that seems to be put against us in their outline
at paragraph 8 is a version of what
is called in their primary submissions
the exclusive actual consideration theory. What I propose to do is to address
that directly,
again, so that at least Mr Lenehan has an opportunity to
respond to how we say it is wrong.
The theory seems to be that if you
have an open‑textured power and there are a range of permissible
considerations, if the
decision‑maker chooses one consideration, and it is
then the content of the obligation reduces to nothingness. We have three
responses to that, and it is those I wanted to
offer primarily. The first
response is that is not this case on the evidence. The second is even if it is
this case, the logic
of the theory is unsafe. The third is even if it is this
case and the theory is safe, it is contrary to this Court’s previous
The exclusive actual consideration theory necessarily
requires the Court to be satisfied that there was an exclusive actual
consideration.
It is not clear to us even now what the respondents say was the
exclusive actual consideration, but what the evidence shows is that
not one consideration, there were, unsurprisingly, a range that fed into each of
three determinations.
That evidence is principally to be found from
Mr Warren, whose evidence, in our submission, was clear, putting the first
determination
in one category and the second and third in a separate, that there
was not one exclusive consideration, and if there were considerations,
they were not ones about which our clients could say nothing. If we go back to
the appellants’ book of further materials,
paragraph 11, where we were before, one sees immediately that the intention
of the scheme was, among other things, to be:
affordable for all parties.
I mentioned before that necessarily
includes an individual consideration of the affordability to tenants. At
paragraphs 19 to 20,
there is the evidence put by the respondents
that process
and, importantly, the respondents put into evidence the brief that
went to the Minister for the first determination, which your Honours
find at appellants’ book of further materials, page 222.
the “Background” there is a noting that Cabinet approved a framework
and an implementation plan. Under the heading
“Issues Arising”
there is a mention of how it overrides tenancy agreements but there is no
mention of sections 41 and
Residential Tenancies Act
and the effect on those. Then there is an identification of why there is a need
for immediate gazettal. Namely, it is said to:
remove any ambiguity around the rent to be charged, particularly where
historical records are of a poor and/or inconsistent standard.
which individuals could have plenty to say about what the historical rental
arrangements were, including all of my clients,
who could have said that they
had never once paid the amount that was in the quote‑unquote
“existing framework”.
Under the heading “Timing”
there is an acknowledgement that there had been no communication with the
tenants. Under
the heading “Financial” is the word
“Nil”, which seems to be a near direct response to the idea that the
exclusive actual consideration was money or financial policy. Rather, if one
goes to the next page, the identification of sensitivities,
the sensitivities
identified are:
legal uncertainty regarding rental liabilities –
you have the signature at the bottom. What we seek to emphasise is the absence
of anywhere mention of there being some exclusive
actual consideration, let
alone the considerations including ones about which my clients could say
In respect of the second determination, the evidence again
comes from Mr Warren. If one goes to the appellants’ book of further
materials at 149, paragraph 22, Mr Warren notes that:
the Chief Executive Officer of the Department signed a
the handwritten note linking this brief to the Minister who made the decision.
Importantly,
there is no evidence here of high‑level policy, nothing at
all to show Cabinet was involved, no mention at all of six communities
added, no mention at all of the effects of the
Residential Tenancies Act
sections 41 and 42 being blocked.
The explanation, however,
given for the delay of the second stage is clear, in particular, in the
appellants’ book of further
materials at 230, where they note the
delay of four months, and then they give four reasons for the delay which, in
our submission,
are the closest one gets to the actual considerations relevant
here. They were:
COVID‑19 restrictions . . . significant weather events,
staffing capacity . . . and concerns by the housing and
legal sectors
on the model.
The recommendation is to approve a
four‑month extension, notation that there is no Cabinet involvement, and
then, at 232, the
third dot point, identification of how this is being
implemented. In respect of the third determination, there was no evidence put
on by the respondents to show the actual consideration at all. Nowhere is there
a mention of high‑level policy in form or
in substance.
the respondent put on was another affidavit from Mr Warren, which is at the
appellants’ book of further materials
pages 367 to 369, which
annexed the third determination, gave no explanation for what consideration
motivated it and, in our submission,
that leaves the Court to infer that it was
the same set of considerations as the second determination, given that it
further delayed
In our submission, the conclusion on the
evidence is enough to defeat the point put by the respondents now, namely, that
no evidence that supported one actual exclusive consideration, nor is
there an actual exclusive consideration identified about which
one could say
Could I then move to what is probably the most important
response, putting aside the evidence, to the theory that is put by the
respondents,
and that is to deal with it at the level of logic. I would invite
the Court, for the sake of argument, to adopt five assumptions
in order to
explore the logical flaw in the position put by the respondents now.
first is to assume a statutory power that is limited only by statutory context
and purpose and legal unreasonableness but requiring
procedural fairness. The
second assumption is that, subject to those limits, I would invite the
Court to assume there are, just
for the sake of argument, 10 possible
permissible considerations. Then, for the sake of argument, I would invite the
Court to put
those 10 possible permissible considerations on a
At one extreme would be a consideration about which impacted
persons would obviously have things to say and at the other extreme
considerations about which it could be said that impacted persons have nothing
to say. Then assume, as the final assumption,
that there is evidence to support
the actual consideration being only the one at the far extreme which, for the
sake of argument,
I will refer to as “X”.
In our submission,
even in that scenario, there are things that my clients could have said or,
indeed, any person affected could
have said. There are three categories of
things. The first I will call “other than X”. A person impacted by
decision could direct the decision‑maker to other permissible
considerations.
GAGELER CJ:
I think we understand the argument
If the Court pleases.
Mr Albert, I mean, if you just step back for a moment, your starting
point is either good or bad, is it not, and that is that affordability
parties – the point you took us to at the book of further
materials 144 – is itself critical.
And we know from
Disorganized Developments
at [45] that where something is particularly within the knowledge of
the person – here, affordability for them – then
something to which someone might expect there to be procedural fairness, notice
and the like. So, is any of this greater
than that proposition, taken at its
No, is the answer to your Honour, but
at that point you have accepted our response at the level of fact, which we say
Well, it is fact and logic.
And logic, yes,
indeed. But we can – I proposed to deal with it, but I will not at
the moment deal with it just at the level
of logic, assuming fact is against us,
but with respect, what your Honour says about the facts is enough to defeat
the submission
put against us.
Well, it is fact and
logic that there were particular matters within your clients’ knowledge
which were not available to the
person making the determination.
Mr Lenehan’s point, if I can put it crudely, is that when a
government has to deal with something at a very high
of policy which will affect
a large group of people, it may be the case that the content of procedural
fairness does not require
the government to consult with all those affected.
So, a good example is raising income taxes, you do not do that.
response here, as I understood it, was that this is different because we have a
finite group, and they are especially vulnerable,
and they are participants in a
statutory scheme which is all about ensuring that they have adequate housing,
and they might have
had said things that might have affected the way the
determination would have been produced and its
With respect, that is right, but can I
add one factor, which has not yet come
Yes, please
that is what distinguishes our situation from those other situations of rates,
ratepayers, income tax
– there are many other examples –
is that we had an individual contract, a private law relationship that was being
upset by the exercise of the power.
That cannot be said for
income tax. It cannot be said for relocating a runway, which is the
. It cannot be said for rates or ratepayers, which is the example
given by Justice Mason, I think, in
. It cannot be said for any
of those cases. In this case, the legal relationship both before the
determination and after the determination
that is impacted is a private,
individual, tailored legal relationship.
regulation 5 is construed in the broad way – I think you want to
say that it is construed in a narrow way – how
does that impact the
private law relationship?
It also impacts the
private law relationship.
Well, does it not impact it
by allowing for the possibility of making submissions in relation to
affordability that could reduce
the rent to zero?
If the power was available, then yes. Your Honours have heard me on the
question of whether – well, there are two questions:
is it available
and was it in fact exercised? We answer those: no and no.
So, this comes back to something I put to you earlier, Mr Albert,
and that is your complaint about denial of procedural fairness
relates to before
the determination.
availability of the rebate and the other matters arises after the determination
has been made.
I accept “if at
‑ ‑ ‑ but that
is why one can put, in a sense, even if you are wrong about the way in which the
rebate works,
your argument about the lack, denial of procedural fairness before
the determination stands good, on your argument.
With respect, that is right. I will leave for the moment other matters and
address them in reply, if necessary. Can I move then,
relatively briefly, to
legal unreasonableness. The unreasonableness here is an outcome‑focused
exercise. We rely on what
this Court said in
and, in particular,
the focus, with respect, rightly given as to the factual circumstances that are
the subject of challenge.
For the purposes of legal unreasonableness, we
refer back to the earlier submissions about the overall aim of the scheme and,
particular, the notions that it is about provision of housing that is safe
and habitable and the subject of fair rent. We also place
emphasis on the
second reading speech by which the section 23 power was expanded to cover
classes, which your Honours will find in
the joint book of authorities at
page 1010, where the Minister told the Parliament that the purpose of the
adjustment of section
23, relevantly, to capture classes, was to:
rectify an irregularity –
and then, revealingly for our purposes, the Minister said that the rent
determination for a class of dwelling would be, and I quote:
taking into account location or style of building.
I want to be clear
what we are saying and what we are not saying. We do not say that that gives
rise to mandatory relevant considerations.
What we do say is that it is
revealing of the obvious rational criteria for a class determination. Indeed,
it was the criteria
used in respect of the urban determinations to which I took
the Court earlier.
Would you just give me that
reference again please, Mr Albert?
is in the joint book of authorities, part E,
Page – I have it as 101, but I am
not think it is 101.
No. I am sorry,
your Honour.
Would it be
That might be right, I am sorry,
your Honour. Ms Benn no doubt will help me. It is 1001. The flaw in
the approach adopted by
the Court of Appeal below was to ignore almost all
detail in respect of the effect of each of the determinations and to instead
right back and look at the alleged overarching approach. That, in real
terms, divorced what was the detached theory from the messy
grounded reality of
what was being done to these public housing tenants. I am sorry, the page
reference, your Honour, was 1015.
In our submission, there are six reasons
individually, or in any combination, which show that the reality of these
determinations
was fairly described as arbitrary, unjust or unfair. The first
is that it treated unlike dwellings alike and like dwellings unlike
one another.
The notion in the Act of a class has, in our submission, embedded within it an
expectation of a sufficient level of
commonality to be properly so
In our submission, that is an obvious stretch when one is
dealing with a vast area and houses which will, by definition, not all
same age; not all have the same facilities, including not all having the same
facilities other than bedrooms. For example,
a two‑bedroom house with two
bathrooms is different to a two‑bedroom house with one
That is to say, the proxy that was used by the Minister was
itself inappropriate and ill‑adapted for the exercise of the power
reference to class. It was also problematic in that it disregarded
location – which is an obviously salient feature –
very way that the Minister acknowledged in the second reading speech.
The second factor – and I am going to seek to illustrate
these first four factors in a moment – was what the
Appeal described, at paragraph [158], as, and I
The adoption of a uniform cost‑based model for the fixing of rent for
remote social housing –
a fixed rate of $70 per bedroom –
they said. In reality, the per‑bedroom rate was not what was in
fact implemented. Instead, what was implemented was far more
arbitrary. Under
the first stage, nobody was paying $70 per bedroom, and in the second
stage – on Mr Warren’s evidence
were 170 houses that were also not paying $70 per bedroom because they were
five or more.
The third factor that we say is arbitrary or fundamentally
unjust was that it had the practical effect – if one assumes in
favour of the respondents that the aim was to defray expense – of
having those with more bedrooms indirectly subsidised by
those with fewer.
There is no such approach in respect of urban public housing dwellings where, as
the example we went to before
at the appellants’ book of further materials
at 172 illustrates, there are bespoke rent rates referable to the actual number
of bedrooms, not capped and therefore not leaving smaller bedroomed houses
subsidising larger.
The fourth factor is the one that has been hinted at
already, and that is about the oscillating list of communities. In our
submission,
those changes are not intelligible as to why. In the first
determination, there were 103. We refer to the practical illustration
that with Laramba and Anmatjere, why those six communities that were added in
determination 2 were not there for determination
1. Equally, it is
unintelligible as to why there are 103 communities in the first determination,
109 in the second determination,
but 17 were dropped for the fourth
determination, again raising the apparent prospect that one could advocate or in
some way achieve
the end of being excluded from this scheme.
illustrate the arbitrary effects of those combination of factors in respect of a
particular and neat example of the communities,
and to that end invite
your Honours to go to appellants’ book of further materials 392,
which I referred to briefly earlier.
We stand by the illustrative examples we
gave in the written submissions, but this one illustrates the point –
as I say, hopefully
neatly – by reference to different
Appellant book of further materials at 392, and it would be useful, if
your Honours do not have it, to have the colour copy.
This is the map you took us to before which shows the
exclusions.
It does, yes. So, the three communities
that I would ask the Court to focus on for the purposes of the illustration are
which is in the bottom‑left and is orange; Ilparpa, which is
grey and no dot, up and to the left; and then the third one is
a community
called Anthepe – which importantly is spelt
A‑n‑t‑h‑e‑p‑e – which is
northernmost of the clump of three communities next to Kilgariff. So, those are
the three communities I would seek to focus
on, and I am going to ask that the
focus be on one‑bedroom dwellings and six‑bedroom dwellings in those
three communities.
If one goes – and I would invite
your Honours to have the map and this other document open at the same time
if one then opens up the appellant book of further
materials at 171, you will find the urban determination that we visited earlier.
That determination was a determination by the Minister, using the same power,
exercised – as it says at the top – in
This is the one you took us to to show us the
extent to which you can impose conditions both by reference to breaking up the
into smaller classes, distinctions between particular suburbs in
particular ‑ ‑ ‑
Precisely, precisely.
But why is that – I
mean, we have seen this before, how does that prove unreasonableness in this
If your Honour will indulge me for a
minute, it will hopefully become apparent fairly quickly. So, the table
labelled at the top:
Alice Springs – 6 March 2017
this is five
years before the determination – your Honours will see Arumbera
and Ilparpa are both identified as communities.
So, for a one‑bedroom
house in Arumbera and Ilparapa it is $250, and for a six‑bedroom house in
Arumbera and Ilparpa
it is $650. Critically for what follows, to show the
arbitrariness, what this document shows is that in 2017 the Minister, exercising
the same power, regarded as exactly equivalent the one‑bedroom and
six‑bedroom houses in those very closely proximate
10 kilometres apart.
That is superficially rational and credible
because they are equal distance, roughly, to the services in Alice Springs, and
number of bedrooms. What your Honours will not find in that table
at 171 is any reference to Anthepe, again spelt
A‑n‑t‑h‑e‑p‑e.
So, as at the 2017
determination, Anthepe is not covered by any determination and, importantly for
what follows, Anthepe residents
have the benefit of sections 41 and 42
Residential Tenancies Act
. So, that sets the scene for the
predetermination situation.
Then we go to the first determination, which
your Honours will find relevantly in the appellants’ book of further
26, and when one looks at the list of communities, one sees
Anthepe is included, but you will not find Arumbera or Ilparpa. So,
of the first determination – these are three neighbouring
sections 41 and 42, lose it. That is effect on Anthepe. A
one‑bedroom house in Anthepe goes to $150 rent, even though
we know in the
neighbouring community – by reason of the 2017
determination – a one‑bedroom house is $250 a week.
a $5,200 a year difference.
A six‑bedroom house in Anthepe under
the first determination goes to $250. Note the difference: a six‑bedroom
in Anthepe at this point is $250, and in the neighbouring communities of
Arumbera and Ilparpa, it is $650. That is a $20,000 a year
between six‑bedroom houses in neighbouring communities, but to make things
even more inexplicable, a one‑bedroom
house in Arumbera and Ilparpa is
$250, and a six‑bedroom house in Anthepe is also $250.
then changes, and the effect is arbitrary in different ways in the second
determination, because in the second determination,
if your Honours go to
appellants’ book of further materials 31 and 32 –
reflected in the fact that Arumbera is orange
– captures Anthepe and
Arumbera, but it does not capture Ilparpa. Inexplicably, but no doubt a cause
of great joy, Arumbera
rents plummet, despite five years elapsing, from their
rates by the Minister in 2017, but the Ilparpa residents get none of that
benefit. The Ilparpa residents are still captured by the 2017 determination,
for which they are paying $250 for a one‑bedroom
house, and they are still
paying $650 for a six‑bedroom house.
So, then compare and contrast
the Ilparpa six‑bedroom residence with the Arumbera six‑bedroom
residence. In 2017, the
Minister exercising this power was satisfied that they
were exactly equivalent – $650 for both – but at the point
the second determination, but not the first, the Minister for reasons unknown
has dropped the rent from $650 to $250 for the six‑bedroom
Arumbera but not Ilparpa.
Those arbitrary effects continue into the
third determination, but then in the fourth determination, the misfortune flips.
For reasons
that are a mystery, apparently – as we have
said – it was possible to be excluded from these, but what you see,
by reference to the colour on the map, is that in the fourth determination
Arumbera remains, but this time Ilparpa and Anthepe are
excluded. You will find
that list at appellant book of further materials 41.
So, under the
fourth determination, if you compare Arumbera and Ilparpa, right next to each
other, the rent difference for a one‑bedroom
350 per cent: it is $70 in Arumbera and $250 in Ilparpa. A
six‑bedroom house has a 230 per cent difference: $280
Arumbera and $650 in Ilparpa. But there is another arbitrary element to
this and that Anthepe being dropped in the fourth determination
and it, not
being covered by an earlier determination, means that the rents in Anthepe
reverted to the original individual rent settled
by their contract and the
Anthepe residents regained the protection of sections 41 and 42.
our submission, that – as one of any number of
illustrations – shows the arbitrary effects of these determinations.
It shows like dwellings – and when I say “like”, it is
the Minister who regarded them as like in 2017, being treated
unlike – it shows that there is not a uniform cost model; it shows
that five-and-more-bedroom houses are apparently heavily
subsidising – when you talk about Ilparpa, but being subsidised when
you talk about, at different times, Arumbura and Anthepe
houses; and you see the immediate, in our submission, irrational effects of the
changing list of communities.
The last two factors that we would seek to
identify and rely on briefly is that the only evidence of the cost‑based
which was the apparent theory being implemented, did not match what was
in fact implemented. The relevant evidence of this is the
appellant book of
further materials at page 196, where there is an identification of the
so‑called stakeholder advisory group
agreeing to the operational cost per
bedroom model.
That model is to be found in what is called
“Attachment A”, which is referred to in the appellant book of
further materials
203, but the model itself is at the appellant book of further
materials 200, which I would seek to take the Court to, and which sets
totality of the evidence about the so‑called:
Dwelling Based Rent Data
Your Honours will see, the top table, are
Dwelling Rent Models
You will see in the left
column that, unlike the determinations, what was put to the stakeholder advisory
group included differentiation
for five-bedroom dwellings. The eighth column
over identifies the operational cost approach per bedroom, but it is the ninth
which is the one that becomes the thing that is endorsed, and that is the
The discount is consistent with the notion of it being, quote,
“affordable for all parties” – at least in
– because it has regard to affordability if one just took the
operational cost. Our point is a simple one: what was in the
determinations
did not match what was the operational cost. So, if the operational cost was
rational, that does not explain what
was in fact implemented.
factor which we identify – to deal with very briefly – is,
in our submission, the base unfairness of blocking,
for this particular group,
access in particular to the process in section 42 of the
Residential
Tenancies Act
in circumstances where the same operational cost could have
been recovered by, for example, exercise of the option in section 46
Residential Tenancies Act
, being the mechanism of a simple rent
Put it differently, if the CEOH had just wanted to
recover $70 per bedroom from one‑bedroom dwellings, the corporation
have done that by just offering all one‑bedroom dwelling occupants a
rent rate of $70. They would have recovered the exact
same amount as a
rent reduction. In that circumstance, the only effect of the determinations on
that class was to deprive them of
access to the very thing that Parliament
intended as a mechanism to ensure rent was, in the language of the Act, fair.
the mechanism designed in section 42 of the
Residential
Tenancies Act
Unless there are any other matters, those are the
primary submissions for the appellants.
GAGELER CJ:
And is there
anything you wish to say about the special leave application, or is it we just
rely on the written submissions here?
are content to rely on the written submission, subject to just one point, and it
is a realisation that only hit us –
or hit me, at least –
in the last week. I do not think it affects anything anyone has said, but there
is a mismatch between
the aspect of the proceeding that was referred and the
reasons that it was dismissed.
The mismatch is that what was referred by
the Chief Justice to the Full Court had two elements: a challenge to the
determination,
the fourth determination; and a challenge to the policy. We
submit to the Court that one should read the orders in light of the
When one looks at the reasons, in particular at paragraph [3], what is
clear is they only considered the fourth determination
and not the
So, if – as we urge the Court to do – the
order is read in light of the reasons, then it is only one part of the part
was referred that the order dealt with. In respect of the other part, on the
totality of the evidence, it seems clear that
that aspect of the referral was
GAGELER CJ:
All right. Thank
If the Court pleases.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Lenehan, can you use five minutes?
MR LENEHAN:
Yes. I will use the available time to say, really, in a nutshell how we
approach both aspects of the claim. Your Honours have seen
section 23 is a very broad power. We say it was designed –
your Honours can see this from the extrinsic materials –
allow the Minister to do the very thing that was done here, that is, to apply a
form of policy.
The extrinsic materials refer to both the idea of
Commonwealth policy and also Territory‑specific policy. That is what was
done. What – and I will come back to this in detail – was
actually done here was to apply an across‑the‑board
policy that,
contrary to what your Honours have heard this morning, brooked no
exceptions. Now, in saying “brooked no exceptions”,
overlooking that your Honours find some communities missing from the first
determination and the fourth termination.
Your Honours will see
from the evidence that I will show you that the explanation in relation to the
first determination appears
to be an error. There were some communities that
were simply omitted. In terms of the fourth determination, the situation is
more complicated. It is somewhat more complicated because, of course,
that determination is the subject of D1 and not D7.
So, the evidence
that your Honours have does not reveal the reasons for it, but
your Honours can infer from the geographic locations
of the omitted
it had had something to do with Alice Springs and
the management of those
So, this was, with that starting point then, an attempt to
apply universally in the Territory a policy, and to do so in a manner
for the number of bedrooms, which was used as the surrogate for rental value,
was entirely agnostic, we say, to the individual
characteristics of both the
dwelling and the people who lived within the dwelling. And it was, therefore,
equally agnostic to the
specific effects of the policy upon
Mr Albert’s clients.
Saying that, that was obviously
something in a general sense. Your Honours see in the discussion by the
SAG of things like affordability,
in a general sense, there was an understanding
that it was important to make this form of accommodation affordable, but not by
to any individual characteristics of the people who dwelt
Mr Lenehan, even if all of that is
right – you may wish to consider this over the lunch
period – given that you accept
that procedural fairness is an implied
requirement of
section 23 ‑ ‑ ‑
MR LENEHAN:
Yes, we do.
is there not perhaps always a minimum content to procedural
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, in this case, the
minimum content is, of course, absence of bias but no hearing when one is
applying a policy which simply
had no regard for the circumstances of
individuals.
Even, perhaps, without a hearing, that
notice may be a minimum requirement?
MR LENEHAN:
Kioa v West
Justice Brennan refers with apparent approval to an article by
Mr Johnson where he makes that point.
MR LENEHAN:
your Honour also knows that his Honour accepts – although
he says it is, perhaps, an exceptional case, and in
, of course, you
are dealing with a power directed specifically to the individual –
that there may be cases in which no hearing
at all is required, because the
decision‑maker does not propose to have regard to anything specific to an
individual. That
is this case, we say.
GAGELER CJ:
Section 23 can apply to an individual dwelling or it can apply to a
class of dwelling.
MR LENEHAN:
Yes. It can.
Does your argument go so far as to say if the Government is to adopt a
general policy as to rent‑setting, that it would be permissible
Minister to make a determination applicable to a single dwelling in accordance
with that policy and not give the tenant an
opportunity to be
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, that would be a case which
was really functionally equivalent to a dwelling‑level decision. So, in
we would accept that most likely procedural fairness does have
GAGELER CJ:
All right. So, then we are focusing on the
class part.
MR LENEHAN:
GAGELER CJ:
the class can be defined in any number of ways. It can be defined
geographically, by reference to a type of dwelling.
MR LENEHAN:
GAGELER CJ:
And we can see, just from the circumstances
of this case, that the classes have been changed, presumably for good
reason – you
are asking us to draw an inference about a good reason
for reducing the class in relation to last determination. Why should not
who are affected directly by the determination be able to address the Minister
as to the desirability of applying this blanket
policy to their
circumstances?
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, at least in
relation to the first three determinations, because there were to be no
exceptions. What was sought to be
done was simply to apply it to all remote
that was both a permissible approach under a class‑based power, and
because it was a permissible approach under a class‑based
power, it means
that the idea that one then, with that sort of intention to apply this to every
remote community in the Territory,
has to first consult each of the residents of
those dwellings before one can do exactly what the power says one can do seems
to be quite extraordinary. It seems to us to really involve what
Justice Brennan in
called a clog on administrative
decision‑making. Can I say one more thing?
GAGELER CJ:
MR LENEHAN:
The sequence, then, of both the
determination making and also the rebate is important, because – and
this is the point that
your Honour Justice Gordon and
Justice Gleeson both made – there is a distinctly different
individualised approach to the question
of affordability at that level, but that
also tells your Honours that this is not something that is then had regard
to and requires
a hearing on at the level of the determinations, because all of
that is to take place later. I am sorry to delay
your Honours.
GAGELER CJ:
No, that is very helpful, thank
you. We will take the luncheon adjournment.
AT 12.47 PM
LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 2.15
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Lenehan.
Your Honours, just to let you know where I am
going – so, I was going to go quickly back to one or two aspects of
the statutory
regime just to clarify some things that emerged this morning.
Then I will go to some of the weeds, but only the important aspects,
again clarify things for your Honours, particularly in terms of the
reasonableness claim, but ultimately we say that really
does not matter all that
much anyway. Then ‑ ‑ ‑
Did you say “matter any more”?
MR LENEHAN:
really does not – the weeds aspect, your Honours will ultimately
find nothing that particularly goes one way or another.
Then I will come
directly to the critical aspect, which is really the content question, and some
of the questions that your Honours
had before lunch.
just ask your Honours to go back to section 23 of the
just to make the point that your Honours, I think, already have,
that is: a very broad power, no mandatory considerations and giving
obviously a broad discretion to the Minister. From there, I mentioned before
lunch that it was designedly broad to do the
very thing that happened here, that
is, to give effect to a policy. Your Honours, if you turn to the joint
book at ‑ ‑
Mr Lenehan, I am so sorry, but when you said no mandatory
considerations, would you agree that the concept of fairness from the
Residential Tenancies Act
would need to be something that would have to
be considered?
MR LENEHAN:
Yes, the usual subject, scope,
et cetera. Of course, your Honour.
Do you accept that the effect of
section 23(4) is that the tenants’ liability is decided by the
determination, regardless of
any rebate that they might receive in due
MR LENEHAN:
That is an important point.
Your Honour needs to read that provision in the context of the entire Act
and, in particular, the regulation‑making
power at section 37, and
37(2)(e) tells your Honours that the kind of provision that
your Honours find in regulation 5 is exactly
what was contemplated by
the Parliament, that is:
The Regulations may:
(e) make provision for and in relation to the letting of dwellings by the Chief
Executive Officer (Housing) –
So, I think your Honour has in mind that there was a faint, I think,
suggestion made that perhaps 23(4) meant that, really, there
no – that the rebate has no effect. But the regulation‑making
power gives power to make exactly the kind of regulations
that one has in issue
here. Just while I am on
might be – not that it had no effect, but the fact that the liability
is not altered by the rebate was seen to be a
matter of importance in working
out whether or not procedural fairness – or the content of procedural
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, it is a little bit
difficult to understand that submission, because ultimately if the regulations
were made within power,
looking at 5, it gives a discretion to grant a
rebate – and we adopt what your Honour Justice Gordon said,
that that is both
prospective and past, it can be either – which will
modify the person’s liability to pay amounts to the Territory, which
what happened.
Now, the associated submission that “eligible
person” means that as soon as one gets a house, one is adequately housed
and not an eligible person, we say that must be wrong, because it would have
this effect. If your Honours look again to –
I am sorry, I have
moved from the Act to what appears behind tab 8, and the
regulations – if one looks to regulation 4(1),
the power of the
Chief Executive Officer to let a dwelling to anybody depends on them having that
So, the consequence of what Mr Albert says appears to be
perhaps you can let it once, you certainly cannot let it again, and maybe
some interim time you decide that the condition has not been met and you
effectively evict the person, because they no longer
meet the required condition
for having a house let to them. And, as your Honours observed, it makes
the rebate power in regulation
5, in our submission, almost wholly
Mr Albert gives the example of a house in which there is
not a door, but that is obviously not what is sought to be done by this
beneficial provision. The beneficial provision has in mind that people will not
be able to pay their entire rent, and when they
are not, then they should be
able to get a rebate.
So, we do say that it is true, there are different
repositories of power, but the scheme here has in mind that there will be a
determination,
potentially applicable to a dwelling or a class of dwellings, and
then there can be a further granting of a rebate by the CEO. The
effect of those two exercises of power is what is going to lead to the liability
to pay. Does that answer your Honour’s
Could you put that again? The combined operation of those two exercises of
power gives rise to the liability to pay, being the power
determination plus the rebate?
MR LENEHAN:
Yes. So, somewhat
inaptly, the 23 power is sometimes called base rent, but then that is
adjusted by the rebate power where a person,
prospectively or by reference to
what has happened in the past, is relieved of that liability to pay. I moved
away from, but if
I could come back to, the rationale for the section 23
power, and your Honours find that in the extrinsic materials that are
tab 39 of the joint bundle, and at page 1011. This is part of
the second reading speech for amendments made in 1982.
What was the page, sorry, Mr Lenehan?
MR LENEHAN:
sorry, your Honour, it is 1011, but if your Honours perhaps start
at the foot of 1010. Your Honours there see that the mischief
led to section 23 being in an earlier form, that is then later amended to
add provision for classes, is that there was a Commonwealth
State Housing
Agreement which seemed to be at odds with what was provided for in the
That is at the bottom of 1010 and then over to 1011. So,
the immediate mischief was to ensure that one could take advantage of the
Commonwealth State Housing Agreement, but then, reading on:
By giving the responsible minister –
we emphasise:
complete discretionary powers in the matter of rental determination,
clause 23 will enable the commission to comply with the requirements
agreement and with any new or changed requirements which may emerge in the
future, either by virtue of the Commonwealth‑Northern
Territory relations
or purely Northern Territory policy initiatives.
does that work in your favour?
MR LENEHAN:
Well, we say
from the outset, this broad power was understood not to be directed to, as in
, individual interests. It was always understood to be operating at
that broader policy level. Now, I accept that policy –
Disorganized Developments
and, for that matter,
can sometimes have an individual aspect, it may require a connection of
individual facts to the policy, but not necessarily,
and what I am about to show
your Honours indicates that what was done here was not of that
GAGELER CJ:
So, what is the – I see from your
outline, Mr Lenehan, that you explain very clearly in paragraphs 3
through to 6 why this power
attracts procedural
MR LENEHAN:
GAGELER CJ:
I do not see is a clear statement – a positive statement –
of what is the content of procedural fairness that
it attracts, in your
submission.
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, variable, and it
would depend on the nature of the power being exercised, and I think I have
accepted this before
lunch. So, when one makes a determination in respect of a
dwelling, that will attract, we would accept, usually, both notice and
requirement.
Your Honour then pressed me and said, well, what about
a class of case where there is only one dwelling? Now, that is the kind of
that your Honours dealt with in
Disorganized Developments
almost inevitably, the connection of the determination to somebody’s
individual circumstances is going to involve
some matters personal to particular
people. But in this case, what was done – and I am about to show
your Honours this –
was to make or attempt to make an
across‑the‑board policy that simply applied to all dwellings,
wherever they were.
GAGELER CJ:
I understand that, but you are
accepting, in using section 23 for that purpose, there was a requirement to
observe procedural fairness.
MR LENEHAN:
Yes. We do, but
GAGELER CJ:
am just trying to understand what is the content. Is it a notice requirement?
Is it – how do you connect it to the
individual rights that you
say – or individual interests – that underlie the
existence of this obligation?
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour,
in this case, it is the kind of situation that Justice Deane deals with in
. That is, there is no hearing required, there is no notice
required, there remains the need to appear and be unbiased, but that
is all that
procedural fairness requires here.
What is the
statutory implication, then? The statutory implication is that procedural
fairness will be provided, without any necessary
content. What are the terms?
If one were to include the implication in section 23, what would it
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, the way we would
approach that question is that, of course, procedural fairness being a variable
content, what is
required will depend on the particular circumstances. And
perhaps if I could ask your Honours to turn to what Justice Deane says
, because we find it helpful.
you have to say that the individual interests that are undoubtedly affected are
not affected as individuals?
MR LENEHAN:
Yes. Yes, we
So, the content in section 23 would be
referable to the potential impact on individual
MR LENEHAN:
Mr Lenehan, can I ask you this. I understand the point you are making.
So, it is the model that we are going to charge rent by reference
to bedrooms,
the model caps that at four. You are saying, well, nothing any particular
tenant could have said about that would make
any difference – it is a
take it or leave it sort of situation. But my question is: what about the
dollars, the fixing of
the dollars, for each category?
Could they not
have said something like that is, for example, inconsistent with the market rate
for rent in the Northern Territory
generally, or inconsistent with rates that
are applicable in our community, and that might have been something they could
have contributed
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, they may
have well have said that, but your Honour has seen in the reasoning of the
unfortunately‑named SAG
committee, that the approach that is taken has no
regard, ultimately, to any of those things.
do recall that the dollars before the SAG committee were different to the ones
that ended up in the first determination.
MR LENEHAN:
they lie somewhere between the actual and the discounted rates that one finds
for this model. So ‑ ‑ ‑
But what if you wanted to make a submission that a rate for a single
bedroom was – as an empirical fact – too high,
regard to prevailing market rates in the Northern Territory? That might or
could have led to a change in the dollar.
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, we would submit not, for this reason. There simply
was – the adoption of this policy is driven in part by operational
costs. First the SAG committee, then the Cabinet, and then ultimately the
Minister was not paying any regard to those kinds of matters.
There had been a
decision to do something
which ‑ ‑ ‑
MR LENEHAN:
Well, your Honour, that submission might have been made, but this is a
power that lets one do exactly what I have just said, that
is, put all of those
things to one side, put all of those individual interests to one side, and
proceed, ignoring them, by the cost
per bedroom approach.
Or it might have been: we want our entire community excised, as
happened in determination 4.
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, I should say two things about determination 4. The first
thing is that it is simply not before your Honours in terms
of proceeding
The fact is that they are taken out. The reason
may not be – because it is not really, in a sense – it is
example of the things that they could have said, even on a class
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, there unfortunately is
no material in the material before your Honours as to why those communities
are taken out from
the fourth determination.
know that. I do not need those facts to make the point. Not only as to the
dollars analysis put to you by Justice Steward in
terms of dollars
generally, given either the market rent particularly or the market rent
generally, but there are community excisions
as well that might have been put.
There are quality submissions about quality of residence that might have been
put, particular,
again to a particular community.
MR LENEHAN:
What the fourth determination reflects, your Honour, is really a managerial
decision about particular communities located close to
Alice Springs.
I know, just put –
assume for the moment that determination 4 is not there, and we were just
dealing with 1 to 3.
MR LENEHAN:
These factors that I am putting to you are
factors which are relevant to whether or not something could have been said,
even taking
the policy at the level you put it.
MR LENEHAN:
So, taking only determinations 1 to 3 and taking the terms of
section 23, the question is: can I make a universal policy –
which is what I am saying the Territory did – through the
determination and apply it, putting out of my mind particular locations
particular interests of people in those locations? The answer, we say, on the
proper construction of section 23, is yes.
If the answer to that is
yes and that is what the Minister determined to do, then how does that then feed
into the approach of both
Justice Mason and Justice Brennan in
, where their Honours say, effectively, it is really the things
that the decision‑maker proposes to have regard to which tell
your Honours the outer boundaries of content in that kind of
So, having decided to make a universal policy decision applicable
to all of the dwellings, there simply is no room for having regard
people’s individual concerns, people’s suggestions that the policy
really should be – what your Honour is putting
to me is that the
policy should be a different policy.
No, I am not.
What I am putting to you is that the policy can be identified, even –
assume, for the moment, for argument
purposes – in the way you
described, but when you seek to apply that policy or that decision across the
board in the way in
which you described under section 23, there are really
three questions.
First of all, whose interests am I affecting and what
are the nature of those interests? Second, having identified what they are,
then asks oneself, is there procedural fairness? You say yes. The question is:
what is the content of that in the context of
the answers to the first two
questions? At the moment, I just do not think the right questions are being
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, that is the analysis that
we would see, but when you get to the third question, what is the content that
is affected
by the things that the decision‑maker proposes to have regard
to, and the decision‑maker here did not propose to have
anybody’s individual interests and any suggestion that certain communities
should be excluded. It was a universal
policy, that is one of its
dimensions.
GAGELER CJ:
There is nothing wrong with the
decision‑maker proposing a universal policy, notifying those affected of
it, inviting any submissions
and then still choosing to go ahead with the
universal policy, notwithstanding what might be said by individuals. That would
an ordinary and natural exercise in policy‑making in an area like
You are saying that it is possible to just unilaterally choose a
policy which can doubtless be implemented under section 23. You
that section 23 attracts a requirement for procedural fairness, but it
seems to me, Mr Lenehan, that, at the moment, you are
robbing procedural
fairness of any procedural aspect.
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour,
we say not. We do say that when one looks – so your Honour
knows that both Justice Mason in
and also Justice Brennan,
look at section 18 and ask themselves: what does it require?
Justice Mason, for his part, says that it
goes too far to say, for example,
one should be heard on the exercise of that power because one has the status of
a prohibited immigrant.
What he goes on to say is that, departing from
, nevertheless that power is a discretionary power and permits regard
to personal circumstances. So, the reason Mr Merkel’s
is because his Honour detected, in the circumstances that the
delegate proposed to take into account in that case, things that were
to Mr Kioa and his family.
But that is what is
happening here. You have a Minister who knows that he is about to –
either by reference to an individual
tenancy or a class of
tenancies – affect those very people. The interests are directly
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, what the Minister is
actually doing is to proceed in a similar sort of status‑based way to that
that Justice Mason
has in mind in
. That is: I am going to
apply this to everything. The important point that I think I made before the
break, that is not to say
that those kinds of important individual interests
would not be taken into account, ultimately, but they were to be taken into
by reference to the rebate
MR LENEHAN:
Yes, yes. So,
your Honours know what
stands for. In my submission,
there is an analogy to be drawn there, but it also tells your Honours that
when the determination
was being made – given that both initially the
rebate and then later the safety net were things that were contemplated to
– the determination itself was not having regard to those
individual matters.
Then one gets back to: is that a permissible
exercise of power? Yes. Does that involve the decision‑maker simply
to one side all of those individual interest? Also, yes. Then, whether
one asks it from an instrumental – thinking about
the rationale for
procedural fairness –perspective or a dignitarian perspective, why
does one give a hearing in those circumstances
if the Minister is putting all of
those things to one side? There is no purpose.
Can I ask a slightly different question which relates to the rebate or the
safety net.
MR LENEHAN:
would it not have been a requirement for procedural fairness for the Minister to
give notice of the change and then invite
submissions from people at that stage,
rather than later on, about whether they are eligible for the safety net? Thus,
eliminating
any exposure to people who genuinely cannot afford the new increase
for some period of time when it kicks in.
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, in a way that is what happened, because your Honour
knows that the first determination has the interim period attached
MR LENEHAN:
The interim
period has in mind that you will continue – your Honours see
this in the determination in the first column –
rental prices that
are related to the existing policy. Your Honours also know that the rebate
to be applied for that whole interim
period was to be the same one that applied
Sorry, it was to be the?
MR LENEHAN:
Same one that applied before. Do your Honours want me to take you to
those specific references?
You mean the
determination?
MR LENEHAN:
In both the evidence and the policy
material, your Honours can see the things that I am
GAGELER CJ:
Perhaps you should,
Mr Lenehan.
MR LENEHAN:
Yes. So, if your Honours
start with the old regime and if your Honours go to our book of further
materials and to
Are there findings about this?
MR LENEHAN:
No, there are
not, but happily, the evidence is tolerably clear. So, on page 35 you
see, 1.2, there is reference to the full rent.
Second paragraph under that
heading, towards the bottom of the page:
As there is no private market in remote communities on which to base full
rent, remote maximum dwelling rents are set in line with
the lowest urban full
rent in 2010.
There is then reference to different rates potentially
applying in different circumstances. Your Honours see the outcome of that
at page 41, which adopts the classifications on the left‑hand
side – “New or rebuilt”, “Refurbished”
“Existing houses” – and then has a series of maximum
rentals for various bedrooms.
The figures that are applied in the
determinations as the interim measure are the ones that appear on the top line,
or rebuilt” figures. That is why, perhaps with the
exception of Ms Tilmouth on which the evidence is unclear, the interim
period involves Mr Albert’s clients being in really an almost
identical position, because not only are the figures from the
old policy taken,
there is also continuation of the rebate policy. Your Honours can see that
at – it is set out at ‑
Page 35, is it?
MR LENEHAN:
but then there is ‑ ‑ ‑
Second‑last paragraph.
MR LENEHAN:
‑ ‑ ‑ a further developed policy which is
at 362 of our bundle of materials. Within that document, at 367,
Rate of Assessable Income Charged as Rebated Rent by
And your Honours see the maximum
rate – this is on the left‑hand side – is the figure
of “23”, which
is 23 per cent of income. You see
from the passage that immediately follows that there is a relatively frequent
review procedure,
and that is what results in these rentals changing
frequently.
That is really the – it is true that is part of
the animating factor for the adoption of the new policy. That is the finding
the primary judge, for example, at paragraphs [16] and [17]. So,
there is an attempt to rationalise a system in which rents differ
reason of the application of the rebate policy. That is then what leads to the
decision – see again paragraph [17]
of the primary judge’s
reasons, and also paragraph [91] of the Court of Appeal – to
first the Cabinet decision and then
the development of a new
Perhaps if I could invite your Honours just to go
to – Mr Albert took you to these, so I do not need to labour the
appellants’ book of further materials. The figures that you see for
interim period, which at that point was to go up to 1 May 2022, those are
the figures that I said before are taken directly from
the old policy, from the
top row of the old policy, the 150 and down to
aspect of the old policy.
MR LENEHAN:
It is the rates for the
new dwellings, and so those had been applied as rent for the interim period, and
the rebate policy is continued
for that entire period. Just to give
your Honours a reference to the fact that the rebate policy continues for
that entire period,
that is dealt with in Mr Warren’s third
affidavit, at page 358 of the respondents’ book of further materials
and paragraph
Is that 358,
MR LENEHAN:
MR LENEHAN:
It is the passage that I think Mr Albert
regarded with some suspicion before, but all he is really saying there is that,
because the
implementation of the second period – the new approach to
rent was delayed on a number of occasions – the rental rebate
continued to apply.
So, this was, I think, a long way of answering
your Honour Justice Steward’s question. Your Honour asked
me: could the Minister
have given notice that this change was coming? In fact,
in effect, that is what was done because we continued over this interim
we continued over the rebate, and the interim policy was applying rents based on
the old approach.
More importantly for your Honour’s
question, the rebate policy was continuing exactly the same, although in the
future there
was then to be a somewhat different, it is true, safety net
approach. So, people were aware, in prospective terms, what was coming
could have – bearing in mind that there are then two further
determinations – made a submission as to why those things
Were there findings below as to whether
the first determination, for example, was given notice – people were
given notice of
MR LENEHAN:
I think we accept,
your Honour, that they were not, and there
is after it was made.
MR LENEHAN:
There was a finding by the
primary judge that perhaps we had complied with any obligation of procedural
fairness by talking to the
understand.
MR LENEHAN:
That is not an argument that we
But once the determination was made, were
people not told about it? Tenants?
MR LENEHAN:
Yes, there was,
and is, a program of telling people about the effect of the
determinations.
That is what is set out in the
MR LENEHAN:
minutes of that meeting.
MR LENEHAN:
But that notice is not
notice ‑ ‑ ‑
MR LENEHAN:
I am sorry, your Honour, I missed your Honour’s
The form of that notice – all we
have is a proposal that that would occur. There is no evidence of the
MR LENEHAN:
No, your Honour, I do
not – we will check that, but I do not believe there
So, does that mean though that your case about
procedural fairness is slightly more nuanced in the sense that you say it was
by the provision of the interim period?
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, that is a conclusion that is open, yes.
Mr Lenehan, the first determination has already been made at that
MR LENEHAN:
It has, that is so.
GAGELER CJ:
So, it cannot be in answer to the first determination.
MR LENEHAN:
GAGELER CJ:
Do you draw a distinction between the first
determination and the second and third determination? Do you say that somehow
determination constituted notice of the possibility of the second or
third determination?
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, I am saying that
it effectively could do, yes.
GAGELER CJ:
Well, I am asking, is
it part of your case? I have not seen any hint of this in your
submissions.
MR LENEHAN:
No, it has not. I think I was
responding to, and had perhaps taken too far, a question from Justice Steward.
I think I am saying,
though, in terms this perhaps feeds into our materiality
argument. It ultimately does not matter because there is a period which
continued right up to the time of the third determination and then the fourth
determination comes in, which is not in play
How could it be immaterial when one just does not know what
effect – if there were otherwise a condition of procedural fairness,
one could not know what effect the compliance with that would have
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, that is so, but given that
the interim period continues and then ultimately the third determination is
replaced by a
fourth, and your Honours only have determinations one through
to three in play, any adverse effect is difficult to discern.
I do not quite understand how this argument is put, Mr Lenehan
– and I am being slow, I know – but when one part of your
says: listen, they have the benefit of the interim period after the first
determination, so they could have made submissions
and could have dealt with,
you know – they were on notice and they could have made submissions.
Well, that seems to presuppose
that before the first determination, if they had
been given notice, they could have made submissions. I just do not understand
those two submissions can sit.
MR LENEHAN:
seemed to me to be inconsistent.
MR LENEHAN:
I think I am
accepting, in response to the Chief Justice’s argument, that I have
gone a little far
Right, okay. So, then would you just remind me precisely what your case is,
then, on that issue.
MR LENEHAN:
Yes, we do accept that there
was no notice and no opportunity for submissions given in the making of those
three determinations.
And if there were an
obligation, either to give notice or to give notice and to accept submissions,
then do you press any point that
anything that could have been done would have
been immaterial?
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, we do
have – your Honour will have seen, at the back end of our
procedural fairness argument, a materiality argument.
That is very short and
that is for good reason.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Lenehan, what you are
really saying is it is possible for a decision-maker to say: I have made up my
mind, I am not having regard
to any individual circumstances, therefore I am not
going to allow anyone to make any submissions to me that might persuade me to
take into account what I have already made up my mind I am not going to
MR LENEHAN:
Yes, that is so, but, your Honour,
that is not a maverick submission of our own making, that is something that
Justice Brennan contemplates
then is there a question about whether the decision is legally
unreasonable?
MR LENEHAN:
There may be. We say
your Honours would not accept that submission. Can
GAGELER CJ:
Lenehan, you might have to persuade me of that. I just do not understand how a
decision‑maker can exclude any content of
procedural fairness by closing
the decision‑maker’s mind to the possibility of being persuaded
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, would your turn up
, which is tab 18.
It has been described as
reducing the content to nothingness.
MR LENEHAN:
Except Justice Brennan is talking about that
in the context of a provision where part of the policy of the provision was to
that people did not abscond. So, it is not really so much reducing it to
nothingness as excluding procedure. I appreciate that
he does not quite put it
in those terms.
In other words, the way I have always
understood it was the reason why there was no notice given was because if you
gave them notice
they would abscond, and that was the risk that was being sought
to be avoided.
MR LENEHAN:
other words, the giving of notice rendered the outcome that was sought to be
achieved by the policy, in effect, inconsistent with
it. That is not this
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honours are focusing,
understandably, on what appears at page 615 – which is the passage
that Justice Edelman directed
me to before – and the reference
to what was said by Mr Johnson in the Federal Law Review. His Honour
immediately goes on
to not accept that it follows from that and the fact
that – this is referring to
– the notion
an irreducible minimum required by the principles of natural
it would be necessary . . . in some circumstances, perhaps
unusual circumstances –
no exercise of that power is conditioned on observance of the principles of
natural justice.
Then goes on to say some familiar things which also reflect what
your Honour the Chief Justice said in
content and reducing that to nothingness, but the passage that I had
it is the next bit which is important and that is the question of statutory
construction:
the intention to be implied when the statute is silent is that observance of
the principles of natural justice conditions the exercise
and this is the important bit:
although in some circumstances the content of those principles may be
diminished (even to nothingness) to avoid frustrating the purpose
for which the
power was conferred.
MR LENEHAN:
Are you contending
that we are in that territory?
MR LENEHAN:
Yes, because when one
has – this gets back to where I started before lunch – a
power that can be applied in this way to
every dwelling in the Territory and can
be done in a way that permissibly allows the Minister to put to one side
individual interests,
can the Minister be required, as a condition of entering
into that whole process, to go through a procedure of consulting everybody
before one does that.
I do not think that was
the case that was put. Mr Albert said the minimum content was giving
notice, effectively, and giving people
a reasonable opportunity to
MR LENEHAN:
consult with everybody.
MR LENEHAN:
implicit – your Honour immediately thinks about what that then
involves – in that would be, presumably, some
form of requirement to
at least consider those many, many responses all in circumstances where, because
section 23 allows one to
do this exercise by reference to a class and not
be reference to individual interests, ultimately all of that is going to be
The passage that I actually wanted to take your Honours
particularly to was what appears at page 620 of
Justice Brennan’s reasons.
At the foot of that page, where
his Honour says – and this is after his Honour has said a
number of things about the breadth
of the presumption and the need –
see 619 – for individual interests to be
affected ‑ ‑ ‑
where are you reading from now, Mr Lenehan?
MR LENEHAN:
Sorry, I was just summarising what your Honours see up to this
MR LENEHAN:
his Honour has made the point that your Honours noted in
Disorganized Developments
. That is – this is on
If a power is apt to affect the interests of an individual in a way that is
substantially different –
et cetera. So, his Honour is dealing with the strength of the
presumption, but then at 620, at the foot of the page – and here
his Honour is obviously moving from the attraction of the presumption to
what it may require as a matter of content:
It does not follow that the principles of natural justice require the
repository of a power to give a hearing to an individual whose
interests are
likely to be affected by the contemplated exercise of the power in cases where
the repository is not bound and does
not propose to have regard to those
interests in exercising the power.
That is what I am saying is this case:
If the repository of the power were authorized to exercise the power in his
absolute discretion –
and his Honour obviously knows – see, for example,
– that those words do not literally mean what they
say, but his Honour is talking about very broad powers:
without taking account of individual interests and he proposed so to exercise
the power, the repository might exercise it without
hearing the individuals
whose interests are likely to be affected. But that would be an exceptional
Now, his Honour – I am sorry, your Honour is about
to ask me a question.
I think it is very difficult to
cherrypick just that bit out of it, because one starts with the passage you took
us to on 619. At
620, in the first big paragraph, it says:
legislature is not likely to intend that a statutory power of a strictly
legislative nature be conditioned on the observance of the
principles –
all members of the public are affected in the same way –
not this case:
But the legislature is more likely to intend –
to be so conditioned if an exercise of the power singles out individuals by
affecting their interests in a manner substantially different
that is this case. Then one comes down to the passage you read for us,
which is described by Justice Brennan over the page as
“exceptional”.
MR LENEHAN:
Yes, but we do apply
what his Honour says to this case. That is, this is in fact a power that
allows one to do what his Honour
is referring to there:
authorized to exercise the power . . . without taking
account of individual interests –
By applying this sort of universal policy in the way that has been done,
that is what the Minister did here. That is why I have been
emphasising ‑ ‑ ‑
But the problem is that even if all of that is right, that is not the only
aspect of the power. So, the power can, for example –
and I think
you have accepted it – be exercised in relation to a dwelling, a
single dwelling.
MR LENEHAN:
Yes, that is
And there you cannot possibly suggest that it
is going to be exercised just in relation to a single dwelling. One would not
regard to the interests of the person in that
MR LENEHAN:
And we do not suggest that,
your Honour, no.
Justice Brennan’s comments are not addressed to a distributive power
such as we have here. It is a power that can
apply in a distributive manner,
have different circumstances of application, even if one entirely accepts your
submission that –
in relation to, for example, an extremely large
class that is unconstrained by the regulations that were passed the next
the class that covered the entirety of the exercise of the
power, that is only one application of that power. I think what your
really amounts to is that, in that application of the power, you say that
procedural fairness, maybe other than bias,
MR LENEHAN:
Yes, consistent with the passage from
that I have mentioned a few times and Justice Deane, that is
So, your concession is not really a concession at
MR LENEHAN:
Well, we do accept the earlier points
that your Honour has just put to me. So, we do accept single dwelling
procedural fairness
both applies and undoubtedly requires a hearing. We do
accept that smaller classes, and this is consistent with what is said in
, that that kind of case may
also require those steps to be taken.
Can I flip it?
Do you go so far as to say that the exercise of power, the Minister is not
entitled to take into account individual
MR LENEHAN:
Well, once you are in that territory, then you are in the presumption which
Justice Brennan identifies on 619, at the foot of the
Just after the reference to
Just after the reference to
MR LENEHAN:
No, that is true, but then that is
qualified, we say, by what appears over the page in 620, introduced by the
It does not follow –
It is true, his Honour goes on to say
the presumption may be displaced by the text . . . the nature
of the power and the administrative framework –
but what follows the qualifications are, at one end, clear. It is an
exceptional qualification, and you have to overcome the first
full paragraph
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, he of
course – and I think I have already made this point – is
dealing with a very obviously individually‑directed
power, a power of
deportation that can only be addressed to a single person. But his broader
point of principle, we say, we do seek
to apply to this quite different power,
and it is not only that passage of his Honour’s reasons that supports
the submission
that I am making.
If your Honours go to 628,
you see at the top of the page – and this is where he is reaching the
conclusions regarding Mr Kioa’s
case – after the reference
The repository must adopt a fair procedure having regard to the matters he is
bound to take into account –
So, that is mandatory relevant
considerations:
and, I would add, the matters he proposes to take into account.
distinction that his Honour is drawing – permissive
considerations versus mandatory relevant considerations, to use the
well‑known distinction from Aronson – is qualified by it is not
every permissive consideration that the decision‑maker
That is right, but the preceding
page – I have not read it for a while, but I thought on the preceding
page his Honour preceded
that analysis that it must be read in the context
of – that they require:
the principles . . . require in particular circumstances depends on
the circumstances known to the repository at the time of the exercise
which he would have known, and you have:
to adopt a reasonable and fair procedure . . . which
conforms to the procedure which a reasonable and fair repository of the power
would adopt in the circumstances when the power is exercised.
not just limited in that sense to the distinction between mandatory and he
proposes to take into account. The analysis,
I think, on the preceding page is
broader, is it not?
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honour, he on the
subsequent page – and I am not trying to trade quotes with
your Honour, but if you look to the bottom
of the page, he makes the same
point again.
Where are you reading now,
MR LENEHAN:
That is in the final
Which page are you at now?
I am sorry, I am at 628:
A person whose interests are likely to be affected by an exercise of power
must be given an opportunity to deal with relevant matters
adverse to his
interests which the repository of the power proposes to take into account in
deciding upon its exercise –
GAGELER CJ:
That is so,
but that is not an exhaustive statement of the content of procedural fairness.
That is absolutely right. If a decision‑maker
proposes to take a
particular factor into account adversely to a person whose interests are to be
affected, ordinarily that particular
factor has to be put to the person and they
have to be able to respond.
MR LENEHAN:
But also it is a requirement of procedural fairness that the person be
able to bring to the decision‑maker’s attention
a factor that is
able to be taken into account that the decision‑maker may not be proposing
to even consider. That is part
of it, is it not?
MR LENEHAN:
Well, your Honour, we would – and I am perhaps repeating
myself – then go back to what one sees at 620, which is dealing
with breadth of power and is applicable, we say, to this very kind of power.
That is, there may be powers – and this is something
that the authors
of Aronson deal with in seeking to reconcile various strains in the authorities
considerations, and accept that these
circumstances will be relatively rare. In many cases, particularly with
individually directed
powers, it will be inescapable that the
decision‑maker must or generally will take into account matters personal
to the individual.
Mr Lenehan, you have scoured
the cases in the footnotes in the textbooks.
MR LENEHAN:
GAGELER CJ:
What is the closest case to the present
that you can point to that would indicate the lack of content that you give to
fairness is consistent with authority?
MR LENEHAN:
Well, it really is the passage from Justice Brennan in
GAGELER CJ:
All right, that is the high
MR LENEHAN:
It is. We say that the outcome in
Disorganized Developments
can be seen to be consistent with that.
Your Honours obviously are very familiar with what your Honours said
there, but perhaps
if your Honours – if your Honours would
indulge me, and look to where your Honours dealt with
Disorganized
Developments
MR LENEHAN:
Yes, which is tab 27 of the
joint book of authorities. The area where your Honours deal with content
is at paragraph [43] and following.
So, your Honours note, referring
, the point about general policy, but nevertheless say
that in this case, this being a particular case, because – see
[11] – the determination could only deal with one
property at a time, necessarily:
requires the identification of facts to connect the proposed prescribed place
with the purpose of disruption.
So, your Honours then say, paragraph [44]:
There is no reason to doubt that an owner or occupier may have something to
say of relevance about the characteristics of the
. . . or about possible adverse impacts of declaring a
But then when your Honours come to deal with what is more
specifically required in paragraph [45] your Honours draw a
distinction
between those matters and the:
opportunity to make more general submissions as to the likely
efficacy . . . of the declaration power –
So, that matter, as we read it, is in the area that I am seeking to
convince your Honours of, that is, there is a policy at that
– a general policy – about which an individual has
nothing to say.
So, [45] draws a distinction, I think
you just put to us, between matters within the knowledge of the particular
person and what is
described as more general submissions?
MR LENEHAN:
Is your submission that the matters
identified by Mr Albert are in the latter category, not the former? That
is, they are matters
of general submissions, not matters within their
MR LENEHAN:
That is so, your Honour, because
when it comes down to what would we say, it is things like: this particular
area should not be included.
And as I said, the universal application of this
policy to all areas is one of the important integers of the policy
Your Honour the Chief Justice asked me for my high
point, and perhaps I skipped too quickly over
, which is, of
course, tab 22 of the joint book, and page 411, the reasons of
Justice Brennan where – and we say this coheres
his Honour said
Sorry, what page?
MR LENEHAN:
I am so sorry,
your Honour, it is page 411, or 738 of the joint
MR LENEHAN:
referring, towards the bottom of the page, to
the Minister is not bound to hear an individual before formulating or
applying a general policy or exercising a discretion in the
particular case by
reference to the interests of the general public, even when the decision affects
the individual’s interests.
Again, that is what we say is involved here.
GAGELER CJ:
If I remember correctly, there was a two‑stage decision‑making
structure in this case, where the individual is heard in
respect to the
individual’s circumstances at the first stage, and then a report goes to
the Minister at the second stage.
MR LENEHAN:
GAGELER CJ:
And it is in that context that
Justice Brennan is making this statement.
MR LENEHAN:
That is so, your Honour, but his Honour is making clear that, in terms
of the policy itself and whether in particular it should
be applied or not,
which is I think the high point of Mr Albert’s submissions, those are
all things that one is not required
to be given procedural fairness in respect
When that is applied to this kind of power, your Honour
Justice Edelman asked me about the different possible exercises of the
So, here, applicable to over 5,000 dwellings and an even larger number
of people who are paying money in respect of those dwellings,
a requirement to
potentially give notice to and receive submissions from that very large number
of people – and your Honours
see this in cases like
and Justice Basten’s reference to
, which your Honours have in the bundle – that is
an example of where the class is very large and it also may change between
time of giving notice and the time the determination is made.
variable in that way, which is a further matter which tells your Honours
that the content here is reduced, we say, and
your Honours see that that is
the approach that Justice Basten suggested should be taken in
at paragraph 6.
So, it is a very small class.
You accept, as I take it, that there is some substantive content of procedural
a class of five or ten people.
MR LENEHAN:
I think I have accepted that a number of times
now, your Honour, yes.
So, as the class gets
larger and more and more people are deprived of procedural fairness, the content
gets smaller.
MR LENEHAN:
The more people who are deprived of the dignitarian principle of procedural
fairness, the stronger your argument is, you say, to
MR LENEHAN:
We do, and both
explained that that is really a matter of practicality and how one
gives notice to and receives submissions from an extraordinarily
changeable group of people.
Is that where you would
start to characterise the power as legislative rather than executive, in a
MR LENEHAN:
Well, those distinctions, of course, are
dangerous and have been for some time, but it is the better explanation of what
is involved
there. In fact, that is the explanation that one can see in
Justice Brennan’s reasons in
, when he talks about
individual affectation. Unless your Honours have any further questions in
terms of procedural fairness –
I know I have been moving around a
little bit – I was proposing then to move to
unreasonableness.
GAGELER CJ:
MR LENEHAN:
So, your Honours heard that
Mr Albert’s argument depends upon a number of suggested features of
the determination and the
circumstances in which it was made. The first, as we
understood it, was that the determinations were irrational because they treated
unlike dwellings alike. That is, in some sense, true.
determinations provided the same rent for dwellings by reference to the number
of bedrooms, but – and this is the point
Court of Appeal makes, your Honours see, at 168 of the core
appeal book, paragraph [158] – that is really just an
of the nature of the power, a power that precedes by reference to classes. The
point their Honours make at the top of 169
we say is entirely
Almost any determination made with reference to a class will be susceptible
to that criticism, because a class by its very nature
involves a grouping by
reference to a particular standard which in real life application will fall
short of uniformity.
So, we say that is really just an aspect of the
power and not something that would lead your Honours to conclude that the
was unreasonable. The real complaint, we think, is that
Mr Albert’s clients say that a different policy should be
But your Honours recall – and perhaps
your Honours have not yet seen this – if you turn up
page 83 of the respondent’s
book of further materials, this is where
the Stakeholder Advisory Group – I am going to reject SAG as an
unfortunate acronym
– deals with the various proposed models. There
is an important point, if your Honours start at page 83, just above
the “Dwelling
Based Rent Model Options” heading:
it is acknowledged that no rent model will be without implementation
challenges.
So, recognition that none of these approaches is perfect and each has
upsides and downsides. There is then, over the page, at the
top of 84, the
“Factor Principle Approach” which is an approach that appears to be
closer to the approach Mr Albert suggests
would be a rational one, and then
there is discussion at the bottom of the page about the approach that is in fact
taken, the “Operational
Cost Approach”.
If your Honours
turn earlier in the book of further materials, you see, starting at
page 78, there is a meeting record which evidences
the discussion of those
things, and you will see there is serious consideration of the various
approaches, including the approach
that Mr Albert says is preferable, but
towards the bottom of the page:
The chair asked the group to nominate their preferred rent model. All
members agreed that the operational cost per bedroom model
was the best
So that, we say, evidences a process of rational decision-making,
looking at the various alternatives, none of which was perfect.
None of that,
we say, involves legal unreasonableness. The second complaint that ties into
some of the points that were made about
procedural fairness – but I
think, in answering many of your Honours’ questions, I might have
skipped over this point
– it is the notion that the determinations
were under-inclusive and did not operate in respect of all remote
I mentioned before that that is explained, it is explained
by the ministerial briefing that introduces the second determination,
your Honours have behind or at page 192 of the respondent’s book
of further materials. And if you look at the second‑last
paragraph on
that page, you will see that it said:
The current gazetted rent determination does not capture all remote
gazetted rent rate. The new instrument rectifies this issue by ensuring remote
rent rates are gazetted for remote communities
not captured in the current
gazetted rent determination.
So, that is the evidence for the proposition
that I have put a number of times, that is, this was intended to be a
universally applied
policy and it inadvertently, in the first determination,
omitted some communities. And so, we say that the submission about
under-inclusiveness
does not get off the ground as a factual matter.
even if there was something more to that, the decision that might have been made
others, the process that
Mr Albert says should have been undertaken, that is also going to involve
line‑drawing. We say it
is difficult to discern any legal
unreasonableness in line‑drawing of that nature, to the extent that it
exists, but the ministerial
minute that I have just taken your Honours to
tells your Honours that it is true there was an inadvertent omission in the
first determination,
but the intention was not to be selective and was to be
The third matter that was raised by Mr Albert concerns
the operational costs model that was actually implemented, and there was a
suggestion that that should have been different. I think I answered a question
from Justice Steward about that issue, about whether
it, in fact, reflected
the amount put forward by the SAG. The point that we make in our written
submissions is that, really, the
$70 figure that emerges falls between the
reduced operational costs – which was about $60 – and the
actual operational
cost of about $80 that was estimated in 2018.
see that recorded at the respondents’ book of further materials at
page 91. So, the full rent is the $78 figure and
the discount is the $59
figure, and the Minister has chosen something roughly between those figures
three years later. And we say
there is nothing that leaps out in the nature of
unreasonableness from those facts.
There was also a complaint that there
was a different amount charged for the initial rent period – that is,
$150 for a one‑bedroom
dwelling – before the commencement of
the new model. But really, that just reflects the lead‑in process of
an interim model and so we say no legal unreasonableness
Finally – and maybe this is really where this
submission ultimately goes – Mr Albert relied on, I think, a
combination
of those factors and then, particularly, the exclusion of what he
described as the rights under sections 41 and 42 of the
Residential
Tenancies Act
as revealing that this was fundamentally unfair. But we
do say – and I may have made this point already – the
relationship
between section 41 of the
Residential Tenancies
and section 23 of the
Housing Act
, that was intended
and it reflects the quite different approaches to be applied to a
market‑based residential lease system
and a social housing
Your Honours can see that referred to in the reasons of the
Court of Appeal at core appeal book, page 97,
paragraph [46], where their
Honours say that very thing. So, we say
that it cannot be the case that that obviously intended incident of the scheme,
here through the making of the determinations, could in some way render
those things legally unreasonable because it simply reflects
the intention that
one sees in setting up section 23 and its overriding effect –
see subsection 23(4) – on things that
one finds in the
Residential Tenancies Act
. Putting all that together, we say the
legal unreasonableness aspect of the appeal should also fail.
think, just leaves me with D1, and unless your Honours have any questions
written submissions.
Your Honours will have seen that we largely line up with our friends there
in terms of the orders that should
be made. We do say that it is really the
your Honours
to make those orders. If that is the choice, then logically
the question of jurisdiction is the one that comes first and ought to
the disposition in the way that the parties agree.
Mr Lenehan, can I just ask you: the form of the orders, are they the
ones at paragraph 32 of your written submissions?
MR LENEHAN:
I think they are, your Honour. Yes, I am told they
MR LENEHAN:
Unless your Honours have any other questions, those are the submissions for
the respondents.
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you. Mr Albert, do you
have anything in reply?
Yes, your Honour, just
in reply to seek to offer slightly different or fuller responses to some of the
issues that have been raised
with my learned friend. I would seek to make just
a handful of points. The first is to respond to and expand upon a point raised
by your Honour Justice Steward with my learned friend, where you were
postulating the question of whether my clients could say something
amount that had been set either at what we call stage one or
We would respectfully embrace that, but can I add a
consideration that has not yet arisen but falls squarely into the same category
of what I took your Honour to be referring to, and that is the question of
time. My clients, in respect of each of the determinations,
could foreseeably
and sensibly would have said delay – not indefinitely,
necessarily – that is to say, we accept, for
the sake of argument:
we accept that you have a global policy; we accept you are applying it bluntly
and universally; you are already
delaying it – indeed, that was the
entire point of determination 2 and 3 – but we want to be
heard on how long you delay
In our submission, that marries
neatly with your Honour’s postulation of quantum of money to say,
well, quantum of time –
which we know was an issue – could
also have been addressed. That idea, in our submission, marries very
neatly – and,
indeed, your Honour’s question marries very
neatly with what Justice Deane was speaking of in
particular at page 745 at about point 6 of the page, which is report
page 418, where his Honour dealt with a postulated scenario
situation where political grounds which had not been raised before were thought
to be relevant. His Honour says – and
it – that fact of political grounds being an issue:
constitutes a powerful reason why the person whose continued
incarceration –
in that case:
is involved should be at least given the opportunity of being heard in
relation to –
those, in that case, political grounds.
Equally, Justice Deane makes a very similar point in
page 533, at about point 8 of the page, report
I heard my learned friend to say – I may be
mistaken – that our case was that all our clients could talk about
meaningfully
were concerns of a general nature – for example,
Ms Tilmouth saying: why is Laramba caught by determination 1 and not
next door? I want to be absolutely clear, we do not and have never,
put our case only at that level. Of course, she could have
said that, but
equally our clients could have raised very individual considerations.
marry that point with the point about time that I just raised, can I take you to
just one example, which is in the evidence of
Mr Badari’s evidence, which you do not need to go to, is at the
appellants’ book of further materials at
page 131. Mr Badari
gives evidence to say – he is about to be hit with this rent
rise – and his evidence was, and I
We would have to give up buying more things our kids need if
goes up again. We are already struggling to feed our children. It
birthday on 19 September and we cannot afford to buy him a present. He
knows this and he is very upset with us.
That is an example of an
individual consideration that could directly feed into the question of time in
either of two foreseeable
ways: either he says we have some big bills coming
up – like our children’s birthdays – wait to apply
accepting your policy, wait for another two months so we can just get
through this hurdle; or – and this would apply, one expects,
almost everyone who got a rent rise – wait six months so I can get
another job, so I can pay for this rent rise.
So, this time factor is
it fits very neatly with
what your Honour Justice Steward was raising
with my learned friend. Equally, matters raised by my learned friend fit neatly
some of the rationales which came out in discussion with Mr Lenehan a
few moments ago.
Can I start with the instrumental rationale dealt with,
among other places, by Justice Heydon in
International Finance Trust
, which is at tab 16. The
instrumental rationale, one would think, fits hand in glove with the very thing
that Mr Lenehan said about
the six communities that he submits to
your Honours were omitted by error from the first
determination.
Had the first determination been the subject of any
form of notice to anyone in remote communities, it is hard to imagine that
would not have stood up and said, hang on, you are about to make an
error here. You have said – supposing the notice says
this – that this is to apply to all remote communities, but we have
noticed – Ms Tilmouth might have said – the
the road is not caught, just letting you know.
So, the very thing that
is theoretically spoken of about the instrumental rationale for procedural
fairness very practically could
have achieved the avoiding of the very thing
that Mr Lenehan now describes as an error. That instrumental rationale, of
fits immediately with what Justice Heydon said in
International Finance
at 143 and equally with what
your Honour the Chief Justice said in
paragraphs 50 and 51, and equally with what Justice Deane said in
at joint book of authorities page 553, at about point six,
which is the report at page 633.
GAGELER CJ:
You have cited that to us before.
apologise if I am repeating myself. The second rationale which arose from a
question from your Honour the Chief Justice was
the dignity rationale,
picked up by the question from your Honour Justice Edelman, which
feeds directly into what your Honour put
to my learned friend about still
having a global policy even at the end of a process, but there has still been an
inherent value
in hearing from people on that.
In our submission, with
respect, that has to be right and it is consistent with what this Court said in
– your Honour Justice Gordon at
paragraph 81, your Honour Justice Edelman at paragraphs 89
and 90 – and what your Honour
the Chief Justice said in
at paragraph 186 as well.
Can I then move to the
point that my learned friend made primarily in response to questions from
your Honour Justice Edelman about
the size of the class, and
Mr Lenehan’s proper and correct concession that where there are
smaller classes there would be content.
There is an important but perhaps
easily missed what seems to be a concession in the outline filed by the
respondents today and
their previous submissions at 9.1, where they seem to
accept the point that we have been making all along that each of these
determinations
represents four separate exercises of the section 23
That is so when one looks at the terminology of class and the
fact that the Ministers, on each occasion, identified the number of
bedrooms as
qualifying each class. The reason that that is significant is because it
dovetails directly with the evidence given
by Mr Warren, which is at
appellants’ book of further materials page 381, where he gave
evidence as to the number of people
in each class, relevantly, for the third
determination.
His evidence was – remembering the third
determination is the largest number of affected communities – that
one-bedroom class had, as its total number for the third
determination, 139 people. What we know is that class was therefore
– we do not know how much – for the first
determination. So, when Mr Lenehan says, well, this idea of smaller
larger content, what he does not say – and one can
understand why – is the tipping points or tipping point at which the
content flips from being substantive to being nothing.
In that sense,
that concession that there were four exercises on each of the three occasions
provides this Court, as it happens,
with a perfectly set up situation where the
exercise of the power is in respect of classes of very different sizes ranging
as I said, about 130 at the lowest to, at the highest –
according to Mr Warren – 3,066, which was for the determination
for the class of three-bedroom dwellings.
I then need to deal with a
matter of fact which we say, respectfully, Mr Lenehan has misrepresented,
and that is the idea that what
the respondents call the interim period reflected
a, quote, “existing policy”, and the existing policy,
your Honours
were told, applied to my clients. There is no evidence at all
that my clients ever agreed in writing or by action to any of the
amounts set
out in the so-called existing framework. None. To the contrary, the evidence
filed by the respondents shows my clients
never paid or agreed to pay an amount
of rent that was reflected by that quote‑unquote existing policy. Zero
out of three
Your Honours will have seen that I cross-examined
Mr Warren about this, particularly by reference to Mr Nadjamerrek, at
some length.
Mr Nadjamerrek, according to the respondent’s records,
was paying $99, and you will see me ask Mr Warren, in a probably not
effective way, how do you get to $99 by reference to the policy? And the short
answer is, he could not.
No matter which way you diced it, he could not
get to $99. And $99 is also not a number that you will see in the policy at
So, what we have, as we sought to make the point by way of our written
submission, is a gap between the antiseptic, air-conditioned
piece of paper in
an office in Darwin and the reality on the ground for my clients in Gunbalanya
and Laramba, and it is the reality
we have now and have always sought to have
the Court have regard to.
Can I then relatedly go to the
so‑called safety net policy, and that is to try to offer what I hope is a
more coherent answer
than I fumbled through this morning, because the point
distils, I think, to something fairly confined. On the evidence, which again
emphasise was filed by the respondents, the first time the safety net, so
called, which is 25 per cent for a period
of six months
– the first time that was in an operative
policy was from 6 February 2023, not 2022, which is after the
fourth determination.
That is important for two reasons. The first is
it has no relationship chronologically with the decision of Cabinet or the three
determinations of the Minister that are the subject of the appeal. The second
point is that policy was put into evidence by the
respondents principally for
the purpose of the fourth determination proceeding which is pending, which
directly challenges that policy.
In that sense, in our submission, it is
properly left for that proceeding which is pending for it to be explored and
perhaps determined
in that way.
I understood, perhaps incorrectly,
Mr Lenehan to say that the fourth determination was not in evidence in this
proceeding. That,
with respect, is incorrect. The respondents put it into
evidence before the Court of Appeal because, quite rightly, they wanted
Court of Appeal to have an awareness of the totality of the picture. So, it was
not before Justice Burns, but it was put in
by leave, with our agreement,
before the Court of Appeal.
I think the last – no, I am
sorry. There are two points, two final points. The second‑last point is
to draw a distinction
which came up slightly indirectly in interactions with my
learned friend, a distinction made most clearly in
Disorganized
Developments
– but not only there – between, on the
one hand, the formulation of policy and, on the other hand, the application of
that policy. In our submission, this case is about, and is only about, the
application of the policy, if there was a policy properly
that sense, in our submission, we are comfortably within the realm of what this
Court said, at paragraph [43] of
Disorganized Developments
that very distinction between formulating policy, for which there may be no
procedural fairness, and implementation, for
which there is procedural fairness.
It is equally consistent with what Chief Justice Mason said in
at joint book of authorities page 715, at about
point 8, which is reported page 388.
That distinction,
formulation versus implementation of policy, is most analogously deployed in a
way consistent with the submissions
we make by the South Australian Court of
– which I do not need to take
your Honours to, but it is in the joint book of authorities at
pages 803 and 804 – where
their Honours are similarly
dealing with a scenario where there was an uncontested debate about the funding
of public hospitals,
and there had been a high‑level policy decision about
funding of public hospitals and, relevantly, a restriction on that
What Chief Justice King in
well, notwithstanding the formulation of that policy, in that case by
commission, it is the implementation of the policy
in respect of the individual
hospital that was
the thing that was being challenged and was rightly
regarded as being conditioned by procedural fairness with some
The last point to make by way of reply is on legal
unreasonableness, and it is really just to identify that the respondents seem
principally rely on what is in truth a straw man argument, that we are putting
forward some alternative model and that that alternative
model is not only a
rational model but the only rational model.
That is not our case, it has
never been our case. Our case is that the way that it was in fact implemented
here was arbitrary, was
fundamentally unfair, that it was the blunt nature of
the exercise of the power that led to arbitrary effects of the kinds that we
have sought to develop earlier. Unless there is anything further, those are the
submissions.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Lenehan.
MR LENEHAN:
Your Honours, I am so sorry to rise. Can I just make clear there is no
concession by us in paragraph 9.1 that each determination
involved multiple
exercises of power.
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you. The Court will
consider its decision in these matters and will adjourn until Tuesday
9 September in Canberra at 10.00
THE MATTERS WERE ADJOURNED
RTF format (1.64 MB)
Signed PDF/A format