Reference by Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Ltd (Summons) [2024] ACopyT 1 (26 March 2024)
Reference by Phonographic Performance
Company of Australia Ltd (Summons)
[2024] ACopyT 1
File number:
CT 1 of 2023
Judgment of:
ROFE J (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– application
to issue summons – application to compel document production under
(Cth) – where applications
are objected to
Legislation:
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
Cases cited:
Reference by APRA AMCOS (Summonses)
173 IPR 253
Reference by the Phonographic Performanc
Company of Australia
Ltd (ACN 000 680 704)
[2009] ACopyT 1
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submissions:
Date of hearing:
Determined on the papers
Counsel for Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Ltd:
Mr C Dimitriadis SC with Ms M Evetts
Solicitor for Phonographic Performance Company of
Australia Ltd:
Gilbert + Tobin
Counsel for the Commercial Radio & Audio Ltd:
Mr J M Hennessy SC with Ms A Campbell
Solicitor for the Commercial Radio & Audio Ltd:
Ashurst Australia
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 1 of 2023
REFERENCE BY:
PHONOGRAPHIC PERFORMANCE COMPANY OF AUSTRALIA
LTD (ACN 000 680 704) UNDER
SECTION 154
PHONOGRAPHIC PERFORMANCE COMPANY OF AUSTRALIA LTD (ACN 000
ROFE J (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
in the form of the proposed summonses provided to the Tribunal on 19 December
2023 issue to:
(a) Australian Radio Network Pty Ltd (ACN 065 986 987);
(b) Nova Entertainment Pty Ltd (ACN 093 553 989); and
(c) Southern Cross Austereo Pty Limited (ACN 109 243 110),
returnable on 22 April 2024 at 4.00 pm.
application to compel production by Commercial Radio & Audio Ltd of
documents pursuant to
be otherwise dismissed.
FOR DETERMINATION
ROFE J (DEPUTY PRESIDENT):
1. INTRODUCTION
applicant in the present Reference is the Phonographic Performance Company of
Australia Ltd (
proposes to bring into operation a new Commercial Radio Broadcasters Licence
) to licence commercial radio broadcasters (the
) to communicate PPCA Sound Recordings to the public by way of a
radio broadcast using the Broadcasting Services Bands (as defined
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
(Cth)). In bringing these proceedings,
PPCA seeks to confirm the Scheme as proposed, or alternatively, varied as the
Tribunal reasonably
identified Commercial Radio & Audio Ltd (
) in the Reference as
representing commercial radio broadcasters in Australia as being responsible for
negotiating the terms on which
CRA’s commercial radio broadcaster members
can broadcast sound recordings. On 30 May 2023, CRA made an application to be
a party to this matter.
23 November 2023, I made orders by consent pertaining to, inter alia, document
production:
Document Production
or before 19 December 2023, the parties email to the Associate to Rofe J any:
(a) draft summonses containing the agreed Summons Categories, together with a
request that the Tribunal exercise its power to issue
the summons under
(b) draft orders containing the agreed Factual Categories to be disclosed,
together with a request that the Tribunal exercise its
power to make those
orders pursuant to
(c) draft summons seeking document production from a party in respect of any
Document Categories that are not agreed;
(d) draft summons seeking document production from any third party;
(e) draft orders seeking Factual Categories to be disclosed; and
(f) short written submissions with respect to each of the matters referred to in
paragraphs (c) to (e) above.
19 December 2023, the parties each provided draft summonses and orders pursuant
to the above orders.
submitted the following:
(a) a draft summons containing the Summons Categories sought from CRA, as agreed
between the parties;
(b) draft orders containing PPCA’s Factual Categories to be disclosed by
CRA, of which the parties agreed upon all except one,
being what I will call
disputed Factual Category 4
(c) three draft summonses separately addressed to Australian Radio Network Pty
), Nova Entertainment Pty Ltd (
) and Southern Cross
Austereo Pty Limited (
submitted the following:
(a) a draft summons addressed to PPCA containing Summons Categories as agreed
between the parties; and
(b) draft orders containing CRA’s Factual Categories to be disclosed by
PPCA, which was also agreed in its entirety by the
disputed Factual Category 4 of PPCA’s Factual Categories sought disclosure
of the following:
Factual Category 4 – Talent Expenditure
The names and annual remuneration of the top 3 highest remunerated radio
presenters from ARN, Nova, SCA and West Coast Radio, and
the names of the radio
presenter’s show(s).
making their respective applications to issue the summonses, the parties
provided submissions in support, which I shall refer to
as the December
submissions.
9 January 2024, I granted leave for the parties to issue summonses to each
other. However, I declined to make orders requiring
CRA to disclose the
information sought in disputed Factual Category 4. Further, I considered it
premature to issue summonses to ARN,
Nova and SCA at that time. In PPCA’s
December submissions, it provided no explanation as to how, and why, the four
in disputed Factual Category 4 were selected (noting that it only
sought to issue summonses to SCA, Nova and ARN only, with no draft
provided for West Coast Radio), how they are representative of CRA’s
membership, and whether the four stations were
likely to fall within the
representative sample stations to be provided by CRA.
parties each provided further submissions, on 29 and 31 January 2024
respectively, regarding the relevance and appropriateness
of production of
documents pursuant to disputed Factual Category 4 and the draft summonses
addressed to ARN, Nova and SCA. I shall
refer to these submissions as the
January submissions.
reasons deal with the dispute regarding disputed Factual Category 4 and the
issuance of summonses as sought by PPCA to ARN,
Nova and SCA.
2. DISPUTED FACTUAL CATEGORY 4
disputed Factual Category 4, PPCA seeks to obtain information concerning the
annual remuneration of the top three highest
remunerated radio presenters from
ARN, Nova and SCA in the Financial Year (
) 2022/2023.
seeks either (a) an order requiring CRA to disclose the information under
disputed Factual Category 4; or (b) for the issuance
of the summonses to ARN,
Nova and SCA.
said that it initially sought information from CRA concerning the annual
remuneration of the top 10 highest remunerated radio
presenters across all of
CRA’s members in FYs 2022/2023, 2021/2022 and 2020/2023. Following
objection by CRA, PPCA submits
that it narrowed the range of this category in an
attempt to reach a compromise, and to try and reduce the purported burden on CRA
and its members (without conceding that any such burden arose).
objects to the provision of the information sought in disputed Factual Category
4 primarily on the basis that the Tribunal lacks
the power to compel CRA to
answer the disputed factual request, which it submits is akin to an
interrogatory.
submits that the information sought in disputed Factual Category 4 is
information not in the possession of CRA and, in any event,
that information is
irrelevant to the Reference. The factual material sought by PPCA is plainly not
information in the possession
of CRA. CRA is an organisation representing radio
broadcasters: it does not operate radio stations and engage radio presenters.
submits that PPCA can only obtain the information it seeks by summonsing the
non-party radio broadcasters directly.
3. LEGISLATION
Tribunal has power under
to compel production of specific documents:
to take evidence on oath
(1) The Tribunal may take evidence on oath or affirmation, and for that purpose
a member may administer an oath or affirmation.
(2) A member or the Registrar may summon a person to appear before the Tribunal
to give evidence.
(3) A member or the Registrar may summon a person to produce specified documents
or articles to the Tribunal by producing the documents
or articles to a
specified person at a specified time at a specified place.
of the Act provides that:
164 Procedure
In proceedings before the Tribunal:
(a) the procedure of the Tribunal is, subject to this Act and the regulations,
within the discretion of the Tribunal;
(b) the Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence; and
(c) the proceedings shall be conducted with as little formality, and with as
much expedition, as the requirements of this Act and
a proper consideration of
the matters before the Tribunal permit.
4. PRINCIPLES
principles regarding document production concerning a determination of a
Reference under
Act have been helpfully set out by Perram DP
(as his Honour then was) in
Reference by APRA AMCOS
(Summonses)
(2022) 173 IPR 253
at [2], [4]-[9]:
[2] The present proceeding is a determination of a reference under
(Cth) (‘the Act’).
Section 154(4)
Act relevantly provides:
(4) The Tribunal shall consider a scheme referred under this section and,
after giving to the parties to the reference an opportunity
of presenting their
cases, shall make such order,
confirming or varying the scheme or substituting for the scheme another scheme
proposed by one of the parties, as the Tribunal considers reasonable in the
circumstances.
[4] In exercising the power under
, the Tribunal is not sitting as a
court. It is sitting as a price fixing tribunal which produces a determination
which is quasi-legislative
in nature. There are no pleadings and no formally
defined issues. Whilst the Tribunal must hear the parties on their cases and
afford them procedural fairness, it is not bound by the cases which they put.
So much is inherent in the power of the Tribunal to
vary a scheme. It is open
to the Tribunal, so long as it affords the parties procedural fairness, to do
something quite different
to what they propose. It also within its power to
adopt a scheme but for different reasons to those which are advanced in its
For example, the Tribunal might, in appropriate cases, consider the
economic analysis to be largely a thought experiment underpinned
by no real data
and to conclude instead that some other, more transparent, method of arriving at
a price was warranted.
[5] The power to require the production of documents is contained in
of the Act:
(3) A member or the Registrar may summon a person to produce specified
documents or articles to the Tribunal by producing the documents
or articles to
a specified person at a specified time at a specified place.
his power is not at large
It may be exercised
only if it may be seen as having a proximate connection with the exercise of the
. In deciding whether a document sought by a summons has a
sufficiently proximate connection with the exercise of the power in
the concept of relevance is a useful one. However, in the determination of what
is relevant for the purposes of 154(4), two considerations
should be borne in
[7] First, in a reference proceeding such as the present, it is not the case as
I have just explained that the perceived issues
between the parties exclusively
define the scope of what is relevant to the exercise of the power in
So much flows from the fact the Tribunal is entitled to reject the pricing
methodologies put forward by them subject only to the
requirements of procedural
[8] Secondly, the
question of what is relevant to the determination of the
reference is likely to be affected by the stage to which the proceedings
. As the matter gets closer to a hearing, there will be an
increased focus on the nature of the dispute between the parties.
outset, however, it will generally be more difficult to be dogmatic about what
is relevant and what is no
t. The fact that the relevance inquiry tends to
narrow over time is a well-known phenomenon in ordinary civil litigation and has
frequently been remarked upon in the context of attempts to set aside subpoenas:
Gloucester Shire Council v Fitch Ratings, Inc
[2016] FCA 587
per Wigney J.
[9] The combination of these two matters together widens further the caution
with which the Tribunal should approach relevance debates
in a context such as
the present. It will rarely be likely at this stage of the proceedings that it
will be appropriate to reject
the issue of a summons which seeks the production
of documents on a rigid view of what must be relevant or irrelevant...
(Emphasis added.)
5. PRODUCTION OF INFORMATION BY CRA
5.1 Submissions
submits that
together with
empowers the Tribunal to compel
document production in response to disputed Factual Category 4.
contends that nothing in the Act or the regulations precludes the Tribunal from
requiring CRA to provide the information sought
by way of disputed Factual
Category 4. PPCA contends that requiring CRA to provide the information in
disputed Factual Category 4
would be the most efficient and cost-effective means
of obtaining the information. In the absence of express indication to the
PPCA submits that the power afforded by
to control its
procedures is broad enough to permit the Tribunal to make such an order.
further argues that this construction is also consistent with
purpose of document production pursuant to the Factual Categories is to avoid
time and expense to be spent on formal summonses
addressed to non-parties. As
the representative of the relevant three radio broadcasters in this Reference,
it submits that CRA is
in a position to obtain such information efficiently and
cost effectively without formal summonses being required.
submits that the Tribunal has a specific power to compel the production of
specific documents pursuant to
According to CRA, the Tribunal does not
have the power to compel a party to a reference to provide information,
particularly information
not in its possession, rather than specific documents,
nor does the Tribunal have the power to compel a party to create documents
the purposes of then producing them.
maintains there is no power conferred on the Tribunal to which the creation of
documents, or administration of interrogatories,
is incidental and argues that
conferred a general power on the Tribunal to compel the parties to
produce any document or answer any request,
would be wholly redundant.
5.2 Consideration
Tribunal’s power under
, in matters of procedure, is broad and
unfettered, save as to the Act and the regulations. That power is complemented
, which expressly enables the Tribunal to summon a person to produce
specified documents or articles:
Reference by the Phonographic Performance
Company of Australia Ltd (ACN 000 680 704)
[2009] ACopyT 1
Reference by PPCA
at [8] (per Emmett P).
Reference by
Emmett P observed at [10] that the
Tribunal’s powers to order persons who procure the issue summonses to bear
the costs and
expenses incurred by persons in complying with them are within the
scope of the Tribunal’s power to determine its procedure
power of the Tribunal to order a party to pay the costs of compliance with a
summons is to be implied from or incidental to,
the power of the Tribunal to
summon persons to appear before it and to produce documents under
Reference by APRA AMCOS
at [16]-[18] (per Perram DP).
the power of the Tribunal under
in matters of procedure is broad and
unfettered, the exercise of that power is subject to the Act and the
regulations. The Tribunal
is given the power to summon a person to produce
specific documents to the Tribunal in
do not accept that the Tribunal’s broad powers to control its own
procedure extends to compelling a party to the Reference
to first collect, and
then provide, information not already in its possession. This strays beyond the
Tribunal’s power in matters
of procedure under
and matters implied
or incidental to that power. The compulsion of a party to provide information
outside its possession exceeds
the Tribunal’s power to require the
production of specific documents under
I will not make an order
requiring CRA to provide the information sought in disputed Factual Category
now turn to consider whether to issue the three summonses sought by PPCA.
CRA’s principal objection to the issue of these
summonses is one of
6. PROPOSED SUMMONSES
6.1 Relevance
noted above, PPCA seeks information concerning the annual remuneration of the
top three highest remunerated radio presenters from
ARN, Nova and SCA in FY
2022/2023. PPCA submits that the information sought is confined, readily
available (PPCA gave the example
of one high profile presenter remuneration
package being reported in the media) and relevant to the issues in dispute.
its January submissions, PPCA clarified that the inclusion of West Coast Radio
in disputed Factual Category 4 was inadvertent and
confirmed that it only sought
the requested information in relation to ARN, Nova and SCA.
contends that the information sought is relevant to the issues in dispute in
this Reference, which concerns the remuneration
payable to sound recording
PPCA submits that what broadcasters
pay for other inputs of a radio programme,
including its radio presenters, is a factor that the Tribunal is entitled to
account when assessing the reasonableness of the remuneration payable
for other inputs, namely the music in sound recordings.
maintains that ARN, Nova and SCA were selected on the basis that it understands
them to be the largest three radio groups in
Australia, consistent with the fact
that these radio groups’ stations are among the highest performing
stations according to
recent GfK surveys published on CRA’s website at the
https://www.commercialradio.com.au/Radio-Surveys
expects that stations from these radio groups will likely fall within the
Representative Sample Stations, as defined in
the agreed Factual Categories
sought from CRA:
Factual Category 6 – Listenership data – DAB+
Representative Sample of Stations
For each of paragraphs 2 (Sample CRA Members Revenue), 5 (Listenership data
– AM FM) and 6 (Listenership data – DAB+),
PPCA requests that CRA
include information in relation to the following stations, to be selected based
on the first survey period
in each of the calendar years, 2004 (excluding DAB+),
2010, 2019, 2022 and 2023:
3 stations by Share % of commercial listening from each of the 5 capital cities
(Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth)
(15 total);
2 stations by Share % of commercial listening from each of the major regional
markets (Canberra, Newcastle and Gold Coast) (6
total); and
5 DAB+ stations by cumulative audience of commercial listening (nationally) (5
(Total representative sample size = 26 stations).
(Share % has the meaning given by the official radio audience measurement
service provider at the time of the relevant survey(s)).
expects that the talent remuneration information sought from ARN, Nova and SCA
will provide an indication of what the top three
radio groups are prepared to
pay its radio presenters, which is a factor that the Tribunal is entitled to
take into account when
assessing the reasonableness of the licence fee for sound
recordings to be determined under this Reference.
seeks orders that CRA bear any costs associated with production of documents
pursuant to the three summonses.
contends that the information sought by PPCA is irrelevant to the proceedings.
CRA submits that the amount which three of CRA’s
members pay a handful of
radio presenters cannot sensibly have any bearing upon the appropriate fee for
all commercial radio stations
to pay for sound recordings within PPCA’s
repertoire.
6.2 Consideration
Reference is at an early stage. The parties have exchanged position papers and
agreed some categories of documents to exchange.
note the caution given by Perram DP in
Reference by APRA AMCOS
that it will generally be more difficult to be dogmatic about what is
relevant to the determination of the reference at an early stage
proceeding. As the matter gets closer to a hearing, there will be an increased
focus on the nature of the dispute between
the parties, and a corresponding
narrowing of the relevance enquiry.
consider that PPCA has demonstrated that the information sought in the three
summonses may be relevant to the Reference. This Tribunal
may be assisted by
information regarding talent remuneration when assessing the reasonableness of
the licence fee to be determined
under this Reference. Given the stage at which
this Reference currently finds itself, the level of relevance established is
for me to issue the three summonses sought.
my conclusion that the Tribunal lacks the power to compel CRA to provide the
information sought in disputed Factual Category
4, I do not consider that it is
appropriate to order that CRA bear any costs associated with the production of
documents in response
to the three summonses.
7. CONCLUSION
Accordingly,
I will issue the three summonses sought by PPCA.
I certify that the preceding forty-two (42)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Rofe (Deputy
Dated: 26 March 2024
RTF format (395 KB)
Signed PDF/A format