Australian Salaried Medical Officers Federation [2025] FWCFB 261 (12 November 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 261
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
DECISION AND ORDER
Fair Work Act 2009
- Application for an intractable bargaining
declaration
Australian Salaried Medical Officers Federation
(B2024/1319)
ACT PUBLIC SECTOR MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS
DETERMINATION 2023-2026
DEPUTY PRESIDENT EASTON
COMMISSIONER MCKINNON
COMMISSIONER
SYDNEY, 12 NOVEMBER 2025
Application for an intractable bargaining declaration; workplace
determination – finalisation of terms – workplace determination
Further to our decision of 14 October 2025 (see
) the parties have conferred on the final terms of the workplace
determination to be known as the
ACT Public Sector Medical Practitioners
Workplace Determination 2025
Determination
A small number of matters remain for consideration. In this decision
we have used the same defined terms and abbreviations as we did
in our previous
The bargaining representatives do not agree on the final terms of
clause 4.3. In the course of the bargaining, the parties agreed
on the terms of
clause 4.2 and 4.3 as follows:
“4.2. The nominal expiry date of this Determination will
be 31 March 2026.
4.3. Bargaining for a replacement enterprise agreement will commence no later
than eight months prior to the nominal expiry date of
Determination.”
The effect of clause 4.3 is that bargaining for a replacement
agreement was due to commence on 31 August 2025. That date has now passed.
The Territory seeks an amendment to clause 4.3 to require bargaining
to commence no later than three months before the expiration
Determination. It submits, reasonably, that given the passage of time since
bargaining effectively concluded, the parties
will be in breach of clause 4.3 as
soon as the Determination commences if the clause is not amended.
ASMOF argues that clause 4.3 should not be altered because the
Determination should be in the same terms as the other ACTPS agreements.
also argue that the effect of the Territory’s proposal is to preclude
Medical Practitioners and their Union from bargaining
for the core
conditions.
The AMA similarly argues that reducing the period to three months
would “undermine” the Full Bench’s decision that
practitioners should not be distinguished from other ACTPS employees.
There is a more significant impediment to the Territory’s
proposal by reason of the terms of the statute.
Subsection 270(2)
Work Act 2009
(Cth) (Act) requires the determination to include the agreed
terms. Clause 4.3 is one such term. It must be included in the determination
However, the issue identified by the Territory needs to be addressed
to ensure that clause 4.3 has meaningful operative effect and
to ensure the
parties are not disadvantaged by the time taken to bring this matter to a
conclusion. We see no reason why the practical
difficulties identified by ASMOF
and the AMA cannot be overcome by the commencement of bargaining in relation to
medical practitioners
as soon as practicable after the determination is made. To
date, the primary focus of bargaining has been the common ‘core’
conditions, which are negotiated with all ACTPS unions on the basis that they
will apply in the same way to all ACTPS employees,
including medical
practitioners. ASMOF and the AMA will have a reasonable opportunity to
contribute to bargaining on those matters
once bargaining for a replacement
agreement commences. Further, we do not agree that a different approach to the
commencement date
for bargaining will undermine our earlier decision. It is a
practical necessity because of the different course adopted in bargaining
relation to medical practitioners.
We will vary the determination once made under
(as it applies
to workplace determinations under
- see further below.
Clause 56.2
The bargaining representatives agreed on staged increases in
allowances from 1 January 2023 onwards. The AMA proposed that additional
be included:
“Any subsequent ACTPS-wide adjustments to allowance rates
during the life of the Determination will automatically apply to this
Determination.”
We do not think that this additional provision is necessary. The
life of the Determination is relatively short and it can be assumed
ACTPS-wide adjustments “during the life” of the Determination are
already known and have been incorporated into
the specific adjustments already
included in the Determination.
Clause 112.1
ASMOF, the AMA and the Territory have agreed that that clause 112.1
should be in the following terms:
‘From 1 July 2025 each Specialist and Senior Specialist
who is eligible for TESL will be paid an allowance of $19,707 per annum
Medical Education Expenses (MEE). The allowance will be paid on a fortnightly
basis and will count as salary for superannuation
One independent bargaining representative does not agree with the
amount proposed by the Territory. No submissions have been received
arguing for
a different rate.
In the circumstances we are content to apply the amount agreed by
the majority of bargaining representatives.
Clause 112.3
In the 2022 Agreement the annual limit for reimbursement of medical
education expenses for full-time Specialist and Senior Specialist
was adjusted
“in line with ACT Treasury annual CPI projections” (per clause
110.2). Similarly, education allowances for
junior medical officers was also
adjusted by the same method (clause 113.2).
ASMOF and the Territory have agreed that the MEE allowance in the
Determination will be adjusted by the same method as the 2022 Agreement.
The AMA argued that the allowance should be adjusted by the ABS
Consumer Price Index (CPI) for the Education and Health sub-indexes
for Canberra
or, if discontinued, the most comparable ABS index. The AMA argued that the MEE
must move in line with the real costs
of professional education and clinical
training to remain effective, rather than the general household inflation or
wage growth.
The link between education expenses for medical practitioners and
the ABS’ health CPI data is not immediately obvious. The health
collected by the ABS measures changes in the price of health services. Even
though medical practitioners covered by Determination
are providing health
services that may or may not affect the ABS’ data, we are not satisfied
that the MEE allowance should
be adjusted by reference to changes in the price
of health services.
The AMA submitted that the Education CPI indexes measure changes in
the cost of course and tuition fees charged by tertiary and professional
education providers but also submitted that medical education expenses for Staff
Specialists could include other expenses such as
simulation-based training,
college CPD modules and conference participation.
We are not satisfied that the AMA has made out a proper case to
change how the annual cap for medical education expenses is
Final determination
For the reasons given above and in our earlier decision, we will
Determination
in the terms published separately today.
Variation under s.218A
As noted above, clause 4.3 of the Determination requires bargaining
for a replacement agreement to commence on 31 August 2025. This
is an obvious
defect in the determination because the date by which bargaining was to commence
has now passed.
On 24 July 2025, bargaining commenced in relation to common core
provisions for replacement agreements covering the Territory and
all other ACTPS
employees. This followed the commencement of bargaining with ACTPS unions on 18
July 2025. Bargaining for the next
MPEA should commence as soon as reasonably
practicable. In the circumstances, clause 4.3 will be varied to replace
with ‘four’. The practical effect of this change
is that bargaining for a replacement agreement will now be required
to commence
on Monday 30 November 2025.
We have separately published our
varying clause 4.3 of the Determination, effective today.
We make the following orders effective today:
1. Pursuant to
Fair Work Act 2009
we make the ACT Public Sector
Medical Practitioners Workplace Determination 2025.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
of Counsel instructed by Slater & Gordon Lawyers for
Australian Salaried Medical Officers Federation
K Eastman SC
Counsel with
of Counsel and
of Counsel for
Australian Capital Territory as represented by Canberra Health Servies
of BAL Lawyers for Radiation Oncologists
Counsel instructed by Sullivans Legal Co for Australian Medical Association
Witness MP-8
, Independent Bargaining Representative
Hearing details:
March 3, 4.
Final written submissions
CHS: 24 March 2025
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<AG531082 PR793645>
RTF format (1.08 MB)
Signed PDF/A format