Freeport-McMoRan Inc. [2025] APO 23 (18 July 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
PATENT OFFICE
Freeport-McMoRan Inc.
[2025] APO 23
Patent Application: 2023203092
Title: Methods and systems for deploying equipment required to meet defined
production targets
Patent Applicant: Freeport-McMoRan
Delegate: Tim Gillett
Date: 18 July 2025
Hearing Date: Written submissions filed on 18 December 2024
Catchwords: Patents – section 45 – examiner’s objection
– not a manner of manufacture – mining equipment
– Monte Carlo
– simulation – forecasting – production target – remit
to examination – inventive
Representation: Patent attorney for the Applicant: GLMR
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Application: 2023203092
Title: Methods and systems for deploying equipment required to meet defined
production targets
Patent Applicant: Freeport-McMoRan Inc.
Decision: 18 July 2025
Claim 1 of the application, as proposed to be amended
is not for a manner of manufacture.
The application is remitted for
further examination with a focus upon inventive step and manner of manufacture.
REASONS FOR DECISION
application 2023203092 (‘
the present application
’) was filed
on 17 May 2023 in the name of Freeport-McMoRan Inc. (‘
’). The application was filed as a divisional application of
2021204532 (‘
’), the national phase entry of
PCT/US2021/022494.
examination reports have been issued for the present application, each with a
single objection that the application is not for
a manner of manufacture.
Similarly, four examination reports were issued for the parent application with
each one objecting that
the application is not for a manner of
manufacture.
inventive step objection was raised in the first report for the parent
application. The Applicant responded to that objection,
and it has not been
raised since.
to the present application have been proposed on 20 June 2023, 9 April 2024, and
26 August 2024 with no objection taken.
I have no reason to believe that those
amendments are not allowable and as such, all further references will be to the
specification
as proposed to be amended on 26 August 2024.
Applicant requested to be heard on 4 September 2024 and was invited to provide
submissions by 20 December 2024. The Applicant
provided submissions on 18
December 2024.
examination of the present application is governed by the
Patents Act
) as amended by the
Intellectual
Property Laws Amendment (Raising the Bar) Act 2012
the Raising
the Bar Act
) as the application was filed after 15 April 2013.
Thus, the standard of proof that applies in the present case is the balance of
probabilities (subsection 49(1)). I must accept the application if satisfied on
the balance of probabilities that the application
complies with the Act. If I am
not so satisfied, then I can refuse the application (subsection
Description
description begins by setting out the technical field as follows on page
The present invention relates to mining operations in general and more
particularly to
methods and systems for deploying equipment required to meet defined
production targets.
from this, the description addresses efficiency as follows on pages
The overall efficiency of the mining operation is based in part on the
efficiency of the equipment and processes for delivering the
excavated ore to
the various locations for further processing. Part of that overall efficiency
involves a determination of the capacities
of the various loading and conveying
systems (e.g., the number of shovels and haul trucks) that are required to
achieve a desired
production target. For example, failing to provide sufficient
capacity, e.g., numbers of shovels and/or haul trucks, will make it
if not impossible, to achieve the desired production target. While the desired
production target may be more easily achieved
by providing additional numbers of
shovels and/or haul trucks, the provision of an excessive number of shovels
and/or haul trucks
also results in inefficiencies and represents a sub-optimal
use of resources. Indeed, providing an excessive number of shovels and
haul trucks may make it more difficult to achieve the desired production target
as a result of increased wait or idle times
and/or traffic congestion resulting
from the provision of an excessive number of haul trucks.
understand from this that providing the appropriate equipment to mine sites is
critical for efficient operation and meeting production
description follows by stating that existing solutions are typically empirical,
involving significant trial and error. Furthermore,
they are not dynamic so even
if the optimal amount of equipment is reached, that number will soon cease to be
optimal. Note the following
While various methods of determining the appropriate equipment capacities
(e.g., the number of shovels and haul trucks) that will
be required to meet
desired production targets are known and being used, such methods are typically
empirical and usually require
a significant amount of operational trial and
error before arriving at the optimal capacities or numbers of equipment required
reach the desired production targets. Moreover, because the mining
environment is constantly changing, even if the optimal numbers
or capacities of
the various systems happen to be reached, they will soon cease to be optimal as
the mining operation progresses.
As a practical matter, the optimal capacity is
rarely reached and the mining operation will either involve insufficient or
equipment capacity, or will fail to consistently meet the desired
production targets.
specification elaborates on this point on page 8 with the following stated
advantages of the invention:
A significant advantage of the systems and methods of the present invention
is that they
may be used to provide highly accurate estimates or determinations of the
system or equipment capacities required to meet defined
production targets for
material processing systems. Those estimates or determinations may then be used
to deploy the equipment in
numbers and capacities sufficient to meet the
production targets...
further on page 8:
... Unlike prior methods, which are typically empirical and involve a
significant
amount of time and effort to consider the numerous variables and possible
combinations involved, the methods and systems of the present invention
provide rapid and definitive determinations of the particular
equipment capacities (e.g., number of shovels and haul trucks) that will be
required to meet the defined production targets.
Moreover, the systems and
methods of the present invention may be used on a more or less continuous basis
to ensure that the deployed
capacities remain sufficient to meet the defined
production targets on a shift-by-shift basis.
take from this that the application is directed at providing a rapid and
accurate estimate of equipment capacity required to meet
a set production target
in a mining operation.
description follows with further information in the form of consistory clauses
which provide an overview of various aspects of
the invention. Without going
into detail, the explanations provided match that shown in FIG.3 closely which I
have reproduced below.
specification frequently uses the term ‘entropy’ to describe the
system. Specifically, the stochastic simulation is
said to estimate the effect
of entropy by processing historical data.
is an unexpected word in the context of a mining operation. Having not
encountered its use in this field before and being
unable to locate it in any
relevant glossary, I have concluded that it does not have a technical meaning in
this field. Whilst the
specification discusses the term, it does not clearly
state that a special meaning is to apply. As such, a meaning derived from a
plain understanding is appropriate which I will consider
Macquarie Dictionary
entropy as follows:
noun a measure of the unavailable energy in a thermodynamic system; it may
also be regarded as a measure of the state of disorder
of a system. A change of
entropy in a reversible process is the ratio of heat absorbed to the absolute
temperature.
specification is clearly not directed toward a thermodynamic analysis. As such,
“a measure of the state of disorder of a system”
appropriate which is consistent with the specification on pages 5-6 which
As is known, entropy is a measure of the degree of disorder of a system. As
used herein, the term entropy is also used to describe
the degree of variability
introduced into a system or process as a result of entropy changes.
is not immediately apparent what this disorder pertains to or how it should be
measured though. For instance, describing a disordered
bookshelf as having high
entropy does not seem appropriate.
specification provides further context on page 6 as follows:
The cycle time and variance module 48 estimates the effect of entropy on the
cycle time to produce the future cycle time estimate.
Module 48 does this by
providing historical cycle time data to stochastic simulator 40. Stochastic
simulator 40 simulates systems,
such as those systems described herein, having
variables that change stochastically or randomly with individual probabilities.
the case of the cycle time and variance module 48, the stochastic simulator
uses the historical cycle time data to simulate the cycle
time 'system,' i.e.,
the cycles traveled by haul trucks 22 as they move between the material loading
system 12 and the material processing
system 26. Stated somewhat differently,
the historical cycle time data are used by the stochastic simulator 40 to
account for the
effect of entropy on the material conveying system 14, e.g.,
haul trucks 22, to produce the future cycle time estimate for the material
conveying system 14.
further on page 14:
In one embodiment, stochastic simulator 40 comprises a Monte Carlo simulator,
although other types of stochastic simulators are known
and could be used as
this information, once the plain meaning is supplemented with guidance from the
specification, and noting that the reader must
avoid absurd constructions, I
consider that the person skilled in the art would understand entropy to be a
non-specific reference
to variability or randomness. The expression
‘estimate an effect of entropy’ should not be read overly literally
the variability or randomness has been measured. Instead, I consider
that it means that randomness is somehow accounted for in the
modelling system
and thus included in the resourcing estimate which is provided.
specification discusses the effect that this variability or randomness has on
the system on page 9 with the following:
For example, in a mining operation wherein a plurality of haul trucks are
used to convey excavated ore from one or more shovels to
one or more continuous
material processors, such as ore crushers, the haul trucks will tend to
periodically 'bunch up,' at various
points in the cycle, with an excessive
number of haul trucks queuing up at either the loading area (e.g., at the
shovel) or the discharge
area (e.g., at the crusher). Such bunching can also
occur on the mine road network between the shovels and the crusher. The
and/or severity of the delays associated with such truck bunching is
due to a number of factors and may be exacerbated if an excessive
number of haul
trucks are used or if an insufficient number of shovels and/or ore crushers are
Indeed, because the various elements, systems, and processes (e.g., loading,
conveying, and processing systems) of the material processing
interrelated, the effect of entropy on any one of the various elements, systems,
and processes will also affect the material
throughput and efficiencies of the
other elements, systems, and processes. Stated somewhat differently, variations
resulting from
entropy in one element, system, or process will ripple though the
material processing system, potentially affecting the other elements,
and processes as well.
last point is important, and I will come back to it soon being:
“variations resulting from entropy in one
element, system, or process will ripple though the material processing system,
potentially
affecting the other elements, system, and processes as
specification discusses how the system handles the effect of entropy on the
cycle time with the following on page 7:
A next step 58 involves estimating or accounting for an effect of entropy on
the cycle time of the conveying system 14 to produce
the future cycle time
estimate for the conveying system 14. Step 58 may perform a stochastic
simulation step 60 which uses historical
cycle time data to simulate the cycle
time of the system in a way that takes into account the random or stochastic
variations in
the historical cycle time data. Step 58 may be performed at least
in part by the cycle time and variance module 48 in conjunction
with stochastic
simulator 40.
statements are made in relation to the material processing time on page
A next step 62 of method 54 involves estimating an effect of entropy on the
material processing time to produce a future material
processing time estimate
for the material processing system 26. Step 62 may perform a stochastic
simulation step 64 to account for
the effect of entropy on the particular
material processing system 26. Step 62 may be performed at least in part by the
system performance module 50 in conjunction with stochastic simulator
do not understand how steps 58/60 and 62/64 could possibly be distinct. As just
”variations resulting from entropy... ripple
through...”
. I consider that these ‘steps’ can only be
read as items that the system accounts for, not literally actions taken in
it is awkward, I am comfortable with this understanding. The specification
should not be read overly literally in relation
to entropy being calculated or
the ordering of steps.
specification also states that the system is provided with historical data which
measures cycle times and material processing
times. These measured times are
apparently improved by estimating the effect of entropy. Given these are
measurements from a live
system, it is not readily apparent how the measurements
could be anything but all inclusive. What is it that a simulation includes
a measurement from a live site cannot?
issue is highlighted in FIG.9a which I have reproduced below:
9a indicates that the idle time averaged approximately 3.8 minutes at an actual
site. However, the simulation predicts the idle
time to be around 4 minutes.
This discrepancy presents a challenge as the specification appears to suggest
that data from real operations
is less reliable for predictive purposes that the
proposed simulation. I conclude that the simulation apparently accounts for a
of entropy that is not adequately captured in operational
data is plainly measured at real sites with a specific number of resources, say
X haul trucks and Y crushers. It appears
that the simulation is being used to
determine what will happen when there are X + n haul trucks and Y + m crushers.
In this sense,
accounting for entropy seems be a reference to the fact that
variability or randomness on a mine site is tied to dynamic operations.
data for equipment cycle times could be inaccurate when the amount of equipment
changes and this seems to be what FIG.9a
shows, that truck idle time will
increase in the situation being modelled by comparison to the historical
now to the stochastic simulator, notably, the Applicant overtly stated that the
details of how to implement such a Monte
Carlo simulator are well-known and do
not require discussion. See the following on page 14:
However, because Monte Carlo simulators are well-known in the art and could
be readily provided by persons having ordinary skill in
the art after having
become familiar with the teachings provided herein, the particular Monte Carlo
simulator that may comprise stochastic
simulator 40 will not be described in
further detail herein.
on to other terminology, the specification discusses production constraints and
provides several examples including shift changes
and blasting operations. These
seem to represent a plain meaning of constraint, which is a confinement or
restriction.
time, material processing time, and delay estimates seem to have plain meanings.
Delay estimates have been defined by the Delay
Hazard Function Module which is
shown in equation form on page 17 of the specification as:
this equation the specification notes that
“P is the probability of a
delay occurring between times t
given no current
. This is consistent with my understanding of probability
density functions.
have no further difficulties with any of this
terminology.
application contains 25 claims with 1, 7, 13, and 25 being independent. Claims 1
and 25 are directed toward a system whereas claims
7 and 13 are directed toward
a method. I will initially focus on claim 1 which reads as
1. A system for deploying equipment for mining operations, comprising:
a plurality of material loading systems comprising one or more shovels;
a plurality of material conveying systems comprising one or more haul
a plurality of material processing systems comprising one or more ore
crushers, stockpiles and/or extraction systems;
a production constraint module, said production constraint module generating
at least one of a process delay time and a planned downtime
for at least one of
the plurality of material loading systems and at least one of the plurality of
material processing systems;
a stochastic simulator;
a cycle time and variance module operatively associated with said stochastic
simulator, said cycle time and variance module providing
historical cycle time
data to said stochastic simulator, said stochastic simulator using the
historical cycle time data to estimate
an effect of entropy on a cycle time of
the at least one of the plurality of material conveying systems, said cycle time
and variance
module producing a future cycle time estimate for the at least one
of the plurality of material conveying systems based on the estimated
entropy on the cycle time;
a processing system performance module operatively associated with said
stochastic simulator, said processing system performance module
historical material processing time data to said stochastic simulator, said
stochastic simulator using the historical material
processing time data to
estimate an effect of entropy on a material processing time of the at least one
of the plurality of material
processing systems, said processing system
performance module producing a future material processing time estimate for the
one of the plurality of material processing systems based on the
estimated effect of entropy on the material processing time;
a delay hazard function module operatively associated with said stochastic
simulator, said delay hazard function module predicting
whether a delay will
occur during the operation of at least one of the plurality of material loading,
conveying, and processing systems
and estimating a duration of the predicted
delay, said delay hazard function module:
defining a probability density based on historical delay data associated with
the at least one of the plurality of material loading,
conveying, and processing
applying the probability density to a Hazard Function to predict whether a
delay will occur in the at least one of the plurality of
material loading,
conveying, and processing systems;
if a delay is predicted to occur, then providing the historical delay data to
said stochastic simulator, said stochastic simulator
using the historical delay
data to estimate a duration of the predicted delay in the at least one of the
plurality of material loading,
conveying, and processing systems;
a processing system operatively associated with said production constraint
module, said cycle time and variance module, said processing
system performance
module and said delay hazard function module, said processing system determining
a loading system capacity and
a conveying system capacity required to meet a
defined production target for the material processing system based on at least
of the process delay time and the planned downtime generated by said
production constraint module, the future cycle time estimate
produced by said
cycle time and variance module, the future material processing time estimate
produced by said processing system
performance module, and the delay duration
estimate produced by the delay hazard function module; and
an equipment deployment system operatively associated with said processing
system, said equipment deployment system deploying one
or more of the plurality
of material loading systems to meet the determined loading system capacity and
one or more of the plurality
of material conveying systems to meet the conveying
system capacity.
1 essentially mimics what is shown in FIG.3. Similarly to the specification, no
order is implied to the systems or modules which
are claimed.
claim is directed toward a system for deploying equipment for mining. The
Macquarie dictionary defines ‘deploy’ in
military terms which is
clearly not appropriate in the present context. A more general definition from
the Meriam-Webster dictionary
which I consider to be appropriate
to put something into use
this definition, the claim defines a system which puts equipment for mining to
use. I note that this is subtly different to the
invention which has been
described, which as I noted earlier is directed to providing a rapid and
accurate estimate of equipment
capacity required to meet a set production target
in a mining operation.
claim follows by setting out the types of equipment involved. Note that these
pieces of equipment are claimed to be a part of
the system, not simply a list of
equipment which the system models.
claim then sets out constraints, cycle times, and material processing times
which are being modelled. These are plain and do not
discussion.
claim then defines a stochastic simulator, initially in name only. I consider
that the term ‘stochastic simulator’
has a technical meaning to the
person skilled in the art, with an appropriate explanation from Wikipedia being
as follows:
A stochastic simulation is a simulation of a system that has variables that
can change stochastically (randomly) with individual probabilities
stochastic simulator is later defined to estimate the effect of entropy on
cycle/processing times and the length of delays, without
further definition as
to what that entails. I conclude that it uses random variables to estimate the
effect of entropy. Similarly
to the specification, I consider that this means
accounting for entropy rather than calculating it.
cycle time and variance module, processing system performance module, and delay
hazard function module are defined to provide historical
data to the stochastic
simulator. After the stochastic simulator has estimated an effect of entropy,
the relevant module produces
an estimate of future cycle time, material
processing time, and delay duration. The claim does not define how, or on what
estimate is made.
claim then set out that a processing system determines the loading system and
conveying system capacity which is required to meet
a defined production target
based on the future cycle/processing times and the length of delays which have
been calculated. With
that, the claim specifies that equipment required to meet
that capacity is deployed.
Claim interpretation
are several issues which confuse me at this point:
I am unclear on
how the modules generate future times using entropy which has been accounted for
but not specifically calculated.
unclear on how the system calculates future cycle time, processing time, and
delay durations independently given that they
are interrelated and changes to
one will impact the others. Repeating the content from page 9 again
“variations resulting from entropy in one element, system, or process
will ripple though the material processing system, potentially
affecting the
other elements, system, and processes as
reading the specification, I understand how the claimed invention is intended to
operate. Rather than persist with what could
be a futile attempt to construe the
claim, I will instead interpret the claim consistent with my understanding of
the invention such
that I can decide the present matter.
have no issue with the preamble, equipment, production constraint module, and
equipment deployment systems and will continue to
construe them as written and
noted above.
understand that the stochastic simulator, cycle time and variance module,
processing system performance module, delay hazard function
module, and
processing system are all aspects of a simulator which must:
Use historical
cycle time, material processing time, and delay data.
Employ random
sampling in the adoption of cycle times, material processing times, and delay
probability density function and a hazard function to model failure.
Output a loading
system capacity and a conveying system capacity which is required to meet a
defined production target.
more could be inferred from the specification and assumed to be part of claim 1,
I consider that any further assumptions about
the claim are not necessary for me
to decide the present matter. For example, the claim does not define:
The modelling of
X + n haul trucks or Y + m crushers as discussed earlier.
Repeated random
sampling as would typically be used in the Monte Carlo method.
Modelling of
roads, bottlenecks, or dynamic operations of any kind beyond failure.
Repetition such
that a series of equipment arrangements are modelled.
issues exist with all independent claims. I do not consider that further
construction of those claims will yield a different
outcome and so will proceed
with my current understanding of claim 1 noting that the claims are sufficiently
similar that any decision
I make in relation to claim 1 will apply equally to
all claims.
The Examiner’s objection – Manner of
Manufacture
single objection item number 4 remains outstanding from examination report
number 4 which can be summarised as follows:
The Applicant's submissions have been fully considered but are not found
persuasive. I maintain that the claimed invention, as a matter
of substance, is
a scheme for deploying equipment or material loading systems in a material
processing system according to loading
and conveying system capacities to meet
defined production targets, and that this is not a manner of manufacture in the
Section 18(1)(a)
Patents Act
is followed by a rebuttal of the Applicant’s submissions which I have not
The Applicant’s submissions – Manner of
Manufacture
Applicant has submitted that the substance of the present invention lies outside
a computer in the deploying of an optimal number
of resources. The key point
seems to be that
National Research Development Corporation v Commissioner of
[1959] HCA 67
[1959] 102 CLR 252
[1961] RPC 134
Grant v Commissioner of Patents
[2006] FCAFC 120
”) are more relevant to the
present case than later caselaw such as
Research Affiliates LLC v
Commissioner of Patents
[2014] FCAFC 150
Commissioner of Patents v RPL Central Pty
[2015] FCAFC 177
”). The submission is
concluded with:
The present invention results in an artificially created state of affairs
(i.e. a “useful product” as meant in Grant),
in the sense that a
material effect (as detailed within the specification) is realised - efficient
and optimized use of shovels and
haul trucks, thereby preventing accumulation of
ore due to lack of available shovels or haul trucks/shovels standing idle due to
an excessive number of available haul trucks/shovels. This is analogous to the
invention in NRDC where the material effect was observed
in fewer weeds. This is
a material effect achieved outside of the computer.
The significance of the invention corresponds to a ‘remarkable
advantage’ in that the operating costs / inefficiencies
associated with
one or more haul trucks or shovels standing idle for extended periods is
minimised while still meeting the required
production target. This advantage is
realised by deploying the material loading systems and the material conveying
systems by the
equipment deployment system so as to meet the loading or
conveying system capacity, which are configured to meet the production target.
is followed by further submissions directed toward
Bio-rad Laboratories,
[2018] APO 24
”) which has been
discussed in examination reports. The submissions address the level of detail in
relation to calculations
which are made and concludes with:
The Applicant respectfully submits that the patent-eligibility of the present
application cannot be predicated on the lack of “concrete
mathematical
details for formulae” in instances where systems have “variables
that change stochastically or randomly
with individual probabilities”
(page 14, lines 4-5). Stated somewhat differently, the fact that the systems
being modelled
by the claimed invention are not analytically tractable cannot be
used to say they are not patent eligible.
Applicant finishes by reiterating what they consider to be the substance of the
invention which can be summarised with:
...As noted above, the ‘material effect’ of the claimed invention
is achieved
outside of the computer
, with the substance of the invention
relating to optimal deployment of mining equipment to meet production targets,
such that idle
time for each equipment or possibility of lack of sufficient
equipment when required is minimized.
Legal principles – Manner
of Manufacture
Patents Act 1990
(1) Subject to subsection (2), an invention is a patentable invention for
the purposes of a standard patent if the invention, so
far as claimed in any
(a) is a manner of manufacture within the meaning of
Statute of Monopolies;
broad principles to consider regarding manner of manufacture have been set out
National Research Development Corporation v Commissioner of Patents
[1959] HCA 67
). At [14]:
The right question is: “Is this a proper subject of letters patent
according to the principles which have been developed for
the application of
of the Statute of Monopolies?”
guidance was provided in
D'Arcy v Myriad Genetics Inc
[2015] HCA 35
) to look for the substance of the invention.
This is reflected in [87] and [88] by the majority and repeated by the minority
quite succinctly:
Whatever words have been used, the matter must be
looked at as one of substance and effect must be given to the true nature of the
Technologies Australia Pty Limited
[2016] APO 49
(Aristocrat
summarised considerations appearing in
at [35] which are relevant to
assessing whether a computer-implemented invention, is in substance, a manner of
manufacture as follows:
I conclude that it is relevant to consider a range of matters. Without
seeking to be exhaustive, these include:
must be more than an abstract idea, mere scheme or mere intellectual
information;
contribution of the claimed invention technical in nature;
the invention solve a technical problem within the computer or outside the
the invention result in improvement in the functioning of the computer,
irrespective of the data being processed;
the application of the method produce a practical and useful result;
be broadly described as an improvement in computer technology;
the method merely require generic computer implementation;
computer merely an intermediary or tool for performing the method while adding
nothing of substance to the idea;
there ingenuity in the way in which the computer is utilised;
the invention involve steps that are foreign to the normal use of computers;
the invention lie in the generation, presentation or arrangement of intellectual
information.
note that later Full Court decisions including
Encompass Corporation Pty Ltd
v InfoTrack Pty Ltd
[2019] FCAFC 161
Repipe Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
[2021] FCAFC 223
diverted from this approach in any meaningful way.
Technologies Australia Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Patents
[2022] HCA 29
August 2022)
(‘Aristocrat ‘22’)
left previous
Full Court decisions in relation to manner of manufacture
undisturbed.
Considerations
Applicant has focussed on
submitting that the present invention is for a manner of manufacture. Later
caselaw has been discussed such as
Research Affiliates
along with a suggestion that these are primarily relevant to
computer implemented inventions, whereas the present invention lies
think this misrepresents the teaching of recent caselaw which is essentially a
refinement of the words in
“Whatever words have
been used, the matter must be looked at as one of substance and effect must be
given to the true nature
of the claim.”
implemented inventions are not a special category of invention for which manner
of manufacture law is different. This has
been acknowledged by the High Court
across both sets of reasons in
Aristocrat ’22
following from [77]:
...It is not apparent in the present case that asking whether the claimed
invention is an advance in computer technology as opposed
to gaming technology,
or indeed is any advance in technology at all, is either necessary or helpful in
addressing that issue...
And the following from [152]:
The question of whether a claim, as properly characterised, is the proper
subject matter of a patent should not be deconstructed to
require, separately
from the general principles of patentability, consideration of whether the
subject matter is "computer‑implemented"...
Research Affiliates
Aristocrat ’16
seek to identify the substance of the
invention and whether that is patentable. I consider that those principles are
relevant to
all inventions but need to be applied appropriately for the matter
the following comments which the Applicant made in submissions:
The significance of the invention corresponds to a ‘remarkable
advantage’ in that the operating costs / inefficiencies
associated with
one or more haul trucks or shovels standing idle for extended periods is
minimised while still meeting the required
production target. This advantage is
realised by deploying the material loading systems and the material conveying
systems by the
equipment deployment system so as to meet the loading or
conveying system capacity, which are configured to meet the production
Therefore, the Applicant submits that the substance of the claimed invention
satisfies the requirements for a manner of manufacture.
is a leap here from the system being configured to meet production targets to
the substance of the invention being for a manner
of manufacture without
addressing what the substance of the invention is.
will now use the established approaches to determine what the substance of the
invention is and whether the application is for a
manner of manufacture or not.
Note that I have not considered any question of whether the present invention
solves a problem within
a computer or not. Whilst the invention is computerised,
the substance of the invention does not lie in that computerisation and
the Applicant’s submissions this point does not appear to be
There must be more than an abstract idea, mere
scheme or mere intellectual information.
invention improves mining operations by identifying the optimal set of equipment
to use so that actual capacity matches planned
capacity. It uses a stochastic
simulator to model random events and account for variability, which is referred
to as entropy. I will
note here that equipment capacity is complex. For example,
whilst the amount of material a haul truck can hold is well known, the
material it can move from one place to another is impacted by how quickly it can
move, idle time, and delays for example,
each of which vary
stochastically.
specification promises to provide a rapid and accurate estimate of the equipment
that is required in a mining operation based
on these more accurate estimates of
claimed, the invention defines a simulation being used to estimate various
aspects of a proposed mining operation and calculate
loading and conveying
system capacities required to meet a production target, with the calculated set
of equipment being deployed.
claimed invention is about using a specific approach to simulation which
improves the forecasting of mine equipment operations.
As a result of the
calculation, a tangible amount of equipment will be deployed into operation.
That same equipment will be capable
of extracting a volume of material which can
later be measured directly.
is not simply a plan or concept which exists in theory. The invention relates to
the identification of a particular amount of
equipment which is going to be
deployed in order to achieve a set production target. The output of that
equipment will depart from
reality in a tangible, measurable way. To use the
It is necessary that there be some "useful product", some physical phenomenon
or effect resulting from the working of a method for
it to be properly the
subject of letters patent.
physical effect is that actual mine output will match calculated output more
closely and thus a system can be arranged which
will output the planned
production target.
way to view the invention is that it is a scheme to improve mining operations by
simulating forecasting outputs instead of
using trial and error. In this way
there is nothing physical and tangible, merely an idea about the optimal way to
conduct a mining
alternatives differ in substance. Is the invention just the idea of using
simulation, or a specific, more accurate simulation?
The specification
highlights how existing methods fail to account for entropy (variability)
suggesting that in substance, the invention
is a more accurate simulation.
Noting that the quantity being estimated (e.g., how much material a given set of
equipment can extract)
is real and measurable, I consider that in substance, the
present invention is more than an abstract idea or intellectual information.
Whether it is a scheme will come down to its technicality which I will address
Is the contribution of the claimed invention technical
could argue that stochastic simulation itself is technical. It involves
mathematics and the calculation of an objective result
which does not have
aesthetic appeal or belong to the creative arts. This presents positively.
However, stochastic simulation is
plainly not the Applicant’s
contribution. I will address this point soon with extensive prior art
demonstrating that stochastic
simulation is well known.
closer review of the simulation is needed which is where I encounter a problem;
the claims lack detail on what is and how it is
simulated. The claims define
cycle time, processing time, and delay durations, but only define that a random
variable uses historical
data to predict future values. This basically defines
an experienced guess which I couldn’t reasonably call technical. In truth
the invention isn’t directed toward guessing, but that has not yet been
set out in the claims. At present the claims define
using a broadly defined
mathematical algorithm to calculate what equipment is considered optimal to meet
a production target.
using a stochastic simulator there is practically no information about what is
being modelled. I find this troublesome because
it seems that any technicality
to the present invention lies in the modelling, which is missing. For example, I
would assume that
road networks, queues, weather conditions, and the like would
all be modelled in a sophisticated simulation of a mining operation.
nothing of that kind is mentioned. Where the specification addresses that
“haul trucks will tend to periodically 'bunch up’,”
which undoubtedly relates to road design among other things, nothing has been
cannot be satisfied that the claimed invention provides a technical
contribution. While the claims do not define anything overtly
non-technical,
neither do they define a contribution which is technical.
conclude that there is not presently a contribution which is technical in
Does the application of the method produce a
practical and useful result?
is clearly a useful and practical result, an electronic forecasting solution
which provides for rapid and accurate estimate
of what pieces of equipment
should be used in a mining operation to enable the meeting of a production
target. This presents positively.
the Applicant has submitted, there is no doubt that the substance of the present
invention lies outside a computer. There is no
suggestion that the Applicant has
invented a new computer or ability to process information. Instead, the
Applicant has suggested
a focus on the concrete, tangible effect of the
calculation and deployment of equipment.
substance the invention is not directed to merely deploying equipment but
instead to a rapid and accurate estimate of the correct
amount of equipment. I
will emphasise that in this context, correct is the amount of equipment which
can deliver a specific amount
of extracted material rather than the amount which
optimises profit, customer satisfaction, appeal or any other similarly abstract
it is not clear what is being modelled. Despite extensive discussion of
stochastic simulation, it is not clear how the invention
uses random variables.
This is true of both the claimed invention and the specification. Where I have
looked for information about
how the stochastic simulator works, all I have
found is a statement that the person skilled in the art could have implemented
it stands, while the invention is not purely abstract and does provide an
invention that is useful, this alone is not enough to
provide for patentability.
There could be aspects of the stochastic simulation which are technical, but at
the level it is presented,
this is plainly not the Applicant’s
contribution. Beyond this, I have not been able to find any material which
provides patentable
subject matter and so as a matter of substance, I am not
satisfied that the present invention is patentable.
matters: inventive step
finalising the present matter, having reviewed prior art to understand the field
of stochastic simulation I have concerns that
claimed invention may not be
inventive. Noting that the Applicant has not had a chance to respond to the
prior art I have seen, I
consider that the best course of action is for the
application to return for further examination of these potential
offer the following observations about prior art which can be considered and
raised by the examination section if appropriate:
Askari-Nasab, Hooman (2013), Mining Optimization Laboratory (MOL) – Report
Five, © MOL, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Canada, Pages 230, ISBN:
978-1-55195-327-4, pp. 123-136.
D4: Applications of Queuing Theory for
Open-Pit Truck/Shovel Haulage Systems [Viewed on internet on 8 May 2025]
https://vtechworks.lib.vt.edu/server/api/core/bitstreams/67d24cff-9d41-40f0-9dad-b488050fedd9/content>
Published on 19 December 2012
D5: Dilip Sembakutti, “Analysing
equipment allocation through queuing theory and Monte-Carlo simulations in
surface mining operations”,
Int. J. Mining and Mineral Engineering, Vol.
8, No. 1, 2017
D6: Dumakor-Dupey, N. K., Temeng, V. A. and Bansah, K. J.
(2017), “Optimising Shovel-Truck Fuel Consumption using Stochastic
Simulation”, Ghana Mining Journal, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 39 –
appears that D3 is directed toward the efficient use of loading and hauling
fleet in open pit mines. It seems to disclose modelling
material loading,
conveying and processing systems
“In the simulation model, trucks,
shovels, waste dumps, stockpiles, and crushers are modeled as resources of the
truck-and-shovel
operations.”
page 107-4),
constraint modelling
“This means that the mine employs 3 shovels and 11 trucks during the
year, but in odd months it does not use one of the trucks
because of scheduled
maintenance.”
page 107-7),
stochastic simulation, accounting for
entropy, and historical data
“The simulation model deals with the
uncertainties associated with the operations of trucks and shovels. Each
stochastic variable
is represented with a probability density function. Most of
the probability density functions are obtained by performing data analysis
historical dispatching data gathered from a Jigsaw dispatching
(page 107-5), and
delay hazards
(Table 2 see
stochastic variables, probability density functions and failure
does not appear to explicitly teach the use of a hazard function, however, that
seems to be inherent in the disclosure of using
a probability density function
to model failure, and in any case may be well known. I note that Survival
Functions are discussed
in a Wikipedia article titled the same.
D5, and D6 provide similar disclosure of stochastic simulation usage in the
modelling of mining operations. Each varies in relation
to the aspect of
operations which are being modelled, how the model is setup, and the factors
which are incorporated.
the above reasons I find that claim 1 is not for a manner of manufacture. While
I have not formally addressed other claims, they
do not add material which would
overcome this issue.
it is not clear to me what form an amendment might take to provide
patentability, I remit the application for further examination.
Noting that I
have also discussed inventive step, I consider it appropriate to invoke
Regulation 13.4(3)
and provide the Applicant 6 (six) months from the date of
this decision to bring the application in order for
acceptance.
Tim Gillett
Delegate of the Commissioner of
https://app.macquariedictionary.com.au/?search_word_type=dictionary&word=entropy
RTF format (4.05 MB)
Signed PDF/A format