URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/2018/55.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SAS Trustee Corporation v Miles [2018] HCA 55 (14 November 2018)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
BELL, GAGELER, NETTLE AND EDELMAN JJ
SAS TRUSTEE CORPORATION APPELLANT
PETER MILES RESPONDENT
SAS Trustee Corporation v Miles
14 November 2018
aside orders 1 and 2 of the order of the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales made on 4 May 2017 and in their
place order that the appeal to
that Court be dismissed.
appellant pay the respondent's costs of this appeal.
On appeal from the Supreme Court of New South Wales
Representation
N J Williams SC with T M Ower and S Palaniappan for the appellant (instructed
by SAS Trustee Corporation)
D F Jackson QC with J M Morris SC and M J Weightman for the respondent
(instructed by Cardillo Gray Partners)
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
SAS Trustee Corporation v Miles
Superannuation and pensions – Police pension – Disabled member of
police force – Entitlement to additional allowance
respondent certified by appellant as incapable of personally exercising
functions of police officer due to specified
infirmities determined by
Commissioner of Police to have been caused by being hurt on duty – Where
respondent received annual
superannuation allowance as disabled member of police
force – Where s 10(1A)(b)(ii) of
Police Regulation
(Superannuation) Act 1906
(NSW) provided that annual superannuation
allowance might increase by additional amount commensurate with member's
incapacity for
work outside police force – Where respondent sought
additional amount by reason of supervening infirmity increasing respondent's
incapacity for work outside police force – Where supervening infirmity
increasing respondent's incapacity for work outside
police force not subject of
certification by appellant or determination by Commissioner of
Police – Whether respondent entitled
to additional amount of annual
superannuation allowance.
Statutes – Interpretation – Principles – Context –
Cognate terms – Choice between textually available
constructions –
Where cognate terms "incapable", "incapacity" and "totally incapacitated"
appearing in Act – Where alternative
textual constructions as to whether
infirmity increasing incapacity for work outside police force required to be
caused by being
hurt on duty – Whether cognate terms to be construed as
bearing same meaning.
Words and phrases – "additional amount", "annual superannuation
allowance", "certified", "commensurate", "disabled member of
the police force",
"hurt on duty", "incapable of personally exercising the functions of a police
officer", "incapacity for work outside
the police force", "infirmity of body or
mind", "member of the police force", "specified infirmity", "supervening
infirmity or incapacity".
Police Regulation (Superannuation) Act 1906
(NSW), ss 1, 1A, 3, 4, 5,
5A, 7, 8, 10, 10B, 14, 21.
Superannuation Administration Act 1996
CJ, BELL AND NETTLE JJ. This is an appeal from a judgment of the Court of
Appeal of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
(Payne JA and
Sackville A-JA, Schmidt J
dissenting)
allowing an appeal from a judgment of Judge Neilson of the District Court of New
South Wales
The issue is the meaning of the expression "incapacity for work outside the
police force" in s 10(1A)(b)(ii) of the
Police Regulation
(Superannuation) Act 1906
(NSW) ("the Act"). In effect, the expression
presents a constructional choice between two possibilities. Either it means
for work outside the police force from a specified infirmity of body
or mind determined to have been caused by being hurt on duty
when a member of
the police force – which is the meaning determined by Judge Neilson and
Schmidt J – or it means incapacity
for work outside the police force
howsoever caused – which is the meaning ascribed to it by the majority of
the Court of Appeal.
As will be explained, context and purpose favour the
former and it appears consistent with relevant extrinsic
Relevant statutory provisions
3 of the Act establishes the Police Superannuation Fund ("the Fund"),
which, subject to the Act, is under the control of
the SAS Trustee Corporation
("STC"). It applies in respect of persons who became members of the police
force before 1 April
Fund is comprised of deductions of six per cent made from members' salaries
under s 5, other deductions and payments under
ss 5A and 20A, amounts
appropriated from the Consolidated Revenue Fund under s 4 and other fees
and moneys received by STC pursuant
to the Act. The Act provides for defined
benefits and s 4 requires that if at any time the amount of the Fund is
insufficient to
meet the superannuation allowances and other amounts payable
under the Act, the amount of the deficiency is a charge against the
Consolidated
Revenue Fund.
7 of the Act provides for the "annual superannuation allowance" payable to a
member of the police force who has served 20
years or more of equivalent
full-time service and who
retires on or after reaching 60
years of age, or before reaching that age if rendered incapable of exercising
the functions of a police
officer from an infirmity of body or mind caused
otherwise than by being hurt on duty. The amount is a percentage of attributed
salary proportionate to the member's number of years of service as a police
officer (up to a maximum of 72.75 per cent for 30 or
more years of
full-time service):
7 Superannuation allowance except where
member hurt on duty
(1) The annual superannuation allowance for a member of the police force who has
served 20 years or more of equivalent full-time
service and retires on or after
attaining the age of 60 years or, being under that age, is discharged after
being certified under
section 8(1) to be incapable, from infirmity of body or
mind, of personally exercising the functions of a police officer referred
section 14(1)
Police Act 1990
, is an amount calculated in
accordance with the following formula:
represents the amount of the annual superannuation allowance
represents a percentage of the member's attributed salary of
office at the date of the member's retirement or discharge equal to
the sum of:
(a) the percentage specified in the Second Column of the Table to this
subsection opposite the total number of years of both full-time
and part-time
service specified in the First Column of that Table that has been completed by
the member, and
(b) in the case of a person who has completed less than 30 years of
equivalent full-time service, one-twelfth of 2.425 per cent for
each month of
full-time or part-time service that has been completed by the member after the
last completed year of service referred
to in paragraph (a),
represents the equivalent service ratio of the member as at
the date of the member's retirement or discharge.
First Column
Second Column
Completed years of both full-time and part-time service of
Amount per centum
(2) An annual superannuation allowance under subsection (1) shall not be
payable to a member of the police force to whom an annual
superannuation
allowance is payable under
section 10.
is to be noted that such a member is not entitled to any "additional amount" for
incapacity for employment outside the police
provides that a superannuation allowance must not be granted or paid under
to a member who is discharged under the age of 60 years unless STC,
having regard to the medical advice of two members of the Police
Medical Board
or any one or more medical practitioners nominated by STC, has certified the
member to be incapable from infirmity
of body or mind (caused otherwise than by
being hurt on duty) of exercising the functions of a police
8 Determination of members medically unfit
(1) A superannuation allowance or gratuity must not be granted or paid under
to a member of the police force who:
(a) is discharged after the commencement of the
Police Regulation (Superannuation and Appeals) Amendment Act
(b) at the time of the member's discharge is under the age of 60 years,
unless STC (having regard to medical advice on the condition and fitness for
employment of the member) has certified the member to
be incapable, from
infirmity of body or mind, of personally exercising the functions of a police
officer referred to in
section 14(1)
Police Act 1990
Section 14(1)
provides that a
police officer has the functions conferred or imposed on a constable by or under
any other law (including the common
law) of the State.
(2) For the purposes of determining a member's incapacity:
(a) STC is not to have regard to the member's
actual rank or position or functions (other than the functions referred to in
(b) the capacity to exercise a function by delegation is not taken to be a
capacity to personally exercise the function.
(2A) (Repealed)
(3) In this section:
medical advice
means the advice of:
(a) 2 members of the Police Medical Board, or
(b) any one or more medical practitioners nominated by the STC."
relevantly provides for the "annual superannuation allowance" payable to a
member of the police force who is discharged after being
certified incapable
from a specified infirmity of body or mind of exercising the functions of a
police officer caused by the member
being hurt on duty when a member of the
police force, or who has resigned or retired and who had such an infirmity at
the time of
his or her resignation or
retirement:
10 Superannuation allowance where member hurt on
(1) In this section:
attributed salary of
(a) in relation to a member of the police force who is
discharged – the member's attributed salary of office at the date of
the member's discharge, or
(b) in relation to a former member of the police force who resigned or
retired – the member's attributed salary of office at
the date of the
member's resignation or retirement.
disabled member of the police force
(a) a member of the police force who is discharged after being certified,
pursuant to section 10B(1), to be incapable, from a specified
infirmity of body
or mind, of personally exercising the functions of a police officer referred to
section 14(1)
Police Act 1990
(b) a former member of the police force who resigned or retired and who,
according to a certificate given pursuant to section 10B(2)
at any time
after the member's resignation or retirement, was incapable, from an infirmity
of body or mind, of personally exercising
the functions of a police officer
referred to in
section 14(1)
Police Act 1990
at the time of the
member's resignation or retirement,
that infirmity being determined, pursuant to section 10B(3) or on
appeal, to have been caused by the member being hurt on duty or
member having been hurt on duty when he or she was a member of the police force,
as the case may be.
includes discharged as referred to in
(1A) Subject to this section, the annual superannuation allowance for a disabled
member of the police force is:
(a) an amount that
is equal to 72.75 per cent of the member's attributed salary of office,
(b) except where paragraph (c) applies, an additional amount that is:
(i) not more than 12.25 per cent of the member's attributed salary of office,
(ii) commensurate, in the opinion of STC, with the member's incapacity for work
outside the police force, and
the disabled member is totally incapacitated for work outside the police force
and, in the opinion of STC, the member was hurt
on duty because the member was
required to be exposed to risks to which members of the general workforce would
normally not be required
to be exposed in the course of their employment, an
additional amount that is:
(i) not less than 12.25 per cent and not more than 27.25 per cent of the
member's attributed salary of office, and
(ii) commensurate, in the opinion of STC, with the risks to which the member
was so required to be exposed,
multiplied by the equivalent service
ratio of the member as at the date of the member's discharge, resignation or
retirement.
(1B) An annual superannuation allowance may be granted under this section to a
disabled member of the police force whatever the member's
length of service.
(1BA) A superannuation allowance referred to in subsection (1A) or an
additional amount of a superannuation allowance referred to
subsection (1D) is not payable to a disabled member of the police force
unless an application for payment of the allowance or
additional amount
concerned is made:
(a) before the member reaches
the age of 60 years, or
(b) not later than 5 years after the member resigns or retires,
whichever is the later.
(1D) STC may:
(a) make a determination at any time
of an additional amount of a superannuation allowance under this section, and
(b) vary any such determination at any time,
and may direct that the determination or variation take effect from such date
as STC considers appropriate.
(4)-(7) (Repealed)"
Relevantly,
(1B) and 10B were introduced by the
Regulation (Superannuation and Appeals) Amendment Act 1979
to their commencement, members of the police force who were hurt on duty were
entitled to a superannuation allowance not
exceeding 72.75 per cent of the
member's salary of office.
can be seen, s 10(1A)(a) is more generous than s 7 in that it provides
in effect that, where a member is caused to resign, retire
or be discharged from
the police force by being rendered incapable of exercising the functions of a
police officer from an infirmity
of body or mind caused by the member being hurt
on duty when a member of the police force, the superannuation allowance payable
the member is the full 72.75 per cent of attributed salary regardless of
years of service. In substance, s 10(1A)(a) equates the
superannuation
allowance payable to such a member with the superannuation allowance which would
have been payable to the member if,
but for the infirmity suffered as a result
of being hurt on duty, the member had gone on to complete 30 years' full-time
and retired on or after reaching the age of 60.
in contrast to s 7 – which does not provide for any "additional
amount" for incapacity for employment outside the
police force –
s 10(1A)(b) provides in substance that, except where s 10(1A)(c)
applies, the annual superannuation allowance
payable to a member who is caused
to resign, retire or be discharged from the police force by being rendered
incapable of exercising
the functions of a police officer from an infirmity of
body or mind caused by the member being hurt on duty when a member of the
force includes an "additional amount" of up to 12.25 per cent of attributed
salary commensurate with the member's incapacity
for work outside the police
Section 10(1A)(c)
applies where a member is rendered incapable of exercising the functions of a
police officer by reason of an infirmity
of body or mind caused by being hurt on
duty when a member of the police force and is totally incapacitated for work
outside the
police force. It provides that the annual superannuation allowance
payable to the member includes by way of an "additional amount"
not less than
12.25 per cent of attributed salary, and, if the member is so hurt on duty
because of being exposed to abnormal risks,
up to 27.25 per cent of attributed
salary commensurate with the risks to which the member was so exposed.
Section 10B
provides that an annual superannuation allowance must not be granted under s 10
to a member of the police force who is
discharged or resigns or retires unless
STC has certified the member incapable from a specified infirmity of body or
mind of personally
exercising the functions of a police officer, and, in the
case of a member who resigns or retires, unless the member notifies the
Commissioner of Police before resignation or retirement and within six months of
receiving the injury which has caused the infirmity
of that injury. It further
requires the Commissioner of Police to make a determination of whether the
certified infirmity was caused
by the member being hurt on duty when a member of
the police force:
10B Medical examination of disabled member and
determination of whether hurt on duty
(1) An annual superannuation allowance or gratuity must not be granted under
section 10 to a member of the police force who is discharged
unless STC (having
regard to medical advice on the condition and fitness for employment of the
member) has certified the member to
be incapable, from a specified infirmity of
body or mind, of personally exercising the functions of a police officer
referred to
section 14(1)
Police Act 1990
(2) An annual superannuation allowance or gratuity must not be granted under
to a former member of the police force who resigned or retired
(a) the former member notified the
Commissioner of Police before the member's resignation or retirement and within
6 months of receiving
the injury which has caused the member's infirmity of
body or mind, of that injury, and
(b) if the regulations so require, the notification was in the prescribed
(c) STC (having regard to medical advice on the condition and fitness for
employment of the member) has certified that the former
member was incapable,
from that infirmity of body or mind, of personally exercising the functions of a
police officer referred to
section 14(1)
Police Act 1990
at the time of the member's resignation or retirement.
(2A) For the purposes of determining a member's or former member's incapacity
under this section:
(a) STC is not to have regard
to the member's or former member's actual rank or position or any functions
(other than the functions
referred to in subsection (2)(c)) of the member
or former member at the time to which the certification relates, and
(b) the capacity to exercise a function by delegation is not taken to be a
capacity to personally exercise the function.
(2B), (2BA) (Repealed)
(2C) In this section:
medical advice
means the advice of:
(a) 2 members of the Police Medical Board, or
(b) any one or more medical practitioners nominated by the STC.
(3) Where a member or former member of the police force is duly certified under
subsection (1) or (2), the Commissioner of Police
(a) decide whether or not the infirmity to which
the certificate relates was caused by the member being hurt on duty or the
member having been hurt on duty when he or she was a member of the police
force, as the case may be, and the date or dates on which
the member or former
member was hurt on duty, and
(b) give the member or former member written notification of the
28 August 2003, Mr Miles, the respondent in these proceedings, was certified
pursuant to s 10B(1) of the Act as being incapable,
from four specified
infirmities of an orthopaedic nature, of discharging the duties of his office as
a police officer. The specified
infirmities were: (a) cervical spine,
symptomatic degenerative changes; (b) lumbar spine, symptomatic degenerative
changes; (c)
left shoulder, recurrent dislocation; and (d) right knee,
symptomatic chondromalacia. On 4 September 2003, a delegate of the
Commissioner
of Police certified, pursuant to s 10B(3)(a) of the Act, that those
infirmities were caused by Mr Miles being hurt on duty and he
was medically
discharged from the police force on 5 September 2003. In accordance with s
10(1A)(a) of the Act, Mr Miles was entitled
to, and received, a
superannuation allowance equal to 72.75 per cent of his attributed salary
the course of the ensuing years, Mr Miles made several applications to increase
his annual superannuation allowance. In 2004,
Mr Miles applied pursuant to s
10(1A)(b) of the Act to increase his annual superannuation allowance to 85 per
cent of his attributed
salary. The allowance was ultimately determined to be
82.55 per cent by the District Court of New South Wales, following an appeal
Mr Miles from the determination made by STC, the appellant in these
proceedings.
2008 Mr Miles applied to STC to amend the original certificate issued by the
Commissioner of Police to include an additional infirmity
of post-traumatic
stress disorder ("PTSD"). STC rejected that application on 29 October
made a further application in 2009 to amend his s 10B(1) certificate to
include PTSD, contending that at the time the original
certificate was issued he
was unaware that he had a psychiatric condition. STC also rejected that
application and Mr Miles unsuccessfully
appealed STC's decision to the
Industrial Court of New South
to the Full Bench of the Industrial
12 November 2013, Mr Miles made a further application pursuant to
s 10(1A)(b) of the Act for an increase in his superannuation
allowance to
85 per cent. On 29 January 2015, STC rejected that application. Mr
Miles commenced an application in the District
Court of New South Wales as a
person aggrieved by STC's
11 April 2016, Judge Neilson
STC's decision on the basis that, notwithstanding that the PTSD had increased Mr
Miles' incapacity for work outside the police force,
on the proper construction
of s 10(1A)(b)(ii) Mr Miles' PTSD could not be taken into account as
it was a supervening incapacity and
not one arising from the four specified
infirmities certified by STC.
Constructional choice
was observed at the outset, s 10(1A)(b)(ii) permits of a constructional
choice. On one view of its terms, it provides for an
"additional amount" of
annual superannuation allowance for a "disabled member of the police force" who
is incapacitated for work
outside the police force regardless of the cause of
the member's incapacity for work outside the police force. The alternative view
is that it provides for an "additional amount" of annual superannuation
allowance for a "disabled member of the police force" who
is incapacitated for
work outside the police force only if the incapacity for work outside the police
force results from a specified
infirmity of body or mind determined, in
accordance with s 10B, to have been caused by the member having been hurt on
duty when a
member of the police force.
appellant contended for the latter construction, arguing that the incapacity
referred to in s 10(1A)(b)(ii) is, like the incapacity
referred to in
s 10B, an incapacity arising from a certified infirmity caused by being
hurt on duty. It was acknowledged that ss
10(1A)(b) and 10(1D) recognise
that incapacity from a "hurt on duty" infirmity may increase in extent, but the
appellant submitted
that those provisions do not permit new and unrelated
infirmities to be taken into account in s 10(1A)(b)(ii).
respondent contended that s 10(1A) is merely a quantification provision.
It followed, in the respondent's submission, that,
once a member has satisfied
the steps in s 10B and thereby met the definition of a "disabled member of
the police force", the incapacity
referred to in s 10(1A)(b)(ii) (and, too,
the total incapacity referred to in s 10(1A)(c)) may arise at any time and
from any source.
So much is apparent, it was said, in the deliberate change of
language between, on the one hand, the reference to "incapacity for
work outside
the police force" in s 10(1A)(b)(ii) and, on the other hand, the reference
to "incapable ... of personally exercising
the functions of a police officer" in
the s 10(1) definition of "disabled member of the police force" and in
ss 10B(1) and 10B(2)(c).
According to the respondent, that context rebuts
any same-word
presumption
the meaning of incapacity in s 10(1A) compared with ss 10(1) and
The proper construction of s 10(1A)(b)(ii)
starting point for ascertainment of the meaning of a statutory provision is, of
course, the text of the provision considered
in light of its context and
Where the text read in context permits of more than one potential meaning, the
choice between those meanings may ultimately turn
on an evaluation of the
relative coherence of each with the scheme of the statute and its identified
The majority of the Court of Appeal held that there was no reason to restrict s
10(1A)(b)(ii) to incapacity for work outside the
police force caused by the
member having been hurt on duty when a member of the police force. But, with
respect, there are in fact
a number of textual and contextual indications in ss
7, 10(1A)(b)(ii), 10(1A)(c) and 10B that the operation of s 10(1A)(b)(ii) is
with s 7, although a member of the police force who is rendered incapable of
exercising the functions of a police officer
from an infirmity of body or mind
caused otherwise than by being hurt on duty is entitled to a superannuation
allowance proportionate
to the member's number of years of service, such a
member is not entitled to any "additional amount" in respect of the member's
for work outside the police force. That suggests, or at least is
consistent with, a legislative intent that there should be no annual
superannuation allowance paid in respect of incapacity for work outside the
police force not caused by being hurt on duty. Admittedly,
as the majority of
the Court of Appeal
s 7 is not in itself inconsistent with a legislative intent that a member
who is rendered incapable of discharging the functions
of a police officer by
reason of an infirmity of body or mind caused by being hurt on duty should be
paid an additional amount in
respect of any incapacity for work outside the
police force caused by something else. But it is significant that there are no
or implicit indications in s 7 that such a result was
next to s 10(1A)(b)(ii), as has been seen, "disabled member of the police force"
is defined in s 10(1) as a member who has
been certified
personally exercising the functions of a police officer from a specified
infirmity caused by being hurt on duty. In the absence
of contrary legislative
indication, the natural and ordinary linguistic implication of the use in
s 10(1A)(b) of the cognate expression
for work outside
that it imports the same idea of incapacity:
incapacity from a
specified infirmity caused by the member being hurt on duty. Certainly, as the
respondent submitted, the definition
of "disabled member of the police force"
refers to incapacity in respect of police work while the expression in
s 10(1A)(b)(ii) is
descriptive of incapacity in respect of work outside it.
But given the use of cognate expressions within the one section, it is
to suppose that, if a different meaning of incapacity had been
intended in the latter context, it would have been specified. Taken
matters mentioned in what follows, that points towards the construction of
s 10(1A)(b)(ii) urged by the appellant.
next to s 10(1A)(c), the statutory exclusion of s 10(1A)(b) where
s 10(1A)(c) applies, and vice versa, conveys that "incapacitated"
expression "totally incapacitated for work outside the police force" in s
10(1A)(c) has the same meaning as "incapacity" in
the expression "incapacity for
work outside the police force" in s 10(1A)(b)(ii).
to the respondent's submissions, it is also apparent that "incapacitated for
work outside the police force" in s 10(1A)(c)
must mean incapacitated for work
outside the police force from the specified infirmity of body or mind which
rendered the member
incapable of exercising the functions of a police officer
and which was caused by being hurt on duty. That is implicit in the requirement
in s 10(1A)(c)(ii) that the additional amount of between 12.25 and 27.25
per cent of attributed salary payable under s 10(1A)(c)(i)
in respect of the
disabled member's incapacity for work outside the police force be commensurate
with the abnormality of the risks
to which the member was exposed. As the
chapeau to s 10(1A)(c) makes clear, the risks are those that cause the
member to be hurt
on duty. The provision thereby draws a clear link between the
additional amount payable and the event of the member being hurt on
despite the respondent's suggestion that the provision should perhaps be seen as
the result of political compromise of
which the aims are inscrutable, it is
inherently unlikely that the legislative purpose of s 10(1A)(c) is to
provide for additional
amounts by reference to risks that played no role in
rendering the member incapable of work outside the police force. The idea of
legislative intent to provide for an additional amount of up to 15 per cent
of attributed salary for risks to which a member was
exposed but which did not
contribute to the member's incapacity for work outside the police force not only
is arbitrary but significantly
ill-accords with the absence of any "additional
amount" benefits from the benefits for which s 7 provides where a member is
outside the course of duty. By contrast, the likelihood of a legislative
intent to provide for an additional amount of up to 15
per cent of attributed
salary for risks so grave as to result in an injury when on duty which renders a
member both incapable of
discharging the functions of a police officer and
totally incapacitated for work outside the police force appears compelling.
that "incapacity" in the expression "incapacity for work outside the police
force" in s 10(1A)(b)(ii) appears to have the same
"incapacitated" in the expression "totally incapacitated for work outside the
police force" in s 10(1A)(c), s 10(1A)(c)
thus provides strong support for
the conclusion that "incapacity" in s 10(1A)(b)(ii) means, as it does in
the cognate term in s 10(1A)(c),
incapacitated for work outside the police
force from the specified infirmity of body or mind which rendered the member
of exercising the functions of a police officer and which was caused
by being hurt on duty.
likelihood of that being so is in turn further fortified by the fact that,
perforce of s 10B(2), no annual superannuation allowance
is payable under
s 10 to a member who resigns or retires by reason of being rendered
incapable of exercising the functions of a police
officer from a specified
infirmity caused by being hurt on duty, unless the member notifies the
Commissioner of Police of the injury
before resigning or retiring and within six
months of receiving the injury which caused that specified infirmity. The
the notification is to allow the Commissioner of Police to
investigate the injury for the purpose of making a "hurt on duty" determination
under s 10B(3). If s 10 contemplated the payment of an additional
amount for incapacity for work outside the police force arising
infirmity other than the specified infirmity of body or mind caused by being
hurt on duty, it is to be expected that the
Act would have provided for similar
temporal limits for notification of that other infirmity. Otherwise, s 10
would have the unlikely
consequence that, although the Act sets strict time
limits for the notification of the injury claimed to have rendered a member who
resigns or retires incapable of exercising the functions of a police officer,
and conditions the payment of annual superannuation
allowances on compliance, a
member could delay for an indefinite period of time before notifying the
Commissioner of Police or STC
of an injury not caused by being hurt on duty that
is claimed to render the member who resigns or retires incapable of work outside
the police force.
majority of the Court of Appeal
and the respondent emphasised, that s 10(1BA) permits a disabled member to
make an application for payment of the annual superannuation
allowance or
additional amount before the member reaches the age of 60 years or up to
five years after the member resigns or retires,
whichever is later, and
s 10(1D) empowers STC to make and vary a determination of an additional
amount "at any time". But contrary
to the reasoning of the majority of the
Court of Appeal, and the respondent's submissions, that does not imply that a
notify STC at any time up to the age of 60 years or five years after
resigning or retiring of an infirmity caused otherwise than
by being hurt on
duty that is claimed to render the member incapable of work outside the police
force. Those sub-sections do not
undercut the notification requirements in
s 10B(2). Rather, it appears from the way in which s 10(1BA) groups the
application time
limits for superannuation allowance with the application time
limits for additional amounts, and seemingly treats them as one, that
class of injury contemplated by s 10(1BA) is injury sustained in the course of
duty which results in an infirmity rendering
the member incapable of exercising
the functions of a police officer. Hence, as it appears, s 10(1D) is limited to
dealing with
the possibility of that specified infirmity so developing over time
as either to cause or to exacerbate the member's incapacity for
work outside the
police force.
those considerations together conveys that the preferable view of
s 10(1A)(b)(ii) is that, like s 10(1A)(c), it contemplates
kind of incapacity for work outside the police force, being incapacity the
result of the specified infirmity of body or
mind determined to have been caused
by the member being hurt on duty when a member of the police
Lembcke v SAS Trustee Corporation
Lembcke v SAS Trustee
Corporation
the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of New South Wales rejected an argument
that the "additional amount" payable under s 10(1A)(b)(ii)
was subject to
an implicit limitation that a disabled member receiving a superannuation
allowance under s 10(1A) as well as earnings
outside of the police force
should not be better off than he or she would have been on his or her
pre-disablement salary. The argument
was in effect that s 10(1A) should be
conceived of as having a hybrid character comprised of a purely superannuate
automatic entitlement
to 72.75 per cent and a further compensatory element for
incapacity for work outside the police force of up to 12.25 per
regardless of its proper characterisation, s 10(1A) required no more than a
consideration of what additional amount, in the
opinion of STC, is commensurate,
in the sense of proportionate, with the member's incapacity for work
the police force. Meagher JA
a similar vein that the "section requires ... one question, and one question
only, what is the applicant's incapacity for work
outside the police force?"
10(1A) was plainly not compensatory and therefore the idea of an implied
limitation fell away.
this case, Sackville A-JA invoked
as support for the idea that
the construction of s 10(1A) for which the respondent contended should not
be rejected simply because
it produces what might be thought to be anomalous
Likewise, in submissions before this Court, the respondent invoked
in support of his submission that the construction of s 10(1A) for
which he contended is consistent with the superannuate nature of
a fund into
which members pay contributions to ensure that if they are "hurt on duty" and in
consequence lose their careers in the
police force, they are thereafter provided
for with superannuation benefits at a level commensurate with their ability to
work outside
the police force.
from making clear, however, that s 10(1A) is to be construed in accordance
with its terms rather than according to preconceptions
really takes the matter no further. Plainly enough,
s 10(1A) provides for benefits commensurate with the extent to which a
is incapacitated for work outside the police force. But the question
remains whether, upon its proper construction, s 10(1A) confines
benefits to incapacity for work outside the police force the result of an
infirmity caused by injury sustained in the course
of duty. And for the reasons
given, it should be concluded that it does.
Legislative history
and extrinsic materials
although it is not a strong point, that construction of s 10(1A) appears
consistent with the legislative history of the
Act and the extrinsic materials.
As has been discussed, ss 10(1), 10(1A) and 10B of the Act were introduced by
amendment in 1979
to replace provisions which allowed for a maximum pension of
72.75 per cent of salary in office. The purpose of the amendment was
the Second Reading Speech in the lower house
"The main changes will be to bring benefits to Police in line with
those under the Workers' Compensation Act which has been used to
determine the
level of lump sum benefits for the loss of a limb, the loss of an eye, etc, and
also in the event of death.
Pensions on discharge due to injury may be increased from 72.75 per cent
of salary to 85 per cent provided such increase does not
exceed the amount
that would have been paid as a weekly allowance had the Workers' Compensation
Act applied.
The Police Superannuation Board is to be increased to include the Registrar
of the Workers' [C]ompensation Commission and this will
be the body to determine
the amount of pension to be paid and will take into consideration the nature of
the wound or injury and
the ability of the officer to earn on the open labour
market, and any other relevant factors.
The 85 per cent of salary
will be paid where the injured officer is totally incapacitated for all work as
distinct from Police duties.
Cabinet also decided that in special circumstances
more than 85 per cent, but never exceeding 100 per cent, of salary
could be paid
if in the opinion of the Commissioner the injury which resulted
in total incapacity was received in circumstances which exposed the
exceptional risks.
(emphasis added)
was further stated
bill would provide a statutory minimum superannuation allowance of 72.75 per
cent of salary. A member of the police force
whose disability also
causes incapacity for work outside the police force
would be paid an amount
in addition to the disablement allowance
The additional amount would
not exceed 12.25 per cent of the salary of office and be commensurate with the
extent of incapacity.
In such cases the maximum annual allowance would
therefore be 85 per cent of salary. However,
in cases of total
incapacity associated with exposure to exceptional risk
, the additional
amount would be no less than 12.25 per cent and no more than 27.25 per
cent – the maximum allowance being therefore
100 per cent of salary.
The result would be that hurt-on-duty pensions could reflect the degree of
incapacity suffered and also any exceptional risk undertaken.
(emphasis added)
is to be observed that the latter emphasised observations were directed to s
10(1A)(c) rather than s 10(1A)(b), but the fact that
s 10(1A)(c) was
intended to have the effect there stated is consistent with s 10(1A)(b)
operating as the appellant contended.
the Court of Appeal, Sackville A-JA pointed
following part of the Second Reading Speech as supporting the contrary
consideration has been given to the time from which the new hurt-on-duty
benefits should operate. The conclusion reached
is that the only way of
ensuring equity in this matter is to provide that the new benefits apply only in
respect of injuries received
after the commencement of the hurt-on-duty
provisions of the bill. However, the benefits would apply to a member of the
police force
who is hurt on duty after the commencement of these provisions but
who does not suffer infirmity until he has left the police force."
respect, however, that statement is apt to refer to a situation where the
infirmity is caused from being hurt on duty but does
not manifest until a later
point. It does not suggest that s 10(1A)(b)(ii) should be construed
otherwise than as the appellant contended.
examinations
counsel for the respondent drew attention to the fact that, although s 10B makes
explicit provision for STC to have regard
to medical advice before certifying a
member incapable from a specified infirmity caused by being hurt on duty of
exercising the
functions of a police officer, the Act makes no explicit
provision for STC to have regard to medical advice when determining whether
member is incapacitated or totally incapacitated for work outside the police
force. In counsel's submission, that difference is
unsurprising and not
inconsistent with the construction of s 10(1A)(b) for which he contended.
Once a member is certified incapable
of exercising the functions of a police
officer, the member is granted an annual superannuation allowance and, if the
member thereafter
applies for a variation of the allowance, STC would have power
as part of its power to do "all things that are necessary or convenient
done for, or in connection with, the exercise of STC's
to insist upon medical examination as a condition of its consideration of the
application for variation, and to engage medical advisors
as appropriate.
much may be accepted. But none of that does anything to lessen the force of the
considerations already identified that point
in favour of the conclusion that
the only incapacity with which s 10(1A)(b)(ii) is concerned is incapacity
from a specified infirmity
of body or mind caused by a member being hurt on duty
when a member of the police force. Granted, once a member has been certified
under s 10B as incapable of exercising the functions of a police officer,
an annual superannuation allowance becomes payable and
any application
thereafter for a variation of amount will entail a separate consideration. But
it remains that what is to be considered
is the effect on the member of the
infirmity which rendered the member incapable of exercising the functions of a
police officer.
Conclusion and orders
the result, it should be held that, upon the proper construction of
s 10(1A)(b) of the Act, the expression "member's incapacity
outside the police force" means the member's incapacity from a specified
infirmity of body or mind determined pursuant to
s 10B or on appeal to have been
caused by the member being hurt on duty when he or she was a member of the
police force. The appeal
should be allowed. Orders 1 and 2 of the Court of
Appeal of the Supreme Court of New South Wales made on 4 May 2017 should be
aside and in their place it should be ordered that the appeal to the Court
of Appeal be dismissed. The appellant is to pay the respondent's
costs of the
appeal to this Court.
J. Statutory construction is the process by which meaning is attributed to
doubtful case, it involves constructional
The statutory text must be considered from the outset in
attribution of meaning to the text in context must be guided so far as possible
by statutory
the understanding that a legislature ordinarily intends to pursue its purposes
by coherent
for Mr Miles emphasised the naivety of thinking that s 10(1A)(b)(ii) of the
Police Regulation (Superannuation) Act 1906
(NSW) ("the Act") is other
than the product of industrial compromise. However, neither he nor counsel for
the SAS Trustee Corporation
("STC") suggested that the industrial character of
the sub-paragraph warrants departure from any of those principles of statutory
construction.
Construction
of s 10(1A)(b)(ii) is informed by the context of that sub-paragraph within
the second of two mutually exclusive streams
of superannuation allowance for
which the Act provides. Within that context, it is further informed by the
extent to which textually
available alternative constructions of the
sub-paragraph contribute to the achievement by coherent means of the evident
purpose for
which that second stream of superannuation allowance is provided.
first stream of superannuation allowance, for which provision is made in
s 7(1), applies where a member either retires or is
discharged after being
certified by STC under s 8(1) to be "incapable, from infirmity of body or
mind, of personally exercising the
functions of a police officer" referred to in
Police Act 1990
(NSW). The annual allowance
applicable under
is calculated as a percentage of the member's
attributed salary at the time of retirement or discharge irrespective of the
(if any) of the member's incapacity for work outside the police force.
The percentage varies solely by reference to the member's
length of service and
is capped at 72.75 per cent for a member who has served 30 or more years. The
allowance is payable irrespective
of the extent (if any) to which the member
might have an incapacity for work outside the police force and, in the case of a
discharged after being certified to be incapable of personally exercising
the functions of a police officer, continues even though
the member might
subsequently make a full recovery.
second stream of superannuation allowance, for which provision is made in
, applies only where a member or former member falls within the
definition of a "disabled member of the police force" in
that definition is the gateway through which a member or former member of the
police force must pass in order to become
entitled to superannuation allowance
within that second stream. The gateway, however, is not unrelated to the path
to which it leads.
Importantly, the definition explains the purpose for which
an entitlement to the second stream of superannuation allowance is bestowed
member who passes through the gateway. More importantly for present purposes,
the definition explains the content of and the
relationship between the
components of that allowance.
a member or former member to fall within the definition, two preconditions must
be met. The first precondition is met, in the
case of a member, if the member
is discharged after being certified, by STC under s 10B(1), "to be
incapable, from a specified infirmity
of body or mind, of personally exercising
the functions of a police officer" referred to in
or, in the case of a former member, if the former member has been
certified by STC under s 10B(2) to be "incapable, from an infirmity
or mind, of personally exercising the functions of a police officer" referred to
second precondition, applicable equally to a member or former member, is that
the same infirmity that has been the subject of
certification by STC under
s 10B(1) or s 10B(2), as the case may be, has been determined by the
Commissioner of Police under s 10B(3),
or by the District Court on appeal
under s 21(4), to have been caused by the member or former member having
been "hurt on duty" when
a member of the police force. The expression "hurt on
duty" is defined in s 1(2) of the Act to mean injured in circumstances
if the member were a worker, would entitle the member to compensation
Workers Compensation Act
(NSW). A worker is
entitled to compensation under that Act if the worker has received a personal
injury arising out of or in the
second stream of superannuation allowance is accordingly only available to a
member or former member who has an infirmity of
body or mind which has been
determined by the Commissioner of Police under s 10B(3), or by the District
Court on appeal under s 21(4),
to have arisen out of or in the course of
his or her employment as a police officer.
the second stream of superannuation allowance, s 10(1A)(a) operates to
provide a disabled member of the police force with
an entitlement to a base
level annual allowance of 72.75 per cent of the member's attributed salary at
the time of retirement or
discharge – equivalent to the highest level of
allowance available under the first stream. The entitlement of a disabled
to that base level annual allowance exists irrespective of the extent (if
any) to which the disabled member might be incapacitated
for work outside the
police force and continues even though the disabled member might make a full
recovery after discharge or retirement.
that base level annual allowance an additional amount is then to be added under
s 10(1A)(b) or (c) if and to the extent that the
disabled member of the
police force is incapacitated for work outside the police force.
a disabled member or former member who is "totally incapacitated for work
outside the police force" and who, "in the opinion
of STC, ... was hurt on duty
because the member was required to be exposed to risks to which members of the
general workforce would
normally not be required to be exposed in the course of
their employment", s 10(1A)(c)(i) provides for an additional amount which
can take the annual allowance to a level between 85 per cent and
100 per cent of the member's attributed salary at the time of
or discharge. The precise additional amount is required by
s 10(1A)(c)(ii) to be "commensurate, in the opinion of STC, with the
to which the member was so required to be exposed".
a disabled member or former member to whom s 10(1A)(c) does not apply,
s 10(1A)(b)(i) provides for an additional amount which
can take the annual
allowance to a level up to 85 per cent of the member's attributed salary at the
time of retirement or discharge.
The precise additional amount is required by
s 10(1A)(b)(ii) to be "commensurate, in the opinion of STC, with the
member's incapacity
for work outside the police force". Section 10(1D) makes
provision for STC to determine at any time an additional amount under
10(1A)(b) or (c) and to vary at any time any such determination.
elaborate structure has a coherent operation if, but only if: (1) the
incapacity for work outside the police force which is
captured by each of
s 10(1A)(b)(ii) and s 10(1A)(c) is the same incapacity; and (2) the
incapacity is an incapacity attributable
to the same specified infirmity of body
or mind that has been determined by the Commissioner of Police under
s 10B(3), or by the
District Court on appeal under s 21(4), to have
been caused by the member being hurt on duty.
the incapacity for work outside the police force which is captured by each of
s 10(1A)(b)(ii) and s 10(1A)(c) is so construed,
the structure of the
additional amount provided for by s 10(1A)(b) and (c) is internally
coherent. The focus throughout is on the
specified infirmity of body or mind
that has been determined by the Commissioner of Police under s 10B(3), or
by the District Court
on appeal under s 21(4), to have been caused by the
disabled member being hurt on duty. The inquiry throughout is as to the extent
to which, in the opinion of STC, that specified infirmity has rendered the
disabled member incapacitated for work outside the police
additional amount which can take the annual allowance to a level up to 85 per
cent of the disabled member's attributed salary
becomes available by reference
to STC's opinion under s 10(1A)(b) as to the extent to which the specified
infirmity has resulted
in the disabled member being incapacitated for work
outside the police force – 85 per cent being commensurate with STC forming
the opinion that the specified infirmity has resulted in the disabled member
being totally incapacitated for work outside the police
force. The greater
additional amount which can take the annual allowance to a level between 85 per
cent and 100 per cent of the
disabled member's attributed salary becomes
available under s 10(1A)(c) where STC forms the opinion that a disabled
member who is
totally incapacitated for work outside the police force suffered
the specified infirmity by reason of being required to be exposed
to risks to
which members of the general workforce would normally not be required to be
exposed in the course of their employment.
alternative construction of s 10(1A)(b)(ii), of which the majority in the
Court of Appeal was persuaded, is that the sub-paragraph
refers to incapacity
for work outside the police force irrespective of the source of that incapacity.
Although that construction
is textually available, it results in a distortion of
the complementary operation of s 10(1A)(b) and (c) in setting an additional
amount which the disabled member is entitled to be paid.
relationship between s 10(1A)(b) and (c) appears not to have been the
subject of detailed submissions before the Court of Appeal.
Taking that
relationship into account, the conclusion of Schmidt J must be preferred to
that of the majority.
appeal must therefore be allowed. I agree with the orders proposed by
Kiefel CJ, Bell and Nettle JJ.
Section 10(1A) of the
Police Regulation (Superannuation) Act 1906
(NSW), when read with the definitions that precede
relevantly provides for
"the annual superannuation allowance
a [member of the police force who is discharged after being certified
... to be incapable, from a specified infirmity of body or
mind, of personally
exercising the functions of a police officer ... that infirmity being determined
... to have been
caused by the member being hurt on duty
]" (emphasis
annual superannuation allowance has two components. First, s 10(1A)(a)
provides that the allowance contains a base amount of
72.75 per cent of the
member's attributed salary of office. Secondly, s 10(1A)(b) provides,
subject to an exception that does not
apply in this case, for an "additional
amount" that is not more than a further 12.25 per cent of the member's
attributed salary of
office and which is "commensurate, in the opinion of [the
SAS Trustee Corporation], with the member's incapacity for work outside
police force". This appeal concerns the preconditions for an award of this
additional amount.
essential issue on this appeal is the interpretation of the words of
s 10(1A). The appellant submitted that a precondition for
the award of the
additional amount of the annual superannuation allowance, like the precondition
for the base amount, is that the
member's incapacity for work arises from the
specified infirmity "caused by the member being hurt on duty". The respondent,
the approach of the majority of the Court of Appeal of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales, submitted that the additional amount
the annual superannuation allowance includes an amount for incapacity for work
outside the police force whether or not that incapacity
(i) arises from the
specified infirmity or (ii) was caused by the member being hurt on duty.
is a textual difficulty with the respondent's interpretation, although this
difficulty was not a matter that was raised before
the Court of Appeal. In the
Court of Appeal, the parties' focus upon context and purpose led the Court to
divide as to the meaning
of s 10(1A). However, the textual difficulty for
the respondent's interpretation, identified during oral submissions in this
can be seen when s 10(1A) is read with the definitions included as
set out above. The difficulty is that the annual superannuation
which includes the base amount and the additional amount, is "for" both a person
and a purpose. The person must be a
member of the police force. The purpose
must be to provide for a member having a certified incapacity, arising from a
infirmity preventing the personal exercise of the functions of a
police officer, where that infirmity was "caused by the member being
text of s 10(1A), thus understood, naturally requires that the amount of
the annual superannuation allowance be confined to its
purpose, which includes
the causal requirement that the allowance be awarded for the particular
consequence of being hurt on duty.
The concept of a member of the police force
being "hurt on duty" is defined in s 1(2) as being "injured in such
circumstances as
would, if the member were a worker within the meaning of the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
, entitle the member to compensation under
Workers Compensation Act 1987
entitles a worker to compensation for an "injury", which is defined in
as "personal injury arising out of or in the course of employment".
task of statutory construction involves the legal application of the meaning of
statutory words, as interpreted, to the facts
of a case. In
Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings
this Court said that the task of statutory construction must begin and end with
the text of the statute. That statement does not
mean that the text of a
statute must be interpreted only according to the range of semantic meanings of
the individual words. It
means only that the interpretation of a statute, like
any other legal instrument, is an interpretation of its words. Those words
interpreted in their context and in light of their purpose although legal rules
can sometimes exclude or restrict the use of
some context. In ascertaining the
reasonably intended meaning of Parliament
text is, literally, those
matters to be considered (simultaneously) together with the text. Context can
give words an interpretation
that is the opposite of their ordinary meaning and
grammatical
Context can also permit a construction of words that excludes their application
to matters that would have fallen within the application
of their literal
However, as with contractual interpretation, where "the clearer the natural
meaning the more difficult it is to justify departing
in statutory interpretation "questions of degree arise" and it will be more
difficult to displace an interpretation that
"has a powerful advantage in
ordinary meaning and grammatical
reasons of Kiefel CJ, Bell and Nettle JJ demonstrate that the context
and purpose of s 10(1A) of the
Police Regulation (Superannuation) Act
supports the interpretation that an additional amount of the annual
superannuation allowance under s 10(1A)(b) is only available if
member's incapacity for work outside the police force is from the specified
infirmity of body or mind determined to have been
"caused by the member being
hurt on duty" when he or she was a member of the police force. That context and
purpose aligns with,
and reinforces, the natural and ordinary meaning of the
words of s 10(1A) when read together with its defined terms.
appeal should be allowed. I agree with the orders proposed by Kiefel CJ,
Bell and Nettle JJ.
Miles v SAS Trustee
Corporation
[2017] NSWCA 86.
Miles v SAS Trustee
Corporation
(2016) 22 DCLR (NSW) 223;
[2016] NSWDC 56.
Police Regulation
(Superannuation) Act 1906
(NSW), s 1A.
Police Regulation
(Superannuation and Appeals) Amendment Act 1979
(NSW), Sch 1 (8), (10).
Miles v SAS Trustee
Corporation
[2010] NSWIRComm 69.
Miles v SAS Trustee
Corporation
(2011) 206 IR 164.
Police Regulation
(Superannuation) Act 1906
(NSW), s 21(1).
Miles v SAS Trustee
Corporation
(2016) 22 DCLR (NSW) 223.
McGraw-Hinds (Aust) Pty Ltd
[1979] HCA 19
; (1979) 144 CLR 633 at 643 per Gibbs J;
[1979] HCA 19
Murphy v Farmer
(1988) 165 CLR 19 at 27 per Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ;
[1988] HCA 31
CIC Insurance Ltd v
Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384 at 408 per Brennan CJ,
Dawson, Toohey and Gummow JJ; [1997] HCA 2;
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
; (1998) 194 CLR 355 at 381
per McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ;
[1998] HCA 28
Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
; (2012) 250 CLR
[2012] HCA 55
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
; (2017) 91 ALJR 936 at 940-941
per Kiefel CJ, Nettle
and Gordon JJ;
[2017] HCA 34
; 347 ALR 405 at 410;
[2017] HCA 34.
Taylor v Owners –
Strata Plan No 11564
[2014] HCA 9
; (2014) 253 CLR 531 at 557
per Gageler
and Keane JJ;
[2014] HCA 9
[2017] HCA 34
; (2017) 91 ALJR 936 at 944
per Gageler J;
[2017] HCA 34
; 347 ALR 405 at 415.
Miles v SAS Trustee
Corporation
[2017] NSWCA 86 at [74] per Sackville A-JA (Payne JA
agreeing at [1]).
Emphasis added.
Miles v SAS Trustee
Corporation
[2017] NSWCA 86 at [4] per Payne JA, [67]
per Sackville A-JA.
[2003] NSWCA 136
; (2003) 56 NSWLR 736.
[2003] NSWCA 136
; (2003) 56 NSWLR
per Santow JA. See also at 739 [11]-[13].
[2003] NSWCA 136
; (2003) 56 NSWLR
(Meagher JA and Ipp JA agreeing at 737 [1],
[2003] NSWCA 136
; (2003) 56 NSWLR
[2003] NSWCA 136
; (2003) 56 NSWLR
736 at 751-752
(Meagher JA agreeing
at 737 [1]).
Miles v SAS Trustee
Corporation
[2017] NSWCA 86 at [55]-[56].
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 16 October 1979 at
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 16 October 1979 at
Miles v SAS Trustee
Corporation
[2017] NSWCA 86 at [92].
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 16 October 1979 at
Superannuation
Administration Act 1996
Thiess v Collector of
[2014] HCA 12
; (2014) 250 CLR 664 at 671
[2014] HCA 12.
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
; (2017) 91 ALJR 936 at 944
[2017] HCA 34
405 at 415;
[2017] HCA 34.
CIC Insurance Ltd v
Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384 at 408; [1997] HCA 2.
Thiess v Collector of
[2014] HCA 12
; (2014) 250 CLR 664 at 672
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
; (2017) 91 ALJR 936 at 940-941
, 944-945 [39]-[41],
[2017] HCA 34
; 347 ALR 405 at 410, 415, 416.
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
; (1998) 194 CLR 355 at 381-382
[1998] HCA 28.
Workers Compensation Act
when read with
(definition of "injury").
Allianz Australia Insurance
Ltd v GSF Australia Pty Ltd
[2005] HCA 26
; (2005) 221 CLR 568 at 574-575
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
239 CLR 27 at 44
[2009] HCA 41.
[2012] HCA 55
; (2012) 250 CLR 503 at 519
[2012] HCA 55.
Newspapers Ltd v Wavish
[1956] HCA 69
; (1956) 96 CLR 526 at 528;
[1956] HCA 69
Ballrooms Co Ltd v Zenith Investments (Torquay) Ltd
[1971] AC 850 at 880;
Director of Public Prosecutions (Nauru) v Fowler
[1984] HCA 48
; (1984) 154 CLR 627 at
[1984] HCA 48
Burragubba v Queensland
[2015] FCA 1163
; (2015) 236 FCR 160 at 164
Blackstone,
Commentaries on
the Laws of England
(1765), Introduction, §2 at 60;
Ex parte Walsh
and Johnson; In re Yates
[1925] HCA 53
; (1925) 37 CLR 36 at 91, 93;
[1925] HCA 53.
Arnold v Britton
AC 1619 at 1628 [18].
Cooper Brookes (Wollongong)
Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1981) 147 CLR 297 at 321;
Hepples v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1992] HCA 3
; (1992) 173 CLR 492 at
[1992] HCA 3
Telstra Corporation Ltd v Australasian Performing
Right Association Ltd
[1997] HCA 41
; (1997) 191 CLR 140 at 186;
[1997] HCA 41.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (311 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter