2002567 (Refugee) [2024] AATA 4218 (11 October 2024)
2002567 (Refugee)
[2024] AATA 4218
(11 October 2024)
DECISION RECORD
Migration & Refugee Division
CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
South Africa
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant
a protection visa.
Statement made on 11 October 2024 at
REFUGEE – protection visa –
South Africa – born and lived in third country but not eligible for
citizenship and
right to enter and reside lapsed – many short visits to
country of citizenship, with relatives and friends there – membership
particular social group – homosexual man – low profile and
protection of father – criminalisation and social
attitudes –
ethnicity – mixed race/’coloured’ – political opinion
– economic conditions and crime
– country information –
decision under review affirmed
LEGISLATION
ss 5H(1)(a)
(2)(a), (aa), (2A), (5),
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth), Schedule
BBK15 v MIBP
[2016] FCA 680
(2016) 241 FCR 150
[2015] FCA 478
SZSPT v MIBP
references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has been
omitted from this decision pursuant to section 431
Migration Act 1958
replaced with generic information which does not allow the identification of an
applicant, or their relative or other dependants.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
The applicant claims to be a citizen of South Africa. Noting that the applicant
has indicated that he was born in Zimbabwe and lived
there for many years, I
have addressed the question of his citizenship in detail in my consideration of
the applicant’s claims.
The applicant applied for a protection visa on 8 March 2017. On 31 January 2020
a delegate of the Minister for Home Affairs (the
Minister) made a decision to
refuse to grant the applicant a protection visa under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) (the Act). This is a review of that
The applicant attended a Tribunal hearing on 8 August 2024.
SUMMARY OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
Protection Visa Application
I have carefully considered all of the relevant evidence on the
Department’s file, including the protection visa application,
applicant’s statutory declaration, the submissions from the
applicant’s former representative and the documents submitted
Department by the applicant and his representative.
According to information provided in the protection visa application, the
applicant was born in Bulawayo, Zimbabwe in [Year]. The
applicant described
himself as a South African citizen.
The applicant indicated that he had lived at a number of addresses in Bulawayo,
Zimbabwe. The applicant gave his occupation as
[occupation 1]. With regard to
employment, the applicant referred to a number of jobs, including roles as [an
occupation 1] at [Employers
The applicant indicated in the application that he had a right to enter and
reside in Zimbabwe. He referred in this regard to his
nationality.
With regard to his family, the applicant indicated that his mother was a South
African citizen and resident in Australia at that
time. He indicated that his
father was born in Zimbabwe. He referred (at page 6 of the protection visa
application form) to a brother
born in [Year], a sister born in [Year] and
brother born in [Year]. He indicated that they were born in Zimbabwe, citizens
Africa and resident in Australia. The applicant referred to a further
sister, who was also resident in Australia at the time of the
application.
The applicant indicated that he had departed Zimbabwe on [Day 1] July 2016,
arriving in Australia on [Day 2] July 2016. He indicated
that he had entered as
a visitor, travelling on a South African passport issued in [2015]. The
applicant referred to numerous trips
to South Africa to visit family and
friends, including trips in July 2016, January/February 2016, August 2015,
March/April 2015,
October 2014, May 2013, December 2012 to January 2013, and
June/July 2012.
The applicant made a statutory declaration in support of the application. In
summary, he claimed that he would be persecuted by
Zimbabwean authorities if he
returned to his country. With regard to his citizenship, he stated that he could
not be granted citizenship
of Zimbabwe even though he had lived there since
birth because his parents were not Zimbabwean citizens. He provided copies of
birth certificate and his South African passport. He stated that, because he
was born in Zimbabwe and his parents had authority to
live in Zimbabwe, he was
also allowed to live and work in Zimbabwe and had done so until he came to
Australia [in] July 2016. He
provided a copy of his Zimbabwean ID.
The applicant indicated that he had three siblings who lived in Australia on a
permanent basis and that he had never married.
The applicant stated that he had been ‘certified by medical
practitioners’ as ‘homosexual in sex gender’.
He referred to
letters from a doctor in Zimbabwe and an Australian doctor, as well as a letter
from [Organisation] in Zimbabwe.
The applicant stated that homosexuality was illegal in Zimbabwe and that the
gay community watched with fear the government’s
stance towards them. He
stated that he had been gay all his life but that he had been hiding his
sexuality and living in fear of
being caught, arrested, tortured and
prosecuted.
The applicant referred to having worked for many years in the family business
‘[Business name]’ and described this as
a safe place to work. The
applicant described his parents’ roles and activities, and referred to
having been actively involved
in charity and community work. He stated that in
this way he avoided the treatment given to gay people in Zimbabwe. He described
his father as a ‘protection figure’ but indicated that his father
had passed away [in] December 2015 and was no longer
there to protect and
safeguard him from hostility, persecution and harassment. He referred to gay
people having to live a double
life to avoid stigmatisation, discrimination,
arrest and prosecution and to Zimbabweans being increasingly homophobic. He
gay rights as being dominated by the fact that same sex sexual
activity was illegal in Zimbabwe. He referred to campaigns against
men and women, and to laws passed in 2006. He referred also to Mugabe’s
views about the gay community and Mugabe’s
actions in this regard.
The applicant referred to the gay community in Zimbabwe living in constant fear
of being arrested, tortured and killed, and stated
that many gay people had been
persecuted. He referred to a pastor having been put on trial for speaking out
against repression and
human rights abuses. The applicant stated that the
government did not tolerate any open views or sympathy for the gay and lesbian
community. He referred to the arrest of officials of Gays and Lesbians Zimbabwe.
He stated that it was well known that people who
spoke in favour of rights of
gay and lesbian people were also targeted. The applicant referred to keeping a
low profile for fear
of being caught but stated that it was a matter of when he
would be caught. He stated that at his workplace he had started to have
that some people were going to expose him and get him into harm’s way. He
had also started feeling somewhat the same
around some people who he thought
were friends. He stated that they were becoming more vocal and he was getting
scared that he was
going to be surrendered to the police. He stated that he did
not have a normal life because he was scared every day that he would
arrested. He referred to activities he avoided for fear of being caught. He
described feeling suffocated, unsafe and fearful on
a constant basis while in
The applicant stated that he had been to South Africa on a number of occasions
but each time he had stayed for a short time. He
stated that he was well aware
of the situation in South Africa and that he knew about gay people who had been
beaten, stabbed, strangled
and stoned to death. He referred to such incidents
causing fear to the gay and lesbian community. He stated that it seemed that it
was not safe for him to be in South Africa. He stated that he had been to South
Africa on many occasions and had been warned by people
known to him of dire
consequences if his sexuality were to be known to people.
The applicant also made claims with respect to being opposed to
‘Mugabe’s political parties’. He stated that some
people knew
he opposed Zanu-PF and he had become very concerned that he would be caught out
and that that would be the start of his
woes/prosecution. He stated that it was
for this combination of reasons he had become very fearful, particularly when he
happened to gay people when they were caught/reported, and what
happened to people who opposed the government. He stated that Zanu-PF
were there to catch the opponents of Mugabe and not provide protection to people
like him. He stated that the whole system
was run by people loyal to Mugabe and
there was no way out until the collapse of the regime. He stated that, although
the MDC shared
power, Zanu-PF was the dominant and widespread party and ruled
the country. MDC members and supporters were considered to be enemies
government. The applicant stated that people like him who were MDC supporters,
did not speak Shona and were coloured faced
difficulties, intimidation,
humiliation and worse. He stated that they grew up learning and speaking
English, and overnight the authorities
were trying to make Shona the main
language in Zimbabwe.
The applicant described the political situation in Zimbabwe, referring to it as
very volatile. He referred to people being arrested
and tortured, and
disappearing. He referred to racial tensions increasing and to many people
leaving Zimbabwe for reasons of persecution,
harassment and intimidation. He
stated that he and his family suffered persecution and discrimination on other
fronts as well because
they opposed Zanu-PF and were considered supporters of
the MDC, and because they were classed as aliens. He stated that Mugabe and
party treated such people with suspicion and contempt. People like them were
mistreated, harassed, discriminated against, deprived
of rights and persecuted.
He referred to Mugabe’s people looking for opportunities to
involve/implicate people who were opposed
to the party in wrongdoing and
persecute them. He stated that many were arrested, beaten, tortured and killed
just for being MDC
supporters.
The applicant referred to a possibility that, if Mugabe’s people came to
know his identity and his support for the MDC and
the fact that he had
Australian relatives and was in Australia, there would be serious repercussions.
This was more probable because
he was classed as gay and a ‘coloured
alien’. The applicant said that due to his political views and support for
opposition party people like him were targeted by the regime which he
described as being built on a dictatorship. The applicant referred
having been in power since 1980 and to abuses committed by Zanu-PF personnel. He
described feeling very scared because
he was alone. He made submissions to the
effect that he would never change his political view as a pro-democracy
supporter and described
being aware of the consequences. He stated that his
views and past support of the opposition were now most probably known to the
local authorities and supporters of Mugabe. He referred to facing harassment,
arrest, physical violence and even worse. The applicant
stated that he had only
felt freedom after coming to Australia.
The applicant stated that his visits to South Africa had been short and for the
purposes of visiting relatives, friends, etc. He
stated that he had not lived or
worked there and could not live there.
The applicant described the purpose of his visit to Australia and referred to
discussing his situation with his family. He stated
that he could live a safe
life as a gay person and did not have to live in constant fear. He described
wanting to live the rest of
his life freely, usefully and with human dignity and
without fear. He stated that nothing had happened to him personally because
had tried to live his life in hiding which had become suffocating and a life
without aim, purpose or direction. The applicant
described his hopes for the
The applicant stated that it was not easy to leave his motherland and that was
why it had taken him a while to take this step. He
stated that he knew that, if
Mugabe’s men had come to know about him, his life would certainly be in
danger and he had to take
this step because he refused to live in fear and
without any sense of human dignity.
The applicant stated that he had worked all his life, held trade qualifications
and possessed lengthy work experience. He referred
to being able to find work
and live life as a useful member of the community. He referred to having worked
in [Country 1] and in
his family business in Zimbabwe. He described himself as a
law-abiding citizen and provided a copy of a police report from Zimbabwe.
applicant also referred to a statement from a Zimbabwean journalist living in
[Country 2].
The applicant submitted a number of documents in support of his application,
including the following:
A copy of the
bio-data pages of his South African passport issued on [in] 2015. This recorded
Zimbabwe as the applicant’s place
Copies of his
birth certificate recording his birth in Bulawayo in [Year]. The birth
certificate recorded his father’s place
of birth as Rhodesia and his
mother’s place of birth as [Country 3]. Neither parent is recorded as
having a National Identity
Card number.
A full copy of
the applicant’s South African passport. This records numerous entries to,
and exits from, places such as [Country
3], South Africa and Zimbabwe. It also
appears to record arrivals in Australia, including [in] July 2016, [September]
2016, [December]
2016, [January] 2017 and [February] 2017.
A copy of what
appears to be a Zimbabwean National Registration card.
A copy of a
Queensland Driver Licence.
A letter of 27
October 2016 from [Ms A], [Official position] of [Organisation] in Bulawayo,
Zimbabwe. The letter described the role
of the [Organisation] and the nature of
[Ms A]’s relationship with the applicant. It described the applicant as an
forthright, benevolent and upstanding member of the LGBTI community. It
stated that these positive personal attributes were not appreciated
Zimbabwean society. It referred in particular to the ‘political powers
that be’ and stated that this led to
the applicant leaving Zimbabwe as
life in Zimbabwe living as an openly gay man had become increasingly risky for
A letter of 10
November 2016 from [Dr B] stating that the applicant was known to them in both
Zimbabwe and Australia. [Dr B] confirmed
that the applicant was homosexual.
A statutory
declaration from [Ms C] who indicated that she was a former national of Zimbabwe
and now lived in [Country 2]. [Ms C]
described her background, activities and
experiences in Zimbabwe. She described, for instance, experiencing difficulties
at the hands
of ZANU-PF and the state controlled media. She referred also to the
corruption of the government and its officials, and to experiencing
intimidation. She described the situation in Zimbabwe as extremely volatile. [Ms
C] also described attitudes to homosexuality in
Zimbabwe, stating for instance
that homosexuality was a dirty word to anyone connected with the ruling party
and many of the masses.
She referred to a risk of a homosexual Zimbabwean being
subjected to brutal interrogation should he return to the country. She described
the operation of the regime and expressed the view that Mugabe would die in
power. She stated that she had homosexual friends in
Harare and Bulawayo, and
that they all kept the lowest profile possible, living in fear of exposure. She
stated that those who had
not been able to cope had left for other
A letter, dated
11 August 2019, from [Ms A], who describes herself as a trans woman and refers
to her experiences and activities in
Zimbabwe. The letter refers to the
treatment of LGBTQ individuals in Zimbabwe by police and government agents as
well as members
of the public. It refers to a lack of protection. The letter
describes Zimbabwe as being unsafe for members of the LGBTQ community
that the applicant’s return to Zimbabwe could be potentially dangerous for
him, even to the extent of endangering
A letter of 8
August 2019 from [D], Senior Admin Officer at [Workplace]. The letter refers to
the applicant’s employment at
the [Workplace] and describes his character
and attributes.
A copy of an
‘S.A. Citizen’ Identity Card, apparently issued to the applicant
[in] October 2005.
The applicant’s (then) representative made a submission dated 7 March
2017. This referred to aspects of the applicant’s
history and background,
including his sexuality, his mixed race (described as ‘coloured’)
and his being opposed to Mugabe’s
government. Submissions were made to the
effect that homosexuality was illegal in Zimbabwe, and that the gay community
was discriminated
against, arrested and tortured. It was submitted that the
applicant was part of a particular social group and had a well-founded
his membership of that group. It was submitted that homosexuality was illegal.
Submissions were made to the effect that
the applicant faced harm for reason of
being gay, being of mixed race and opposing Zanu-PF. Reference was also made to
the applicant’s
political opinion.
The submission referred to aspects of the legislation and legal framework.
The submission referred to a risk of harm to the applicant because he was gay,
of mixed race and opposed Zanu-PF. Further, he was
likely to be persecuted on
his return to Zimbabwe due to being against the Mugabe regime and supporting the
opposition party. It
was submitted that the fear the applicant held was based on
what was happening to gay people in both Zimbabwe and South Africa. It
submitted that the applicant’s opposition to the ‘current
regime’ and his being of mixed race raised the real
possibility of
persecution if he returned to his ‘home country’. The submission
addressed the political situation in
Zimbabwe as well as human rights abuses in
the country. This included reference to discrimination against the LGBT
community and
persons with HIV/AIDS. It was submitted that the applicant was
aware of the persecution of people from the gay community and those
who opposed
the regime. He was likely to be persecuted if he returned. Reference was made to
aspects of the Human Rights Watch World
Report 2015 with respect to Zimbabwe as
well as the US Department of State’s 2014 Human Rights Report on Zimbabwe.
It was submitted
that the applicant had taken part in protest against the
government, albeit ‘on a low scale without having been exposed’.
was submitted that he had grave concerns that the fact of his being homosexual
would expose him, if caught, to serious investigations
which might include his
activities against the government.
It was submitted that there was evidence that gay people in Zimbabwe, when
exposed, had been mistreated, harassed, threatened abused
and mistreated. Same
sex relationships were not only unlawful but the regime had formed its own views
had avoided the consequences because he had
worked mostly in the family business, kept a low profile and had the support of
his influential
father who had died about a year earlier. If he returned to
Zimbabwe, he would have no protection and would be likely to be exposed
employment and socialising. He now had no family members in Zimbabwe. The
submission referred to the statutory declaration
of a well-known former
journalist living in [Country 2]. It was submitted that articles clearly showed
that homosexuals were mistreated,
threatened, abused, tortured and even killed
in Zimbabwe and South Africa. It was submitted that same sex sexual activity was
offence in Zimbabwe and reference was made in this regard to an
article entitled
LGBT Rights in Zimbabwe
was submitted that the applicant was very likely to be persecuted if he returned
to Zimbabwe. Submissions were also made to the
effect that the applicant
satisfied the complementary protection criterion. In this regard, reference was
made to the applicant’s
sexuality, his being opposed to the ‘current
regime’, the fact that he would be a failed refugee applicant and would
persecuted on the basis that he had spoken against the Mugabe government, his
having lived in a western country (it was submitted
that he would be taken to
have been brainwashed to believe in western values) and his mixed race. It was
submitted that, if he returned
to Zimbabwe, he would be subject to
discrimination and mistreatment in all walks of life. It was submitted that the
applicant had
a well-founded fear based on being a member of a particular social
group and being seen to be against the current regime. His need
for protection
was greater now he had spoken out about his fears. There was a risk of
significant harm to him if he were to return
to Zimbabwe.
The reports referred to in the submission included a Human Rights Watch report
of 13 July 2016 entitled
Zimbabwe returns to its ugly past
and the Human
Rights Watch World Report on Zimbabwe.
The applicant’s representative made a further submission dated 16 August
2019. The submission referred to the applicant’s
membership of a
particular social group. It was submitted that, while the applicant held a South
African passport, he had always
lived in Zimbabwe prior to coming to Australia.
He feared that he would not be able to live openly in his home country as a gay
if his sexual orientation were known. He had nowhere to go in Zimbabwe.
His house had been vandalised and taken over by invasion.
He no longer had
property rights. Having been out of Zimbabwe for a period exceeding 6 months, he
no longer had residency there and
would require a residency application to enter
Zimbabwe. He would have no employment and would be unable to sustain himself.
was made to the state of the Zimbabwean economy. It was submitted that
being gay made it a lot more difficult to find employment.
He had never lived
anywhere other than in Zimbabwe. He did not have any ties in South Africa.
Reference was made to DFAT’s
Country Information Report on Zimbabwe and to
a US Department of State report addressing the position of LGBTI individuals in
Submissions were also made in relation to the complementary protection
criterion. It was submitted that LGBTI people were treated
differently in all
walks of life and that, if returned to Zimbabwe, the applicant would be
subjected to discrimination and mistreatment
in all walks of like. Reference was
made to other Tribunal decisions. It was submitted that the applicant’s
fear was real given
what had happened to others in a similar situation and
suffered persecution at the hands of government agencies, because of their
opposition to the Mugabe regime. It was submitted that there was a risk of
significant harm to the applicant if he were to return
to Zimbabwe.
The applicant submitted a number of articles and reports in support of the
application. These included the following:
LGBT rights in Zimbabwe
An article on
Zimbabwe, dated 29 September 2015 and entitled
Homosexuality contrary to our
values, Mugabe tells UN
A January 2019
Country Policy and Information Note from the UK Home Office on Sexual
orientation and gender identity and expression
in Zimbabwe. The document refers
to matters such as state treatment and societal treatment of LGBTI
individuals.
A report from
the US Department of State headed ‘Zimbabwe 2015 Human Rights
report of 17 April 2015 entitled
Xenophobia in South Africa: ‘They beat
my husband with sticks and took everything’
as well as an article of 6
May 2015 entitled
Mob violence sets SA xenophobia apart
, an article of 3
May 2015 entitled
Xenophobia in South Africa
, an article entitled
Hundreds displaced by xenophobic violence in Grahamstown
, a report headed
‘Hardline Australia, confused Scandinavia and tense Russia: the global
immigration picture’ and an article
More xeno attacks
. These reports referred to the targeting of foreigners in South
Departmental Interview
The applicant attended an interview with an officer of the Department on 15
August 2019.
A support person was present at the interview. The applicant attended the
interview without his (then) migration agent. The applicant
participated in the
interview in English.
I have had regard to all of the applicant’s evidence at the interview,
although it is not necessary to set this out in full.
Aspects of the
applicant’s evidence, particularly with respect to his race and sexuality,
are summarised below. Aspects of
this evidence are also referred to in my
consideration.
I note that the applicant’s evidence included evidence to the effect that
he was mixed race, that both his parents were mixed
race and that they were
basically a ‘lost race’. The applicant also gave evidence about his
experience growing up in
Zimbabwe as a gay person, saying that it was not an
easy road and that it was a treacherous road leading a double life. He referred,
for instance, to being afraid of being attacked, victimised, scrutinised and
ostracised. He claimed to have been in constant fear,
and referred also to the
experience of friends and relatives. He said he had friends and relatives who
experienced more of the brunt
of that hostile behaviour from authorities. He
referred to living a double life and described his relationship and interactions
his family. He described his father’s role as a ‘protection
figure’ prior to his passing. He described the circumstances
in which he
sought a protection visa.
The applicant also referred to the situation for the gay and lesbian community
in South Africa. For instance, he referred to hostility
and referred to
situations of killings of gay people. He made claims to the effect that he
thought the South Africans were generally
more aggressive and their reactions
were more adverse. He referred to it being publicised through the television and
newspaper. The
applicant referred to growing up with the fear of living in
Zimbabwe because of his sexual orientation and made claims to the effect
felt more at risk in South Africa than he did in Zimbabwe. The applicant
referred to not having family to protect him and
how he would be received by
people who were completely anti-gay. He said the hostility was worse in South
Africa and that he probably
never would have survived it. The applicant also
gave evidence to the effect that the thought of living in South Africa never
his mind and that it was never an option. He gave evidence to the effect
that he had nowhere to go and described it as like stepping
into the complete
unknown. He gave evidence that it had never really crossed his mind and said he
did not want to return home. With
regard to Johannesburg, he said it was never
really a place he felt comfortable living in. He referred to violence against
gay people.
He said it was not just the fear of attack against gay people. He
said the crime was rampant. He said it was not a place he felt
comfortable
staying in because it was just not safe all round. He referred to violence and
crime being rife. He said it was never
a place to stay ideally. The applicant
referred to fearing carjacking, robbery, theft and mugging. He referred to
Australia as a
place where there was a sense of peace and a sense that you could
be yourself and not worry about being victimised or ostracised.
The applicant also made claims to the effect that he felt that should he return
now things would be much worse for him, especially
after being away. He referred
to not having family. The applicant said he did not have a comforting feeling
just because of the gay issue but because of the place
itself. It never really felt like home to him. He felt like home for him was
where his family was and that was where ideally he would like to be. He gave
evidence to the effect that his house in Zimbabwe had
been vandalised.
With regard to South Africa, he said the fact that it was legalised and there
was marriage equality did not change the fact that
there was a danger to anyone
who was gay there. He said it was a political façade. He faced a great
chance of being harassed
or ostracised in South Africa. He gave evidence to the
effect that it was not an option for him to go there. He referred to situations
of people being harassed and tortured and victimised and threatened with their
life for being gay.
Delegate’s Decision
On 31 January 2020, a delegate of the Minister made a decision to refuse to
grant the applicant a protection visa. The delegate
found that the applicant was
a citizen of South Africa as evidenced by his passport. The delegate accepted
that the applicant did
not have a right to enter and reside in Zimbabwe.
The delegate addressed the claim to the effect that the applicant might face
harm in South Africa because he was regarded as a foreigner
or migrant there.
The delegate accepted that xenophobic violence occurred in South Africa but
found that it was reported to target
mainly black Africans from elsewhere in
Africa and occasionally poor migrants from Pakistan and Bangladesh. The delegate
the applicant had travelled frequently to and from South Africa as
the holder of a South African passport. The delegate did not accept
applicant would be regarded as a foreigner or migrant in South Africa. The
delegate addressed claims relating to political
opinion in Zimbabwe. The
delegate addressed the position in relation to membership of the LGBTI
community. The delegate referred
to previous travel to Australia by the
applicant. The delegate considered the situation in South Africa with respect to
matters such
as crime, the experience and treatment of mixed race South
Africans, the availability of state protection, employment, housing and
treatment of mixed race South Africans. With respect to violent crime, the
delegate found that the persecution feared by the
applicant did not involve
systematic and discriminatory conduct. The delegate found that the applicant
might face some hardship on
persecution feared in relation to employment and accommodation did not involve
harm. The delegate addressed claims by the applicant to the effect that,
because he was gay, he would be harmed if he were to return
to South Africa. The
delegate noted that the applicant had relatives in urban areas, including
Johannesburg, South Africa’s
largest city, and Cape Town in Western
Province. The delegate found that there was no real chance of harm in South
Africa due to
the applicant’s sexual orientation. The delegate considered
the applicant’s circumstances as a gay man of mixed race.
The delegate
found that the criminal violence feared by the applicant was random and sporadic
in nature and therefore not systematic
and discriminatory. The delegate was not
satisfied that the applicant had a well-founded fear of persecution for combined
of race and sexual orientation. The delegate was not satisfied that the
applicant met the criteria in
With regard to complementary protection, the delegate was not satisfied that,
as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of being
removed to South Africa,
there was a real risk that the applicant would face significant harm for reason
of his mixed race or sexuality.
The delegate found that the crimes the applicant
feared were opportunistic in nature rather than being targeted. The delegate
that the risk of experiencing violent crime was a risk faced by all South
Africans. The delegate found that the risk of violent crime
was one faced by the
population generally. The delegate found that there were not substantial grounds
for believing that, as a necessary
and foreseeable consequence of being removed
to South Africa, there was a real risk that the applicant would suffer
significant harm.
Review Application
The applicant attached a copy of the delegate’s decision to the review
application.
On 11 June 2024, the applicant submitted to the Tribunal a Pre-hearing
information form.
Prior to hearing, the applicant submitted a number of additional documents,
including the following:
A record of a
Certificate IV in [Subject 1] awarded to the applicant.
certificates awarded to the applicant in relation to [Subjects 2 and 3] and a
Diploma in [Subject 4].
A copy of a
Certificate III in [Subject 5] issued to the applicant by
[University].
The applicant also submitted to the Tribunal a further written statement. In
the statement, the applicant referred to employment
and training undertaken in
Australia and qualifications gained here. He stated that his entire family were
all living in Australia
and it was his greatest desire to continue to live with
them. He said it would result in immense sadness if his wish to stay and
continue working and living in Australia was denied.
The applicant attended a Tribunal hearing on 8 August 2024. I have had regard
to all of the applicant’s evidence at the hearing,
although it is not
necessary to set this out in full. Aspects of his oral evidence are set out in
my consideration, below. The applicant
confirmed at the hearing that he no
longer had a representative.
CRITERIA FOR A PROTECTION VISA
The criteria for a protection visa are set out in
of the Act and
Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) (the Regulations). An
applicant for the visa must meet one of the alternative criteria in
s 36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c). That
is, he or she is either a person in
respect of whom Australia has protection obligations under the
‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other ‘complementary
protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same family unit as such a
person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same class.
Section 36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the
applicant for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the
Minister is satisfied Australia has protection obligations because the person is
A person is a refugee if, in the case of a person who has a nationality, they
are outside the country of their nationality and,
owing to a well-founded fear
of persecution, are unable or unwilling to avail themselves of the protection of
that country: s 5H(1)(a).
In the case of a person without a nationality,
they are a refugee if they are outside the country of their former habitual
and, owing to a well-founded fear of persecution, are unable or
unwilling to return to that country: s 5H(1)(b).
Under s 5J(1), a person has a well-founded fear of persecution if they
fear being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality,
membership of
a particular social group or political opinion, there is a real chance they
would be persecuted for one or more of
those reasons, and the real chance of
persecution relates to all areas of the relevant country. Additional
requirements relating
to a ‘well-founded fear of persecution’ and
circumstances in which a person will be taken not to have such a fear are
out in ss 5J(2)-(6) and ss 5K-LA, which are extracted in the
attachment to this decision.
If a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s 36(2)(a), he
or she may nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant
of the visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection obligations
because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of being
removed from
Australia to a receiving country, there is a real risk that he or
she will suffer significant harm: s 36(2)(aa) (‘the complementary
protection criterion’). The meaning of significant harm, and the
circumstances in which a person will be taken not to face
a real risk of
significant harm, are set out in ss 36(2A) and (2B), which are extracted in
the attachment to this decision.
Under s 36(2B)(c) of the Act there is taken not to be a real risk that an
applicant will suffer significant harm if the Tribunal
is satisfied that the
real risk is one faced by the population generally and is not faced by the
applicant personally. The term ‘population
of the country generally’
refers to the commonly understood concept of the general population, such that
there is no requirement
that the risk be faced by all members or every citizen
of a country’s population for s 36(2B)(c) to apply:
BBK15 v MIBP
[2016] FCA 680
(2016) 241 FCR 150
. The reasoning in
and other Federal
Court judgments (
SZSPT v MIBP
[2014] FCA 1245
MZAAJ v MIBP
indicates that s 36(2B)(c) will apply where a real risk is faced by an
individual applicant, but is the same as the risk faced by
the general
population.
Mandatory considerations
In accordance with Ministerial Direction No.84, made under s 499 of the
Act, the Tribunal has taken account of the ‘Refugee
Law Guidelines’
and ‘Complementary Protection Guidelines’ prepared by the Department
of Home Affairs, and country
information assessments prepared by the Department
of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) expressly for protection status
determination
purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the decision
under consideration.
INDEPENDENT COUNTRY INFORMATION
It has been reported that South Africa has one of the world’s most
liberal legal environments for LGBT+
According to a UK Home
Office Background Information Note issued on 20 August 2020, South Africa became
the first country in the
world to provide constitutional protection to LGBT
people, by making discrimination on race, gender, sexual orientation and other
grounds, illegal. In 2006, same-sex marriage became legalised. The UK Home
Office document included reference to a 2019 US Department
of State Human Rights
Report which referred to a 2018 University of Cape Town report as underscoring
violence, particularly against
lesbians and transgender
As discussed with the applicant at hearing, I noted that there are reports of
violence. I raised with him that there is information
that seems to suggest that
this is targeted in particular at lesbian and transgender people. For instance,
the US Department of State’s
2023 Country Report on Human Rights Practices
for South Africa stated that, despite government policies prohibiting
discrimination,
there were reports of official mistreatment or discrimination
based on sexual orientation or gender identity or expression. The State
Department went on to state that black lesbians and trans persons, particularly
in rural areas, were vulnerable to assault and to
‘corrective rape’.
The State Department also referred to anti-LGBTQI+ attitudes within traditional
and rural communities,
in townships, and among police. The State Department also
reported that cabinet had passed a revised ‘National Intervention
(NIS) Countering Discrimination, Hate Crimes, GBVF That Are Perpetrated Against
People on the Basis of Their Sexual Orientation,
Gender Identity, Gender
Expression and Sex Characteristics’. The State Department stated that the
revised NIS ‘widened
its scope beyond violence against LGBTQI+ persons to
motivating for an expansion of access to all human rights of LGBTQI+
The report referred to the National Prosecuting Authority
securing eight convictions during the 2022-2023 financial year for hate
targeting individuals for their sexual orientation and to this result being
attributed to a ‘fully functioning Rapid
Response Team’ established
by the NIS. The State Department reported that the constitution explicitly
prohibited discrimination
based on sexual orientation. The law prohibited
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression,
or sex characteristics in housing, employment, nationality laws, and
access to government services such as health
As also discussed with the applicant at the hearing, there is independent
information suggesting that the LGBT community faces particular
difficulties in
poorer and non-urban areas. For instance, a report from the South African
Institute of Race Relations indicated that
it was especially those in rural and
poorer communities who still regularly experienced discrimination and
hate-driven
The South African Human Rights commission stated in a paper that violence on the
basis of sexual orientation, gender identity and
expression and discrimination
tended to impact most severely on black, poor and rural LGBTIQ
A report from Arcus
Foundation stated: ‘Conservative attitudes, and cultural, religious, and
traditional moral codes disproportionately
affect young lesbian and transgender
women and leave them particularly vulnerable to violence. Peri-urban and rural
areas, with high
unemployment rates, poor implementation of legislation, low
levels of education, and inadequate resources for organising are considered
hotspots for hate crimes and human rights
violations.’
A December 2017
report stated that risks were particularly high for black LGBT people in rural
LGBT people in Western Cape (where Cape Town is located) are reported to be
most likely to be completely open about their sexuality
(70% of people there,
compared to 57% nationally).
also discussed with the applicant at hearing, Cape Town has been described as
the ‘gay capital of Africa’. It has
been reported that Cape Town is
and that an annual gay
pride parade has been held in Cape Town since
The available information also indicates that a National Task Team (NTT) on
Gender and Sexual Orientation-Based Violence was established
by the Department
of Justice and Constitutional Development in March 2011. The Working Group of
the NTT then established a Rapid
Response Team to respond to pending cases in
the criminal justice system for crimes levelled against LGBTI
While it has reported that the overall transition has been slow, Stonewall has
reported that ‘South Africa’s strong
legal protections for LGBT
people have had, and continue to have, a hugely positive effect on society
including in government, where
LGBT rights have been firmly enshrined in South
Africa’s human rights
framework’.
At the hearing I put to the applicant the gist of the information above on the
position for LGBTQI+ people in South Africa.
Position for
‘Coloured People’ in South Africa
It has been reported that, according to South Africa's latest census, coloured
people make up 8.2% of the
population.
A 2018 South African
Institute for Race Relations survey found that 52% of coloured South Africans
had not personally experienced
any racism directed at them, below the overall
average of 72% but higher than the proportion of white people who said they had
personally experienced racism that was directed at
An April 2019 report from
France24 indicated that coloured people in South Africa felt a sense of
exclusion or marginalisation. The
report stated, ‘If one goes by official
figures, this picture of marginalisation is somewhat different.’ It noted
household income among the ‘Coloured’ community was twice as
high as for the black majority who make up 81% of the population,
unemployment for the coloured community was lower than for the black labour
force. It quoted a source as saying that coloured
people had always been
marginalised under colonial and apartheid
The independent information indicates also that the South African Parliament
has enacted equality legislation, namely the Broad-Based
Black Economic
Empowerment Act, to redress the imbalances caused by apartheid in South Africa.
This is the legislative framework
which governs black economic empowerment
(‘BEE’) and is a series of affirmative action policies that benefit
population. The information indicates that ‘Black people’
includes Africans, Coloureds, Indians and Chinese who are citizens
Republic of South Africa by birth or
South Africa
Independent information points to a high rate of crime, including violent
crime, in South Africa, and indicates that it affects
every sector of
For instance, a report
from ABC Foreign Correspondent in September 2018 quoted a source as saying that
crime was happening to all
races in South Africa and everyone in
Another 2021 report
from the Institute for Security Studies noted crime and violence levels were
rising and these increases were
probably the consequence of a combination of
factors such as socio-economic deterioration, urbanisation, increased
inequality, declining
police performance and high levels of police corruption.
The main driver of murder in many areas was the availability of illegal
A 2023 report from the
US Department of State Overseas Security Advisory Council stated that violent
crime remained an ever-present
threat but that most crimes were opportunistic in
CONSIDERATION
OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
Background and Nationality
A preliminary question arises as to the applicant’s nationality.
In this regard, I note that the applicant gave evidence at hearing about his
history in Zimbabwe. His evidence in this regard was
broadly consistent with his
written and oral evidence to the Department. He also gave evidence about his
nationality, claiming that
he was a national of South Africa and no other
country. His evidence was that he did not have a presently existing right to
and reside in Zimbabwe.
In summary, the applicant’s evidence at the hearing was to the effect
that he was born in Bulawayo. He indicated that he had
lived with his parents as
their carer in a retirement village in Bulawayo for almost 5 years before he
came to Australia in 2016.
I am willing to accept that this is the case. While
the applicant initially indicated that he did not own a house in Bulawayo, he
ultimately indicated that the house had been vandalised. I am willing to accept
that this is the case. He gave the address of this
house and indicated that he
had lived there for about 12 years immediately before he was at the retirement
village. He also identified
previous addresses at which his parents had lived in
Zimbabwe. I accept that the applicant was born in Zimbabwe and lived in Bulawayo
until he came to Australia in 2016.
The applicant gave evidence at hearing about his history and activities in
Zimbabwe. For instance, he indicated that he had finished
school in [Year] and
that his highest level of education was a diploma. He gave evidence to the
effect that he and other family members
had worked for his father in the family
business which was engaged in manufacturing [products]. He gave evidence to the
effect that
he did this from [Year] until about 2012. He said the business
closed down with the economic conditions in Zimbabwe. With regard
to what he had
done after 2012, he said he basically lived with his parents until the time he
moved to Australia. He referred also
to doing the odd [job task 1] job and doing
[job task 2] at various [workplace]s. He said he did not do any full-time role;
relied on casual work. He gave evidence that, between 2012 and 2016, he
would casually take on jobs with [Employers 1 and 2]. With
[Employer 1] he would
do [job task 1]. With [Employer 2] he would do [job task 1] as well or sometimes
[job task 3]. The applicant
indicated that he was [an occupation 1]. The
applicant also gave evidence about previously having worked in [Country 1] on a
holiday. I accept this evidence about the applicant’s education
and past employment. I note that, although he said he did not
speak it fluently,
the applicant gave evidence that he speaks Afrikaans well enough to communicate
with his family. He referred to
sometimes communicating with his siblings in
that language and indicated that his parents had spoken Afrikaans frequently and
The applicant gave oral evidence about his parents. In summary, he indicated
that his father was born in Zimbabwe and his mother
in [Country 3]. His mother
had passed away (in Australia) in February 2020 and his father in December 2015.
With regard to his siblings,
the applicant indicated that he had one brother and
2 sisters. His [other] brother, [Mr E], had passed away in Australia in April
2022. He indicated that his brother, [Mr F], and his 2 sisters, [Ms G] and [Ms
H], all lived in Perth. He indicated that [Mr F] worked
as [an occupation 2] for
[Employer 3] and [Ms H] as [an occupation 3] for the same company. [Ms G] was
[an occupation 4] for [Employer
4]. The applicant indicated that [Ms H] had been
in Australia since 2012, that she was married to an Australian citizen and that
she was an Australian citizen. The applicant indicated that he and his other
family members had come to Australia together in July
2016. [Mr F], [Ms G] and
their spouses had permanent residency in connection with their work before they
moved to Australia. He,
[Mr E] and his mother had come on visitor visas. The
applicant indicated with regard to [Mr E] and his mother that an application
been made for them to come in as dependants, that they had been granted bridging
visas and that they had passed away before the
applications were processed. The
applicant indicated that he was in contact with his sisters and brother in Perth
and was on good
terms with them. I accept this evidence about his family which
was broadly consistent with evidence he had given to the Department.
With regard to whether he still had contact with anyone in Zimbabwe, the
applicant indicated at the hearing that he had an aunt
in [Country 3] and an
aunt in Zimbabwe he kept in contact with. He referred to having relatives in
[Countries 1 and 4]. He gave evidence
to the effect that he had distant
relatives in South Africa, an uncle of his father in Cape Town and a distant
aunt of his father
in Durban. He gave evidence to the effect that he no longer
had relatives in Johannesburg. He indicated that he had friends in South
he had grown up with, one in Cape Town and one in Johannesburg. He gave evidence
to the effect that he was in contact with
them and spoke to them 2 or 3 times a
year. He indicated that his friend in Cape Town was [an occupation 5] for [a
company 1] and
that the friend in Johannesburg worked in administration for [a
company 2]. I accept that the applicant has an aunt in [Country 3],
Zimbabwe and relatives in Cape Town and Durban as claimed. I accept that he has
a friend in Cape Town and a friend in
Johannesburg and that he maintains contact
with them as claimed. The applicant indicated that he had been in South Africa
his passport in 2015 and that he had transited in Johannesburg on his
way to Australia in 2016. He indicated that he had to go through
South Africa
for international travel.
The applicant gave evidence to the effect that he arrived in Australia in July
2016, that he needed to travel to [Country 5] on
2 occasions while he was
waiting for his bridging visa and that he had previously come to Australia on a
holiday with other family
members in December 2013. I accept his evidence in
this regard. The applicant confirmed at the hearing that he applied for a
visa in March 2017. He said he was ‘somewhat’ aware of
what was in his protection visa application and that, as far as
he knew, all the
information in the application was accurate and correct.
When asked about stamps in his passport for places like [Country 3], Zimbabwe
and South Africa, the applicant indicated that his
younger sister had lived in
[Country 3] and he would visit her periodically. They would go to South Africa
periodically to do shopping.
He indicated that he would go to Johannesburg to do
shopping because it was the closest city to Bulawayo. He indicated that [Mr F]
and his wife had lived in Cape Town in South Africa for a period so he would go
and visit them a couple of times. [Mr F] worked in
South Africa for about 4 or 5
years as [an occupation 6] for [a company 3]. The applicant indicated that [Mr
F] left South Africa
in July 2016 and was now an Australian citizen. The
applicant gave evidence that they would stay at a motel. I accept that the
visited [Country 3] to see his sister and that he visited Johannesburg
in South Africa periodically to do shopping. I accept also
that he visited his
brother, [Mr F], when [Mr F] was living in Cape Town in South Africa.
With regard to his nationality and his status in Zimbabwe, the applicant gave
oral evidence to the effect that he was a citizen
of South Africa and no other
country. He claimed to have been on a resident visa in Zimbabwe. He gave
evidence to the effect that,
shortly after Mugabe took over, citizens who had a
right to foreign citizenship had to relinquish their right to Zimbabwean
citizenship.
For them to travel, they had to acquire South African passports
because the Zimbabwean government would not give them passports if
foreign birthright. He indicated that he had foreign birthright because his
grandmother was South African and this was reflected
on his father’s
passport. That made them alien to the country as far as Zimbabwean law went. The
applicant confirmed that they
had Zimbabwean passports and gave them up. He gave
evidence to the effect that they were forced to renounce their Zimbabwean
citizenship
because of that foreign birthright. In order to be able to travel,
the only way they could get a certificate was to take up South
citizenship and get a South African passport. When I raised with the applicant
that my understanding under the Zimbabwean
constitution was that a child born in
Zimbabwe who had either a father or mother who was a Zimbabwean citizen at the
time of their
birth was a Zimbabwean citizen by
the applicant said he was
a Zimbabwean by birth. That law in the constitution was only revisited recently.
The only reason they took
up South African citizenship was to get a passport.
When I raised with the applicant that I had read that Zimbabwe now allowed dual
citizenship, the applicant said that was recent. He gave evidence that his
father had to renounce his Zimbabwean citizenship as well.
That was the only way
he could get a passport. Even though he was born there, they did not consider
him rightfully a Zimbabwean citizen.
The applicant indicated that it was around 2002 or 2003 that he was required to
give up his Zimbabwean citizenship. He gave evidence
to the effect that his
National Registration Card had been issued when he turned 16 in [Year]. He
indicated that they had been considered
citizens right up until 2002 or 2003
when the Zimbabwean immigration law changed for all citizens who had foreign
birthright. Everyone
who had a parent with foreign birthright was not able to
apply or renew a passport because they were no longer considered citizens.
were considered aliens to Zimbabwe. He said the registration card was issued
before that. With regard to whether he had a right
to enter and reside in
Zimbabwe, he said he would have to apply for residency. Because he had resided
there before, it would be feasible
to apply for residency. He confirmed that he
would have to make an application.
I have carefully considered the applicant’s claims about his citizenship
and his status in Zimbabwe. I accept that the applicant
was born in Bulawayo as
indicated in his birth certificate, and that his father was born in Zimbabwe and
his mother in [Country 3]
as also reflected in his birth certificate. I accept
the applicant’s evidence that his grandmother was South African. As
with the applicant, it has been reported that in 2001 people in
Zimbabwe were forced to renounce their ancestral citizenship in order
granted Zimbabwean citizenship.
It has also been reported that a 2001 amendment gave people of foreign origin 6
months to renounce their foreign nationality or automatically
Zimbabwean nationality.
consistent with the applicant’s claims to the effect that, in spite of
being born in Zimbabwe, the family members lost
their entitlement to Zimbabwean
citizenship due to their South African background and having an entitlement to
South African citizenship.
I accept that they were effectively forced to choose
between Zimbabwean and South African citizenship and chose South African
citizenship
for the purposes of travel. I accept that they effectively renounced
their Zimbabwean citizenship. I note that the applicant has
a South African
passport. In all the circumstances, I accept that he is a citizen of South
Africa and no other country.
I find that South Africa is the applicant’s country of nationality for
the purposes of s 5H(1) of the Act. Having regard to
the definition of
‘receiving country’ in s 5(1), I find that South Africa is the
relevant receiving country for the purposes
of s 36(2)(aa). I must assess the
applicant’s claims against South Africa as his country of nationality. I
discussed with the
applicant at the hearing that, if I were to find that he was
a citizen of South Africa, I would need to consider his claims against
I accept that the applicant had a Zimbabwean National Registration card and
that, in spite of no longer being a citizen, he was
able to stay in Zimbabwe as
a resident until 2016. However, I note that DFAT has provided the following
advice in relation to loss
of domicile: ‘The Immigration Act states that
an individual may lose their ‘domicile’ (lawful permanent resident)
status in Zimbabwe if they voluntarily depart from and reside outside Zimbabwe
with the intention of making their home there; or
are absent from Zimbabwe for a
continuous period of five years or longer. Taking up residence outside Zimbabwe
is regarded as prima
facie evidence of such an intention, and the onus of
proving otherwise is on the person whose status is in question. Losing domicile
status would generally preclude the individual from re-entering Zimbabwe without
obtaining a new
I accept that the applicant has been absent from Zimbabwe for longer than 5
years and that, in these circumstances the applicant
has lost his domicile or
lawful permanent resident status. I accept that he would have to obtain a new
visa to re-enter Zimbabwe
and that he does not have a presently existing right
to enter and reside in Zimbabwe.
Place to which applicant is
likely to return
I am conscious that the applicant has spent limited time in South Africa in the
past. However, the available evidence indicates
that the applicant has spent
time in both Johannesburg and in Cape Town, where his brother lived in the past.
He retains some connection
with Cape Town in particular where he has a friend
and a relative, and with Johannesburg where he has a friend. I note that, when
raised with the applicant at the hearing whether he would be likely to go to
Cape Town or Johannesburg, he said that he would not
go to South Africa. I
accept that the applicant does not wish to go to South Africa. I accept that he
has not lived there in the
past. However, the applicant has spent some time in
Cape Town and Johannesburg in the past. I find that he is likely to return to
one of these 2 large urban
While I note that the
applicant would be returning to a country that he has not lived in previously
and would have to establish himself
there, the evidence indicates that the
applicant has multiple family members who have established themselves in
Australia and the
applicant acknowledged at the hearing that they would support
him if he were to have to go to South Africa. I do not accept that
he would have
to live in a poor area or outside the large cities, and find that he would not
do so. I find that he would return to
Cape Town or Johannesburg, places where he
spent time in the past and with which he retains some
connection.
Applicant’s Sexuality
I note that the applicant made claims to the Department with respect to his
sexuality and with respect to fearing harm in South
Africa on this basis.
The applicant gave further evidence about his sexuality at the hearing. I
discussed with the applicant when and how he first became
conscious of his
sexuality. He gave evidence to the effect that it could have been in his early
teens when he went to an all boys’
boarding school. He indicated that he
had not told his family, stating that it was not acceptable and not openly
spoken about. He
said even in the family it was not something he could speak
sexuality. It was something that was never spoken about. He said they knew he
was never confident enough to say, ‘this
is who I am’. Even now in
his [Decade] it was not something he spoke about with his siblings. The
applicant indicated that
he did not have relationships with men in Zimbabwe. He
said he strongly believed the only reason he didn’t was because he was
hiding this part of him, hiding from his family, hiding from society. Being in a
relationship would compromise this thing that he
was hiding so he never had that
opportunity to be in a relationship. He gave evidence to the effect that he had
initially had relationships
with women to gain especially his father’s
approval, or try and camouflage who he was. He referred to having tried to date
girls a couple of times but indicated that on one occasion the girl could tell
he was not being himself and on another he was confident
enough to tell her it
was not going to work.
The applicant indicated that he had not had any relationships since leaving
Zimbabwe. When asked whether there was a reason for
that, he said he put it down
to a couple of things. Perhaps because he had become so comfortable with being
alone it had never really
been on his priority list to get involved. Another
reason would be that he had been so preoccupied with securing good work and
that going out and dating had not really been a priority. When asked
whether it was the case that he was not really interested in
or looking for a
relationship, the applicant said when he was watching a movie he could picture
himself in those ideal relationship
situations. He said maybe if it was meant to
be it would happen. He said he was not going to pursue it or push for it to
I asked why, if he was not in relationships with people, he was
concerned that people would harm him for his sexuality. He said it
quite a lot that people were harmed because of that because it was so widely not
accepted in Zimbabwe. He said he was probably
one of the fortunate ones because
of his father’s influence. Even though his father did not accept it,
because of his influence
he was probably protected in a way. People would look
beyond him because of the way they respected his father. His father was highly
influential in the community. When asked how people knew he was gay, the
applicant said by his mannerisms people would be able to
tell straight away. The
applicant later said that his sexuality was based on his preferring male
partners and confirmed that he had
not had a relationship with a man. He claimed
that it was apparent from his mannerisms and actions that he was gay.
I discussed with the applicant the letters he had provided in relation to his
sexuality. The applicant said that [Dr B] was his
doctor so he discussed
everything with her and that [Ms A] was a good friend who was openly gay. He
indicated that he knew [Ms C]
from Zimbabwe and described her as an openly
lesbian, highly influential TV presenter. He said that [Ms C] and her partner
left Zimbabwe and moved back to [Country 2] where she was born,
primarily because of the scandal and stigma and drama they were experiencing
with people who would not be accepting of her sexuality. He indicated that [Ms
A] had been ‘exiled’ to [Country 6] where
they took him as a gay
activist from Zimbabwe and he was now representing a gay organisation. He said
they tried to get some action
against the Zimbabwean laws against gays and
lesbians in Zimbabwe.
While the applicant has indicated that he has never had a relationship with a
man, his evidence is essentially to the effect that
he is attracted to men or
prefers male partners. I am willing to accept that the applicant is attracted to
men and that he is gay
in this sense. I have had regard to the evidence from
witnesses such as [Dr B], [Ms A] and [Ms C]. I accept that the applicant has
discussed his sexuality with them and that they regard him as gay. While the
absence of any relationships might make him less readily
identifiable as a gay
man, I accept that he identifies as a gay man and that his mannerisms might lead
some people to identify him
as being gay. The absence of any past relationships
might raise a question as to whether the applicant has an interest in seeking
out, or engaging in, a relationship. While I accept that he may have an interest
in securing good work and studying in Australia,
he has now been in Australia
for approximately 8 years and, on his own evidence, has not had any
relationships in that time. While
I have some doubt about the extent of the
applicant’s interest in engaging in a relationship, I am willing to accept
a gay man he may wish to engage in a relationship with a man in the
Consideration of Refugee Criterion
Circumstances in South Africa as a gay man
The applicant made claims to the Department about fearing or facing various
to the Tribunal he did
not appear to claim that he would face serious or significant harm in South
Africa for reason of his sexuality.
I note that, when asked at hearing about why he was seeking protection in
Australia, the applicant said that, at the time he put
the application through,
his migration lawyer deemed it was the best way for him to seek residency in
Australia as his family were
permanent residents at the time and he did not have
the required skills to apply for permanent residency. His migration lawyer
that a protection visa would be the best way for him to apply. As he
experienced extensive persecution for being gay in Zimbabwe,
he recommended that
would probably be the most positive angle to use to apply for a humanitarian
visa. When asked whether there was
any reason why he would fear returning to
South Africa, the applicant said the only reason he would not go to South Africa
had never really lived there. He was not comfortable with South Africa.
He had never lived there. He had only ever lived in Zimbabwe.
When asked whether
there was a reason why he feared serious or significant harm in South Africa,
the applicant said not necessarily
South Africa. He said he did not think he
would feel persecuted or feelings of being harmed in South Africa. He just did
comfortable living in South Africa. They had a lot of crime and he was
not familiar with living in South Africa. All the times they
had visited it was
only ever brief periods. It never really felt comfortable enough for him to say
it was a country he could call
whether there was a reason why he would not feel safe in South Africa. He said
particular reason other than it was not familiar to him. That would be the
only reason.
I raised with the applicant that, from the information he had given me, he had
been to South Africa on occasions in the past. I
asked whether he had been
fearful about going to South Africa. The applicant replied in the negative. When
asked whether he had any
problems there, he said that he did not. I noted that
from what he said his brother lived and worked there for about 4 years. The
applicant confirmed that this was correct and that his brother lived in Cape
Town. When asked whether his brother had any problems
there, he replied in the
negative. When asked whether, if he had to go to South Africa, he might expect
support from his family who
were living in Australia, the applicant said they
would most definitely support him in any way. He said that the ideal situation
was that they would want him to be with them rather than in another country.
When asked whether there was anything else he wanted
to tell me about why he did
not want to go to South Africa or why he would be fearful going there, the
applicant said one important
detail that he failed to mention earlier was his
brother was shot in South Africa. That was the main reason he left. He described
an incident in which burglars broke into the house. He gave evidence that they
had to sell up and leave because they were traumatised.
He said he thought maybe
that had a bearing on fear of living in South Africa. I raised with the
applicant that I had asked him earlier
whether his brother had had any problems
in South Africa and my understanding was that he had told me he did not. I asked
there was a reason he did not mention this. The applicant said he did
not think it would be necessary. He did not think it would
be relevant at the
time. Now the Tribunal was asking if there was any reason why he felt fearful,
the reason was solely based on
the experience that his brother and his
brother’s family had.
I raised with the applicant that he had mentioned to the Department some things
I asked whether that was an
issue for him in South Africa. The applicant said he never had a bad experience
himself so that would
not be something he would declare. He said he had not had
a bad experience himself. He indicated that he was never threatened or
South Africa for his sexuality. I put to the applicant the gist of independent
information on the situation for gay people
in South Africa. I referred, for
instance, to information from the UK Home Office Background Information Note of
August 2020 (see
‘Independent Country Information’, above). I raised
with him that there were some reports of violence but that some information
seemed to suggest that this was targeted particularly at lesbian and transgender
people. I put to him the gist of information from
the US Department of
State’s 2023 Country Report on Human Rights Practices for South Africa. I
raised with the applicant that
information I had seen seemed to suggest that the
LGBT community faced more difficulties in poorer and non-urban areas. I put to
him the gist of a number of reports in this regard. I noted that I had seen
reported, for instance, that LGBT people in Western Cape
were most likely to be
completely open about their sexuality (70% of people there, compared to 57%
nationally). I had seen Cape Town
described as the gay capital of Africa and a
place that was home to a gay village, and it was reported that an annual gay
pride parade
had been held in Cape Town since 1993.
I raised with the applicant that the information seemed to suggest that there
was a liberal legal environment and protections for
gay people and the LGBT+
population. It seemed to suggest that there were still some problems, for
instance with violence, but that
might seem to be particularly in rural and
poorer communities and non-urban areas. I raised with the applicant that, from
had said, it seemed he did not have any problems as a gay man on his
trips to South Africa in the past and was not fearful when he
was there. I
raised with the applicant, particularly if he were to go to one of those larger
urban areas like Johannesburg or Cape
Town in Western Cape, I might have some
doubt that he would face a real chance of serious harm for reason of his
sexuality or a real
risk of significant harm. When this was raised with him, the
applicant indicated that he did not think there was a real chance of
harm or significant harm in South Africa. I also raised with the applicant
information on the National Task Team on Gender
and Sexual Orientation-Based
Violence and the Rapid Response Team.
I have carefully considered the applicant’s claims and evidence. While I
note that the applicant has claimed that his brother
was shot in South Africa
and described an incident in which burglars broke into the house, I do not
accept that this incident occurred.
When first asked whether his brother had had
any problems in South Africa, the applicant replied that he had not. However,
whether there was anything else he wanted to tell me about why he did
not want to go to South Africa or why he would be fearful going
applicant said one important detail that he failed to mention earlier was his
brother was shot in South Africa. He went
on to describe the claimed incident in
which burglars broke into the house. When asked whether there was a reason he
had not mentioned
this, he said he did not think it would be necessary. He did
not think it would be relevant at the time. Now the Tribunal was asking
was any reason why he felt fearful, the reason was solely based on the
experience that his brother and his brother’s
family had. I do not find
this explanation at all convincing. If the applicant’s brother had been
shot during a burglary, this
would have been a significant event and of clear
relevance to whether his brother had had problems in South Africa. I do not
the applicant’s explanation as to why he did not mention this
incident when asked initially about whether his brother had had
any problems in
South Africa. I find the applicant’s subsequent claims and evidence about
this to be lacking in credibility
and do not accept that any such incident
I have accepted that the applicant is a gay man in that he is attracted to men.
I accept that he identifies as a gay man and that
his mannerisms might lead some
people to identify him as gay. While I have some doubt about the extent of the
applicant’s interest
in engaging in a relationship, I am willing to accept
that, as a gay man, he may wish to engage in a relationship with a man in the
future. I have assessed his situation on this basis.
I have considered the applicant’s position in South Africa as a gay man
and have considered independent country information.
I note that, in a statutory
declaration to the Department, the applicant made claims in relation to his
sexuality. He said, for instance,
that he had been to South Africa on a number
of occasions but each time he had stayed for a short time. He stated that he was
aware of the situation in South Africa and knew about gay people who had
been harmed in various ways. He referred to such incidents
causing fear to the
gay and lesbian community, and to dire consequences if his sexuality were to be
known. I note also that the applicant’s
representative made some
submissions with regard to South Africa (although the submissions were largely
focused on Zimbabwe) and
have had regard to this. At interview with the
Department, the applicant also referred to matters such as the hostility being
in South Africa, gay killings, people being more aggressive, reactions
being more adverse and people being harmed for being gay.
However, in his oral
evidence to the Tribunal, the applicant indicated that he had not been fearful
going to South Africa and he
had not had problems there in the past. When asked
that he had not had a bad experience. After I raised with him information on the
situation for gay people and LGBT+ people in South
Africa, the applicant
indicated that he did not think there was a real chance of serious harm or
significant harm in South Africa.
I find that, in spite of his evidence that he
is identifiable as gay, he chose to travel to South Africa on numerous occasions
the past. Notwithstanding his claims to the Department, I find based on his
evidence at the hearing that he was not fearful about
travelling to South Africa
and did not have any adverse experiences there related to his sexuality or for
any other reason. While
I accept that his visits to South Africa were relatively
short and that he did not live there for an extended period, I nevertheless
attach some weight to his past experiences in the country and his willingness to
travel there.
As discussed with the applicant at the hearing, independent information
indicates that South Africa has one of the world’s
most liberal legal
environments for LGBT+ people. South Africa became the first country in the
world to provide constitutional protection
to LGBT people, by making
discrimination on race, gender, sexual orientation and other grounds, illegal.
In 2006, same-sex marriage
was legalised. Independent information indicates that
the effect of these legal protections has been positive. For instance, as set
out above, while it has reported that the overall transition has been slow,
Stonewall has reported that South Africa’s strong
legal protections for
LGBT people have had, and continue to have, a hugely positive effect on society
including in government. The
independent information indicates that the South
African government has put in place a range of strategies. I am conscious that,
despite this very liberal legal framework, there are reports indicating that
discrimination and violence nevertheless occur. There
is some information
indicating that transgender people and lesbian women are particularly
vulnerable. I note, for instance, the information
from the State Department to
the effect that that black lesbians and trans persons, particularly in rural
areas, are vulnerable to
assault and to ‘corrective rape’. I note
also the information from Arcus Foundation to the effect that conservative
and cultural, religious and traditional moral codes
disproportionately affect young lesbian and transgender women and leave them
particularly vulnerable to violence. The independent information indicates also
that people in poorer and rural areas are particularly
affected. For instance, I
note the information from the South African Institute of Race Relations to the
effect that it is especially
those in rural and poorer communities who still
regularly experience discrimination and hate-driven crimes. The South African
Rights Commission has also observed that violence on the basis of sexual
orientation, gender identity and expression and discrimination
tends to impact
most severely on black, poor and rural LGBTIQ people. The report from Arcus
Foundation, cited above, indicates that
peri-urban and rural areas are
considered hotspots for hate crimes and human rights violations. It has been
reported also that risks
are particularly high for black LGBT people in rural
I have carefully considered all of the relevant evidence. While I note that the
applicant would be returning to a country that he
has not lived in previously
and would have to establish himself there without the presence of his immediate
family, as noted above
the applicant has multiple family members who have
established themselves in Australia and the applicant acknowledged at the
that they would support him if he were to have to go to South Africa. In
all the circumstances, I do not accept that he would have
to live in a poor area
or outside the large cities, and find that he would not do so. I note also that,
as discussed above, he has
ongoing connections in both Cape Town and
Johannesburg, the places he has visited in the past, and maintains contact with
in both places. I note that independent information indicates that, in
spite of the liberal legal environment, discrimination and
violence do occur in
South Africa. However, it indicates that lesbian women and transgender people
are particularly at risk, as are
people outside the urban centres. As set out
above, the evidence indicates that the applicant has visited both Cape Town and
Johannesburg
in the past, and that he has done so without being fearful or
having any adverse experiences. In all the circumstances, I find that
applicant could return to either of those places without facing a real chance
that he would suffer harm amounting to serious
harm for reason of his sexuality.
I do not accept that he would face a real chance of suffering violence as a gay
man, or otherwise
suffering serious harm for reason of his sexuality. In making
these findings, I have had regard to the instances of serious harm
enumerated in
s 5J(5) of the Act, although I am conscious that this is not an exhaustive
I note that submissions were made to the Department about the position for gay
people in Zimbabwe and reference was made to a number
of reports. The statements
from people such as [Ms A] and [Ms C] also addressed the risk to gay people in
Zimbabwe. However, for
reasons set out above I have found that the applicant is
a South African citizen and have considered his claims with respect to South
Africa as his country of nationality. Looking to the reasonably foreseeable
future, I do not accept that there is a real chance that
he would be persecuted
in South Africa for reason of his sexuality.
Situation as a
‘Coloured Person’ in South Africa
The applicant has referred in his claims to being ‘coloured’. When
I raised with the applicant at the hearing that he
had made some claims to the
Department about being coloured, he indicated that this meant being mixed race
and that his parents were
both mixed race. I accept that the applicant’s
parents were both mixed race and that the applicant would be considered
in South Africa. At the hearing, the applicant confirmed
that he was not claiming that this was something that would cause him difficulty
in South Africa. The applicant confirmed that his brother was mixed race as
well, and that he was able to live and work in South
Africa. I raised with the
applicant the gist of information on the situation for coloured people in South
Africa (as set out above
under the hearing ‘Independent Country
Information’). I put to him that, from what he was saying, he was not
that this was something that would cause him difficulty in South
Africa. When asked whether there was anything else he wanted to
say about that,
the applicant responded in the negative.
As noted above, independent information indicates that ‘coloured’
people make up 8% of the South African population.
A 2018 South African
Institute for Race Relations survey found that 52% of coloured South Africans
had not personally experienced
any racism directed at them, below the overall
average of 72% but higher than the proportion of whites who said they had never
experienced racism that was directed at them. While the France24
report of April 2019 (referred to above) indicated that coloured
people in South
Africa might feel a sense of exclusion or marginalisation, it also stated,
‘If one goes by official figures,
this picture of marginalisation is
somewhat different.’ It noted that household income among the
‘Coloured’ community
was twice as high as for the black majority,
and that unemployment for the coloured community was lower than for the black
force. While the independent information does suggest that some people
report experiencing racism, it indicates that household income
‘coloured’ community is much higher than for the black majority. The
applicant’s brother lived and worked
in South Africa for a number of years
in the past. I find that he was able to do so without suffering any problems
there for reason
of being a coloured person or any other reason. Looking to the
reasonably foreseeable future, I find that there is no real chance
applicant would suffer serious harm in South Africa for reason of being a
coloured person or a coloured gay man.
Crime in South
The applicant has referred to crime in South Africa, including carjacking,
robbery, theft and mugging. I accept that the crime rate
is high in South Africa
and that crimes of the types described by the applicant do occur. I note that,
while the US Department of
State Overseas Security Advisory Council indicates
that violent crime remains an ever-present threat, it has observed also that
crimes are opportunistic in nature. Independent evidence indicates that
crime affects all races and every sector of society. While
I accept that there
are high rates of crime, the independent evidence indicates that such crime is
largely opportunistic in nature,
and that crime affects all races and sectors of
society. I find that the risk of such crime is not related to any of the reasons
in s 5J(1)(a) and does not give rise to a real chance that the applicant would
suffer serious harm for any of those reasons. For
reasons set out above, I have
not accepted that there is a real chance that the applicant would suffer serious
harm in the form of
violence for reason of being a gay man or for reason of his
Reports on Xenophobic Attacks in South Africa
I note that the Department was provided with a number of reports on xenophobic
attacks or attacks on foreigners, particularly in
2015. These articles relate to
reported attacks on foreign nationals, including people from other parts of
Africa such as Congolese
and South Sudanese. I accept that there were attacks on
foreign nationals in South Africa around that time as described in those
reports. At hearing, I discussed with the applicant that I might doubt the
relevance of the reports to him as he was a South African
citizen and had spent
time in South Africa before. When asked whether there was anything he wanted to
say about that, he said where
that might come into play was because, when
visiting South Africa with a vehicle with Zimbabwe rego plates, you immediately
a target as a foreigner. They did not take into consideration that you
might carry a South African passport. They just looked at
the foreign plates and
saw you as not wanted in their country. I have had regard to the
applicant’s submissions in this regard
and to the reports submitted by the
representative. While it may be that he drove a car with Zimbabwean number
plates in the past,
the applicant is no longer resident in Zimbabwe and I have
found that he does not have a presently existing right to enter and reside
Zimbabwe. In any event, on his own evidence he visited South Africa on multiple
occasions in the past and did not feel fearful
or have any adverse experiences.
He is a citizen of South Africa. Looking to the reasonably foreseeable future, I
do not accept that
there is a real chance that he would be persecuted in South
Africa for reason of being a foreigner or being perceived as a
Failed refugee applicant /
claims with respect to Zimbabwe
As discussed with the applicant at the hearing, claims were made to the
Department about matters such as the applicant’s pro-MDC,
anti-ZANU-PF and
pro-democracy views, and about not speaking Shona and being opposed to the
regime in Zimbabwe. Claims were made
to the effect that the applicant would be a
failed refugee applicant and would be persecuted because he had spoken out
against the
Mugabe government and lived in a western country and had mixed race.
In his statutory declaration to the Department, the applicant
also referred to
matters such as being pro-MDC, and opposed to Mugabe and ZANU-PF. Those claims
appear to have been made with respect
to Zimbabwe (although I have also
considered the applicant’s position as a coloured person in South Africa).
I discussed with
the applicant at the hearing that I might have difficulty
seeing that such things put him at risk in South Africa.
While the claims about being a failed asylum seeker and having lived in a
western country appear to have been directed at Zimbabwe
in particular, I have
nevertheless had regard to the fact that the applicant has made a protection
application and that he has been
in Australia and has a number of relatives
here. As discussed with him, an application for a protection visa is
confidential. Although
he had been to Australia previously (in 2013), his
evidence does not suggest that he had any adverse experiences in South Africa.
When I put to the applicant that I was not sure why having been to a western
country or being a failed asylum seeker would put him
at risk in South Africa,
the applicant said it was not South Africa he was afraid of being at risk, it
was Zimbabwe. In all the circumstances,
I do not accept that there is a real
chance that he would be persecuted in South Africa for reasons connected with
being a failed
asylum seeker or having been in Australia (a western
I raised with the applicant that it seemed his then representative had made
claims and submissions in relation to Zimbabwe (as did
the applicant in his
statutory declaration to the Department), and it was not clear how those things
would put him at risk in South
Africa. The applicant said, ‘No, I
don’t have claims against it for South Africa.’ The only reason he
go back to South Africa was that he had never lived there; he did not
really have experience or a desire to live in South Africa.
He said even though
he was a citizen of South Africa he had not lived there before and was not
familiar with living in South Africa.
He said he really had nowhere to go to.
The applicant indicated at the hearing that he had not been involved in any
political activity
in Zimbabwe and I accept that this is the case. I have
carefully considered all of the claims that have been made in relation to
Zimbabwe, in particular in the applicant’s statutory declaration to the
Department and his then representative’s submissions,
and the evidence
the Department. It may be that the
applicant has pro-MDC, anti-ZANU-PF and
pro-democracy views and that he does not speak Shona or support the government
in Zimbabwe.
However, I do not accept that such matters in any way give rise to
a real chance that he would be persecuted in South Africa for
political opinion or any other reason.
Lack of experience and
connections in South Africa
As noted above, the applicant has referred to not having experience in South
Africa or a desire to live there, to not having lived
there before, to not being
familiar with South Africa and to having nowhere to go. He has also referred to
South Africa being strange
to him and having only ever visited there. He said
the thought of moving and living there did not seem real. He has given evidence
to the effect that he has never really lived there, that he is not familiar with
living there and that he did not feel comfortable
living in South Africa. He had
only ever lived in Zimbabwe. I discussed with the applicant at the hearing that
I would need to consider
whether there was a real chance of persecution for one
of the relevant 5 reasons (which I spelt out to him).
As discussed with the applicant at the hearing, he has given evidence that he
has worked all his life, that he has trade qualifications
and that he has been
working in Australia. At the hearing, he indicated that he was working in a
full-time position [doing a job
task] in [work sector], and that he also did
casual [work] in [related work sector]. As set out above, I have found that he
have support from his family in Australia if he were to return to South
Africa and that he has connections in Cape Town and Johannesburg
in particular.
I accept that the applicant would face challenges in establishing himself in
South Africa, in particular because he
has not lived there previously, does not
have existing accommodation and employment, and has limited experience and
connections there.
However, I do not accept that these matters relate to any of
the reasons in s 5J(1)(a) or give rise to a real chance that he would
persecuted for any of those reasons.
Consideration
I have carefully considered all of the applicant’s claims and evidence,
both individually and cumulatively. I have had regard
to the fact that he is a
gay man and a coloured person (or a person of mixed race). I do not accept that
there is a real chance he
would be persecuted for reason of being a gay man, a
coloured person or a coloured gay man. I have had regard to the high general
crime rate in South Africa, as discussed above. I have had regard to reports on
past xenophobic violence there, although I do not
accept that there is a real
chance that he would be persecuted in South Africa for reason of being a
foreigner or being perceived
as a foreigner. I have had regard to the fact that
the applicant would be returning to South Africa as a failed asylum seeker and
after having been in a western country. I have had regard to matters related to
the fact that the applicant has not lived in South
Africa previously, that he
does not have existing accommodation and employment there, and that he has
limited experience and connections
However, even considering all of his circumstances cumulatively, I am not
satisfied looking to the reasonably foreseeable future
that there is a real
chance that he would be persecuted for any of the reasons enumerated in s
5J(1)(a). I am not satisfied that
he is a refugee as defined in s 5H(1).
For the reasons given above, I am not satisfied that the applicant is a person
in respect of whom Australia has protection obligations
s 36(2)(a).
Complementary Protection Criterion
Having concluded that the applicant does not meet the refugee criterion in
s 36(2)(a), I have considered the alternative criterion
s 36(2)(aa). For reasons outlined above, I have concluded that South Africa
is the relevant ‘receiving country’.
As noted above, I have accepted that the applicant is a gay man in that he is
attracted to men. I accept that he identifies as a
gay man and that his
mannerisms might lead some people to identify him as gay. While I have some
doubt about the extent of the applicant’s
interest in engaging in a
relationship, I am willing to accept that, as a gay man, he may wish to engage
in a relationship with a
man in the future and have taken account of this in
making my findings. I have noted that independent information indicates that,
spite of the liberal legal environment, discrimination and violence towards LGBT
people do occur in South Africa. However, the
independent information indicates
that lesbian women and transgender people are particularly at risk, as are
people outside the urban
centres. As set out above, the evidence indicates that
the applicant has visited both Cape Town and Johannesburg in the past, and
he has done so without being fearful or having any adverse experiences. In all
the circumstances, I find that the applicant
could return to either of those
places without this giving rise to substantial grounds for believing that there
is a real risk that
he will suffer significant harm for reasons connected to his
sexuality. I do not accept that there are substantial grounds for believing
that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of being removed to South
Africa, there is a real risk that he will suffer violence
in connection with his
sexuality, or otherwise suffer significant harm for reason of being a gay
I have had regard to the applicant’s position as a ‘coloured’
person in South Africa and have considered independent
country information as
discussed above. While the independent information does suggest that some people
report experiencing racism,
it indicates that household income among the
‘coloured’ community is much higher than for the black majority. The
applicant’s
brother lived and worked in South Africa for a number of years
in the past. I find that he was able to do so without suffering any
there for reason of being a coloured person or any other reason. I am not
satisfied that there are substantial grounds for
believing that there is a real
risk that the applicant will suffer significant harm for reason of being a
coloured person or a coloured
I accept that the general crime rate is high in South Africa. As noted above,
the applicant has referred to crime in South Africa
such as carjacking, robbery,
theft and mugging, and I accept that such crimes occur. Having regard to the
independent information
pointing to a high crime rate and indicating that most
crimes are opportunistic in nature, I accept that there is a risk of random
opportunistic crime in South Africa. However, independent information indicates
that crime affects all races and every sector
of society. I have had regard to
the high general crime rate. However, I find that any risk of harm in this
regard is one faced by
the population of the country generally and not by the
applicant personally. Pursuant to s 36(2B)(c), there is taken not to be a
risk that the applicant will suffer significant harm in this regard. As
discussed above, I have considered the applicant’s
sexuality but do not
accept that there are substantial grounds for believing that there is a real
risk that he will suffer significant
harm in connection with his sexuality.
I accept that there were attacks on foreign nationals in South Africa in around
2015 as described in the reports that were submitted
to the Department. I have
had regard to the applicant’s submissions to the effect that, when
visiting South Africa with a vehicle
with Zimbabwe rego plates, you immediately
became a target as a foreigner. While it may be that he drove a car with
Zimbabwean number
plates in the past, he is no longer resident in Zimbabwe and I
have found that he does not have a presently existing right to enter
in Zimbabwe. In any event, on his own evidence he visited South Africa on
multiple occasions in the past and did not feel
fearful or have any adverse
experiences. He is a citizen of South Africa. I am not satisfied that there are
substantial grounds for
believing that there is a real risk that he will suffer
significant harm for being a foreigner or being perceived as a foreigner.
I have had regard to the fact that the applicant has made a protection
application and has been in Australia. As discussed above,
an application for a
protection visa is confidential. Although he had been to Australia previously,
his evidence does not suggest
that he had any adverse experiences in South
Africa. When I put to the applicant that I was not sure why having been to a
country or being a failed asylum seeker would put him at risk in South
Africa, the applicant said it was not South Africa he was
afraid of being at
risk, it was Zimbabwe. In all the circumstances, I do not accept that there are
substantial grounds for believing
that, as a necessary and foreseeable
consequence of being removed to South Africa, there is a real risk that he will
suffer significant
harm in connection with being a failed asylum seeker or
having been in Australia (a western country). Even if he has pro-MDC,
anti-ZANU-PF
and pro-democracy views and does not speak Shona, I do not accept
that these matters in any way give rise to substantial grounds
for believing
that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of being removed to South
Africa, there is a real risk that he will
suffer significant harm.
I have had regard to the applicant’s claims in relation to matters
associated with lack of experience and having limited connections
Africa. As discussed above, he has given evidence that he has worked all his
life, that he has trade qualifications and
that he has been working in
Australia. As set out above, I have found that he would have support from his
family in Australia if
he were to return to South Africa and that he has
connections in Cape Town and Johannesburg in particular. I accept that the
would face challenges in establishing himself in South Africa, in
particular because he has not lived there previously, does not
have existing
accommodation and employment, and has limited experience and connections there.
However, I do not accept that these
matters constitute significant harm or give
rise to substantial grounds for believing that there is a real risk that the
will suffer significant harm. I do not accept that they involve the
intentional infliction of pain or suffering such as to constitute
inhuman treatment or punishment or torture. Nor do I accept that they involve an
act or omission that is intended to cause
extreme humiliation such as to
constitute degrading treatment or punishment. The evidence in this regard does
not support a conclusion
that there are substantial grounds for believing that
there is a real risk that the applicant will be subjected to the death penalty
or be arbitrarily deprived of life.
I have carefully considered all of the applicant’s claims and evidence,
both individually and cumulatively. I have had regard
to the fact that he is a
gay man and a coloured person (or a person of mixed race). I am not satisfied
that there are substantial
grounds for believing that there is a real risk that
he will suffer significant harm in connection with being a gay man, a coloured
person or a coloured gay man. I have had regard to the high general crime rate.
I have had regard to reports on past xenophobic violence,
although I have not
accepted that there are substantial grounds for believing that there is a real
risk that he will suffer significant
harm for being a foreigner or being
perceived as a foreigner. I have had regard to the fact that the applicant would
be returning
to South Africa as a failed asylum seeker and after having been in
a western country. I have had regard to matters related to the
fact that the
applicant has not lived in South Africa previously, that he does not have
existing accommodation and employment there,
and has limited experience and
connections there.
However, even considering all of the applicant’s circumstances
cumulatively, I am not satisfied that there are substantial
grounds for
believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the applicant
being removed to South Africa, there is a
real risk that he will suffer
significant harm. I am not satisfied that the applicant is a person in respect
of whom Australia has
protection obligations under s 36(2)(aa).
In making my findings, I am conscious that the applicant referred at the
hearing to his achievements in Australia. He said also
that he hoped the
decision would be based on the fact that Australia over the past 8 years had
become home and that, ideally, he
would prefer to reside here with his family.
The applicant said he was hoping and praying the decision would be favourable.
He referred
to having been in Australia for the past 8 years. He said it had
become home. He said apart from the fact he wanted to stay with
his family or
his family wanted him to be here with them, he knew no other home. He did not
know what would happen if he was taken
away from this country.
I accept that the applicant has family in Australia, that he has been here for
8 years and that he regards Australia as his home.
I have had regard to the
certificates showing the qualifications he has gained and to the letter from his
employer. I accept that
he has been successful in employment in Australia and is
a highly regarded employee. Nevertheless, for reasons set out above, I am
satisfied that he is a person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under s 36(2)(a) or s 36(2)(aa).
There is no suggestion that the applicant satisfies s 36(2) on the basis
of being a member of the same family unit as a person who
s 36(2)(a) or (aa) and who holds a protection visa. Accordingly, the
applicant does not satisfy the criterion in s 36(2).
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant a protection
ATTACHMENT - Extract from
Migration Act 1958
5 (1) Interpretation
cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment
means an act or
omission by which:
(a) severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally
inflicted on a person; or
(b) pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on
a person so long as, in all the circumstances, the
act or omission could
reasonably be regarded as cruel or inhuman in nature;
but does not include an act or omission:
(c) that is not inconsistent with Article 7 of the Covenant; or
(d) arising only from, inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions that are
not inconsistent with the Articles of the Covenant.
degrading treatment or punishment
means an act or omission that
causes, and is intended to cause, extreme humiliation which is unreasonable, but
does not include an
act or omission:
(a) that is not inconsistent with Article 7 of the Covenant; or
(b) that causes, and is intended to cause, extreme humiliation arising only
from, inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions
that are not inconsistent
with the Articles of the Covenant.
means an act or omission by which severe pain or
suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a
(a) for the purpose of obtaining from the person or from a third person
information or a confession; or
(b) for the purpose of punishing the person for an act which that person or a
third person has committed or is suspected of having
committed; or
(c) for the purpose of intimidating or coercing the person or a third person;
(d) for a purpose related to a purpose mentioned in paragraph (a), (b) or (c);
(e) for any reason based on discrimination that is inconsistent with the
Articles of the Covenant;
but does not include an act or omission arising only from, inherent in or
incidental to, lawful sanctions that are not inconsistent
with the Articles of
the Covenant.
receiving country
, in relation to a non-citizen, means:
(a) a country of which the non-citizen is a national, to be determined solely by
reference to the law of the relevant country; or
(b) if the non-citizen has no country of nationality—a country of his or
her former habitual residence, regardless of whether
it would be possible to
return the non-citizen to the country.
5H Meaning of refugee
(1) For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person in Australia, the person is a
(a) in a case where the person has a nationality – is outside the country
of his or her nationality and, owing to a well-founded
fear of persecution, is
unable or unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of that
country; or
(b) in a case where the person does not have a nationality – is outside
the country of his or her former habitual residence
and owing to a well-founded
fear of persecution, is unable or unwilling to return to it.
Note: For the meaning of
well-founded fear of persecution
section 5J.
5J Meaning of well-founded fear of persecution
(1) For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person, the person has a
well-founded fear of
persecution
(a) the person fears being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group or political
(b) there is a real chance that, if the person returned to the receiving
country, the person would be persecuted for one or more
of the reasons mentioned
in paragraph (a); and
(c) the real chance of persecution relates to all areas of a receiving country.
Note: For membership of a particular social group, see
sections 5K
(2) A person does not have a
well-founded fear of persecution
if effective protection measures are available to the person in a receiving
Note: For effective protection measures, see
section 5LA.
(3) A person does not have a
well-founded fear of persecution
if the person could take reasonable steps to modify his or her behaviour so as
to avoid a real chance of persecution in a receiving
country, other than a
modification that would:
(a) conflict with a characteristic that is fundamental to the person’s
identity or conscience; or
(b) conceal an innate or immutable characteristic of the person; or
(c) without limiting paragraph (a) or (b), require the person to do any of the
(i) alter his or her religious beliefs, including by renouncing a religious
conversion, or conceal his or her true religious beliefs,
or cease to be
involved in the practice of his or her faith;
(ii) conceal his or her true race, ethnicity, nationality or country of
(iii) alter his or her political beliefs or conceal his or her true political
(iv) conceal a physical, psychological or intellectual disability;
(v) enter into or remain in a marriage to which that person is opposed, or
accept the forced marriage of a child;
(vi) alter his or her sexual orientation or gender identity or conceal his or
her true sexual orientation, gender identity or intersex
(4) If a person fears persecution for one or more of the reasons mentioned in
paragraph (1)(a):
(a) that reason must be the essential and significant reason, or those reasons
must be the essential and significant reasons, for
the persecution; and
(b) the persecution must involve serious harm to the person; and
(c) the persecution must involve systematic and discriminatory conduct.
(5) Without limiting what is serious harm for the purposes of
paragraph (4)(b), the following are instances of
serious harm
for the purposes of that paragraph:
(a) a threat to the person’s life or liberty;
(b) significant physical harassment of the person;
(c) significant physical ill‑treatment of the person;
(d) significant economic hardship that threatens the person’s capacity to
(e) denial of access to basic services, where the denial threatens the
person’s capacity to subsist;
(f) denial of capacity to earn a livelihood of any kind, where the denial
threatens the person’s capacity to subsist.
(6) In determining whether the person has a
well‑founded fear of
persecution
for one or more of the reasons mentioned in
paragraph (1)(a), any conduct engaged in by the person in Australia is to
be disregarded
unless the person satisfies the Minister that the person engaged
in the conduct otherwise than for the purpose of strengthening the
person’s claim to be a refugee.
5K Membership of a particular social group
consisting of family
For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person (the
first person
), in determining whether the
first person has a well‑founded fear of persecution for the reason of
membership of a particular
social group that consists of the first
person’s family:
(a) disregard any fear of persecution, or any persecution, that any other member
or former member (whether alive or dead) of the
family has ever experienced,
where the reason for the fear or persecution is not a reason mentioned in
paragraph 5J(1)(a); and
(b) disregard any fear of persecution, or any persecution, that:
(i) the first person has ever experienced; or
(ii) any other member or former member (whether alive or dead) of the family has
ever experienced;
where it is reasonable to conclude that the fear or persecution would not
exist if it were assumed that the fear or persecution mentioned
paragraph (a) had never existed.
may be relevant for determining family relationships
for the purposes of this section.
5L Membership of a particular social group
other than family
For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person, the person is to be treated as a member
of a particular
social group (other than the person’s family) if:
(a) a characteristic is shared by each member of the group; and
(b) the person shares, or is perceived as sharing, the characteristic; and
(c) any of the following apply:
(i) the characteristic is an innate or immutable characteristic;
(ii) the characteristic is so fundamental to a member’s identity or
conscience, the member should not be forced to renounce
(iii) the characteristic distinguishes the group from society; and
(d) the characteristic is not a fear of persecution.
5LA Effective protection measures
(1) For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person, effective protection measures are
available to the person in
a receiving country if:
(a) protection against persecution could be provided to the person by:
(i) the relevant State; or
(ii) a party or organisation, including an international organisation, that
controls the relevant State or a substantial part of
the territory of the
relevant State; and
(b) the relevant State, party or organisation mentioned in paragraph (a) is
willing and able to offer such protection.
(2) A relevant State, party or organisation mentioned in
paragraph (1)(a) is taken to be able to offer protection against
persecution
to a person if:
(a) the person can access the protection; and
(b) the protection is durable; and
(c) in the case of protection provided by the relevant State—the
protection consists of an appropriate criminal law, a reasonably
police force and an impartial judicial system.
36 Protection visas – criteria provided for by this Act
(2) A criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant for the visa
(a) a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection obligations because the person
is a refugee; or
(aa) a non-citizen in Australia (other than a non-citizen mentioned in paragraph
(a)) in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial grounds for believing that, as
a necessary and foreseeable
consequence of the non-citizen being removed from
Australia to a receiving country, there is a real risk that the non-citizen will
suffer significant harm; or
(b) a non-citizen in Australia who is a member of the same family unit as a
non-citizen who:
(i) is mentioned in paragraph (a); and
(ii) holds a protection visa of the same class as that applied for by the
applicant; or
(c) a non-citizen in Australia who is a member of the same family unit as a
non-citizen who:
(i) is mentioned in paragraph (aa); and
(ii) holds a protection visa of the same class as that applied for by the
(2A) A non‑citizen will suffer
significant harm
(a) the non‑citizen will be arbitrarily deprived of his or her life; or
(b) the death penalty will be carried out on the non‑citizen; or
(c) the non‑citizen will be subjected to torture; or
(d) the non‑citizen will be subjected to cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment; or
(e) the non‑citizen will be subjected to degrading treatment or
punishment.
(2B) However, there is taken not to be a real risk that a non‑citizen
will suffer significant harm in a country if the Minister
is satisfied that:
(a) it would be reasonable for the non‑citizen to relocate to an area of
the country where there would not be a real risk that
the non‑citizen will
suffer significant harm; or
(b) the non‑citizen could obtain, from an authority of the country,
protection such that there would not be a real risk that
the non‑citizen
will suffer significant harm; or
(c) the real risk is one faced by the population of the country generally and is
not faced by the non‑citizen personally.
Freedom House,
the World 2024: South Africa
UK Home Office,
Country Background Note: South Africa
(August 2020) at
US Department of
2023 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: South Africa
April 2024)
South African
Institute of Race Relations,
LGBTQ Rights in Sub-Saharan Africa: Perspectives
of the region from the region
(October 2019) at
South African Human Rights
Commission,
Thematic Discussion Paper: Discrimination and Violence on the
Basis of Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and Expression (SOGIE)
(February 2018) at
Arcus Foundation,
Collection and Reporting on Violence Perpetrated Against LGBTQI Persons in
Botswana, Kenya, Malawi, South Africa and Uganda
(January 2019) at
M. Morris, ‘LGBT
community still faces high levels of violence – report’,
(4 December 2017)
C. Hattingh, ‘South
Africa's Post-Apartheid Gay Village: A Victim of its Own Success?’,
International Conference on Tourism
Research (March 2019); see also E. Venske,
‘Pink Tourism in Cape Town: The Development of the Post-Apartheid Gay
in A. Diekmann and M. Smith (eds),
Ethnic and Minority
Cultures as Tourist Attractions
S. Phaliso,
‘Cape Town Pride celebrates equality in South Africa, condemns
Ghana’s new anti-gay law’,
(4 March 2024), available
https://groundup.org.za/article/cape-town-pride-celebrates-equality-in-south-africa-but-attendees-condemn-ghanas-new-anti-gay-law/
LGBTI National Task Team,
(2018), available at
https://www.nationallgbtitaskteam.co.za/about-the-task-team/about-the-task-team-2#:~:text=The%20aim%20of%20the%20NTT,within%20various%20South%20African%20communities.
Stonewall Global Workplace Briefings 2018: South Africa
D. N. Kupemba,
‘Tyla’s racial identity: South African singer sparks culture
(9 December 2023), available at
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-67505674
Institute for Race Relations,
Race rhetoric undermining race relations in SA
(20 March 2018), available at
https://www.politicsweb.co.za/documents/race-rhetoric-undermining-race-relations-in-sa--ir
‘In new S. Africa, some in 'Coloured' community nostalgic for
apartheid’,
(26 April 2019), available at
https://www.france24.com/en/20190426-new-africa-coloured-community-nostalgic-apartheid
Jeannine van de Rheede, ‘The Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment Act 53
of 2003 and the ways in which the commission of
fronting practices affects the
achievement of its objective’,
African Journal of Democracy &
Governance / Revue africaine de la démocratie & de la
Gouvernance
, Vol. 7, No 1, 2020, available at
https://repository.uwc.ac.za/bitstream/handle/10566/6443/The%20BroadBased%20Black%20Economic.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y;
'BTI 2022 Country Report South Africa', Bertelsmann Stiftung (23 February
P. du Toit,
‘Ramaphosa's 'killings of white farmers' comment: What the president
(27 September
J. Holmes, ‘The
white minority took our land. Enough is enough’,
ABC Foreign
Correspondent
L. Lancaster,
Africa needs a murder reduction strategy
, Institute for Security Studies (14
US Department of
State Overseas Security Advisory Council,
South Africa Country Security
(12 December
'Zimbabwe's
Constitution
of 2013', Constitute Project, 27 April 2022, Article 36(1),
Amnesty International,
Zimbabwe: Statelessness crisis traps hundreds of thousands in limbo (16 April
https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/press-release/2021/04/zimbabwe-statelessness-crisis-traps-hundreds-of-thousands-in-limbo/
Amnesty International,
We are like ‘stray animals’: Thousands
Living on the Margins due to Statelessness in Zimbabwe
(2021) at p.11,
available at
https://www.amnesty.org/en/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/AFR4639322021ENGLISH.pdf
Country Information Report Zimbabwe
(19 December 2019) at
See, for instance,
Metropolitan Municipality
, available at
https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwj6nNqU4YKJAxV7rlYBHa9lCGQ4ChAWegQIFRAB&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.statssa.gov.za%2F%3Fpage_id%3D1021%26id%3Dethekwini-municipality&usg=AOvVaw03DDC_R9NMp3nzKFqFrcjS&opi=89978449
RTF format (1.62 MB)
Signed PDF/A format