1502327 [2015] MRTA 852 (16 June 2015)
[2015] MRTA 852
(16 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
MRT CASE NUMBER:
DIBP REFERENCE(S):
CLF2015/12614
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Jonathon Duignan
PLACE OF DECISION:
The tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant
a Working Holiday (Temporary) (Class TZ) visa.
Statement made on 16 June 2015 at 3:42pm
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration on 4 February 2015 to refuse to
grant the applicant a Working
Holiday (Temporary) (Class TZ) visa under s.65 of the
Migration Act 1958
applicant applied for the visa on 6 January 2015. At the time the visa
application was lodged, Class TZ contained one subclass,
Subclass 417 (Working
Holiday). The criteria for a Subclass 417 visa are set out in Part 417 of
Schedule 2 to the Migration Regulations
1994 (the Regulations). Relevantly to
this case, they include cl.417.211(5) which requires that in circumstances such
as this the
Minister is satisfied that the applicant has carried out specified
work in regional Australia for a total period of at least 3 months
as the holder
of a working holiday visa.
applicant presented written documents supporting her application and
appeared before the tribunal on 25 May 2015 to give evidence
and present
the following reasons, the tribunal has concluded that the decision under review
should be affirmed.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
Has the applicant carried out the requisite specified work in regional
417.211 requires, amongst other things, that at the time of the visa
application, the applicant had carried out specified work
in regional Australia
for a total period of at least 3 months as the holder of a Working Holiday visa.
‘Specified work’
and ‘regional Australia’ are defined by
reference to an instrument made by the Minister in writing for this purpose:
cl.417.111. The applicable instrument is IMMI 08/048.
there is no dispute that the applicant was in an area of regional Australia and
performing work of the specified type, being
involved in the packing of fruit
and vegetables on a farm. The difficulty with the application is that the
material the applicant
has presented regarding the circumstances of her work
from 4 October 2014 and 6 January 2015 indicates that she did not, for the
majority of her working days, work what would be considered full work days for
the industry concerned. The records she has provided
indicate that she sometimes
worked as little as 1.85 or 2 hours per day and most frequently less than 4
hours per day. She was working
7 days per week however the longest she ever
worked in any fortnight was 58.62 hours.
applicant explains that she was not aware that the work involved should be by
way of full work days for the industry in which
work occurred. She is aware of
others who were successful in being granted a further visa based on the same
working pattern. She
was hopeful of undertaking more travel in Australia and
fearful that any visa refusal may affect her plans for additional travel.
described the circumstances of her work to the tribunal, which involved being
picked up from the town in which she was staying,
transported to the farm,
working and then being transported back to the town. While there were some
periods of up to 1 to 2 hour
when she waited at the work premises before
starting work, there were not frequent periods where she was present at the work
but not paid. She noted that she could not control her working hours
and the farmer had explained that it was not possible to offer
equivalent employment.
respect of cl.417.221(5) there is no direct reference to the hours of employment
in either the definition of work or the specified
work considerations, however
in the tribunal’s view this provision must be directed to some
consideration of the working arrangements
involved. The provision requires a
total period of at least 3 months and cannot realistically be directed at
accumulated hours of
work totalling 3 months. In the tribunal’s view,
given the intention of the provision to have working holiday makers provide
labour in regional areas and the evident lack of clarity about the time required
it is appropriate to consider the policy of the
Department of Immigration and
Border Protection in this regard. This relevantly provided
Under policy, three months is taken to mean 88 days, which is the shortest
possible combination of months in a calendar year. One
full day of work is
defined as having worked the minimum number of hours considered a standard day
by the particular industry in
which the applicant is employed. Generally, the
Australian working week is 35 to 40 hours, consisting of 7 to 8 hours of work
day. Individual employers can not set a smaller period of time than the
industry standard to satisfy the specified work requirement.
In calculating the period of time for which the applicant has undertaken
specified work, the type of employment relationship the
applicant may have with
their employer, including full/part time employment, casual employment or
voluntary employment, is not as
important as whether the relevant industry
considers the period of work completed to be equivalent to full time work for
that industry.
For example, if the applicant’s paid employment involved 2
weeks on and then 2 weeks off, and this is standard practice in
the industry,
the applicant would be considered to have worked for 4 weeks (28 days). If the
employer is satisfied that the applicant
has undertaken the equivalent of full
time work for that industry for the specified period, the visa decision maker
may be satisfied
that the applicant has undertaken full time work for the
specified period.
Applicants whose work is equivalent to full time employment may count weekends
in the 88 day period. However, if the applicant’s
work is not equivalent
to full time employment, that is, part time or casual, they may only count the
full days actually worked.
If the applicant is employed by more than one employer at the same time, they
may only count each calendar day of work completed
once towards their 88 day
specified work requirement.
The shortest period that may be counted towards the specified work requirement
is 1 day of full time work (for that industry). Applicants
cannot count a long
day of work as more than one day of specified work. For example, if the
industry’s standard day is 6 hours
long, working a 12 hour day does not
count as two days of specified work.
An applicant may count sick days only during periods where they were employed
(that is, paid) and entitled to sick leave or covered
by a workers compensation
scheme. Days may also be counted if the applicant was employed (that is, paid)
but was unable to work because
of climatic conditions (for example, cyclone). In
these situations, supporting evidence should be provided from the employer by
applicant. Casual workers who were prevented from working because of injury
or climatic conditions (for example, cyclone) cannot
count any time they were
unable to work towards the 3 month period.
the tribunal’s view it is correct to apply the Departmental policy here as
it does not contradict or limit the provision
in question and seeks only to
provide some clarity to an unclear provision. Taking account of the policy and
the intention of the
provision the tribunal is of the view that what is required
is the equivalent of 88 days of full day work for the industry sector
It has not been submitted and the tribunal does not accept that in the farming
sector, as is the case here, there are recognised
full day working arrangements
in which workers would work only some 2 to 4 hours per day, 7 days per week.
Even if one were to accept
a reduced work day as the industry standard because
of the nature of the work, it is clear from the records provided by the
that she has only worked in excess of 5 hours per day on 6 of the
claimed 88 days of work. The tribunal does not accept that in the
farming sector
a full day of work is generally accepted to ever constitute less than 5 hours
such that the remaining 82 days of work
can be counted towards the
applicant’s specified work.
this reason the tribunal does not accept that applicant has undertaken specified
work for a total period of at least 3 months.
This is because the nature of the
working arrangements for the majority of days are not those contemplated as
meeting the provision.
is unfortunate that this will result in the applicant being refused her visa.
While she may be aware of others who have been successful
with visa applications
in similar circumstances the tribunal is required to apply the law as it sees
it. It is to be hoped that this
outcome does not affect her future travel plans
however again the tribunal must apply the law as it sees it.
applicant does not satisfy the requirements at cl.417.211(5). This being the
case she does not satisfy essential prescribed criteria
for the only subclass of
Working Holiday (Temporary) (Class TZ) visa. She must be refused the visa sought
under s.65 of the Act and
the delegate’s decision to this effect should be
tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant a Working Holiday
(Temporary) (Class TZ) visa.
Jonathon Duignan
RTF format (129 KB)
Signed PDF/A format