Crispin Rovere and Australian Federal Police (Freedom of information) [2025] AICmr 174 (9 October 2025)
Crispin Rovere and Australian Federal Police (Freedom of information)
[2025] AICmr 174
(9 October 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of Rocelle Ago, General
Manager Freedom of Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian
Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Crispin Rovere
Australian Federal Police
Decision date
Freedom of Information —
Respondent to process request following removal of practical refusal reason claim
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(the FOI Act), I set aside
the deemed access refusal decision of the Australian Federal Police (the AFP).
In considering the AFP’s
position that it no longer maintains that
processing the applicant’s revised request would amount to a substantial
and unreasonable
diversion of the AFP’s resources from its other
operations, I substitute my decision that a practical refusal reason does not
of this decision the AFP
must process the applicant’s request and notify the applicant of its
decision in accordance with s
26 of the FOI Act. The AFP must also advise
whether it has fully implemented my decision.
decision sets aside the AFP’s purported practical refusal decision on the
basis that the AFP no longer maintains a practical
refusal reason
Reasons for decision
Scope of IC review
18 December 2024, the applicant applied to the AFP for access to surveillance
footage relating to an incident.
12 February 2025, the AFP provided the applicant with a s 24AB notice stating
that it intended to refuse the request under s 24AA(1)(a)(i)
of the FOI Act on
the grounds that a practical refusal reason exists, as processing the request
would substantially and unreasonably
divert the resources of the AFP from its
other operations. The applicant declined to revise their request on that
27 February 2024, the AFP refused the applicant’s request under
s 24AA(1)(a)(i) on the basis that processing the request
would amount to a
substantial and unreasonable diversion of resources from the AFP’s other
operations.
19 March 2025, the applicant sought IC review of the AFP’s decision on the
basis that a practical refusal reason did not
the course of the IC review, the AFP indicated that it no longer maintains that
processing the applicant’s revised request
would amount to a substantial
and unreasonable diversion of the AFP’s resources from its other
operations (s 24AA(1)(a)(i)).
an IC review of an access refusal decision, the AFP bears the onus of
establishing that their decision is justified or that I should
give a decision
adverse to the IC review applicant (s 55D(1)).
on the information before me, I am satisfied that the practical refusal reason
no longer exists. The AFP must now process the
applicant’s request and
notify the applicant of its decision within 30 days of receipt of this
Rocelle Ago
General Manager, Freedom of
Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian Information
Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Whether a practical refusal reason exists (ss 24 and
Section 24 of the FOI Act
enables an agency or Minister to refuse access to a document where the agency
has undertaken a request consultation
process in accordance with s 24AB of the
FOI Act, and after that process the agency or Minister is satisfied that the
practical refusal
reason still exists.
Subparagraph 24AA(1)(a) of the FOI Act lists the following practical refusal
(1) For the purposes of section 24, a practical refusal reason exists in
relation to a request for a document if either (or both)
of the following
(a) the work involved in processing the request:
(i) in the case of an agency--would substantially and unreasonably divert
the resources of the agency from its other operations;
(ii) in the case of a Minister--would substantially and unreasonably
interfere with the performance of the Minister's functions;
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
Accessing your information
If you would like access to the information that we hold about you, please
FOIDR@oaic.gov.au
information is available on the
information
page on our website.
On the question of the
processing deadlines that now apply, see
Fletcher and Prime Minister of
As the AFP did not make a
decision within the statutory timeframe, it was taken to have made a deemed
access refusal decision (s
15AC(3)) and its purported decision has been taken to
be submissions.
RTF format (22.1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format