JVG24 v Assistant Minister for Immigration [2025] FCA 1376 (12 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
JVG24 v Assistant Minister for
Immigration
[2025] FCA 1376
File number:
NSD 1665 of 2024
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– application for judicial
review of a decision made by the Assistant Minister for Immigration under s
501(1) of the
Migration Act
(Cth) refusing to grant
the applicant a Safe Haven Enterprise (Class XE) visa – whether Assistant
Minister’s decision
unreasonable, irrational or illogical – whether
Assistant Minister took into account legal consequences of decision –
where applicant would remain in the Australian community following cancellation
of visa – satisfied Assistant Minister made
findings that provide a
logical and rational foundation for the exercise of the Assistant
Minister’s power under s 501(1) of
the Migration Act –
satisfied Assistant Minister’s decision did not lack intelligible
justification – application
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) rr 2.25AB, 2.43
Cases cited:
v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCAFC 103
(2024) 304 FCR
Ayoub v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2015] FCAFC 83
AZAFQ v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
BNGP v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2023] FCAFC 111
(2023) 298 FCR 609
BNGP v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCA 878
CRRN v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
Djokovic v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
(2022) 289 FCR 21
ENT19 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2023] HCA 18
(2023) 278 CLR 75
Ismail v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2024] HCA 2
JNMQ v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2024] FCA 1375
LPDT v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Servies and
Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2012] HCA 61
(2013) 249 CLR
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZMDS
(2010) 240 CLR
NBMZ v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2014] FCAFC 38
(2014) 220 FCR
NZYQ v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2023] HCA 37
; (2023) 415 ALR 254
Plaintiff S22/2025 v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
[2025] HCA 36
RRFM v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCAFC 27
XKTK v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2025] FCA 14
XKTK v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2025] FCAFC 115
General Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Administrative and Constitutional Law and Human Rights
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Legal Aid Commission of NSW (until 8 October 2025)
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr H.P.T. Bevan SC with Mr A Hall
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Clayton Utz
NSD 1665 of 2024
ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR
IMMIGRATION
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
amended originating application for review of a migration decision filed on
5 February 2025 is dismissed.
applicant is to pay the respondent’s costs, as agreed or taxed.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
MARKOVIC J:
is an application for judicial review of a
made by the
Assistant Minister
for Immigration on 11 October 2024 under
refusing to grant the applicant a Class XE Subclass 790 Safe Haven Enterprise
History of the applicant
applicant is from Sudan. He is 36 years old and arrived in Australia by boat in
2014, after being held in immigration detention in Australia and Nauru, the
applicant was granted a
and thereafter
resided in the community.
22 May 2017 the applicant was arrested and charged with two offences: “Agg
Sex assault inflict Abh on victim Si” and
“Robbery Si”.
29 June 2017 the applicant’s Bridging E visa was cancelled pursuant to
Migration Act
and r 2.43(1)(p)(ii) of the
Regulations
(Cth) because he was charged with an offence against
a law of New South Wales.
29 September 2017, while on remand, the applicant applied for a SHEV. In an
Indicative Protection Visa Assessment dated 14 September
2018 the applicant
was found to be a refugee and therefore a person in respect of whom Australia
has protection obligations pursuant
Migration Act
2018, before the application for the SHEV was finally determined, the applicant
was convicted of two counts of indecent assault
and aggravated sexual assault
pursuant to s 61L and
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) respectively.
The applicant was sentenced on the two counts of indecent assault to terms of
imprisonment of 12 months and four
months respectively and on the count of
aggravated sexual assault to a term of imprisonment of six years. Non parole
periods were
specified in each case.
11 October 2024 the Assistant Minister made the decision, exercising his
discretion under
Migration Act
to refuse to grant the
applicant the SHEV.
11 October 2024 the applicant was granted a Class WR Bridging R (Removal
Pending) (subclass 070) visa (
) by a delegate of the
for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs under reg 2.25AB of the
Regulations.
A procedural matter
2 September 2025 the parties were notified that I intended to deliver judgment
in this proceeding on 3 September 2025.
response to the notice of listing the then solicitors for the applicant, with
the consent of the Assistant Minister, informed my
Chambers that the Full Court
of the High Court of Australia was due to deliver judgment at 10.00 am on 3
September 2025 in the matter
Plaintiff S22/2025 v. Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
Plaintiff S22/2025 appeal
). The solicitors for the applicant noted that, like the
proceeding before me, the application before the High Court:
... involves an application for a constitutional writ brought in respect of a
decision not to revoke the mandatory cancellation of
a Temporary Protection
Visa. The issues identified by the [applicant] in that case concern, amongst
other things, the issue of the
consideration of the legal consequences of a
decision and whether the expectations of the Australian community consideration
rationally apply to an NZYQ-affected non-citizen. Argument was also heard
by the Court in respect of the decision-maker’s consideration
of the legal
consequences of their decision, in circumstances where the decision-maker
reasoned that the Minister would separately
consider the type of visa that could
be granted to the Applicant following his release from detention, following
departmental advice.
parties also noted that a Full Court of this Court had at the time reserved its
judgment in
XKTK v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
(proceeding NSD 206 of 2025) (
XKTK appeal proceeding
indicated that it proposed to stand delivery of that judgment over pending the
High Court’s judgment in the Plaintiff
S22/2025 appeal proceeding.
regard to the matters set out by the parties and the apparent relevance of the
issues to be determined in the Plaintiff S22/2025
appeal proceeding and/or the
XKTK appeal proceeding to the application before me, I concluded that the
interests of justice favoured
deferral of delivery of judgment in this
proceeding until after determination of those proceedings and vacated the
listing for delivery
of judgment on 3 September 2025.
High Court delivered judgment in
Plaintiff S22/2025
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] HCA 36
on 3 September 2025,
as anticipated.
that decision, orders were made in the XKTK appeal proceeding requiring the
parties to file and serve short written submissions
addressing the decision in
Plaintiff S22/2025
9 September 2025 in consultation with the parties I determined that further
deferral of delivery of judgment in this proceeding
until such time as the Full
Court rendered its decision in the XKTK appeal proceeding would best advance the
overarching purpose
Federal Court of Australia Act
(Cth) and made the following orders:
parties notify the Court when judgment is delivered by the Full Court of the
Federal Court of Australia in XKTK v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and
Multicultural Affairs (Federal Court Proceeding No. NSD 206/2025)
two days of the notification in Order 1, the parties provide to the
(a) any proposed consent orders providing a timetable for further submissions
addressing the effect, if any, of the decisions in
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] HCA 36
without limiting reference to any other relevant cases; or
(b) in the absence of agreement, the parties’ availability for a case
management hearing.
19 September 2025 the Full Court delivered judgment in
XKTK v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] FCAFC 115
23 September 2025 I made orders for the provision of supplementary submissions
addressing the effect, if any, of the decisions
by the applicant and the Assistant Minister respectively on or
before 6 and 20 October 2025. Relevantly since those orders:
(1) no supplementary submissions have been filed by or on behalf of the
(2) on 8 October 2025 a notice of ceasing to act was filed on behalf of the
applicant; and
(3) on 20 October 2025 the Assistant Minister filed supplementary submissions.
the circumstances, on 23 October 2025 the parties were notified that I proposed
to determine the application based on the material
that had been filed and that
if any party had any objection to that course, they should raise and confirm the
basis of that objection
by midday on 29 October 2025. No such objection
has been raised.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
Migration Act
relevantly provides:
(1) The Minister may refuse to grant a visa to a person if the person does not
satisfy the Minister that the person passes the character
(6) For the purposes of this section, a person does not pass the character test
(a) the person has a substantial criminal record (as defined by subsection (7));
(7) For the purposes of the character test, a person has a substantial criminal
(c) the person has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 12 months or
(d) the person has been sentenced to 2 or more terms of imprisonment, where the
total of those terms is 12 months or more; or
decision under
Migration Act
involves a two stage test:
first, a consideration of whether the person has satisfied the decision-maker
that he or she passes the
character test; and, if not, secondly, the exercise of
the discretion whether to refuse a visa: see
Ismail v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 2
THE ASSISTANT MINISTER’S REASONS FOR THE DECISION
Assistant Minister noted that it was not in dispute that the applicant did not
pass the character test as required by
Migration Act
therefore considered whether to exercise his discretion to refuse to grant the
applicant a visa.
Assistant Minister first considered protection of the Australian community,
noting that he gave this consideration “the
highest priority”. In
doing so, the Assistant Minster considered the nature and seriousness of the
conduct finding, after
referring to the nature of the offending, that it
“must be regarded as very serious in nature and that it weighs heavily
grant of the visa”: decision at [28]. He then considered the risk
to the Australian community noting at [29] of the decision
In making [his] assessment regarding the risk that may be posed by [the
applicant] to the Australian community, [he] had regard,
cumulatively, to:
the nature of the harm to individuals or the
Australian community should [the applicant] engage in further criminal or other
conduct; and
the risk of further criminal or other serious conduct, taking into account
the likelihood of [the applicant] reoffending and evidence
of rehabilitation.
to the former, the Assistant Minister noted (at [30]) that he was
“cognisant that violent sexual assault has the potential
to cause physical
injury as well as immediate and long-term emotional and psychological harm to
the victim, which may manifest in
various psychologically damaging ways
throughout the victim’s life” and that he considered “that
there is a long-term
cost to be borne by the broader Australian community
whenever a women (sic) is violently sexually assaulted”. The Assistant
Minister concluded (at [31]), having regard to the applicant’s offending
history, that “any future offending of a similar
nature or seriousness
would have the potential to cause serious physical and psychological injury to
members of the Australian community”.
to the latter, the Assistant Minister considered available information about
matters that may have contributed to the applicant’s
past conduct,
indications of remorse and the extent of the applicant’s rehabilitation.
Assistant Minister took the view that the applicant’s mental health and
alcohol may have contributed to his past conduct,
despite the sentencing judge
and Dr Bruce Stevens, a forensic psychologist who conducted a mental health
assessment of the applicant,
not concluding to that effect.
to remorse and rehabilitation, the Assistant Minster considered a report
prepared by Kris North, forensic psychologist, the sentencing
observations, Dr Steven’s report, a submission prepared by Isobel
McGarity, Supervising Senior Solicitor at Refugee
Advice & Casework Service
(Aust) Inc, and the applicant’s statements. The Assistant Minister also
considered the finding
Migration Act
delegate of the Minister on 26 May 2020 insofar as the delegate found that the
applicant was not a danger to the community for
the purpose of that section.
The Assistant Minister rejected a submission that the
is “helpful and persuasive” in considering risk to the Australian
community for the purpose of
Migration Act
[64]-[71] of the decision, the Assistant Minister concluded on risk to the
community including:
safety of the Australian community is the highest priority of the Australian
government, which is committed to protecting the
community from harm resulting
from criminal activity or other serious conduct by non-citizens.
have found that the nature of [the applicant’s] conduct is very serious. I
have further found that violent sexual offending
has the potential to cause
serious physical and psychological injury to members of the Australian
balance, I consider the likelihood that [the applicant] will reoffend is low,
but not negligible. I further consider that should
[the applicant] engage in
similar conduct again, it may result in significant psychological and physical
harm to members of the community.
Furthermore, I consider that some conduct and
the harm that would be caused, if it were to be repeated, is so serious that any
that it may be repeated may be unacceptable. I have given this weight in
support of visa refusal.
view of the nature and seriousness of [the applicant’s] conduct, the
potential harm to the Australian community should he
commit further offences or
engage in other serious conduct, and taking into account the likelihood of [the
applicant] reoffending,
I consider that the need to protect the Australian
community from criminal or other serious conduct weighs significantly against
granting the visa in this case.
Assistant Minister then considered the applicant’s ties to the Australian
community, noting that he had no immediate family
in Australia but that he had
some links to Australia through friends and other people who are citizens,
permanent residents or otherwise
have the right to remain in Australia. He
concluded that the strength, nature and duration of the applicant’s ties
to Australia,
on balance, weighed slightly against refusal of the SHEV.
to expectations of the Australian community, the Assistant Minster was of the
view that they weighed clearly in favour of visa
next factor considered by the Assistant Minster was the legal consequences of
the decision, having regard to
Migration Act
The Assistant Minister accepted that the applicant was a person in respect of
whom Australia has non-refoulement obligations and
the existence of those
obligations weigh in favour of granting the SHEV, “while also noting that
the finding means that [the
applicant] will not be removed to Sudan, so the
feared harm will not occur in the foreseeable future and thus does not carry
in itself”: decision at [106].
[108] of the decision, the Assistant Minster referred to the effect of the
decision in
v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and
Multicultural Affairs
[2023] HCA 37.
The Assistant Minister continued at
[109]-[112]:
the protection finding made for [the applicant] means that if his removal to
Sudan is not required or authorised, he could only
be removed to a third
country. As there is presently no real prospect of this, he would not be subject
to indefinite detention pending
his removal and would instead be released from
am aware that if a refusal decision is made under
, [the applicant] will
not remain in detention. He will be released to reside in the community. I will
separately consider the type
of visa on which he should reside and conditions to
be imposed on that visa, following further advice from the Department.
am also aware that if a refusal decision is made under
in relation to
[the applicant’s] Safe Haven Enterprise (Class XE) visa, there would be
significant restrictions on [the applicant’s]
ability to apply for another
visa. In particular, I understand that [the applicant] would be prevented by
of the Act from making a further application for a protection visa while he
is in the migration zone (unless a Minister administering
the Act determines,
of the Act does not apply to him). Any application for a
visa other than a protection visa would be subject to
of the Act, which
would apply to [the applicant] as a result of a refusal decision under
with the effect that he would not be allowed to make an application for a visa
or have one made on their behalf. This would mean
that, without leaving the
migration zone, he would not be able to apply for any visa other than a Bridging
R (Class WR) visa (as
prescribed by
regulation 2.12AA
Regulations 1994
), for which he could only apply in response to an
invitation. I have given this consideration weight.
making the present decision, I have not speculated on the likelihood of a
Minister (including myself) intervening under any of
the provisions mentioned
Assistant Minster brought his findings on each factor he had considered together
concluding that the factors that weigh against
the grant of the SHEV outweighed
those in favour of its grant and that the applicant represents a risk of harm to
the Australian
community which, in the circumstances of the case, is
unacceptable. Accordingly, the Assistant Minister decided to exercise his
discretion under
Migration Act
to refuse to grant the SHEV
to the applicant: decision at [126]-[127].
THE AMENDED ORIGINATING APPLICATION
applicant relies on an amended originating application filed on 5 February
2025 in which he raises two grounds. Both of those
grounds concern aspects of
matters taken into account by the Assistant Minister in exercising his
discretion under
Migration Act
. Relevantly, as was the
case for the purposes of the Assistant Minster’s consideration of whether
or not to grant the SHEV,
there was no dispute before me that the applicant did
not pass the character test.
ground 1 the applicant alleges that the decision is affected by jurisdictional
error as it is legally unreasonable and/or based
on illogical or irrational
findings. The particulars to ground 1 are:
(a) The Assistant Minister found the need to protect the Australian community
from criminal or other serious conduct weighed significantly
against granting
the visa, even though the Applicant would be residing in the community whether
or not the SHEV was granted and the
risk to the community posed by the Applicant
was the same whether or not the SHEV was granted.
(b) The Assistant Minister found the expectations of the Australian community
that a non-citizen who commits serious breaches of
Australian law should not be
allowed to remain in Australia weighed clearly in favour of visa refusal, even
though the Applicant
would remain in Australia and reside in the community
whether or not the SHEV was granted.
The applicant’s submissions
applicant submits that two key, if not determinative, factors in the decision
refusing his SHEV application were the need to protect
the Australian community,
a consideration which was given the “highest priority”; and the
expectation of the Australian
community that a person with a criminal history of
the applicant would be forfeited the privilege of staying in Australia, a
consideration
which was given “significant weight”. The applicant
observes that the Assistant Minister recognised that, as a result
refusal, he would not remain in detention, but would be released into the
community and that the Assistant Minister acknowledged
that the applicant would
not be removed to Sudan, and there was no real prospect that he would be removed
to a third country. The
applicant notes that the effect was that, on refusal,
he would be released from detention into the community for the reasonably
foreseeable
applicant submits that, despite having made those findings, the Assistant
Minister did not consider or identify how the protection
or expectations of the
community would be met by a refusal decision. He contends that the decision
discloses no logical or rational
connection between the refusal and the
protection of the community or the expectations of the community.
applicant submits that the decision fails to identify any relevant distinction
for the purposes of protecting the community whether
his visa was refused or
granted and, on either decision, the applicant would remain in the community,
where “any risk”
that the offending be repeated was
“unacceptable” and he “would not be subject to any form of
correctional or other
supervision in the community”. The applicant
contends that, despite those matters, the decision is silent as to how the
would be better protected or any risk to community would be alleviated
by a refusal decision. He says that there was simply no logical
or justifiable
basis for the Assistant Minister to have concluded that the protection of the
community “weighed significantly
against granting [the applicant’s]
applicant relies on
v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
[2025] FCA 192
where, in respect of the
circumstances before the Court, Owens J relevantly said:
... The circumstance that, because of
, the applicant would reside in
the community on either outcome of the Minister’s decision, fundamentally
altered the context
in which the assessment of the protection of the community
needed to be considered. By stopping at the point of deciding that “any
risk” of recidivism was unacceptable, and not going on to make the
findings necessary to permit him to assess the relative
risk the applicant would
pose to the community on the alternative outcomes, the Minister failed to engage
in a legally reasonable
way with the issue he had himself raised for
determination.
applicant says that the same may be said with respect to the weight given to the
community expectation that a person with his
criminal history would not be
allowed to remain in Australia. He contends that on either an approval or
refusal decision, he would
remain in Australia for the reasonably foreseeable
future such that there was no logical basis that community expectations be given
“significant weight” towards refusal. The applicant submits that no
explanation was given as to why a refusal decision
better served the community
expectation than an approval decision and that, on either outcome, the community
expectation would not
applicant submits that each of
v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCA 1375
v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2025] FCA 14
, which rejected similar arguments to those now made by
him, can be distinguished and contrasted with
which supports his
to materiality, the applicant submits that where the risk to the community and
the community expectation factors were given “significant
leading to the refusal decision, it is likely that a different decision could
have been made, citing
LPDT v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant
Servies and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
. The applicant
submits, referring to
v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship
and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCAFC 103
(2024) 304 FCR
where the decision involves a multifactorial evaluative task, “[o]nce an
important underpinning of the decision in relation
to several elements is
fundamentally altered, it is simply not possible to have confidence in what the
outcome would have been; it
cannot ‘be affirmatively concluded that the
outcome would inevitably have been the same had the error not been
Consideration
ground 1 the applicant contends that the Assistant Minister’s decision is
legally unreasonable and/or based on illogical
or irrational findings because of
his apparently inconsistent findings as particularised (see [35] above).
is apparent that by ground 1 the applicant does not seek to impugn the Assistant
Minister’s findings of fact that the need
to protect the Australian
community and the expectations of the Australian community weighed respectively
“significantly against
granting the visa” and “clearly in
favour of visa refusal” (at decision [71], [93] and [124]-[125]).
he does not seek to impugn the Assistant Minister’s finding
that as a consequence of the law and practically the applicant
would not remain
in detention and would be released to reside in the community (at decision
[110]). However, the applicant contends
that the illogicality or irrationality
in the Assistant Minister’s decision arises because of a failure by the
Assistant Minister
to make a further finding, that is to consider how the
protection or expectations of the Australian community would be met by a refusal
principles that govern the assessment of whether a decision is legally
unreasonable were not in dispute. As the parties accepted,
a decision may
exceed the implied condition of legal reasonableness by the way in which the
decision was made or because the outcome
is arbitrary, capricious, lacking in
common sense or plainly unjust:
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2012] HCA 61
(2013) 249 CLR 332
(French CJ), [71]-[72], [76] (Hayne, Kiefel
and Bell JJ), [105] (Gageler J). That said, the characterisation of a decision
as unreasonable
because of illogicality or irrationality is not easily made:
Djokovic v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
(2022) 289 FCR 21 at [33]. The test for
unreasonableness is necessarily stringent because courts will not lightly
interfere with
a statutory power involving a discretion:
Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
CJ), [52] (Gageler J) and [135] (Edelman J). Further, it is not every lapse in
logic that will give rise to jurisdictional
Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship v SZMDS
(2010) 240 CLR 611
at [130] (Crennan and Bell
making the decision the Assistant Minister exercised the power in
Migration Act
, which, as I have already observed, requires two steps (see
[21] above). Where, as here, it was not in dispute that the applicant
pass the character test, the question for the Assistant Minister was whether
there were factors sufficient to persuade him,
in the exercise of the
discretion, that the applicant should not be permitted to stay in Australia. In
ENT19 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2023] HCA 18
(2023) 278 CLR 75
the plurality of the
High Court (Gordon, Edelman, Steward and Gleeson JJ) relevantly said the
following about the exercise of the
power in subs 501(1) and (3) of the
Migration Act
at [68]-[69]:
is necessary to say something more about the structure of
decision under
involves two steps, being a consideration of whether the
person has satisfied the decision-maker that the person passes the character
test, and if not, the exercise of the discretion whether to exercise the power
to refuse the visa. If the outcome of the first step
is that the decision-maker
is satisfied by the person that they pass the character test, the only decision
open to the decision-maker
is not to refuse the visa. ...
provisions provide no express criteria for exercise of the discretion. It has
been said that “the protection of the Australian
community lies at the
heart” of the discretionary powers under
Ultimately, the exercise
of the discretion in
or (3) will depend on the facts and circumstances
of the case, having regard to any mandatory and permissible considerations
from a proper construction of those provisions. In this case, it is
sufficient to observe that those considerations would generally
include for
, and will necessarily include for
, considerations in respect of
the reason that the person failed the character test being considerations that
would fall under the
umbrella of a general concept of “the national
interest” broadly construed. ...
(Footnotes omitted.)
applicant relies on
in support of his submission that there was no
logical or justifiable basis for the Assistant Minister to have concluded that
protection of the Australian community “weighs significantly against
granting [his] visa” at [124] of his decision.
The facts of
are complicated. Relevantly the Minister ultimately exercised his power under
Migration Act
to set aside a decision of the then
Administrative Appeals
revoking the mandatory cancellation of
CRRN’s visa under
Migration Act
and to cancel
CRRN’s visa. This meant that CRRN, who had a history of mental illness,
could not access the National Disability
Insurance Scheme (
sought judicial review of the Minister’s decision to set aside the
Tribunal’s decision and cancel his visa.
considering the grounds of review, Owens J first referred to the power under
which his Honour noted was differently conditioned to the power
Migration Act
. The section provides that where the
Minister is satisfied that the person does not pass the character test, the
Minister can set
aside the decision under
and cancel the
person’s visa if the Minister is satisfied that “the cancellation is
in the national interest”.
Owens J noted that the Minister stated in his reasons that
he considered matters of national interest to include protection of the
community and referred to aspects of the Minister’s decision where the
Minister explained and drew his conclusion in relation
to the concept of
protection of the community as it relates to national interest. After doing so
his Honour continued at [22]-[23]:
is no dispute that the Minister was entitled to consider the need to protect the
Australian community as an important aspect
of the national interest, nor that
he was at liberty to define the relevant inquiry as directed fundamentally to an
assessment of
the risk of future offending and the consequences if that risk
were to materialise. Other aspects of the Minister’s findings
reasoning on the topic of the protection of the community to which no challenge
was directed included:
uncontroversial aspects of the Minister’s decision can thus be summarised
as a finding that the applicant poses an unacceptable
risk of harm to the
Australian community, and that the degree of risk he poses is increased in the
absence of a highly structured
program of risk mitigation directed to the
management of his mental illness.
Owens noted (at [24]) that CRRN’s second and third grounds of judicial
review proceeded from the uncontroversial foundation
described at [23] of
. His Honour relevantly continued:
(a) The Minister accepted that the applicant is a person in respect of whom
Australia has non-refoulement obligations, and thus a
decision to cancel his
visa would not result in his removal from Australia (at [81]-[85]);
(b) The Minister acknowledged that the effect of the High Court’s decision
was that a decision to cancel the applicant’s visa would
not result in him being taken into immigration detention. It followed
if his visa was cancelled, the applicant would continue to reside in the
community (at [86]-[88]);
(c) The Minister said that he would “separately consider the type of visa
on which [the applicant] should reside and conditions
to be imposed on that
visa, following further advice from the Department” (at [88]).
(d) The Minister acknowledged that Mr Coffey’s opinion about the level of
risk posed by the applicant was conditioned upon
there being an absence of a
highly structured program of risk mitigation. ...
second ground raised by CRRN was described as an assertion of jurisdictional
error in “failing to complete the fact-finding
aspect of the exercise of
power within the bounds of legal reasonableness” and in “failing to
consider all relevant legal
consequences of the decision, including that a
cancellation decision would ensure the applicant could not qualify for the
at [45]. Justice Owens observed (at [46]) that both
characterisations of the asserted error were an attempt to articulate the
“fundamental
irrationality” in the Minister’s decision for
which CRRN contended. His Honour continued at [46]:
That is, it is contended that, having identified the protection of the
Australian community as a fundamental aspect of the national
interest, and
having identified the risk of recidivism on the part of the applicant as the
relevant threat to that community, the
logical consequence of a cancellation of
the applicant’s visa would seem to be to
the risk of harm
to the community, and yet the Minister found that “the need to protect the
Australian community from criminal
or other serious conduct
significantly in favour of
a finding that it is in the national interest to
cancel [the applicant’s] visa” (at [54], emphasis added).
Owens identified the four steps in CRRN’s argument and having done so
concluded at [55]:
As I will explain, the combined effect of the matters articulated above is that,
having identified the protection of the Australian
community as a centrally
relevant aspect of the national interest, and having identified the risk that
the applicant would engage
in further criminal conduct as the principal relevant
threat to that community, the Minister failed to make the factual findings
necessary to found a rational conclusion on the matters of national interest
that he had identified. Viewed differently, he failed
to consider the legal
consequences of his decision as they related to the aspect of the national
interest under consideration.
Honour explained that conclusion at [56]-[58]:
identified the risk posed by the applicant to the Australian community by reason
of his potential recidivism as a critical
aspect of the national interest, it
was necessary for the Minister to make findings about those matters in reaching
the requisite
state of satisfaction under
s 501BA(2)(b):
LJTZ v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
, per Charlesworth J. On that self-determined premise, the
Minister could not rationally determine whether cancellation was in the
interest or not (let alone the strength of the consideration) without making a
finding as to whether the risk posed by the
applicant would be increased or
decreased if his visa was cancelled. That, in turn, necessarily required a
finding about whether
he would be eligible for support through the NDIS (which
was itself a function of (a) whether the applicant would reside in the community
on a permanent or temporary visa, and (b) whether he would otherwise meet the
eligibility criteria).
follows that the Minister failed to make the factual findings necessary to
provide an intelligible justification for his decision:
(a) Contrary to the applicant’s primary submission, it does not matter
that the Minister did not make findings about the precise
visa upon which the
applicant would reside in the community, or the conditions that would attach to
it. What matters is that he did
not identify the critical feature of
visa that could be granted to the applicant if his existing visa was cancelled;
namely, that they could only be temporary.
(b) The Minister’s finding that the applicant had not
granted access to the NDIS was not sufficient to provide a legally reasonable
foundation for his decision. The factual question
that needed to be resolved is
whether the applicant would be granted access to the NDIS, or at least the
probability of that occurring.
On the evidence before him, the only rational
conclusion was that the applicant would be admitted to the NDIS if he resided in
community on a permanent visa, but could not be so admitted if he resided on
a temporary visa.
(c) Following on from the preceding two failures, the Minister failed to make
any finding about whether the risk posed by the applicant
to the Australian
community would be increased or decreased if the applicant’s visa was
cancelled. On the evidence before him,
the only rational conclusion was that the
applicant would pose a greater risk to the Australian community if the Minister
making findings about those matters, the Minister could not, within the bounds
of legal reasonableness, determine the critical
aspect of the national interest
that he had identified: namely, the protection of the Australian community.
Owens upheld ground 2. Clearly, his Honour reached his conclusion having regard
to the facts peculiar to the applicant in
that case. That is that CRRN’s
risk of recidivism was dependent on access to treatment for his mental health
issues including
access to the NDIS, if eligible. As the Assistant Minister
submits, his Honour did not express any principle of more general application.
Nor would or could his Honour have done so given that the Minister is not
required to evaluate risk in any particular way: see
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2015] FCAFC 83
(2015) 231 FCR 513
their submissions, relied on for the purpose of the hearing and prior to the
delivery of the decisions in
Plaintiff S22/2025
parties identified two other decisions relevant to a consideration of this
ground. Those decisions, discussed below, rejected
similar arguments to those
made by the applicant.
the applicant, JNMQ, sought judicial review of a personal
decision of the Minister made pursuant to
Migration Act
set aside a decision of the Tribunal and to refuse to grant JNMQ a Resolution of
Status (Class CD) visa (
). Relevantly as summarised
at [3]-[10]:
(1) JNMQ had been assessed as engaging Australia’s protection obligations
Migration Act
, and both he and his daughter were
granted temporary protection visas;
(2) JNMQ subsequently applied for a SHEV;
(3) on 16 December 2019 JNMQ was found guilty of two criminal offences and was
sentenced to a term of imprisonment of four years.
He was only required to
serve 16 months of the sentence in prison on condition that he did not
commit another offence punishable
by imprisonment within a period of five years
after release;
(4) however, the length of JNMQ’s sentence led to the cancellation of his
temporary protection visa on 17 June 2020 under
Migration Act
Accordingly, when JNMQ was released from prison on 15 April 2021 he was detained
Migration Act
(5) on 19 August 2021 a delegate of the Minister issued an Indicative Positive
Assessment for a SHEV;
(6) in the meantime, JNMQ had made representations seeking revocation of the
mandatory cancellation of his temporary protection visa
but on 6 October 2021
the Minister personally exercised his discretion under
Migration Act
not to revoke the decision to cancel JNMQ’s temporary
protection visa;
(7) on 12 September 2022 a delegate of the Minister exercised the discretion
Migration Act
to refuse to grant the SHEV. JNMQ applied
to the Tribunal for review of the delegate’s decision to refuse to grant
(8) on 14 February 2023 by operation of the
Migration Amendment
(Transitioning TPV/SHEV Holders to Resolution of Status Visas) Regulations 2023
(Cth), JNMQ’s application for a SHEV was taken to be, and always to
have been, an application for a Resolution of Status (Class
(9) following the handing down of the decision in
, JNMQ was released
into the community;
(10) on 7 December 2023, the Tribunal set aside the delegate’s decision of
12 September 2022 and remitted the matter for reconsideration
direction that the discretion in
Migration Act
to refuse to
grant the visa is not to be exercised; and
(11) on 24 June 2024, the Minister made the JNMQ Decision.
ground 3 of his application JNMQ contended that there was illogicality in the
Minister’s attribution of significant weight
to the consideration of the
protection of the Australian community in deciding that it was in the national
interest to set aside
the Tribunal’s decision and to refuse to grant him
the visa. JNMQ submitted that the Minister could not rationally or logically
have given significant weight to the protection of the Australian community
towards his satisfaction of the national interest in
circumstances where, among
other things, the concomitant outcome of the refusal decision was that he would
not be taken into detention
and would continue to reside in the community, as
the Minister had found:
referring to the principles governing the consideration of the national interest
Migration Act
, Jackman J concluded at [27]:
As the Minister submits, it was logical and rational for the Minister to give
significant weight to the protection of the Australian
community in assessing
whether the national interest favoured the applicant being granted an indefinite
right to remain in Australia.
As the Minister submits, not only does a permanent
visa entitle its holder to an indefinite right to remain in Australia, but
residency is one of the criteria for a non-citizen seeking conferral
of Australian citizenship:
Australian Citizenship Act
(Cth). Thus, the question for the Minister’s consideration when
assessing the protection of the Australian community was not
simply whether the
applicant would be removed from the community upon the refusal of the visa. This
is reflected in the Minister’s
reasons at [53], in which the Minister
referred to the applicant having applied for a Class CD Subclass 851 Resolution
Visa for the purpose of remaining permanently in Australia, and stated
that he had considered the risk of harm to the Australian
community in the
context of the permanent stay period and specific purposes of the visa
application.
the applicant, XKTK, sought an order restraining the Minister
from giving effect to his decision to cancel his SHEV pursuant to
Migration Act
and an order quashing the Minister’s
decision. The Minister cancelled the SHEV because he was satisfied that XKTK
pass the character test and that it was in the national interest to do
so and set aside an earlier decision of the Tribunal revoking
cancellation of the SHEV:
at [1]-[2].
principal issue in the proceeding was whether the Minister’s decision was
legally unreasonable because the cancellation
of the SHEV could not rationally
protect the Australian community or meet the Australian community’s
expectations because XKTK
would nonetheless remain in the community given the
decision in
Halley concluded that he was not persuaded that the Minister’s reliance on
his community protection and community expectations
findings to conclude that
the cancellation of XKTK’s visa was in the national interest was
irrational or illogical:
at [39]. At first instance, XKTK had
sought to distinguish
on two bases, which his Honour set out at
[41]. After doing so and referring to the facts relating to the visa applicant
and those relating to XKTK Halley J said at [45]-[46]:
my view, the distinction is not sufficiently material to distinguish
Jackman J’s reasoning in
at [27]. As his Honour there
identified, “the question for the Minister’s consideration when
assessing the protection
of the Australian community was not simply whether the
applicant would be removed from the community upon the refusal of the
contrary to the applicant’s submissions, none of the reasoning in
stands for or supports the
proposition that the Minister in exercising a discretion under
may only have regard to legal consequences that are “inevitable or
certain” or that are the direct and immediate
consequence of their
decision. Rather, the jurisdictional error identified by Perry J (with whom
Bromwich and Kennett JJ relevantly
at [101] was a
to have regard to a legal consequence that was inevitable or
certain. Similarly, the jurisdictional error identified by the Full
at [81]-[86] (Kenny, Flick and Griffiths JJ) (as cited by Perram
at [29]) was a
by the Minister to take into
account the direct and immediate legal consequence of their decision.
Halley J was satisfied that the Minister “did provide an intelligible
justification for his conclusion on the national
interest consideration when his
reasoning with respect to the community protection consideration and the
community expectations consideration”
was read in conjunction with
[70]-[71] of the Minister’s statement of reasons:
at [48]. As
recorded at [50] of
at [70]-[71] of his reasons the Minister
I am aware that if a cancellation decision is made under
applicant] will not be taken into detention. He will continue to reside in the
community. I will separately consider the type
of visa on which he should reside
and conditions to be imposed on that visa, following further advice from the
Department.
I am also aware that if a cancellation decision is made under
there would
be significant restrictions on [the applicant’s] ability to apply for
another visa. In particular, I understand
that [the applicant] would be
prevented by
of the Act from making a further application for a protection
visa while he is in the migration zone (unless a Minister administering
determines, under
of the Act does not apply to him). Any
application for a visa other than a protection visa would be subject to
the Act, which would apply to [the applicant] as a result of a cancellation
decision under
, with the effect that his visa would remain cancelled
This would mean that, without leaving the migration zone, he would
not be able to apply for any visa other than a Bridging R (Class
WR) visa (as
prescribed by
regulation 2.12AA
Migration Regulations 1994
), for which he
could only apply in response to an invitation. I have given this consideration
minor weight.
considering a submission from XKTK that, where the Minister has provided reasons
in relation to community protection and community
expectations considerations
and did not refer to the matters raised in his reasons at [70]-[71], it should
not be inferred that he
had regard to those matters in addressing those
considerations, Halley J said at [54]-[56]:
accept as submitted by the applicant that the Minister’s reasons at SR
[70]-[71] were part of his consideration of the legal
consequences of his
decision, and followed his findings that the community protection consideration
and community expectations consideration
weighed in favour of cancellation. I
also accept as submitted by the applicant that these findings were made without
any reference
to the prospect of the applicant remaining in the community
following cancellation or the circumstances considered by the Minister
am not persuaded, however, that this has the necessary consequence that the
Minister’s satisfaction that it was in the national
interest to cancel the
applicant’s Safe Haven Visa was irrational, illogical or not based on
findings or inferences of fact
supported by logical grounds. The
applicant’s offending was objectively serious and logically raised serious
potential concerns
for the protection of the community and community
expectations with respect to the cancellation of a visa. On any view it was open
to the Minister to conclude that these considerations were sufficient to support
a finding that it was in the national interest to
support a cancellation of the
applicant’s Safe Haven Visa. At the same time, the Minister recognised
that the legal consequences
of the cancellation decision, given
that the applicant, at least for the foreseeable future, would likely remain in
the Australian community.
consideration by the Minister of the legal consequences of a cancellation
decision was directed at both Australia’s international
refoulement
obligations (at SR [60]-[67]) and the practical implications of a cancellation
decision given the legal effect of
(at SR [68]-[71]). Moreover,
protection of the community and community expectations are not absolute concepts
that require or dictate
the immediate removal or detention of an applicant in
order for them to be engaged or otherwise addressed.
me, relevantly before the decision in
the applicant attempted to
distinguish the decisions in
on a number of
because in those cases (and in
) the Minister was required to be
satisfied that the decision was in the national interest and the decisions were
not concerned with
the exercise of the general discretion under
Migration Act
the challenge in
concerned the logicality of assessment of the
protection of the community and did not relate to community expectations.
the political nature of “national interest”, the Court
accepted that the “protection of the Australian community”
encompassed protection of the community against persons seeking an
“indefinite right to remain in Australia” and, unlike
the present
case, the Minister’s decision made express reference to the purpose of
JNMQ’s visa application, being to
“remain permanently in
Australia”.
and found the reasoning was
not legally unreasonable. The applicant submits that the decision under review
was, like the present case, one where the Minister did not
mention that the purpose of the visa application was to obtain a permanent
to reside in Australia. However, it does not appear that in
J considered submissions on the failure of the decision-maker to address the
temporal aspect of the visas, where any level
of risk had been identified as
“unacceptable”. Here, the Assistant Minister made the express
finding that, when released
into the community, the applicant “would not
be subject to any form of correctional or other supervision in the
community”.
The applicant thus submits that
distinguishable and provides limited assistance.
the applicant says that while
to conclude there
was no illogicality in the Minister’s reasoning about community
expectation, where on either outcome the
applicant would remain in Australia,
did not concern a challenge to community expectation reasoning. The
applicant says that in
the Court treated community expectation and
community protection as a composite consideration, without any separate analysis
reasoning on community expectation. Here, community expectation was
separately and distinctly considered by the Assistant Minister
rationality of the conclusions on that consideration ought to be considered
separately. The applicant submits that, in those
circumstances,
provides limited assistance, and this Court should not feel constrained by or
compelled to follow it.
the following reasons I do not find the attempts to distinguish the decisions in
persuasive and, in any event, as explained below
cannot succeed in light of the decisions in
Plaintiff S22/2025
the Assistant Minister submits, there is an “unresolved tension” as
to whether the risk of harm to the Australian community
is a mandatory relevant
consideration for the purposes of
Migration Act
Notwithstanding that, there is no duty or obligation to evaluate that risk in
any particular way or to ascribe any particular characterisation
to the quality
of that risk: see
AZAFQ v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2016) 243 FCR 451
at [49]-[55].
to the two decisions, in
the Minister expressly referred in his
decision to the purpose of JNMQ’s visa application being to remain in
Australia. In
as in the case before me, the Minister did not
include any such express reference. I accept the Assistant Minister’s
that it is not strictly accurate to say that
. Rather, after considering
and identifying the
differences in the visa status and applications between the applicant in that
case and the applicant in
found that the
Minister’s conclusions on the national interest were logical and rational
when viewed as a whole. The same conclusion
was reached in
the Assistant Minister stated (at [69] of the decision) that, once released into
the community, the applicant would “not
be subject to any form of
correctional or other supervision” is not a basis on which to distinguish
. At that part of his decision the Assistant Minister was simply
acknowledging that, if the applicant was released into the community,
no indication he would engage in programs related to his offending.
at [69] of his decision the Assistant Minister said:
I am also concerned that [the applicant] has not undertaken any
offending-related programs although I am aware that he tried but
was unable to
do so while in prison or in immigration detention. Nonetheless, he has not
engaged in programs related to sexual violence,
aggression and abusive
behaviour. There is no indication that he will do so if released into the
community, noting also that he will
not be subject to any form of correctional
or other supervision in the community.
As the Assistant Minster submits that finding had no material bearing on his
later reasoning in relation to the protection of the
community and the
expectations of the community.
involved a challenge to findings on community expectation and
involved both community protection and community expectations
together, does not take away from the reasoning in either decision.
Relevantly,
the basis for the challenge to both categories of finding was the same, namely
the absence of express positive findings
addressing community protection or
community expectation concerning the applicant remaining in the community, and
the outcome of the reasoning on both categories was the same.
my view the reasoning in
and, as explained below
applies equally to the present case before me. As was the case in
the matters to which the Assistant Minister referred concerning the
applicant’s offending were “objectively serious”
“logically and rationally raised serious potential concerns for the
protection of the community and community expectations”
with respect to
the refusal of a visa: see
at [55]. At the same time, the Assistant
Minister recognised that if the SHEV was refused, the applicant would reside in
the community.
There is no inconsistency in this reasoning. Although open to
him to do so, the Assistant Minister was not required to engage in
a reasoning
process in which he made a relative risk assessment. In making his decision and
exercising his discretion, the Assistant
Minister considered a range of factors
to which he attributed differing strengths. Ultimately the Assistant Minister
concluded that
the factors weighing against the grant of the applicant’s
visa outweighed the factors in favour of its grant and that the applicant
represents a risk of harm to the Australian community that is unacceptable:
decision at [127]. The matters which the Assistant Minister
considered and the
findings he made, including those about which the applicant complains, provide a
logical and rational foundation
for the exercise of the Assistant
Minister’s power under
Migration Act
set out above, since the hearing in this matter, the decisions in
were delivered.
concerned a decision of a delegate of the Minister not to revoke
the mandatory cancellation of the plaintiff’s temporary protection
Migration Act
. In making the decision the delegate
was required to apply “
Direction no. 110 –
Visa Refusal
and Cancellation under
section 501
and revocation of mandatory of cancellation
section 501CA
”. The plaintiff was in detention and was part of the
“NZYQ cohort”.
plaintiff challenged the delegate’s decision on two grounds. The first
was that the delegate failed to consider the legal
consequences of the decision.
The plaintiff focused on the statement at [117] of the delegate’s reasons
where the delegate
I am aware that even if a non-revocation decision is made under
plaintiff] will not remain indefinitely in detention. He will be released from
immigration detention. The Minister will separately
consider the type of visa on
which he should reside and conditions to be imposed on that visa, following
further advice from the
Department.
support of that ground the plaintiff contended: first, that based on his
dealings within the Minister’s department, the delegate
in fact knew that
the Minister would not consider the “type of visa on which” the
plaintiff should reside in Australia;
secondly, the delegate failed to
understand that the only visa the plaintiff could be granted in accordance with
the statutory scheme
was a BVR; and thirdly, the delegate failed to consider the
consequences of the application of the statutory scheme to the plaintiff:
Plaintiff S22/2025
rejecting the second and third of those arguments the High Court (Gageler CJ,
Edelman and Jagot JJ) held at [13]:
It can be inferred that the delegate knew that, as a consequence of the
delegate’s decision not to revoke the cancellation
plaintiff’s TPV, the plaintiff would be considered for and would most
likely be the subject of a grant of the BVR including
the mandatory conditions
to which such visas are subject. This does not mean, however, that the statement
in para 117 of the delegate’s
reasons exposes a failure to confront the
legal consequences of the delegate’s decision in any of the ways proposed
of the plaintiff. To the contrary, in circumstances where the
plaintiff is correct that the delegate knew that the grant of a BVR
plaintiff was being considered and was very likely to be granted on the same day
as the delegate’s decision refusing
to revoke the cancellation of the
plaintiff’s TPV, it is impossible to infer that the delegate misunderstood
the statutory
scheme or failed to consider its application to the plaintiff.
High Court also rejected the first argument noting that it was based on nothing
more than “infelicitous drafting of reasons”:
Honours noted that although the phrase “the type of visa” was
incorrect in that a BVR was the only visa that could
be granted, it was
“apt for the conditions to be imposed on any such BVR”, as only
certain conditions are mandatory whereas
others are discretionary and, apart
from use of that phrase, there was no suggestion in the delegate’s reasons
that he wrongly
believed that some type of visa, other than a BVR, would be
available to the plaintiff:
Plaintiff S22/2025
High Court held that it could not be inferred that the delegate misunderstood
that the plaintiff could be granted some other type
of visa, other than a BVR or
that the delegate failed to consider the application of the statutory scheme to
the plaintiff. Rather,
the delegate correctly recognised that the statutory
scheme “provided for the performance of the delegate’s functions
exercise of the delegate’s powers under
of the [Migration
Act]... separately from the performance of other functions and exercise of other
powers of the Minister to grant
the BVR in accordance with Reg 2.25AB(2) of the
[Regulations]”:
Plaintiff S22/2025
plaintiff’s second ground was that the delegate misapplied paragraph
8.5(2) of Direction no. 110. The plaintiff argued
delegate’s reasoning was internally inconsistent as he reasoned elsewhere
that the plaintiff would be granted another
visa permitting him to reside in the
community: at [24]. While this ground was framed in terms of non-compliance
with Direction
no. 110, it included allegations of illogicality not dissimilar
to the applicant’s arguments of legal unreasonableness relied
Plaintiff S22/2025
the plaintiff argued that the expectations of
the Australian community could not rationally have application to his
circumstances
as it was not in doubt that he would reside in the community
irrespective of the delegate’s decision on his request for revocation
the cancellation decision.
High Court also rejected this ground. In doing so the Court held at [27]:
Nor is there any inconsistency between that evaluation and the delegate’s
recognition that the plaintiff would be in the Australian
community for so long
as there was no real prospect of removal of him from Australia becoming
practicable in the reasonably foreseeable
future. Paragraph 8.5(2), in saying
that “the Australian community would expect that the person should not be
granted or continue
to hold a visa”, must be understood in context. It is
plain from the context that the “visa” being referred to
sentence, in the case of a visa that has been subject to mandatory cancellation,
is the visa that permitted the non-citizen
to remain in Australia – such
as, in the plaintiff’s case, the TPV. The reference is not to the BVR,
which includes mandatory
conditions regulating the plaintiff’s conduct and
which ceases by operation of
Migration Act
once removal of the
non-citizen from Australia is reasonably practicable because of a third country
granting the non-citizen a right
to enter and remain in that country.
, the appellant, XKTK, challenged the primary judge’s
conclusion that the Minister’s decision was not legally unreasonable.
XKTK submitted that the Minister did not explain how cancellation would protect
the community or meet its expectations in circumstances
where he would remain in
the community:
their joint reasons, Stewart and Needham JJ accepted that:
(1) the Minister “expressly contemplated that [XKTK] would reside in the
community under a ‘type of visa’”;
(2) a BVR was the only visa for which XKTK could have qualified while in the
migration zone; and
(3) a BVR was subject to certain mandatory conditions as well as limited
discretionary conditions,
at [100]-[102].
Stewart and Needham JJ referred to the delegate’s
in Plaintiff S22/2025
and considered that it was “very
similar to the reasoning of the Minister” in the case before their Honours
certain respects ... identical”. They identified the key
difference to be the “relevant grounds of challenge”,
irrationality challenge in
Plaintiff S22/2025
being on the basis of the
expectations of the community whereas before them the challenge was on that
basis as well as the protection
of the community. At [112] their Honours
observed that the High Court in
Plaintiff S22/2025
rejected the
irrationality challenge and “reasoned that the ‘visa’ referred
to in the context of the expectations
of the Australian community was the visa
that had been subject to mandatory cancellation” and was not a reference
to the BVR.
Justices Stewart and Needham held (at [113]) that the reasoning in
Plaintiff S22/2025
was equally applicable to the case before their
Honours and the contention based on the expectations of the expectations of the
community and the protection of the community: at [113]. At [114]
their Honours said:
Although the Minister’s reasons in the present case are open to the
criticism that they do not explain how or why the considerations
expectation of the Australian community and protection of the community support
non-revocation in circumstances where the
appellant would continue to reside in
the community, it cannot be inferred that the Minister was unaware that that
would be the result
– that understanding was made explicit, albeit in
another part of the reasons. ... it cannot be inferred from the Minister’s
use of the terminology of “type of visa” that he was unaware that
the appellant would reside in Australia under a BVR
– it was the
conditions to be attached to the BVR that still had to be decided; in that
sense, it was the “type”
of BVR on which the Minister was to be
advised by the Department. ...
separately Wheelahan J observed at [18]:
It is wrong to assume, as the appellant’s submissions seem to do, that
within the scheme of the Act cancellation of a person’s
necessary step towards removal can only lawfully occur when removal is
reasonably practicable, either at the time of cancellation
or in the reasonably
foreseeable future. There are no express limitations to this effect, and no such
limitation is to be implied.
The purpose of cancellation may be met even though
removal from Australia may not be reasonably practicable at the time the
to cancel a visa is made. The Act and the
Migration Regulations
(Cth) contemplate and accommodate a situation where removal from
Australia might not be reasonably practicable at the time a visa
is cancelled,
or in the reasonably foreseeable future, by providing for detention within the
constitutional limits referred to in
until removal is effected. If
detention is not authorised, the Act and regulations provide for bridging visas
as identified below.
Wheelahan went on to note that, having regard to the provisions of the
, the only visa for which XKTK could apply was a BVR which would permit him
to remain in Australia until it became reasonably practicable
to remove him: see
at [21] and [23].
Honour identified two significant features of a BVR that were not shared by
XKTK’s cancelled protection visa. The first
was that the BVR was
susceptible to immediate cessation upon the Minister giving notice of
satisfaction that XKTK’s removal
from Australia was reasonably
practicable:
at [30]. The second was that it was liable to be
subject to conditions and that those conditions were in furtherance of the
interest by regulating the presence in Australia of non-citizens:
at [31]. Justice Wheelahan also rejected XKTK’s claim that
the Minister’s reasons were unreasonable, illogical or irrational.
Honour concluded that when the Minister’s reasons were read fairly, as a
whole and against the object of the power being
exercised it was clear that
“the Minister understood that, in the circumstances that then existed,
removal was not practicable,
that upon cancellation of the visa the appellant
would not be taken into detention, and that some other visa that would be
to conditions would be issued”:
apart from the rejection of the applicant’s submissions made in writing
and at the hearing for the reasons set out above,
the applicant’s
challenge to the decision on the basis that it is legally unreasonable,
irrational or illogical cannot succeed
in the face of these two recent
set out above, and as the Assistant Minister submits, in making the decision,
(1) concluded that, in light of the applicant’s conduct, the harm to the
community should he reoffend and the likelihood of
his doing so, the need to
protect the Australian community weighed “significantly” against
granting the visa, that is
the visa the subject of the refusal decision: see
[28] above;
(2) considered that the expectations of the Australian community, including an
expectation that non-citizens who commit serious breaches
of Australian law
should not be allowed to enter or remain in Australia, weighed “clearly in
favour of refusal”, again
in the context of the visa the subject of the
refusal decision: see [30] above; and
(3) recognised that, as a member of the “NZYQ cohort”, the applicant
will not remain in detention and will reside in
the community but that he
“will separately consider the type of visa on which [the applicant] should
reside and conditions
to be imposed on that visa, following further advice from
the Department”: see [32] above.
Assistant Minister’s reasoning, read fairly and in context, is not
illogical, irrational or legally unreasonable. There
is no inconsistency
between the Assistant Minister’s evaluations of the need to protect the
Australian community and the community’s
expectations and a recognition
that the applicant would be in the Australian community for so long as there was
no real prospect
of his removal from Australia becoming practicable in the
reasonably foreseeable future.
1 cannot succeed.
ground two, the applicant alleges that the Assistant Minister’s decision
was affected by jurisdictional error because he
acted on a misunderstanding of
the law. The applicant contends that in considering the legal consequences of
his decision the Assistant
Minister found that he would separately consider the
conditions,
if a refusal decision was made the applicant would only be able to
apply for a BVR as prescribed by reg 2.12AA of the Regulations
without leaving
the migration zone and the applicant could only apply for a BVR in response to
an invitation. However, the direct
and statutory consequences of the decision
were that the applicant would be granted a BVR without application subject to
conditions for the reasonably foreseeable future.
The applicant’s submissions
applicant submits that the Assistant Minister suggests at [110] of his decision
that there were a range of visas which the applicant
could be granted. However,
the only visa available to the applicant following a refusal decision was a BVR.
The applicant contends
that while the Assistant Minister said that he would
separately consider the type of visa on which he should reside, and the
on which it would be granted, following advice from his department,
legally and practically, the only visa the Assistant Minister
was going to grant
was a BVR subject to the mandatory conditions.
applicant submits that the Assistant Minister was empowered pursuant to
Migration Act
to grant a BVR, with or without application, to
an “eligible non-citizen” who the Minister was satisfied meets the
prescribed for its grant. He observes that the Regulations provided
for the Minister to grant a BVR without application where:
(1) an unlawful non-citizen has been released from detention and their
“removal from Australia is not reasonably practicable”:
reg 2.25AA;
(2) there is no real prospect of the removal of the non-citizen from Australia
becoming practicable in the reasonably foreseeable
future: reg 2.25AB(1).
Despite any requirement for an application under the Regulations, the Minister
may grant the non-citizen
a BVR if the Minister is satisfied that, at the time
of decision, the non-citizen does not hold a substantive visa, a criminal
visa or an enforcement visa: reg 2.25AB(2).
The applicant also observes that certain mandatory conditions must be imposed on
a visa granted under reg 2.25AA or reg 2.25AB of
the Regulations.
applicant submits that he met each of the criteria for the grant of a BVR
without application and each was known at the time of
the decision. He thus
submits that he was a person in respect of whom the Assistant Minister may grant
a BVR without an application.
applicant submits that the
Migration Act
and Regulations were amended following
to enable the Minister to grant a BVR without an application and
that the BVR and its mandatory conditions were directed precisely
situation in which he would be as a result of the decision. The applicant
submits that, had the Assistant Minister not granted
him a BVR following the
decision, he would have been released into the community without any visa. The
applicant contends that it
is improbable and unrealistic to suppose that such a
circumstance would have arisen and, in that sense, it was “inevitable
certain” that he would be granted a BVR following the decision.
applicant submits that as a matter of fact, at the time of making the decision,
a decision had been made simultaneously or immediately
after it to grant him a
BVR without an application. He observes that the fact that a BVR would be
issued following refusal was expressly
noted by the Assistant Minister on the
department’s submission addressed to him. Accordingly, the direct and
statutory consequences
of the decision were that, following the refusal, the
applicant would be granted a BVR subject to mandatory conditions for an unknown
period of time and at least into the reasonably foreseeable future. The
applicant submits that the Assistant Minister did not act
on this understanding
of the law in making the decision but proceeded on a false basis that there were
a range of visas which the
applicant may be granted and which the Assistant
Minister would seriously consider.
Consideration
ground concerns the decision at [110]-[112] (see [32] above). When considered
in context it is clear that the Assistant Minister
understood that:
(1) the applicant is a person in respect of whom Australia has non-refoulement
obligations: decision at [106];
(2) the protection finding made in relation to the applicant means he cannot be
removed to Sudan: decision at [107];
(3) the effect of the decision in
is that a non-citizen’s
detention will no longer be supported by
Migration Act
where there is no real prospect of removal in the reasonably foreseeable future.
In such a case if the non-citizen is in immigration
detention he or she must be
released: decision at [108];
(4) the protection finding in relation to the applicant meant he could only be
removed to a third country but there was presently
no real prospect of that
occurring: decision at [109]; and
(5) if a refusal decision was made under
Migration Act
applicant would not remain in detention and would be released to reside in the
community: decision at [110].
set out those matters the Assistant Minister said that he would separately
consider the type of visa on which the applicant
should reside and the
conditions to be imposed on that visa following further advice from the
department: decision at [110]. Further,
while acknowledging the significant
restrictions on the applicant’s ability to apply for another visa in the
event of a refusal
decision, the Assistant Minister said he had not speculated
on the likelihood of a Minister (including himself) intervening under
statutory powers which may result in the grant of a visa to the applicant:
decision at [111]-[112].
in the analysis summarised above is incorrect or involves or discloses a
misunderstanding of the applicable statutory regime
and the law on the part of
the Assistant Minister.
the Assistant Minster submits, this ground appears to depend on a premise that
the principle in
NBMZ v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2014] FCAFC 38
(2014) 220 FCR 1
extends to the later consideration of possible statutory
decisions and the outcomes of those later exercises of discretionary statutory
decision making. That premise has not been accepted. For example, in
at [18]-[19] a Full Court of this Court (Flick, Griffiths and Perry JJ)
relevantly said:
this context, it may be accepted that the Minister is obliged when considering
the plight of a refugee in immigration detention
to take into account the
“consequences” of his decision:
NBMZ v Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection
[2014] FCAFC 38
(2014) 220 FCR 1
per Allsop CJ and Katzmann J.
In reaching the same conclusion, Buchanan J there said:
[177] ... it is sufficiently
apparent, in my view, that the Minister gave no thought to, or alternatively
regarded as irrelevant or
not significant, that the applicant would, as both a
legal and practical consequence of the decision, face the prospect of indefinite
detention if a visa was
See also his Honour’s comments at [164]-[166].
however, is no authority for the more generally-expressed proposition that the
Minister must take into account when exercising the
discretion conferred by
the prospect that a claimant may be exposed to “indefinite
detention” at some future point of time dependent both upon
future applications that may or may not be made and upon future, potentially
adverse, exercises of the discretion. The task
of the Minister in the present
proceeding was to resolve the more confined question of the manner in which the
discretion conferred
should have been exercised. Future exercises of
discretion and statutory power are to be resolved when they arise. The fact that
the prospect remains open to Mr Ayoub by reason of
to make a future
application for a protection visa perhaps provides some support for a conclusion
that it is at that future point
of time that the prospect of “indefinite
detention” may have to be confronted.
See too for example
BNGP v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant
Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCA 878
v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2023] FCAFC 111
(2023) 298 FCR 609
(Bromwich and Kennett JJ).
the Assistant Minister took into account the legal consequences of his decision.
But he was not required to speculate on the
outcome of any future decision
concerning the grant of a BVR to the applicant and the conditions that might or
would be imposed on
such a visa: see
RRFM v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCAFC 27
as the Assistant Minister submits, having regard to
(1) it cannot be inferred that the Assistant Minister misunderstood that the
applicant could be granted some type of visa other than
(2) it must be inferred from the materials that the Assistant Minister knew
that, upon refusal, the grant of the BVR would be considered
and very likely
granted, but as part of a separate consideration and decision. This does not
involve a failure to consider the legal
consequences of the decision;
(3) it must also be inferred that the unstated alternative, i.e. if the
applicant were not granted a BVR, he would reside in the
community without a
visa, was not mentioned because the Assistant Minister knew that the grant of
the visa was the overwhelming likelihood;
(4) the Assistant Minister correctly recognised that the statutory scheme
provided for the performance of the Assistant Minister’s
functions and
exercise of powers under
Migration Act
separately from the
performance of other functions and exercise of powers to grant the BVR in
accordance with reg 2.25AB(2) of the
Regulations, subject to conditions
including the mandatory conditions.
2 is not made out.
applicant has not made out either of the grounds of his application for judicial
review. It follows that the application should
be dismissed and that the
applicant should pay the Assistant Minister’s costs, as agreed or
will make orders accordingly.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
nine (109) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
the Honourable
Dated: 12 November 2025
RTF format (675 KB)
Signed PDF/A format