Baker v Chief of Army [2017] ADFDAT 3 (28 April 2017)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Baker v Chief of Army
[2017] ADFDAT 3
Appeal from:
Defence Force Magistrate
File number:
DFDAT 1 of 2016
TRACEY (PRESIDENT), BRERETON AND HILEY (MEMBERS) JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Application for extension
of time to appeal – application for leave to appeal against convictions by
Defence Force
magistrate – application for leave to introduce fresh
evidence – whether failure to consider the military context of
offending – whether the findings of guilt were against the weight of the
evidence – whether error in construing s
10.5 of the
Commonwealth
Criminal Code
which applies when conduct constituting an offence is
justified or excused by or under a law – meaning of “law”
10.5 – whether error in failure to find that the defence of sudden or
extraordinary emergency in s 10.3 of the
Commonwealth Criminal Code
was made out – whether error in failure to find that the defence of
self-defence in s 10.4 of the
Commonwealth Criminal Code
Legislation:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Code Act 1899
(Qld) sch 1 (“
Queensland Criminal
”) ss 277, 281
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) sch 1 (“
Commonwealth Criminal
”) ss 2.1, 4.3, 10.3, 10.4(1), 10.4(2)(d), 10.4(2)(e), 10.5,
13.3(2), 13.3(6), 105.21(3)
Defence Act 1903
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
ss 21(1)(b)
Evidence Act 1995
Work Health and Safety
Cases cited:
Ajayi v The Queen
(2012) 263 FLR 465
[2012] WASCA 126
– considered
Commonwealth v Colonial Combing, Spinning and Weaving Co Ltd
[1922] HCA 62
Jerger v Pearce
[1920] HCA 34
(1920) 27 CLR 526
Independent Commission Against Corruption v Cunneen
(2015) 256 CLR
1; [2015] HCA 14 – cited
Mickelberg v The Queen
[1989] HCA 35
(1989) 167 CLR 259
Nguyen v The Queen
[2005] WASCA 22
– considered
Parker v Chief of Air Force
[2010] ADFDAT 2
– considered
Quinn v Chief of Army
[2001] ADFDAT 4
– considered
R v Bernasconi
[1915] HCA 13
(1915) 19 CLR 629
(1994) 75 A Crim R 456
[1994] QCA 547
Re Colina; Ex parte Torney
(1999) 200 CLR 386
[1999] HCA 57
Re Aird; Ex parte Alpert
(2004) 220 CLR 308
[2004] HCA 44
Re Tracey; Ex parte Ryan
[1989] HCA 12
(1989) 166 CLR 518
86 A Crim R 542
– considered
Van Damme v Chief of Army
[2002] ADFDAT 2
– considered
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1
Western Australia v The Commonwealth
[1995] HCA 47
(1995) 183 CLR 373
Date of hearing:
Date of last submissions:
2 November 2016 (Appellant)
9 November 2016 (Respondent)
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Appellant:
LEUT RJ Clutterbuck with COL R Pearce
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Beven Bowe & Associates
Counsel for the Respondent:
BRIG J Woodward with CMDR J Nottle
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Director of Military Prosecutions
DFDAT 1 of 2016
WAYNE DONALD BAKER
CHIEF OF ARMY
TRACEY (PRESIDENT), BRERETON AND HILEY (MEMBERS)
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
period within which the appeal and application for leave to appeal herein must
be lodged be extended to the date on which it was
to appeal, to the extent necessary, be granted.
appeal be dismissed.
REASONS FOR
THE TRIBUNAL:
13 August 2015, the appellant, Major Wayne Donald Baker, was found guilty by a
Defence Force Magistrate (“DFM”) of
two charges of assaulting a
subordinate contrary to
Defence Force Discipline Act
(Cth) (“the DFDA”). He was acquitted of a more serious
charges in respect of which he was convicted were Charges 1 and 3. Charge 1
alleged that the appellant:
[b]eing a Defence member in the State of Queensland on 24 April 2014 whilst
travelling in a bus bound for Gallipoli Barracks, assaulted
8262392 Sergeant
Michael Pithie, a member of the Australian Army who was subordinate to him in
rank, by pulling Sergeant Pithie out
Charge 3 alleged that the appellant:
[b]eing a Defence member in the State of Queensland on 24 April 2014 whilst
travelling in a bus bound for Gallipoli Barracks, assaulted
8262392 Sergeant
Michael Pithie, a member of the Australian Army who was subordinate to him in
rank, by kicking Sergeant Michael
Pithie whilst Sergeant Michael Pithie lay
on the floor of the bus.
3 was an alternative to Charge 2, which was the more serious charge of engaging
in conduct that is a Territory offence, being
assault occasioning actual bodily
harm contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
notice of appeal dated 30 May 2016, the appellant appeals to this Tribunal from
his convictions (and seeks leave to do so to the
extent necessary) and applies
for an extension of time in which to do so. The respondent Chief of Army does
not oppose an extension,
Defence Force
Discipline Appeals Act 1955
(“the DFDAA”), of the
time for appeal until the date on which the notice of appeal was
DFM made a number of findings, including the following, which he said were not
in dispute.
24 April 2014, the appellant, Sergeant Michael Pithie, and other members of
Battalion, Royal
Australian Regiment attended the Kilcoy Races, as part of an organised outing by
the unit. While at the Kilcoy
Races, Sergeant Pithie, along with some members
of the Signals Platoon, consumed too much alcohol and became intoxicated. When
buses left the Kilcoy Races to take the soldiers back to Gallipoli Barracks,
the appellant, Warrant Officer Class Two Iago Walker
and at least one other
member were left behind, as a result of which one of the buses returned to
collect them. At least one of
the members on board the bus had vomited as a
consequence of being intoxicated. Sergeant Pithie was behaving erratically, as
a consequence
of his intoxication.
Officer Walker and the appellant ended up sitting next to each other on the
left-hand side of the bus; Warrant Officer Walker
next to the window and the
appellant next to the aisle. Sergeant Pithie was sitting in the same row as
them, on the other side of
the aisle. Shortly after the bus departed, Sergeant
Pithie was leaning against the seat in front of him, and he began spitting,
either on his feet or on the floor adjacent to his feet. There was some verbal
interaction between Sergeant Pithie and Warrant Officer
Walker. Almost
immediately after this, the appellant stood up out of his seat and said to
Sergeant Pithie, “What the fuck
did you say to my CSM [Company Sergeant
Major]?” or words to that effect. He said those words sufficiently loudly
that others
on the bus could hear. Sgt Pithie subsequently came to be on the
floor of the bus.
Sergeant Pithie came to be on the floor of the bus was the subject of dispute.
The prosecution case was that the appellant crossed
the aisle and assaulted
Sgt Pithie by lifting him out of his seat. That conduct was the basis of Charge
1. The prosecution asserted
that, after Sgt Pithie subsequently fell to the
ground, the appellant then delivered a number of kicks to the upper body of
Pithie while he was on the floor of the bus. Sergeant Pithie
sustained a number of injuries, which the DFM found would amount to
bodily harm. Sergeant Pithie maintained that he sustained those injuries as a
result of the kicking and being half thrown
and pushed down the stairwell of the
bus by the appellant. That conduct was the basis of Charge 2. The DFM was not
satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the injuries were the result of the
actions of the appellant. The appellant was convicted of the alternative
charge, Charge 3, the gravamen of which was the kicking of Sergeant Pithie while
he lay on the floor of the bus.
was evidence that the appellant had called out to the bus driver to stop the
bus. When the bus stopped, Sgt Pithie was assisted
off the bus, lay
on the grass and was given water. When the bus and its passengers got back to
barracks, Sgt Pithie’s injuries
were attended to at the health
The hearing
the trial before the DFM, which began on 4 August 2015, some 38 witnesses gave
evidence, 33 called by the prosecution and 5 by
the appellant. The appellant
was one of those 5 witnesses. In his detailed reasons for decision on 13 August
2015, comprising about
67 pages of transcript, the DFM carefully summarised and
considered the evidence of each witness.
relation to Charge 1, the DFM accepted the version given by the appellant as to
how Sergeant Pithie came to be removed from his
seat. The appellant gave
evidence that he put his hand under the armpit of Sergeant Pithie and lifted him
up. He admitted in cross-examination
that, by his actions, he pulled Sergeant
Pithie from his seat. That was an intentional act involving the infliction of
force sufficient
to constitute an assault. Counsel for the appellant did not
dispute that the appellant had engaged in that conduct; rather, he argued
the appellant was justified in doing so.
relation to Charge 3, the appellant said he had no recollection of making
that it could have
happened. Much of the cross-examination concerned the level of force used by
the appellant, it being put to many
of the witnesses that, if there was any
than a kick.
DFM concluded that:
some 12 of the witnesses, the majority of whom were seated in the rear of the
bus at the time of the incident, gave evidence consistent
with a finding that
they observed the accused kick Sgt Pithie whilst he lay on the floor of the bus.
I accept that the descriptions
given by the witnesses is not wholly consistent,
either by reference to the number of kicks delivered, the force which was used
the part of the accused’s foot which made contact with Sgt
Pithie’s body.
the DFM doubted the reliability of the evidence of some witnesses, on account of
their intoxication, he “found the
evidence of the witnesses who testified
to seeing the accused kicking Sgt Pithie to be honest and reliable, and
sufficient to persuade
[him] beyond reasonable doubt that the accused did kick
Sgt Pithie at least once while he lay on the floor”. In particular,
accepted the evidence of nine witnesses, whom he named, and who he did not
consider had exaggerated their evidence. (One of those
nine was Lance Corporal
Matthew Maher.) The DFM said that he was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
that the appellant kicked Sgt
Pithie at least once whilst he lay on the floor of
the bus. He also said that he was not satisfied that the appellant kicked Sgt
Pithie with any great force. He concluded by
In my view, the evidence of the other witnesses, who observed a kick or a
kicking motion, is so numerous and so overwhelming that
I have no hesitation in
preferring their evidence to that of the accused.
hearing submissions on sentence, the DFM imposed a reprimand in relation to
Charge 1 and a fine of $1500 suspended as to $750
in relation to Charge
majority of the prosecution’s witnesses who were on the bus saw the
appellant pull Sergeant Pithie from his seat or kick
or nudge Sergeant Pithie
with his foot when Sergeant Pithie was on the ground, or both, and said that
this occurred before the bus
stopped. Only two, one of whom was the
appellant, suggested otherwise. Lance Corporal Joshua Walters said that the bus
pulled over
before Sergeant Pithie was lifted from his seat, and the appellant
said that he instructed the bus driver to stop the bus, and waited
for the bus
to stop, before he lifted Sergeant Pithie from his seat. Warrant Officer Walker
said that he heard the appellant tell
the bus driver to stop the bus but could
not recall whether it had stopped at the time when the appellant lifted Sergeant
up. Certain other witnesses either did not recall the bus being told to
stop or did not give evidence as to whether it was in motion
at the relevant
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
notice of appeal described five “grounds of appeal” as
(a) That the Defence Force Magistrate failed to take into account the
overarching requirement to consider all of the elements of
the alleged offending
in a true military context. The appellant’s conduct, in a military
context and in the circumstances
then presented, was justified. This
constituted a material irregularity in the course of the proceedings and a
substantial miscarriage
of justice has occurred.
(b) That the finding of guilt on charges one and three was against the weight of
the evidence.
(c) That the Defence Force Magistrate in considering section 10.5 of the
Commonwealth Criminal Code erred in his construction of
that exculpatory
(d) That the Defence Force Magistrate in considering section 10.3 of the
Commonwealth Criminal Code erred in finding against the
weight of evidence that
the appellant had not satisfied the evidential burden for the defence of sudden
and extraordinary emergency,
and/or, that there was no requirement for the
prosecution to negative such a defence beyond reasonable doubt.
(e) That leave be granted to introduce new and/or fresh evidence with
consequential orders to flow therefrom.
a document dated 2 November 2016 entitled “Amended Appeal”, the
appellant sought leave to amend ground (c) and also
to add an additional ground
(c)(a). So amended, those grounds would be as follows:
(c) That the Defence Force Magistrate in considering section 10.5 of the
Commonwealth Criminal Code erred in his construction of
that exculpatory
provision and by determining that the prosecution had not negatived the defence
raised by the appellant.
Particulars
(i) That the justification or excuse as referred to therein related to “a
law” and not specifically “a law of the
Commonwealth”;
(ii) That s 277 Criminal Code (Qld) is such “a law”;
(iii) That s 281 Criminal Code (Qld) is such “a law”;
(iv) That s 10.4(1) and ss (d) and (e) is such “a law” for the
purpose of s 10.5.
(c)(a) Alternatively, that pursuant to s 10.4(1) and (2) of the Commonwealth
Criminal Code, the Defence Force Magistrate erred in
failing to find that the
defence as set out in s 10.4(2)(d) and (e) had been raised and not negatived by
the prosecution.
was identified as ground (e) is not in itself a ground of appeal, but an
application for leave to introduce fresh evidence, presumably
pursuant to DFDAA
s 23(2), in aid of ground (b). That application was abandoned, and rightly
so, during oral submissions. We indicated
that we would provide brief
reasons in relation to that application, and accordingly we shall do that
APPLICATION TO CALL FRESH EVIDENCE
appellant sought leave to call fresh evidence from himself and his friend Major
John Mickle about conversations they had with
Lance Corporal Maher at Everton
Park Hotel on 26 September 2015. The evidence was contained in the
appellant’s affidavit sworn
9 August 2016 and in an affidavit of
Major Mickle sworn 31 August 2016.
evidence was to the effect that Lance Corporal Maher approached the appellant at
the hotel and apologised for how everything
had turned out following the hearing
before the DFM. The appellant responded by accusing Lance Corporal Maher of
lying when he had
given evidence that the appellant had kicked Sergeant Pithie
when he was on the ground. Lance Corporal Maher did not concede that
that or any other lie, but said that he felt under some pressure to give the
evidence that he did. During a later discussion
that evening, Lance Corporal
Maher told the appellant that he would call the Australian Defence Force
(“ADF”) prosecutor
the following Monday and tell him that he had
perjured himself and that he would “fix the issue”.
did not happen. Rather, the appellant was subsequently informed by Lance
Corporal Maher’s company commander that Lance
Corporal Maher told him that
“he would not be altering or retracting his statement”.
other words, the appellant seeks leave to tender hearsay evidence of what Lance
Corporal Maher said to him on 26 September 2015.
When asked whether he could
point to any authority to support the contention that hearsay evidence could be
used instead of direct
evidence from the witness who is said to have recanted
his evidence, counsel for the appellant was unable to assist. He then said
this application would no longer be pursued.
following passage from the judgment of Fitzgerald P in
75 A Crim R 456
[1994] QCA 547
summarises the alternative conditions for
setting aside a conviction on the ground of a recantation. His Honour said, at
A conviction is set aside on the basis of a recantation if (i) the
witness’s new version of events is sufficiently relevant,
plausible to raise a doubt as to guilt in all the circumstances, including the
original evidence and explanations given
for the original evidence and the
recantation, or (ii) the evidence of the recanting witness is so untrustworthy
that it “ought
not to be allowed to enter into the reasons for any verdict
of guilty”:
Davies and Cody
[1937] HCA 27
(1937) 57 CLR 170.
In the latter
circumstance, it would be inappropriate for the recanting witness to be called
in the event of a retrial.
it would be difficult, if not impossible, for a tribunal to make these kinds of
assessments unless the evidence of the witness
is reduced to writing and the
witness is available for cross-examination. The situation is even more complex
in the present case
because of Lance Corporal Maher’s indication that he
would not be altering or retracting his evidence.
if Lance Corporal Maher was compelled to appear before this Tribunal to give
evidence, his evidence would not assist the appellant
if he adheres to his
original testimony. The appellant would then have to seek and obtain leave
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) (“the
”) to cross-examine Lance Corporal Maher as an unfavourable witness in
the hope of Lance Corporal Maher accepting as true what
the appellant says he
said at the hotel and more clearly identifying the alleged lie or lies. Having
regard to factors such as those
Evidence Act
most unlikely that such leave would be given.
assuming in favour of the appellant that Lance Corporal Maher would now say that
he lied when he told the DFM that he saw
the appellant kicking Sergeant Pithie,
such a recantation would not raise a doubt as to the appellant’s guilt.
There would
not have been “a significant possibility that the [DFM],
acting reasonably, would have acquitted the appellant had the fresh
been before [him]”: see
Mickelberg v The Queen
[1989] HCA 35
(1989) 167 CLR 259
at 273 (Mason CJ); see also at 275 (Brennan J) and 301–302 (Toohey and
Gaudron JJ). It would not meet the first of the alternatives
Fitzgerald P in
say this because there was an abundance of evidence from other witnesses to the
effect that the appellant kicked Sergeant Pithie
while he lay on the floor of
the bus. It also follows that, even if Lance Corporal Maher’s evidence
before the DFM was disregarded,
the result would have been the same.
Accordingly,
we reject the application to adduce fresh evidence and ground
MILITARY CONTEXT – GROUND OF APPEAL (A)
appellant, at [33] of his Outline of Submissions, contends that the DFM
“failed to take into account the framework of military
law and discipline
when making the findings he did, particularly with respect to its application to
the behaviour of individual military
personnel [and] most importantly, the
behaviour of the complainant”. His submissions refer to cases such as
Re Aird; Ex parte Alpert
(2004) 220 CLR 308
[2004] HCA 44
Tracey; Ex parte Ryan
[1989] HCA 12
(1989) 166 CLR 518
where reference is made to
service discipline as relating not only to punishment but also to promote the
efficiency and morale of
the service. However, as counsel for the respondent
pointed out, these authorities relate to jurisdiction and recognise that the
sufficient military context.
appellant also referred to decisions of this Tribunal in
Van Damme v Chief of
[2002)] ADFDAT 2 and
Quinn v Chief of Army
[2001] ADFDAT 4.
concerned offences of ill-treating a subordinate contrary to
of the DFDA.
At [15] the Tribunal stated that the word “ill-treat” “takes
flavour from its context in a statute
concerning military discipline” and,
at [16], that “whether conduct is ill-treatment ... will depend on a
careful assessment
of all the circumstances, always bearing in mind the military
environment in which the question arises”. As the respondent
points out,
at [12] of his Submissions, the Tribunal was recognising that “the mere
causing of physical pain or mental suffering
would not necessarily constitute
ill-treatment as service personnel have to be trained to cope mentally and
physically with the demands
of warfare”. In such cases, the respondent
submitted that “the military purpose and the context in which the events
occurred are very relevant considerations”. This context involves
circumstances and concepts quite different to those that
would amount to an
assault. An assault, being the unlawful infliction of force (or the
apprehension of such force), is no less an
assault just because it is committed
“in a military context”.
concerned the meaning of the word “assault” in the DFDA
and proof of the fault element where the assault comprised threatening
no physical contact. The Tribunal noted that the word
“assault” is not defined in the DFDA and applied the
authorities concerning assault, notwithstanding that the conduct occurred in a
military context.
the respondent points out, these cases do not stand for the proposition that a
superior is authorised to exercise discipline by
the use of force, either to
compel compliance with a command or as a consequence of a subordinate’s
disobedience of a command.
A service member, like any other person, is entitled
to be free from bodily interference, subject to any lawful excuse. Where a
service member has disobeyed a lawful command, the appropriate sanction is
disciplinary action, not the immediate use of unlawful
for the appellant stressed the need for the maintenance of discipline and a safe
work environment, and submitted, at [36]
of the Appellant’s Outline of
Submissions, that the appellant found himself confronted with “a drunken
and insubordinate
Sergeant who failed to comply with a lawful command in
circumstances where because of the conditions inside the bus, coupled with
complainant’s extremely intoxicated state, gave rise to workplace health
and safety concerns which justified or excused
the conduct of pulling him from
his seat and trying to move him from the passage inside the coach”.
command referred to is the appellant’s demand that Sergeant Pithie get up
from his seat. This occurred after Sergeant Pithie
had said words to the effect
of, “What the fuck did you say to my CSM?”, and immediately before
the appellant lifted
Sergeant Pithie from his seat. The preponderance of
evidence was to the effect that the bus was still in motion while all this was
happening. It is difficult to imagine how it would have been safer for Sergeant
Pithie, or anyone else, to require and force him
to stand on the moving bus,
particularly with vomit on the floor, than to have waited for the bus to stop
before requiring him to
DFM did consider the military context where relevant. For example, he
considered it in the context of the contentions regarding
lawful excuse based
upon s 10.5 of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) sch 1
Commonwealth Criminal Code
”). However, the “military
context” has nothing to do with whether the elements of an assault are
established.
This ground of appeal is misconceived.
(a) is not made out.
FINDING AGAINST THE WEIGHT OF THE EVIDENCE – GROUND OF APPEAL (B)
oral submissions, counsel for the appellant conceded that this ground
effectively does not extend beyond the points made in
relation to grounds (c)
we have pointed out in [11]–[14] above, the weight of the evidence clearly
supported the conclusions reached by the DFM.
Accordingly,
ground (b) is not made out.
ERRONEOUS CONSTRUCTION OF S 10.5 – GROUND OF APPEAL (C)
10.5 of the
Commonwealth Criminal Code
provides that “a person is
not criminally responsible for an offence if the conduct constituting the
offence is justified or
excused by or under a law”. The Dictionary to the
provides that “law” means “a law of the
Commonwealth, and includes this Code”.
Dealing first with the defence of lawful authority, no authority was cited to me
supporting the submission. Section 10.5 provides
A person is not criminal [sic] responsible for an offence if the conduct
constituting the offence is justified or excused under a
“Law” is defined under the Criminal Code to mean the law of the
Commonwealth.
appellant makes two complaints about the last sentence quoted above: first, that
s 10.5 refers to “a law”, not “the
law”; and secondly,
that the DFM should not have applied the definition of “law” in the
. In relation to the first point, the reference to “the
law” was clearly a minor slip which had no relevant bearing upon
DFM’s approach to the matter. As we have noted (in [47] below) the DFM
proceeded to consider whether there was “a
law” that fell within the
scope of s 10.5.
second point was of no consequence, as the DFM was only asked to consider and
Defence Act 1903
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
(Cth), which are both clearly laws of the
Commonwealth. No reference was made before the DFM to the provisions now relied
namely Defence Instruction (General) Personnel 35-3 titled
and Reporting of Unacceptable Behaviour
(“DI(G) PERS 35-3”) and,
belatedly after this Tribunal had heard submissions and reserved its decision,
ss 277 and 281
Criminal Code
(Qld) sch 1
Queensland Criminal Code
DFM summarised counsel’s submission to be
the circumstances which confronted the accused, which involved a drunken and
insubordinate sergeant, who had failed to comply with
a lawful command to stand
up, and which occurred in circumstances where, because of the conditions inside
the bus, coupled with Sgt
Pithie’s extremely intoxicated state, gave rise
to workplace health and safety concerns which justified or excused the
conduct of pulling Sgt Pithie from his seat, under section
DFM rejected that submission. He said that the application of s 10.5 “is
dependent on a law of the Commonwealth, expressly
providing a justification or
excuse.” He referred to
Crimes Act 1914
the example referred to in [10.5.100] of
Principles of Federal Criminal
, Stephen Odgers, 3
edition (2015)
(“Odgers”). He said that:
Defence Act
, which relates to command of the
Defence Force,
or sections 28 and 29 of the
Workplace Health and
[sic], which impose certain duties on workers and others in a
workplace, can be interpreted as providing a justification or excuse
contemplated under section 10.5. To put it another way, the argument seems to
be that, if an officer gives a subordinate a lawful
command which is then
disobeyed, the officer would be entitled to resort to using physical coercion on
the subordinate in order to
get them to comply with the order. That, in my view
cannot be accepted. I therefore find that the accused has not satisfied the
evidential burden of raising a defence under s 10.5 and that he has no defence
available to him under that section.
Meaning of “law” in s 10.5 of the Commonwealth Criminal Code
the document dated 2 November 2016 entitled “Amended Appeal”, the
appellant particularised three “laws”
said to be laws within the
meaning of s 10.5 of the
Commonwealth Criminal Code
: s 277 of the
Queensland Criminal Code
; s 281 of the
Queensland Criminal Code
and “s 10.4(1) and ss (d) and (e)” of the
Commonwealth Criminal
. We take the third reference as being to ss 10.4(2)(d) and 10.4(2)(e)
Commonwealth Criminal Code
appellant contends that the DFM erred in his construction of s 10.5 because he
wrongly applied the definition of “law”
as it appears in the
Dictionary to the
. He should have had regard to the words “a
law” and thus not confined himself to laws of the Commonwealth that might
provide justification or excuse. Counsel did not provide any relevant authority
in support of this contention.
he submitted that had Parliament intended to confine this defence to laws of the
Commonwealth it would have expressly said
so in s 10.5. We reject this
submission. The fundamental function of the Dictionary is to define and
give content to words such
as this word, namely “law”, which are
frequently referred to in the statute. Where Parliament has found it necessary
to distinguish between a law of the kind defined in the Dictionary and some
other law, it has done so in clear terms. An example
of that is s 4.3 of the
Commonwealth Criminal Code
, which expressly refers to “the
law” in one part (s 4.3(a)) and “a law of the Commonwealth, a State
or a Territory,
or ... common law” in another (s 4.3(b)).
addition, in the Appellant’s Amended Outline of Submissions, counsel,
referring to the uncontroversial fact that State laws
will continue to operate
in conjunction with Commonwealth laws provided that there is no relevant
inconsistency, submitted that a
justification or excuse provided under a State
law would fall within the scope of “a law” of the kind referred to
a construction would lead to all manner of anomalies and uncertainties,
depending upon where the alleged offence was committed.
In particular, conduct
that might be “lawful” (in the sense of “justified”,
“excused”, “authorised”
or “necessary”, to
identify common “defences” under a Code or at common law) in one
State or Territory might
not be so in another. It would be odd if, and cannot
have been intended by Parliament that, conduct that would otherwise constitute
Commonwealth offence would be criminal if committed in one State or Territory
but not if committed in another State or Territory.
as the respondent has pointed out, s 10.5 is contained in Division 10 of
Part 2.3 of Chapter 2 of the
Commonwealth Criminal Code
provides for circumstances in which there is no criminal responsibility, and
Division 10 specifically provides for “circumstances
involving external
factors”. Division 10 comprises sections headed “10.1 Intervening
conduct or event”, “10.2
Duress”, “10.3 Sudden or
extraordinary emergency”, “10.4 Self-defence” and “10.5
Lawful authority”.
purpose of Chapter 2 of the
Commonwealth Criminal Code
is to provide for
the general principles of criminal responsibility that apply under “laws
of the Commonwealth”. Section
2.1 provides
The purpose of this Chapter is to codify the general principles of criminal
responsibility under laws of the Commonwealth. It contains
all the general
principles of criminal responsibility that apply to any offence, irrespective of
how the offence is created.
respondent submitted, and we agree, that there are no textual or contextual
features of s 10.5 that would support the appellant’s
construction
that a Queensland statutory provision can be “a law” for the
purposes of s 10.5. On the contrary, the appellant’s
submissions, in
effect, provide a construction of the legislation that is at odds with the
internal logical consistency and overall
consistency of the legislation.
was observed in
Independent Commission Against Corruption v Cunneen
(2015) 256 CLR 1 at 22; [2015] HCA 14 at [35] (French CJ, Hayne, Kiefel
and Nettle JJ):
The best that can be done is to reason in terms of relative consistency —
internal logical consistency and overall consistency
in accordance with the
principles of statutory interpretation adumbrated in
Project Blue Sky
— to determine which of the two competing constructions of
“adversely affect” is more harmonious
the purpose of Chapter 2 of the
Commonwealth Criminal Code
is to provide
for the principles of criminal responsibility for offences to which Chapter 2
applies (such as DFDA s 34(1), which is
subject to the
virtue of s 10 of the DFDA), then construing s 10.5 as applying to
Queensland provisions would promote a logical inconsistency
within Chapter
his original submissions, the respondent referred to part of page 233 of
The Commonwealth Criminal Code: A Guide for Practitioners
document published in 2002 by the Commonwealth Attorney-General’s
Department in association with the Australian Institute
of Judicial
Administration. Page 233 relevantly states in relation to s 10.5:
Accordingly it was necessary to provide a general defence which will excuse or
justify conduct which is authorised by law.
The law in question must be a
law of the Commonwealth
. Typical examples for an
application of s 10.5 are those provisions which confer investigatory powers on
police and other officials,
and permits for the import or manufacture weapons,
explosives or drugs ... &c. The reference to conduct which is justified or
excused “by or under a law” recognises that the authorisation may be
indirect or implied, rather than explicit.
(Citations omitted. Emphasis added.)
no authority was cited in support of the sentence italicised in the passage
quoted above, such an inference has also been
drawn by other learned authors
such as Odgers (at [10.5.100]) and Watson & Watson,
Criminal Law: Federal Offences
, at [10.4620].
agree with the conclusion that a law referred to in s 10.5 must be a law of the
Commonwealth.
Gleeson CJ and Gummow J said in
Re Colina; Ex parte Torney
(1999) 200 CLR
[1999] HCA 57
Constitution
The term “law of the Commonwealth” refers to laws made under the
legislative powers of the Commonwealth. This meaning
is settled by a long line
of authority.
(Citations omitted.)
Honours referred to the following cases as examples of this line of authority:
R v Bernasconi
[1915] HCA 13
(1915) 19 CLR 629
Jerger v Pearce
[1920] HCA 34
Commonwealth v Colonial Combing, Spinning and Weaving Co
[1922] HCA 62
(1922) 31 CLR 421
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1
Western Australia v The Commonwealth
[1995] HCA 47
(1995) 183 CLR 373
, McHugh J said at 402 [45]: “A law of the Commonwealth is
simply a law made under or by the authority of the Parliament of
Commonwealth.”
277 and 281 of the
Queensland Criminal Code
are not laws of the
Commonwealth. They are laws of a State. These provisions therefore cannot
provide the appellant the requisite
justification or excuse to the offence of
assaulting a subordinate contrary to s 34(1) of the
Defence Instruction (General) Personnel 35-3
neither DI(G) PERS 35-3 nor any other similar instrument was referred to by the
appellant at his trial before the DFM, in
his petition to the reviewing
authority, or in his request for a further review by the Chief of Army, this
issue arose for the first
time when the appellant provided the Appellant’s
Outline of Submissions for the purpose of this appeal. Counsel for the
was wrong to complain at [44] of the Appellant’s Outline of
Submissions, that “the learned DFM did not take into account
this relevant
instruction in the emerging situation that occurred”.
reference to s 10.5, counsel for the appellant contended at [40] of the
Appellant’s Outline of Submissions:
The maintenance of discipline would constitute such justification. In addition,
the restraint of a person by virtue of the common
law with such person
presenting in a mischievous, disrespectful, and manner that was insubordinate or
otherwise hitherto, lacked
discipline in the ADF is both consistent with a
civilian arrest is [sic] a “or and or” [sic], restrained [sic]
upon an individual by a Commanding Officer in a situation of emergency is
“a law” deriving its genesis from the
Defence Act 1903
subordinate instructions such as DI(G) PERS 35-3.
for the appellant submitted that Defence Instructions issued for the purposes of
the administration of the Defence Force pursuant
Defence Act
have the force of law. The respondent has not suggested
otherwise or that Defence Instructions are not laws of the Commonwealth.
for the appellant referred to parts of DI(G) PERS 35-3, such as clause 13, which
says that “defence personnel have a
responsibility to take all reasonably
practicable steps to protect the health and safety of themselves and others in
the workplace”,
and clause 14, which includes a statement that
“[s]upervisors will be accountable for ... taking all reasonably
practicable
action to prevent unacceptable behaviour in the workplace”.
The appellant also referred to clause 15, which relevantly provides
Commanders and managers must also “manage and report all unacceptable
behaviour complaints promptly and impartially in
accordance with this
Instruction”.
do not consider these to be laws of the kind contemplated in s 10.5. They are,
in effect, aspirational statements of policy, not
provisions which purport to
justify or excuse conduct that would otherwise constitute an offence. In any
event, “reasonably
practicable action” would not include action that
is unlawful. Thus a supervisor could not, in reliance on DI(G) PERS 35-3,
physically restrain an unruly worker in handcuffs or detain him or her in a
locked room without lawful authority, such as a warrant.
identifies, at [10.5.100],
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) as an
example of a statutory justification within the meaning of s 10.5. That section
15KN Protection from criminal liability – officers of issuing
The chief officer, or an officer, of an issuing agency who does something that,
apart from his section, would be a Commonwealth offence
or an offence against a
law of a State or Territory, is not criminally responsible for the offence if
the thing is done to comply
with a request under
section 15KI
or a direction
section 15KL.
also provides, at [10.5.100], an example of a statutory excuse, namely s
105.21(3) of the
Commonwealth Criminal Code
which provides that
the provision in that
making it an offence for a person to refuse or
fail to comply with the request of a police officer to provide the
name and address “does not apply if the person has a
reasonable excuse”.
for the appellant also contended, at [45] of the Appellant’s Outline of
Submissions, that the circumstances that confronted
the appellant “gave
rise to a workplace health & safety concern which justified or excused the
conduct of pulling Sergeant
Pithie from his seat (under s 10.5)”.
Not only is this wrong as a matter of law, it is difficult to imagine how
health and safety could have been better served by the appellant
acting as he did, namely by lifting and kicking Sergeant Pithie
on a moving bus
with vomit on the floor, than it would have been by leaving Sergeant Pithie in
his seat, at least until the bus stopped.
Ground (c)(iv)
the appellant has purported to add, without requesting or obtaining leave prior
to or at the hearing, a further particular
relying upon the self-defence
provisions in s 10.4 of the
Commonwealth Criminal Code
, and in particular
in ss 10.4(2)(d) and (e), as being laws for the purposes of s 10.5, no
assistance has been provided to this Tribunal
by way of submissions on that
will deal with the defences raised under s 10.4 later in these
Conclusions
of the laws to which the appellant has referred, either before the DFM or in
this Tribunal, are laws of the kind that could have
applied under s 10.5 in
order to justify or excuse his conduct.
that the appellant did order Sergeant Pithie to stand up, and assuming that such
an order was lawful, no law of the Commonwealth
authorised the use of force
amounting to an assault to procure compliance with it. (There is no suggestion
that the appellant was
exercising a power of arrest without warrant under s 89
of the DFDA, in connection with which use of reasonable force might have
permissible, having regard to s 92 of the DFDA.)
SUDDEN OR EXTRAORDINARY EMERGENCY – GROUND OF APPEAL (D)
appellant contends, at page 14 of his Outline of Submissions, that the DFM erred
in finding “against the weight of evidence
that a defence of sudden
extraordinary emergency had not been raised and/or the prosecution had not
negatived such defence beyond
reasonable doubt pursuant to s 10.3”.
10.3 of the
Commonwealth Criminal Code
(1) A person is not criminally responsible for an offence if he or she carries
out the conduct constituting the offence in response
to circumstances of sudden
or extraordinary emergency.
(2) This section applies if and only if the person carrying out the conduct
reasonably believes
(a) circumstances of sudden or extraordinary emergency exists; and
(b) committing the offence is the only reasonable way to deal with the
emergency; and
(c) the conduct is a reasonable response to the
defence was also only raised in passing by the defending officer during closing
submissions before the DFM, and even then (at
least explicitly) only in relation
to Charge 1. He said:
Also could you look at sudden and extraordinary emergency at 10.3? He
hasn’t raised what codified laws would normal [sic]
consider to be an
extraordinary emergency but certainly there are cases that go so far as to say
that the emergency doesn’t
have to be life or death. He had a situation
where no one was doing anything and reacting to it. To that extent, it was an
He wanted the bus stopped to get him off, that’s certainly
consistent with an emergency, and he did what he had to do to effect
is, pick the man up.
us, the appellant submitted, at [51] of the Appellant’s Outline of
Submissions, that:
the appellant presented evidence identifying that the commission of the offence
of which he had been convicted was the only reasonable
way to deal with the
alleged sudden or extraordinary emergency, and that his conduct in constituting
the offence was of [sic] reasonable
response to the emergency. This taken, with
the overall res gestae of the events and circumstances that were taking place at
relevant time aboard the bus could readily be identified by the following
submission at [51] proceeded to refer to a number of circumstances, namely that:
the appellant had boarded the bus and noted that
a number of individuals were
very drunk; he was required as a supervisor and as an officer commanding to
exercise management, care
and discipline; a number of people had been physically
sick on the bus; in particular, Sergeant Pithie “was behaving in a
particularly
irrational and intoxicated manner, which was both in any objective
view unhealthy and comprised [sic] the position in so far as workplace,
& safety was concerned, a severe health danger and concern”; Sergeant
Pithie’s actions “were non-compliant
with DI(G) PERS 35-3
contravening the standards applicable to service personnel and in particular the
orders of his Commanding Officer,
with respect to consumption of alcohol and
behaviour generally”; Sergeant Pithie posed a risk both to himself and
others; and
that “a senior Non-Commissioned Officer, including a Warrant
Officer did nothing to assist in administering or at least condemning
disciplining the behaviour of Pithie”. The submission continued at [52]
as follows:
The appellant called out “stop the bus”, and taken in the context of
things, all happened very quickly. The appellant
reasonably perceived that the
situation existed that he had to deal with was vital and bearing in mind the
competing factors, he
had to administer regularity, discipline and appropriate
supervision for the health and well-being of
DFM concluded:
Likewise, in my view, the accused cannot avail himself of a defence under s 10.3
of the Criminal Code because, on any view of the
circumstances confronting him
on the bus, there was no sudden or extraordinary emergency which then justified
him pulling Sgt Pithie
from his seat. I find the accused also has not satisfied
the evidential burden in raising a defence on the
agree with these conclusions. We also agree with the following submissions made
by the respondent.
Parker v Chief of Air Force
[2010] ADFDAT 2
, the members of this Tribunal
were required to consider whether a factual foundation for the operation of the
defence of sudden or
extraordinary emergency had been established. Parker was
prosecuted for causing grievous bodily harm to LAC Hawkins when she struck
with the motor vehicle that she was driving. Parker and Hawkins had been
involved in several verbal confrontations that evening.
When she went to get
into her car, Hawkins continued to confront her, including by banging on the
vehicle and on the driver’s
side window after she had locked herself in
her car for protection.
reviewing the law regarding the defence of sudden or extraordinary emergency,
the Tribunal expressed the following conclusion
In order for the defence of sudden or extraordinary emergency (or necessity) to
be available to the appellant it was necessary for
the Court to be satisfied
that when she commenced to drive from the car park to the accommodation block,
she was facing “an
imminent peril”. This would only be the case if
she believed on reasonable grounds that she confronted a threat of death or
serious injury from LAC Hawkins.
[83], the Tribunal found that “[t]here was no dispute that Hawkins [the
complainant] had behaved objectionably towards the
appellant”. The
respondent submitted, at [54] of his Submissions, that similar circumstances
exist in the present case, though
, the victim actually posed a
real and physical threat to the appellant. In this case, Sergeant Pithie never
posed a threat to the
appellant and there was no imminent peril which required
the appellant to pull Sergeant Pithie from his seat on the moving bus, let
to kick him. As the respondent submitted, at [54], the sole basis for the
appellant’s conduct in relation to Charge 1
was that, as he said at
trial, he “had an extremely intoxicated individual who was not complying
with any orders. [His] only
wish at that point was to have him removed from the
person who wishes to escape criminal responsibility by relying on a provision of
Part 2.3 of the
Commonwealth Criminal Code
(other than s 7.3)
bears an “evidential burden” in relation to that matter:
Commonwealth Criminal Code
s 13.3(2). The term “evidential
burden” is defined to mean “the burden of adducing or pointing to
evidence that
suggests a reasonable possibility that the matter exists or does
not exist”:
Commonwealth Criminal Code
issue, in the context of s 10.3 of the
Commonwealth Criminal Code
considered by the Court of Appeal of Western Australia, by Buss JA (McLure P and
Mazza JA agreeing), in
Ajayi v The Queen
(2012) 263 FLR 465
[2012] WASCA
In that case, the appellant, charged with the transporting of prohibited
drugs to Australia, maintained that she did this under
duress, or alternatively
in response to circumstances of sudden or extraordinary emergency. The duress
comprised the threat of physical
danger to her immediate family if she did not
comply with the request to transport the drugs. The extraordinary emergency was
existence of physical danger to her immediate family if she did not
transport the drugs.
JA discussed in some detail the genesis of Chapter 2 of the
Commonwealth
Criminal Code
, and in particular ss 10.2 and 10.3, namely the report of the
Criminal Law Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General
(“the Committee”) entitled
Model Criminal Code Chapter 2:
General Principles of Criminal Responsibility, Final Report
(1992). At 468
[28], his Honour said:
Section 10.3 was ... enacted in the form recommended by the Committee. The
Committee’s commentary on the draft provision which
became s 10.3
This section recognises that an accused person is excused from committing what
would otherwise be a criminal act
in very limited circumstances
duress, the necessity of the occasion and the response to it are both subject to
an objective test
. The Committee’s proposal is an amalgam of the
principles underlying the common law of necessity and the Griffith Code
equivalent.
(Emphasis added.)
Honour continued at 468–469 [31]–[35]:
Section 10.3(2)
specifies the elements of the defence. If the accused satisfies the evidential
burden in relation to each of the
elements (see s 13.3) and the Crown fails
to negative beyond reasonable doubt at least one of the elements (see
ss 13.1 and 13.2),
then the accused will be taken to have carried out the
conduct constituting the offence in response to circumstances of sudden or
extraordinary emergency within s 10.3(1).
to s 10.3(2)(a), it is an element of the defence that, at the material
time, the accused reasonably believed that “circumstances
of sudden or
extraordinary emergency [existed]”. This element incorporates a
subjective component and an objective component.
The subjective component is
the existence of a belief by the accused that circumstances of sudden or
extraordinary emergency existed.
The objective component is that any such
subjective belief by the accused must have been reasonable.
is unnecessary for an emergency to be both sudden and extraordinary. The
emergency may be either sudden or extraordinary: see
Nguyen v The Queen
[2005] WASCA 22
(Templeman J, Murray J agreeing and McLure J agreeing
generally).
the concepts of a “sudden” emergency and an
“extraordinary” emergency may, in a particular case,
overlap. That
is, an emergency may, in a particular case, be both “sudden” and
“extraordinary”'.
phrase “sudden or extraordinary emergency” in s 10.3 bears its
natural and ordinary meaning. This is apparent from
the statutory text and the
decision of the Parliament not to define the phrase or any of the words that
comprise it.
469 [40], Buss JA summarised what the Court of Appeal had said previously in
Nguyen v The Queen
[2005] WASCA 22
(a) It may be relevant, in deciding whether an emergency is sudden or
extraordinary, to have regard to the time which elapsed between
the accused
becoming aware of the emergency, on the one hand, and his or her acting in
response to it, on the other. However, delay
is not a ‘determinative
(b) The Crown cannot negative the defence by proving that no sudden or
extraordinary emergency in fact existed. Although the absence
of an actual
sudden or extraordinary emergency may be a relevant factor, the ultimate
question is whether the accused reasonably
believed, in terms of s 10.3(2)(a),
that circumstances of sudden or extraordinary emergency existed. See [17] [of
Nguyen v The Queen
[2005] WASCA 22].
at [17], Templeman J (Murray J agreeing, and McLure J agreeing
generally) had made the following observations about s
(a) The circumstances in which the defence may be raised include a sudden
emergency or an extraordinary emergency. It is not necessary
for the emergency
to be both sudden and extraordinary.
(b) In determining whether an emergency is sudden or extraordinary it may be
relevant to have regard to the time which elapsed between
the offender becoming
aware of the emergency and his or her acting in response to it. However, delay
is not a determinative factor.
(c) The prosecution cannot exclude the defence by proving that no sudden or
extraordinary emergency actually existed. Although that
fact may be relevant,
the ultimate question is whether the offender reasonably believed in the
existence of the emergency.
JA proceeded to explain that, similar to what he had said at [32] about
s 10.3(2)(a), the elements in ss 10.3(2)(b) and 10.3(2)(c)
involve not only
a subjective element concerning the belief of the accused but also an objective
component concerning the reasonableness
of such belief: at 470
JA gave two reasons for rejecting the appellant’s contentions that she had
any factual basis for a defence under s 10.3.
At 472 [50], his Honour
First, the appellant did not satisfy the evidential burden in relation to those
objective elements of s 10.3(2) which required it
to have been
for her subjectively to believe that:
(a) committing the offence was the only
way to deal with the
alleged sudden or extraordinary emergency; or
(b) the conduct constituting the offence was a
response to the
alleged emergency.
(Emphasis in original.)
Honour referred to a number of decisions which refer to notions of public policy
which should be taken into account when considering
the reasonableness of
conduct said to have occurred in response to a sudden or extraordinary
emergency. One such decision was
(1996) 86 A Crim R 542
where the appellant was convicted of attempting to escape from lawful custody.
He alleged that he had attempted to escape from
prison because he feared a
life-threatening attack was going to be committed on him and he declined to be
placed in protection by
the prison authorities because he considered that would
place him in greater danger. Gleeson CJ (Clarke JA and Ireland J
observed at 546 that:
[t]he corollary of the notion that the defence of necessity exists to meet cases
where the circumstances overwhelmingly impel disobedience
to the law is that the
law cannot leave people free to choose for themselves which laws they will obey,
or to construct and apply
their own set of values inconsistent with those
implicit in the law. Nor can the law encourage juries to exercise a power to
with compliance with the law where they consider disobedience to be
reasonable, on the ground that the conduct of an accused person
serves some
value higher than that implicit in the law which is
473 [53]–[54], Buss JA continued:
the present case, on the evidence as a whole, it was not open to the jury to
find, as a reasonable possibility, that at the material
time the appellant
believed that:
(a) committing the offence was the only
way to deal with the
alleged sudden or extraordinary emergency; or
(b) the conduct constituting the offence was a
response to the
alleged emergency.
the material time, and on the evidence as a whole, the only
belief open to the appellant, in relation to the factual basis for the alleged
sudden or extraordinary emergency, was that reporting
the relevant facts and
circumstances:
(a) to the authorities (for example, at Perth International Airport immediately
upon her arrival);
(b) further or alternatively, to the captain or senior purser of the aircraft
while it was in transit to Perth,
way to deal with the alleged emergency, further or
alternatively, a
response to the alleged emergency.
(Emphasis in original.)
the respondent has pointed out, the appellant referred to various circumstances
which he submits supports the contention that the
evidential burden in s 10.3
was met. We have summarised them in [80]–[81] above. There is nothing to
indicate how the appellant
believed, reasonably or at all, that there was an
emergency in the relevant sense (such as a person’s life or safety being
in peril), let alone such an emergency as could only be addressed by pulling
Sergeant Pithie from his seat, while the bus was still
in motion, and kicking
him on the floor.
Objectively,
there was no emergency that made it reasonable for the appellant to pull
Sergeant Pithie from his seat at all, let alone
while the bus was moving and
Sergeant Pithie was so intoxicated. Indeed the unreasonableness of him doing
this in those circumstances
was demonstrated by what happened next, namely
Sergeant Pithie falling to the floor. Nor was there any emergency that made it
for the appellant to kick Sergeant Pithie when he was on the
our view, the appellant did not satisfy his evidentiary burden in relation to
any of the requirements in ss 10.3(2)(a), (b) and
(c), let alone all three of
SELF-DEFENCE – GROUND OF APPEAL (C)(A)
appellant contends that the DFM erred by failing to find that the prosecution
had failed to negative self-defence of the kind
referred to in ss 10.4(2)(d) and
(e), after such a defence had been raised by the appellant.
provisions provide that a person is excused from criminal responsibility for
conduct that would otherwise be criminal if he
or she believed that his or her
conduct was necessary to prevent criminal trespass to any land or premises (s
10.4(2)(d)), or to
remove from any land or premises a person who was committing
a criminal trespass (s 10.4(2)(e)). Like s 10.3, s 10.4 also contains
subjective elements concerning the belief of the accused, and an objective
requirement that the conduct is a reasonable response
in the circumstances as he
or she perceived them.
we have noted, this ground was raised after the Tribunal had concluded the
hearing of the appeal. As is the case with grounds
(c) and (d), this is a
matter that, if it were to be relied upon, ought to have been raised before the
DFM. This would have been
particularly important in relation to this ground,
because had it been raised then, the evidence and case may have taken a
course. For example, it might have been expected that the appellant
would have been cross-examined as to his actual belief as to
whether Sergeant
Pithie was committing or was about to commit a criminal trespass, and whether he
believed that it was necessary
to pull Sergeant Pithie from his seat while the
bus were still moving, in order to prevent any such criminal trespass.
those reasons, there is a strong case that leave to add that ground at this late
stage should be refused. However, it is preferable
to dispose of the ground on
the merits.
appellant contends that Sergeant Pithie became a trespasser because his tenure
aboard the bus had been terminated following his
failure to obey a lawful
command. The Appellant’s Amended Outline of Submissions at [46H] state as
His insubordination and failure to remove himself, get up or otherwise handle
himself in a fashion, the subject of direct order,
and remove himself off the
bus put him in the position as a trespasser as at and from the time of the
for the appellant has not provided any authority to support the contention that
such conduct could amount to trespass —
let alone criminal trespass. The
appellant would need to at least demonstrate that he
his conduct
was necessary either to prevent Sergeant Pithie committing criminal trespass or
to remove him because he was committing
such a crime.
even if the appellant believed that Sergeant Pithie was engaged in criminal
trespass, we doubt that the bus would fall within
the scope of
“land” or “premises”; rather, it is a
even if the appellant believed that Sergeant Pithie was trespassing and
“premises” included a bus, before resorting
to force to remove a
trespasser, the appellant would have been required to give a direction to
Sergeant Pithie to leave and then
give him a reasonable opportunity to comply
with that direction. We agree with the respondent that, on any view of the
appellant removed Sergeant Pithie from his seat before he could have
been expected to comply with any direction given. And in any
administration of a kick, even of only moderate force, exceeded what could
reasonably have been considered a reasonable
Accordingly,
this ground also fails.
grant the extension of time required in order for the notice of appeal and
application for leave to appeal to be lodged. We also
grant leave to appeal to
the extent necessary. None of the grounds has been made out. The appeal must
be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
nine (109) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision
the Honourable Justices Tracey (President), Brereton and Hiley
Dated: 28 April 2017
RTF format (563 KB)
Signed PDF/A format