1411575 [2015] MRTA 801 (9 June 2015)
[2015] MRTA 801
(9 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
G Singh Pty Ltd
MRT CASE NUMBER:
DIBP REFERENCE(S):
BCC2014/1028250
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Jennifer Ciantar
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal sets aside the decision not to approve the
application and substitutes a decision that the nomination is approved.
Statement made on 09 June 2015 at 3:49pm
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration on 13 June 2014 to refuse to approve
the applicant’s
nomination under
Migration Act 1958
(the Act) and r.2.72
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations).
applicant applied for approval on 21 April 2014. A nomination of an occupation
for a Subclass 457 visa is made under s.140GB of
the Act and r.2.73 of the
Regulations.
Regulations 2.72(3)
to (12) prescribe the criteria that must be
satisfied for the Minister to approve a nomination by a person. These criteria
are extracted
in the attachment to this decision. For visa applications made
from 23 November 2013, additional criteria are specified in s.140GBA.
delegate decided not to approve the nomination on the basis that the applicant
did not satisfy r.2.72(10(f) because the applicant
had not demonstrated a need
for an additional manager in the sponsoring business and he had not demonstrated
that the business is
restaurant where customers generally order and are served
while seated.
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 31 March 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments.
the following reasons, the Tribunal has decided to set aside the decision under
review and substitute a decision approving the
nomination.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
issue in the present case is whether the applicant meets the criteria for
approval of the nomination. The Tribunal must approve
the nomination if the
applicable requirements in r.2.72 and, for nomination applications made from 23
November 2013, s.140GBA have
been met: s.140GB(2).
The nomination must comply with the prescribed process
requires that the applicant has made the nomination in accordance with
the process set out in r.2.73.
Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant made the application in accordance with
the approved form, and paid the prescribed fee,
as it was at the time of
application. The Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant has nominated an
occupation, Café or Restaurant
Manager, and provided the relevant
six-digit ANZSCO code 141111, and that it has identified Ms Sumeet Kaur, an
applicant for a subclass
457 visa, as the person who will work in the
occupation; and that the location at which the occupation will be carried out is
Druitt 2770.
Tribunal is satisfied that the nominating employer has provided the necessary
certifications and information relating to r.2.72
as part of the nomination.
these reasons the requirements of r.2.72(3) are met.
Nominator is a standard business sponsor or party to a work agreement
requires that the person making a nomination is either a standard
business sponsor or a party to a work agreement other than a Minister.
applicant has provided a copy of the approval as a standard business sponsor, in
effect until 29 June 2015.
these reasons the requirements of r.2.72(4) are met.
Identification of the nominee
requires that the applicant identify in the nomination the visa holder,
or the applicant or proposed applicant for the visa, who
will work in the
nominated occupation.
indicated above, the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant has identified Ms
Sumeet Kaur, an applicant for a subclass 457 visa,
as the person who will work
in the nominated occupation
these reasons the requirements of r.2.72(5) are met.
Requirements for existing Subclass 457 visa holders
criteria for approval of a nomination contain several requirements if a Subclass
457 visa holder is identified as the person to
work in the nominated position.
In these cases:
the applicant
must list on the nomination each person granted a Subclass 457 visa as a family
member of the nominee, unless it is
reasonable in the circumstances not to do
so: r.2.72(6)(a) and r.2.72(7);
the Subclass 457
visa holder must demonstrate that he or she has the skills necessary to perform
the occupation in the manner specified
if required to do so:
r.2.72(6)(b);
the applicant
must provide a written undertaking if the existing Subclass 457 visa was granted
after the sponsor provided an undertaking
relating to certain health
requirements: r.2.72(7A); and
if the Subclass
457 visa holder met cl.457.223(6), he or she must either be an exempt applicant
under cl.457.223(4), continue to meet
cl.457.223(6) or have the specified level
of English: r.2.72(10)(g).
the nominee is not the holder of a Subclass 457 visa, the requirements of
r.2.72(6), (7A) and (10)(g) do not apply.
Information about the nominated occupation
requires the applicant to provide the following information as part of
the nomination:
the name of the
occupation and the corresponding 6-digit ANZSCO code if there is one;
if there is no
such code, and the applicant is a standard business sponsor, the name of the
occupation and the corresponding 6-digit
code as specified in the relevant
instrument; or if the applicant is a party to a work agreement the name of the
occupation and the
corresponding 6-digit code (if any) as specified in the work
agreement; and
the location(s)
at which the nominated occupation is to be carried out.
the basis of the information before it, the Tribunal is satisfied that the
applicant has provided the relevant name and ANZSCO
code for the nominated
occupation, and also the location at which the occupation is to be carried
these reasons the requirements of r.2.72(8A) are met.
No adverse information known to Immigration
requires that either: there is no adverse information known to
Immigration about the applicant or a person associated with the applicant;
is reasonable to disregard such information. For these purposes, ‘adverse
information’ and ‘associated with’
have the meaning given in
r.2.57(2) and (3).
the basis of the information before it, the Tribunal finds that there is no
adverse information of the type described in r.2.57
known to Immigration about
either the applicant or an ‘associated
Specified occupation
2.72(10)(aa) as it applies in this case, requires that the nominated occupation
and its 6-digit code correspond to an occupation
and 6-digit code specified in
instrument IMMI 14/048. In certain circumstances this instrument may also
require the nomination of
an occupation to be supported in writing to the
Minister, by a specified organisation before the nomination can be approved:
r.2.72(10)(b).
Tribunal finds that the applicant is a standard business sponsor and that the
nominated occupation of Café or Restaurant
Manager, and corresponding
ANZSCO code 141111 appear on the relevant list in the instrument. The instrument
does not require that
the nomination be supported in writing by a specified
organisation.
these reasons the requirements of r.2.72(10)(aa) are
Terms and conditions of employment
2.72(10)(c)
requires that the terms and conditions of employment of the nominee
will be no less favourable than those that are, or would be,
provided to an
Australian citizen or permanent resident performing equivalent work at the same
set of terms and conditions of employment is less favourable than another set if
the earnings provided for in the first set are
less than those in the other set
and there is no substantial contrary evidence that the first set is not less
favourable than the
other set: r.2.57(3A). ‘Earnings’ is defined in
r.2.57A and includes the person’s wages; amounts applied or dealt
any way on the person’s behalf or as the person directs; and the agreed
money value of non-monetary benefits. Non-monetary
benefits are benefits other
than an entitlement to a payment of money to which the employee is entitled in
return for the performance
of work and for which a reasonable money value has
been agreed by the employee and the employer. Reimbursements are specifically
excluded, as are payments the amount of which cannot be determined in advance,
and certain contributions to a superannuation fund.
circumstances where there are no Australian citizens or permanent residents
performing equivalent work at the same location, the
person must determine the
terms and conditions of employment that would otherwise be provided by a method
specified in instrument
IMMI 09/113: r.2.72(10AA).
requirements do not apply if the annual earnings of the nominee are equal to or
greater than those specified in the written
instrument IMMI 15/050, namely
$180,000: r.2.72(10)(AB).
the basis of the recently provided contract of employment which specifies a base
salary of $55,000, the Tribunal finds that the
annual earnings of the nominee
are below the relevant threshold and that the requirements of r.2.72(10)(c) and
r.2.72(10)(cc) apply
in this case.
the basis of information provided by the applicant, the Tribunal finds that
there is no Australia citizen or Australian permanent
resident who performs
equivalent work in the applicant’s business in the same location and
therefore r.2.72(10AA) applies.
Although there is another café or
restaurant manager, this person is a Subclass 457 visa holder.
Tribunal has considered the evidence of the nominee’s employment contract
as well as evidence provided relating to a number
of advertisements and
information listed in
www.seek.com.au
www.payscale.com
for Café or
Restaurant Managers in Sydney, which indicates, among other things, that the
base salary consistently offered
is in the range $45,000-$67,000.
Tribunal is satisfied on the basis of the evidence provided by the applicant
that the terms and conditions of employment for the
nominated person are no less
favourable than the terms and conditions that are provided, or would be
provided, to an Australian citizen
or permanent resident for performing
equivalent work at the same location. The Tribunal thus finds that r.2.72(10)(c)
is satisfied.
Base rate of pay
2.72(10)(cc)
requires the base rate of pay under the terms and conditions of
employment that are, or would be, provided to an Australian citizen
or permanent
resident will be greater than the temporary skilled migration income threshold
(TSMIT) specified in the instrument IMMI
this requirement may be disregarded if the base rate of pay will not be greater
than the TSMIT, the annual earnings are equal
to or greater than the TSMIT and
the Minister considers it reasonable to do so: r.2.72(10A). The ‘base rate
of pay’ means
the rate of pay payable to an employee for his or her
ordinary hours of work, but does not include incentive-based payments and
loadings, monetary allowances, overtime or penalty rates or any other
separately identifiable amounts: r.2.57. The meaning of ‘earnings’
is provided in r.2.57A.
the requirement in r.2.72(10)(cc) does not apply if the annual earnings of the
nominee are equal to or greater than those
specified in the instrument IMMI
15/050: r.2.72(10AB).
tribunal is satisfied that the base rate of pay offered to the nominee, being
$55,000, is greater than the current TSMIT of $53,900.
The Tribunal is also
satisfied from the evidence of advertisements for restaurant managers listed on
www.seek.com.au
that the base rate of pay
consistently offered in those advertisements is in the range $55,000 to $65,000,
and therefore the Tribunal
accepts that the terms and conditions of employment
of the nominee will be no less favourable that the terms and conditions that
provided to an equivalent Australian employee.
these reasons the requirements of r.2.72(10)(cc) are
Requisite certification
part of the nomination, the applicant must certify various matters in writing:
r.2.72(10)(e). These include that:
the tasks of the
position include a significant majority of the tasks of the nominated occupation
listed in the ANZSCO or specified
in the instrument IMMI 14/048;
if the applicant
lawfully operates a business in Australia, the nominated occupation is with a
business, or an associated entity,
of the applicant or else, is an occupation
specified in IMMI 14/048; and
qualifications and experience of the nominee are commensurate with those
specified for the occupation in the ANZSCO.
Tribunal has considered the information provided about the qualifications of the
nominee and the statement of duties. The tribunal
is satisfied on the basis of
the relevant certifications in the application form that r.2.72(10)(e) is
Position must be genuine
2.72(10)(f)
requires that the position associated with the nominated occupation
is genuine.
Tribunal has had regard to the explanatory statement to the amendment which
added r.2.72(10)(f) which indicates:
“New paragraph 2.72(10)(f) provides that, as a criteria for approval of
nomination, the position associated with the nominated
occupation is genuine.
The effect of this new paragraph is that, in addition to the other criteria in
subregulation 2.72(10), the Minister must also be
satisfied that the position
associated with the nominated occupation is genuine to approve a nomination made
by a standard business
The purpose of this amendment is to ensure that the Temporary Sponsored Skilled
Migration Program is to address skills shortages
in the Australian labour
market. More specifically, the purpose of this amendment is to strengthen the
Department’s capacity
to ensure that positions nominated under this
Program are in skilled occupations and are genuinely needed by the nominating
nomination was made in respect of the position of restaurant or café
manager ANZSCO 141111. The Tribunal has had regard
to the position as described
in the ANZSCO dictionary, a copy of which is attached to this decision. In
considering the degree of
reliance to be placed on the ANZSCO guide, the
Tribunal has taken into account that r.2.72(10)(e) requires an applicant to
that the tasks of the position include a significant majority of the
tasks of the nominated occupation in ANZSCO. The Tribunal is
not bound by that
description but has been guided by the skill level and tasks detailed in the
ANZSCO dictionary for the nominated
occupation. The Tribunal accepts that the
position of café or restaurant manager involves organising and
controlling the operations
of a cafe, restaurant or related establishment to
provide dining and catering services.
all occupations are included as part of the nomination approval process.
Café or restaurant manager is one of the positions
nominated in the
relevant instrument. However, Fast Food Managers (Aus)/ Quick Service Restaurant
Managers (NZ) are excluded from
this occupation. The Tribunal has considered the
nature of the business and whether the applicant requires a second position of
or restaurant manager.
applicant already employs a subclass 457 visa holder as a restaurant manager.
The applicant has given evidence that the restaurant
has a seating capacity of
56 persons. Currently it is open from 5 PM to 10 PM, Monday to Friday, and from
10 AM until 10 PM on the
weekends. However, the applicant wants to extend the
opening hours to 10 AM to 10 PM, seven days per week. He has observed that a
competing restaurant opens for lunch during the week and is quite busy even
though, in the applicant’s view, the food it provides
is of an inferior
current manager commences duty one hour before the restaurant opens and stays
one hour after the restaurant closes. Therefore,
with the proposed extended
hours, a manager is required for 91 hours per week and as the manager’s
hours are 38 hours per week,
the applicant has submitted that a second
restaurant manager is required.
applicant gave evidence that although the restaurant provides some takeaway
meals, these only amount to about 10 per week and
the bulk of customers eat on
the premises. When customers arrive, they are seated at a table where there are
two menus and also weekly
blackboard specials. The business employs four waiters
who take the orders. The menu includes entrees, main courses and deserts.
are provided to the table. The only disposable packaging used is for takeaway
meals. The restaurant also caters for large parties
manager’s duties include ordering and purchasing supplies which involves
visiting Flemington markets on Saturdays and also
purchasing meat directly from
the suppliers as the applicant is of the view that the quality is better if the
product is inspected
prior to purchase. The manager also makes purchases from
spice shops in Blacktown or Harris Park, as up to 50 different spices are
in the Indian cuisine which the restaurant offers. The manager’s duties
include opening the restaurant, rostering the
staff, obtaining feedback from
cooks and customers about the food provided and ensuring Occupational Health
& Safety regulations
are followed. The manager also discusses the menu
requirements of larger parties and also the specific needs of different types of
customers including Muslims, Hindus and Sikhs. He then discusses dietary
requirements with the cooks. The manager trains and recruits
the waiters where
there is a fair degree of turnover. The applicant has advertisements on the door
for waiters and the manager is
usually in charge of recruitment. The manager
then also trains the waiters and he uses a manual to do so. Training includes
occupational
health and safety training and instructing waiters about how to
check for allergies. The manager might give some assistance on the
there is a shortfall of staff but taking orders is the waiters’ job. The
manager might also process a bill if he is
near the cash register but the other
staff are trained to perform this function. From time to time, the manager might
take cash home
overnight for safekeeping.
Tribunal has considered all the evidence provided to the Department and the
Tribunal. The Tribunal has also taken into account
that the department
previously approved nominations for two cooks positions. The Tribunal is of the
view that if the restaurant is
of a size to require two cooks, it may also
require two managers. In considering the size of the business, the Tribunal also
taken into account that the BAS statements for the calendar year of 2014
indicate sales of approximately $333,000. The gross total
income of the business
in 2014 financial year was $293,618. The applicant’s evidence is that at
the start of 2014, the business
moved from the Central Coast to Mt Druitt.
Tribunal is satisfied that the business is a restaurant and not a fast food
operation. The Tribunal notes that the Department
has already approved 3
Subclass 457 visa program positions for this business. The Tribunal accepts that
the applicant wants to expand
the business so that it opens 12 hours per day, 7
days per week. The Tribunal accepts that these hours are excessive for one
as the business plans to open 84 hours per week. The Tribunal has also
taken into account that the managers duties include being
at the premises an
hour before opening and an hour after closing thus adding another 14 hours per
week. The Tribunal is satisfied
that if the business opens for extended hours
it requires 2 restaurant managers. The Tribunal has also considered the evidence
the proposed duties and accepts that the tasks of the position would
include the majority of the tasks set out in the ANZSCO guide
for the nominated
occupation of café or restaurant manager. On balance, the Tribunal is
prepared to accept that the position
associated with the nominated occupation is
these reasons the requirements of r.2.72(10)(f) are met.
Employment under contract
2.72(10)(h)
requires that the applicant will engage the nominee only as an
employee under a written contract of employment and give a copy of
that to the
applicant provided the Department with an employment contract for the nominee,
signed on 19 February 2015. For these reasons the
requirements of r.2.72(10)(h)
Work agreements
criteria apply where the applicant is a party to a work agreement (other than a
Minister): r.2.72(11), (12). In these circumstances,
the nominated occupation
must be specified in the work agreement as an occupation that the person may
nominate. Certain matters relating
to the tasks of the position and the
qualifications and experience of the nominee must be certified as part of the
nomination. In
addition, if the work agreement specifies requirements that must
be met by applicant, these must have been met.
applicant is not a party to a work agreement, and for these reasons the
requirements of r.2.72(11) and (12) are not applicable.
the reasons given above, the applicant meets all the applicable criteria
prescribed in r.2.72 of the Regulations for the nomination
Tribunal sets aside the decision not to approve the nomination and substitutes a
decision that the nomination is approved.
Jennifer Ciantar
ANZSCO extract
CAFE AND RESTAURANT MANAGERS organise and control the operations of cafes,
restaurants and related establishments to provide dining
and catering services.
Indicative Skill Level:
Most occupations in this unit group have a
level of skill commensurate with the qualifications and experience outlined
In Australia:
AQF Associate Degree, Advanced Diploma or Diploma (ANZSCO Skill Level 2)
In New Zealand:
NZ Register Diploma (ANZSCO Skill Level 2)
At least three years of relevant experience may substitute for the formal
qualifications listed above. In some instances relevant
experience and/or
on-the-job training may be required in addition to the formal qualification.
Tasks Include:
planning menus
in consultation with Chefs
planning and
organising special functions
arranging the
purchasing and pricing of goods according to budget
maintaining
records of stock levels and financial transactions
ensuring dining
facilities comply with health regulations and are clean, functional and of
suitable appearance
conferring with
customers to assess their satisfaction with meals and service
training and supervising waiting and kitchen staff
reservations, greet guests and assist in taking
Occupation:
141111 Cafe or Restaurant Manager
141111 CAFE OR RESTAURANT
Alternative Titles:
Food and Beverage Manager
Restaurateur
Organises and controls the operations of a cafe, restaurant or related
establishment to provide dining and catering services.
Fast Food Managers (Aus)/ Quick Service Restaurant Managers (NZ) are excluded
from this occupation. Fast Food Managers (Aus) and Quick
Service Restaurant
Managers (NZ) are included in Occupation 142111 Retail Manager (General)
Skill Level: 2
ATTACHMENT - EXTRACTS FROM THE
MIGRATION REGULATIONS 1994
2.72 Criteria for approval of nomination — Subclass 457...
regulation applies to a person who is:
(a) a standard business sponsor; or
(b) a party to a work agreement (other than a Minister);
who, under paragraph 140GB (1) (b) of the Act, has nominated an
occupation in relation to a holder of, or an applicant or a proposed
for, a [Subclass 457 visa].
(2) For subsection 140GB (2) of the Act, the criteria that must be
satisfied for the Minister to approve a nomination by a person
are set out in
subregulations (3) to (12).
(3) The Minister is satisfied that the person has made the nomination in
accordance with the process set out in
regulation 2.73.
(4) The Minister is satisfied that the person is:
(a) a standard business sponsor; or
(b) a party to a work agreement (other than a Minister).
(5) The Minister is satisfied that the person has identified in the
nomination the visa holder, or the applicant or proposed applicant
for the visa,
who will work in the nominated occupation.
(6) If the person identifies a holder of a [Subclass 457 visa] (the
visa holder
) for subregulation (5), the Minister is satisfied
that the person:
(a) has listed on the nomination each other holder of a visa of that kind who
was granted the visa on the basis of having the necessary
relationship with the
visa holder as mentioned in clause 457.321 of Schedule 2; and
(b) if the Minister requires the visa holder to demonstrate that he or she
has the skills necessary to perform the occupation —
the visa holder
demonstrates that he or she has those skills in the manner specified by the
(7) For paragraph (6) (a), the Minister may disregard the fact that
1 or more persons required to be listed on the nomination are
not listed,
if the Minister is satisfied it is reasonable in the circumstances to do so.
(7A) In addition to subregulation (6):
(i) the person identifies a holder of a [Subclass 457 visa] (the
) for subregulation (5); and
(ii) the [Subclass 457 visa] was granted after the Minister had waived the
requirements of paragraph 4006A (1) (c) of Schedule 4 on
the basis of a written
undertaking made by the current sponsor of the visa holder (as set out in
subclause 4006A (2) of that Schedule);
the Minister is satisfied that the person has provided, in writing, an
undertaking that is equivalent to the undertaking made by the
current sponsor of
the visa holder; and
(i) the person identifies a holder of a [Subclass 457 visa] (the
) for subregulation (5); and
(ii) the person has listed on the nomination a person described in paragraph
(6) (a); and
(iii) the [Subclass 457 visa] was granted to the person described in
paragraph (6) (a) after the Minister had waived the requirements
paragraph 4006A (1) (c) of Schedule 4 on the basis of a written
undertaking made by the current sponsor of the visa holder (as
subclause 4006A (2) of that Schedule);
the Minister is satisfied that the person has provided, in writing, an
undertaking that is equivalent to the undertaking made by the
current sponsor of
the visa holder.
(8) If the nomination was made before 1 July 2010 — the Minister is
satisfied that the person has provided the following information
as part of the
nomination:
(a) if there is a 6-digit ASCO code for the nominated occupation —
the 6-digit ASCO code;
(b) if there is no 6-digit ASCO code for the occupation, and the person is a
standard business sponsor — the name of the occupation
as it appears in
the instrument in writing made for the purposes of paragraph (10) (a);
(c) if there is no 6-digit ASCO code for the occupation and the person is a
party to a work agreement — the name of the occupation
as it appears
in the work agreement;
(d) the location or locations at which the nominated occupation is to be
carried out.
(8A) If the nomination is made on or after 1 July 2010 – the Minister
is satisfied that the person has provided the following
information as part of
the nomination:
(a) if there is a 6-digit ANZSCO code for the nominated occupation - the name
of the occupation and the corresponding 6-digit ANZSCO
(i) there is no 6-digit ANZSCO code for the nominated occupation; and
(ii) the person is a standard business sponsor;
the name of the occupation and the corresponding 6-digit code as they are
specified in the instrument in writing made for paragraph
(i) there is no 6-digit ANZSCO code for the nominated occupation; and
(ii) the person is a party to a work agreement;
the name of the occupation and the corresponding 6-digit code (if any) as
they are specified in the work agreement;
(d) the location or locations at which the nominated occupation is to be
carried out.
(9) The Minister is satisfied that either:
(a) there is no adverse information known to Immigration about the person or
a person associated with the person; or
(b) it is reasonable to disregard any adverse information known to
Immigration about the person or a person associated with the person.
The meanings of
information
associated with
are explained in
subregulations 2.57 (2) and (3).
(10) If the person is a standard business sponsor — the Minister
is satisfied that:
(a) if the nomination was made before 1 July 2010 - the nominated occupation
corresponds to an occupation specified by the Minister
in an instrument in
writing for this paragraph; and
(aa) if the nomination is made on or after 1 July 2010 – the nominated
occupation and its corresponding 6-digit code correspond
to an occupation and
its corresponding 6-digit code specified by the Minister in an instrument in
writing for this paragraph; and
(b) if required by the instrument mentioned in paragraph (a) or
(aa) — the nomination of an occupation mentioned in the instrument
supported, in writing to the Minister, by an organisation specified by the
Minister in an instrument in writing for this paragraph;
(c) the terms and conditions of employment of the person identified in the
nomination will be no less favourable than the terms and
conditions that:
(i) are provided; or
(ii) would be provided;
to an Australian citizen or an Australian permanent resident for performing
equivalent work at the same location; and
(cc) the base rate of pay, under the terms and conditions of employment
mentioned in paragraph (c), that:
(i) are provided; or
(ii) would be provided;
to an Australian citizen or an Australian permanent resident, will be greater
than the temporary skilled migration income threshold
specified by the Minister
in an instrument in writing for this paragraph; and
(d) if the nomination was made before 1 July 2010 - the person has certified
as part of the nomination, in writing, that:
(i) the tasks of the position include a significant majority of the tasks
(A) the nominated occupation listed in the ASCO; or
(B) the nominated occupation specified in an instrument in writing for
paragraph (a); and
(ii) if the person is lawfully operating a business outside Australia but
does not lawfully operate a business in Australia:
(A) the nominated occupation is a position in the business of the standard
business sponsor; or
(B) the nominated occupation is an occupation specified by the Minister in an
instrument in writing for this sub-paragraph; and
(iii) if the person lawfully operates a business in Australia:
(A) the nominated occupation is a position with a business, or an associated
entity, of the person; or
(B) the nominated occupation is an occupation specified by the Minister in an
instrument in writing for this sub-paragraph; and
(iv) the qualifications and experience of the visa holder, or the applicant
or proposed applicant for the visa, identified in relation
to the nominated
occupation are commensurate with the qualifications and experience
(A) for the occupation in the ASCO; or
(B) if there is no ASCO code for the nominated occupation — for
the occupation in the instrument in writing made for the purpose
of paragraph
(e) if the nomination is made on or after 1 July 2010 – the person has
certified as part of the nomination, in writing, that:
(i) the tasks of the position include a significant majority of the tasks
(A) the nominated occupation listed in the ANZSCO; or
(B) the nominated occupation specified in an instrument in writing for
paragraph (aa); and
(ii) if the person is lawfully operating a business outside Australia but
does not lawfully operate a business in Australia:
(A) the nominated occupation is a position in the business of the standard
business sponsor; or
(B) the nominated occupation is an occupation specified by the Minister in an
instrument in writing for this sub-subparagraph; and
(iii) if the person lawfully operates a business in Australia:
(A) the nominated occupation is a position with a business, or an associated
entity, of the person; or
(B) the nominated occupation is an occupation specified by the Minister in an
instrument in writing for this sub-subparagraph; and
(iv) the qualifications and experience of the visa holder, or the applicant
or proposed applicant for the visa, identified in relation
to the nominated
occupation are commensurate with the qualifications and experience
(A) for the occupation in the ANZSCO; or
(B) if there is no ANZSCO code for the nominated occupation - for the
occupation in the instrument in writing made for paragraph (aa).
(f) the position associated with the nominated occupation is genuine; and
(g) if the person has identified in the nomination the holder of a Subclass
457 (Temporary Work (Skilled)) visa in relation to whom
the requirements in
subclause 457.223(6) of Schedule 2 were met—one of the following
(i) the requirements in subclause 457.223(6) of Schedule 2 continue to be
(A) the holder would be required to hold a licence, registration or
membership that is mandatory to perform the occupation nominated
in relation to
the holder; and
(B) in order to obtain the licence, registration or membership, the holder
would need to demonstrate that the holder has undertaken
a language test
specified by the Minister under subparagraph 457.223(4)(eb)(iv) of Schedule 2
and achieved a score that is better
than the score specified for the test by the
Minister under subparagraph 457.223(4)(eb)(v) of Schedule 2;
the holder demonstrates that he or she has proficiency in English of at least
the standard required for the grant (however described)
of the licence,
registration or membership;
(iii) the holder is an exempt applicant within the meaning of subclause
457.223(4) of Schedule 2;
(iv) unless subparagraph (ii) applies—the holder:
(A) has undertaken a language test specified by the Minister under
subparagraph 457.223(4)(eb)(iv) of Schedule 2; and
(B) achieved within the period specified by the Minister in a legislative
instrument for this subparagraph, in a single attempt at
the test, the score
specified by the Minister under subparagraph 457.223(4)(eb)(v) of Schedule 2;
(h) either:
(i) the person will:
(A) engage the visa holder, the applicant for a visa or the proposed
applicant for a Subclass 457(Temporary Work (Skilled)) visa
only as an employee
under a written contract of employment; and
(B) give a copy of that contract to the Minister; or
(ii) the nominated occupation is an occupation specified by the Minister in
an instrument in writing for sub-subparagraph (e)(iii)(B).
(10AA) For paragraphs (10) (c) and (cc), if no Australian citizen or
Australian permanent resident performs equivalent work in the
workplace at the same location, the person must determine, using the method
specified by the Minister in an instrument
in writing for this
subregulation:
(a) the terms and conditions of employment; and
(b) the base rate of pay, under the terms and conditions of employment;
that would be provided to an Australian citizen or an Australian permanent
resident to perform equivalent work in the person’s
workplace at the same
(10AB) Paragraphs (10) (c) and (cc) do not apply if the annual earnings
of the person identified in the nomination are equal to or
greater than the
amount specified by the Minister in an instrument in writing for this
subregulation.
(10A) The Minister may disregard the criterion in paragraph (10) (cc)
for the purpose of subregulation (2) if:
(a) the base rate of pay will not be greater than the temporary skilled
migration income threshold specified for that paragraph; and
(b) the annual earnings are equal to or greater than the temporary skilled
migration income threshold; and
(c) the Minister considers it reasonable to do so.
(11) If the person is a party to a work agreement (other than a Minister)
— the Minister is satisfied that:
(a) the nominated occupation is specified in the work agreement as an
occupation that the person may nominate; and
(b) if the nomination was made before 1 July 2010 - the person has certified
as part of the nomination, in writing, that:
(i) the tasks of the position include a significant majority of the tasks
(A) if the nomination is made using an ASCO code - the nominated occupation
listed in the ASCO; or
(B) if the nomination is not made using an ASCO code -the nominated
occupation specified in the work agreement; and
(ii) the qualifications and experience of the visa holder, or the applicant
or proposed applicant for the visa, identified in relation
to the nominated
occupation are commensurate with the qualifications and experience specified for
the occupation in the work agreement;
(c) if the nomination is made on or after 1 July 2010 - the person has
certified as part of the nomination, in writing, that:
(i) the tasks of the position include a significant majority of the tasks
(A) if the nomination is made using an ANZSCO code - the nominated occupation
listed in the ANZSCO; or
(B) if the nomination is not made using an ANZSCO code -the nominated
occupation specified in the work agreement; and
(ii) the qualifications and experience of the visa holder, or the applicant
or proposed applicant for the visa, identified in relation
to the nominated
occupation are commensurate with the qualifications and experience specified for
the occupation in the work agreement.
(12) If the person is a party to a work agreement and the work agreement
specifies requirements that must be met by the party to the
agreement — the Minister is satisfied that the requirements of the
work agreement have been met.
Explanatory
Statement to SLI 2013 No.146, Attachment B, p.34
RTF format (178 KB)
Signed PDF/A format