D20-21\083 [2020] SCTA 190 (13 November 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\083
FILE NUMBER : 17-1591
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(Cth) (the Complaints Act) and held on 2 October 2020 before:
Duffield, Member.
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
decision under review is the Trustee’s refusal to compromise the
Complainant’s claim.
Trustee notified the Complainant of its decision by email dated 1 September
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal affirms the decision of the Trustee.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
Complainant sought to be represented and the Tribunal granted the request in
accordance with its discretion under s23 of the Complaints
to s32 of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal requested submissions from the
submission was received from the Complainant; the Trustee relied on material
previously provided.
submissions were exchanged and responses were invited. The Trustee responded.
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
electronic files provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant made a complaint that the decision of the Trustee was
or unreasonable for the reasons summarised in this determination.
Complainant joined the Fund on 1 May 2013, setting up two concurrent pension
Trustee advised that on 14 March 2014 the Trustee’s Financial Education
and Advice Team spoke to the Complainant and her
daughter and reminded her of
her obligation to inform Centrelink of changes to her assets and income. The
Trustee further informed
the Complainant she must obtain a Centrelink schedule
through her online account to provide to Centrelink.
a letter dated 6 June 2017, Centrelink advised the Complainant that the correct
amount of her combined investments from 1 May 2013
were not taken into account
in the payments it made to her for the period from 6 June 2013 to 6 March 2017.
As a result of this,
the Complainant was overpaid and she was now required to
repay the overpayment.
Complainant understood that the Trustee would contact Centrelink about her
payments twice a year. She believed the Trustee would
provide information to
Centrelink and she had no reason to believe this was not done until she received
notification of the Centrelink
Trustee states that it received a request from Centrelink to provide the
Complainant’s account details in August 2017, February
2018 and August
Trustee explained that under the prevailing legislation there is no current
obligation for superannuation funds to report account
details to Centrelink on
behalf of its members; rather the onus to supply information to Centrelink
resides with its Fund members.
However, should the Trustee receive a request
from Centrelink to provide information about a member’s account details
as occurred in the Complainant’s case – the Trustee is
obliged by law to supply the requested information.
Complainant lodged a complaint with the Tribunal on 26 September 2017 regarding
how the Trustee reports account details to Centrelink.
Resolution sought
resolution sought by the Complainant is for the Trustee to pay the Centrelink
debt plus all the fees deducted from both her pension
Events not in dispute:
− The Complainant’s date of birth.
− The date the Complainant joined the Fund.
− The date of the Centrelink letter advising the
Complainant of the overpayment and the requirement to repay the debt.
Tribunal does not consider any provisions of the trust deed of the Fund are
relevant to this complaint.
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
main points made by the Complainant are as follows:
The Complainant
explains that with the help of a financial advisor and the Trustee in 2013, her
pension accounts were set up. She
was told by the Trustee that they contact
Centrelink about the payments twice a year however this did not happen and
happened since 2013 and now the Complainant and her husband have
incurred a Centrelink debt of $24,389.81.
Registration of Complaint form, the Complainant submits:
AS PER THEIR LETTER 12/7/17 .AND FOR THE PAST 4 YEARS-
QUOTE “ THE TABLE BELOW DETAILS YOUR RETIREMENT INCOME FOR THE NEW
YEAR AND SHOWS YOUR SELECTED INCOME PAYMENT AND THE BEFORE TAX OF EACH
PAYMENT .AS REQUIRED BY LAW, WE WILL ALSO SEND THIS INFORMATION
CENTRELINK” SO WHY WASNT THIS DONE AND IF YOU DONT DO IT, WHY WRITE ITS
LAW? I HAD NO REASON TO BELIEVE THIS WAS NOT DONE
UNTIL DEBT ARRIVED. THIS
LETTER AND THE LAST 4 ARE MISLEADING, UNTRUE AND AS A RESULT I’M IN
TROUBLE. I WAS EVEN TOLD ON THE
PHONE THAT DETAILS ARE SENT AUG AND MARCH.
Furthermore, the
Complainant submits that as of 17 October 2019 and a 2017 screen shot of the
Centrelink schedule page online it says
‘If you receive the government age
pension, [the Trustee] will provide Centrelink with a schedule in March and
September each
The Complainant
was notified in February 2017 to provide an income stream schedule and the
Trustee responded that this form is only
issued when requested.
The Complainant
explains that the financial planner they consulted worked out all Centrelink
payments, pension payments and aged care
plan and everything was satisfactory,
to ensure enough money for the Complainant’s standard of living as she and
her husband
The Complainant
explains that when the debt arrived on 5 July 2017 Centrelink wanted it repaid
immediately as they claimed it was
an overpayment. They cut the
Complainant’s fortnightly pension payment and at one stage the payments
were $30.80 a fortnight.
This left the Complainant paying off the debt, helping
her ill son and left ‘very little’ for her standard of living
meaning that her daughter had to pay for groceries.
Complainant’s husband, who now suffers from Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder, fell very ill in July 2017 after learning of
the debt and thus they
lost a household wage of $19,000 a year.
The Complainant
asserts that if the Trustee had ‘fulfilled their commitment with their
online statement and letterhead statements’
the Centrelink debt would have
been minimal.
The Complainant
submits that the Trustee:
... have stated on their website for the last 7 years including up
to today that they report to Centrelink. Their letterhead quotes
"the law". This
is misleading, ambiguous and deceptive. They also report on official letterhead
that "under the law they report".
This too is misleading, ambiguous and
deceptive .
The Complainant
would never have received that money from Centrelink if the Trustee did what
they stated:
There would have been no debt, no stress or loss of household wage,
no borrowing money from daughter , and a different plan put in
place for Aged
The Complainant
submits that she is not 100% at fault for the debt arising rather she believes
the Trustee is at fault due to the
misleading and incorrect information in their
The Complainant
states that the Trustee’s decision is ‘TOTALLY
UNREASONABLE!’.
The Complainant
asserts that the information given to a person in writing on formal letterhead
and backed up by their official website
leads a person to make decisions that
affect their livelihood.
The Complainant
submits that the Trustee should be held accountable and responsible for what
they write and claim.
The Complainant
states that she relied on the correspondence from the Trustee and the phone call
with the Trustee during which she
was told they would send information to
Centrelink twice a year in August and March.
The Complainant
states she was relying on the Trustee to do as they say they would in their
The Complainant
asserts that had she known the correct information she would have provided
Centrelink with whatever information they
The Trustee
main points made by the Trustee are as follows:
The Trustee
explains that the Complainant is seeking compensation for the reduction of her
Centrelink entitlement due to an overpayment
by Centrelink. However, the Trustee
notes states that this doesn’t represent a financial loss.
The Trustee
states that it will not be paying compensation to cover the Complainant’s
Centrelink debt as the onus is on the
member to ensure they provide all relevant
information to Centrelink regarding their account.
The Trustee
submits that it has no legal obligation to report member account details to
Centrelink nor does Centrelink have a process
to receive all member account
details from the Trustee.
The Trustee
notes that upon commencement of the Complainant’s concurrent pension
accounts, it issued her Welcome Letters on
7 May 2013 which included the
following statement:
If you receive any government income from Centrelink
or the Department of Veterans Affairs (such as the Age Pension), you’ll
need to provide them with a Centrelink Schedule to let them know how much income
you will receive from your [Fund] Pension account.
You can download a Centrelink
Schedule from your online account or call us for a copy.
The Trustee
advises that it does not periodically send members a Centrelink Schedule as
Centrelink does not require all members to
report their account details and if a
member requires their Centrelink Schedule they can obtain it by contacting the
Trustee or logging
onto their online account.
The Trustee
explains that it receives biannual requests from Centrelink for account details
in relation to certain members which are
then provided to Centrelink.
The Trustee
notes that it received requests for the Complainant’s information in
August 2017, February 2018 and August 2018.
The Trustee
states that it fulfilled its obligation to Centrelink by reporting the
Complainant’s review balance and her Gross
Annual Pension for the 2017 and
2018 financial years.
The Trustee
states that its Financial Education and Advice Team spoke with the Complainant
and her daughter on 14 March 2014 and reminded
the Complainant of her obligation
to inform Centrelink of changes to her assets and income. The Trustee also urged
the Complainant
to actively obtain a Centrelink schedule through her online
account to provide to Centrelink.
The Trustee
explains that:
Each July, [the Trustee] issue[s] members a summary of their
pension payment details by post. This serves to keep members engaged
account, and to inform members of any changes to their pension amount. In 2016
and 2017, these letters iterated that we
send pension payment information to
Centrelink, as required by law. We are obligated to provide this information
when requested to
do so. As no request was received in previous years, no
information was sent.
The Trustee
states that the Complainant was advised in her Welcome letter and by a Trustee
adviser that she must report changes in
income to Centrelink regardless of any
reporting done by the Trustee. This is in accordance with section 68 of
Security (Administration) Act 1999
which requires individuals to report any
changes in their income to Centrelink.
The Trustee
submits that the Complainant was ‘wholly responsible’ for ensuring
Centrelink were informed of changes to
her assets and income and it did not
breach a reporting obligation, nor did it fail to inform the Complainant of her
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must initially determine whether the
decision of the Trustee refusing to compromise
the Complainant’s claim,
was fair and reasonable in its operation in relation to the Complainant in the
circumstances.
issue is not what decision the Tribunal would have made on the evidence before
the Trustee but whether the decision was fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal took the whole of the evidence and
submissions into account. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the material it has
relied on has been provided to both Parties
Complainant, via her daughter, considers the Trustee misled her into believing,
per various written representations, that the
Trustee would take responsibility
for updating Centrelink on a regular basis as to the pension payments she was
receiving from her
2 superannuation accounts held in the Fund.
Complainant asserts, had the Trustee effected such an arrangement, then any
Centrelink overpayment would have been quickly identified
and any consequential
adjustment in her Centrelink payments could have been easily accommodated.
relevantly submitted by the Complainant’s daughter:
My main argument is ...
- the information given to a person in writing, formal letterhead and backed up
by their official website leads a person to make
decisions that affect their
livelihood. Deceptive information can only be found deceptive when it’s
- 3 forms of communication all deceptive.
- the website still claims it will report to Centrelink ( under the heading
Centrelink Schedule).
- attached new screenshots of the website .. NEW EVIDENCE.
- Lack of intent to fix this issue.
- it’s not a generic website . We have personally logged in.
- explain why you advertise/continue to advertise “the law “on your
letterhead.
- Objection ... 7/5/2013 letter signed by chief executive refers to the
Centrelink schedule and that we need to provide the schedule
to Centrelink .
Online logged in - under Centrelink schedule it says “[Trustee] WILL
provide...”
- no online activity prior to 18/10/2015. Relied solely on information
- 1st Centrelink schedule printed online was 20/10/2017. ( debt incurred )
I can only make a decision based on the information at hand.
Information was deceiving and conflicting and irrespective of the years
have passed, this is still the same. [Trustee] should be held accountable and
are responsible for what they write and claim.
its part the Trustee has relevantly advised:
[Trustee] acknowledges the letters sent to Ms [Complainant] have
since been improved to be more clear to members.
Whilst we understand Ms [Complainant] believed that [Trustee] would report
her Pension details to Centrelink, Ms [Complainant] was
advised in her Welcome
letter and by a [Fund] Adviser that she must report changes in income to
Centrelink regardless of any reporting
done by the Fund. This is in accordance
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
(the Act) which
requires individuals to report any changes in their income to Centrelink.
As an overpayment by Centrelink was paid to Ms [Complainant], her Centrelink
entitlement was reduced to cover the overpayment. Ms
[Complainant] is seeking
compensation from [Trustee] due to the overpayment, however this doesn’t
represent a financial loss.
This has been communicated in our previous responses to the SCT however
I’ve reiterated the main points. A similar case was
investigated by the
SCT (Ref: D18-19 -182
[2019] SCTA 76)
where it was determined that any reporting
to Centrelink by [Trustee] doesn’t remove a member’s obligations to
any changes in circumstance to Centrelink under the Act.
way of overview, the Tribunal makes the following pertinent observations;
it is axiomatic
that the Complainant had a statutory obligation under Subdivision B of Division
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Centrelink of material changes in her financial circumstances which might affect
her entitlement to, or the rate at which
she was paid a Centrelink pension;
under Division 1
of that Act the Secretary of the Department is authorised to require
provision by third parties (including the Trustee) of information
concerning the
affairs of persons receiving social security benefits which may be relevant to
the rate at which such benefits are
payable to them.
the rate at which the Complainant was entitled to her Centrelink pension altered
during the relevant period because of variations
in her two Fund account
because these variations were not disclosed to Centrelink at the appropriate
times the Complainant received successive overpayments
of her Centrelink pension
for several years. Had those variations been disclosed by her in a timely way,
her Centrelink pension would
have been reduced on an annual basis. The
Complainant would have received the same aggregate amount by way of payments
over the relevant
period, but would have received same in a way which, neither
paid her moneys to which she was not entitled for 4 years, nor left
substantial debt to be repaid once the overpayment was identified.
that as it may, the Tribunal having carefully considered the daughter’s
assertions as reproduced above, considers the daughter
[D] may have
inadvertently overlooked the fact that on 14 March 2014 she had a phone
conversation with a representative of the Trustee
[R]. The call lasted for 21
minutes and 32 seconds and the Complainant was audibly present in the
background. Relevantly, at 15
minutes and 20 seconds into the call the following
interchange occurred between R and D:
: Does Mom[Complainant]...get any Centrelink benefits?
: Aged pension...they [Centrelink] will count the money in your
Mom’s super...
: [Is she] currently getting something or not?
: Yes. At the moment Mom’s getting $392.51.
: A fortnight?
: Are they [Centrelink] aware of all her super...?
: [Inaudible]
: So long as...you obviously have an obligation to tell Centrelink
65 and receiving
a pension, they will count these...her super, towards the assets test.
at 17 minutes and 46 seconds:
: Have you provided them [Centrelink] with a Centrelink
schedule from [Trustee]? Does that ring a bell [name of daughter]?
: No, I don’t think we have.
: All right, that is probably what you should think about passing on
to them, because the Centrelink schedule has the details of her
[Complainant’s] 2 pension accounts and all the calculations they
[Centrelink] need, to be able to make sure the calculations
are correct.
: Do you [name of daughter] log on to the accounts online?
: Yes, if Mom needs any information.
: Ok, so you’ve got a log-in ID for her accounts?
: Yes, I do at my home.
: When you go on there next time, have a look at the menu options and
you should see something called a Centrelink schedule for both
: What I suggest you do is print them off and take them along to
Centrelink and update the information. If you want to keep all of
date, that is what you should do.
: Ok, no worries.
: All right.
at 19 minutes and 25 seconds:
: My recommendation would be to print those
calculations...those Centrelink schedules off and take them into...and give them
to Centrelink
which will give them all the information they need to confirm
their calculations. Ok?
: All right, no worries.
: Any other questions?
: No, that should be fine...
these circumstances, the Tribunal considers, whatever the deficiencies of the
Trustee’s written communications with the Complainant,
Complainant, via her daughter was properly informed in a timely fashion of the
need to utilise the Fund’s Centrelink
schedules and personally provide
them to Centrelink. Had the Complainant, via her daughter given effect to the
Trustee’s Representative’s
urgings in March of 2014, then a lump sum
repayment of the Centrelink overpayment would have been avoided.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal determines it was fair and reasonable of the Trustee to refuse to
compromise the Complainant’s claim.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decision under review
if it is satisfied that the decision, in its
operation in relation to the
Complainant, was fair and reasonable in the circumstances. For the reasons
stated above the Tribunal
is so satisfied.
Tribunal affirms the decision of the Trustee.
Stephen Duffield, Member
Triunal signature: 13 November 2020
RTF format (295 KB)
Signed PDF/A format