Mr Colin McKerlie v Private Fleet Pty Ltd [2025] FWCFB 228 (13 October 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 228
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Appeal of decisions
Private Fleet Pty Ltd
(C2025/8082)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT SLEVIN
DEPUTY PRESIDENT GRAYSON
COMMISSIONER
SYDNEY, 13 OCTOBER 2025
Appeal against decision [
] of Commissioner Sloan at Sydney on 28 July 2025 in matter number
U2025/8790 - permission to appeal only – recusal application
application refused – application for orders for production - appeal
proceedings by way of rehearing - application
Mr Colin McKerlie (
has lodged an appeal under
Fair Work Act 2009
) against a decision of Commissioner Sloan
to dismiss an application for an unfair dismissal remedy on jurisdictional
Appeal proceedings
). Permission to appeal is required. The
matter was set down matter for hearing on Tuesday 7 October 2025 before this
Full Bench of
the Commission to consider whether to grant permission.
At the commencement of the hearing Mr McKerlie made two applications.
A recusal application seeking that we disqualify the presiding
member from
participating in the Full Bench and an application for orders that the
Respondent produce documents. This decision concerns
the recusal and the
application for orders for production.
Recusal Application
On 1 October 2025, the Appellant made an application to the presiding
member of this Full Bench asking that he recuse himself from
further involvement
in the Appeal proceedings or any other matter in which the Appellant is a party.
The Appellant provided written
submissions in support of his application
and relied on various documents.
In those submissions the Appellant asked the presiding member to
disqualify himself from sitting in the Appeal proceedings on the
decision in another matter
McKerlie v Fat Prophets
earlier proceedings)
. In that matter the Appellant’s
application for an unfair dismissal remedy was dismissed on jurisdictional
grounds. The earlier
proceedings are unrelated to these proceedings.
On 3 October 2025 the presiding member issued a non-published
decision declining to recuse himself and advised the Appellant that
if he wished
to press the recusal application before the Full Bench this could be done at the
commencement of the hearing on 7 October
Following the presiding member issuing the decision the Appellant
sent further correspondence indicating the application would be
pressed and
previous complaint to the President of the Commission regarding the decision of
the presiding member in the earlier proceedings;
various Facebook posts, internet searches, online opinion pieces and newspaper
articles regarding appointees to the Commission;
decision in the earlier proceedings.
In the earlier proceedings the Appellant’s application for an
unfair dismissal remedy was dismissed on the basis that he was
engaged as an
independent contractor and was not an employee. The Appellant contends that in
the reasoning for that decision an error
of fact was made concerning the
treatment of annual leave. The Appellant asserts that the Decision incorrectly
found that the contract
included a term for 20 days’ unpaid
when it only
provided for 10 days paid leave. The question of the provision of leave in the
contract was then considered in the
analysis of those matters in the contract
that suggested an employment relationship and those that pointed to a
relationship of independent
contractor. In that consideration a finding was made
that the existence of a leave provision indicated an employment
relationship
was a finding in the Appellant’s favour.
The Appellant pressed his application before the Full Bench
contending that the presiding member recuse himself on the basis of actual
and/or apprehended bias. The Appellant argued that recusal was necessary as the
presiding member had either deliberately or
incompetently made an asserted error
of fact in his decision in the earlier proceedings and/or on the basis that the
Commission is
a corrupt institution given the personal political persuasions of
its constituent members. The Appellant made oral submissions in
support of the
application. The Respondent made no submissions. The Appellant was informed that
application for recusal was refused
and that we would publish our reasons. These
are those reasons.
Recusal Application- Consideration
The Appellant contends that in the decision in the earlier
proceedings the presiding member made an error of fact concerning the number
days of unpaid leave that had been agreed in contractual negotiations. The
Appellant asserts that the error was either a fabrication
of the facts or a
failure to be aware of the facts. It is also asserted that the error was
fundamental to the decision in the matter.
The Appellant made a complaint to the
President of the Commission regarding the decision and the presiding member and
also lodged
an appeal against the earlier decision. The appeal was later
In making the current application, the Appellant relies upon the
Fair Work Commission Fair Hearings Practice Direction at [25] which
[25] The general principle is that a Member should not deal with
a matter if in all the circumstances a fair minded observer might
reasonable apprehension that the Member might not bring an impartial and
unprejudiced mind to the case.
The Appellant submits that the finding in the earlier proceedings
would lead a fair minded observer to have a reasonable apprehension
presiding member might not bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to these
proceedings.
Dr Manu Chopra v Al Siraat College Inc T/A Al Siraat College,
Fazeel Arain, Vis Naidu, Esra Boz, Fatema Faoual, Naga Thayalakrishna
Full Bench summarised the approach to be taken to dealing with a recusal as
The procedure to be followed where a recusal application is made
in respect of an individual member of a Full Bench was discussed
by the High
Court of Australia in
QYFM v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant
Services and Multicultural Affairs (QYFM)
. In a joint judgment, Kiefel CJ
and Gageler J determined that such an objection should be considered by all
members of the Bench
and not the judge the subject of the application alone.
Justice Gordon, with whom Edelman J and Steward J agreed, considered that
most, if not all cases, the judge in question should have the opportunity
initially to decide to recuse themselves and thereafter
the Full Bench may
determine its jurisdiction.
(Citation omitted)
On 3 October 2025, the presiding member advised the Appellant that
he declined to recuse himself from the Full Bench. In doing so
he stated that
the assertion that he had made an error of fact in earlier proceedings did not
form a basis for recusal in the appeal
proceedings. Applying the decision in
Ebner v The Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
the presiding member advised that there was no basis
to conclude that a fair-minded observer might hold a reasonable apprehension
that he might not bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the determination
of these proceedings.
The test for apprehended bias described in the Practice Direction at
[10] is drawn from the decision of the High Court decision in
the High Court identified two steps in applying the apprehension of
bias test. First, identification of what is said might lead the
decision-maker
to decide a case other than on its legal and factual merits. Second,
articulation of the logical connection between
these matters and the feared
deviation from deciding the case on its
We consider the following observations on the test of reasonable
apprehension of bias made in the High Court in
Re JRL; ex parte CJL
[1986] HCA 39
(1986) 161 CLR 342
) by Mason J at 352 are also relevant to
the Appellant’s application:
It seems that the acceptance by this Court of the test of
reasonable apprehension of bias in such cases as
has led to an increase in the frequency of
applications by litigants that judicial officers should disqualify themselves
from sitting
in particular cases on account of their participation in other
proceedings involving one of the litigants or on account of conduct
litigation. It needs to be said loudly and clearly that the ground of
disqualification is a reasonable apprehension that
the judicial officer will not
decide the case impartially or without prejudice, rather than that he will
decide the case adversely
to one party. There may be many situations in which
previous decisions of a judicial officer on issues of fact and law may generate
an expectation that he is likely to decide issues in a particular case adversely
to one of the parties. But this does not mean either
that he will approach the
issues in that case otherwise than with an impartial and unprejudiced mind in
the sense in which that expression
is used in the authorities or that his
previous decisions provide an acceptable basis for inferring that there is a
reasonable apprehension
that he will approach the issues in this way. In cases
of this kind, disqualification is only made out by showing that there is a
reasonable apprehension of bias by reason of prejudgment and this must be
"firmly established" (
Reg. v. Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration
Commission; Ex parte Angliss Group
(1969) 122 CLR 546, at
pp 553-554; Watson, at p 262;
Re Lusink; Ex parte Shaw
, at pp 50-51). Although it is
important that justice must be seen to be done, it is equally important that
judicial officers
discharge their duty to sit and do not, by acceding too
readily to suggestions of appearance of bias, encourage parties to believe
by seeking the disqualification of a judge, they will have their case tried by
someone thought to be more likely to decide the
case in their favour.
Applying the test in
, the Appellant has failed to
identify what it is that would lead a fair minded observer to conclude that the
presiding member’s
finding in the earlier proceedings would lead him to
not bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the Appeal proceedings. We can
see no basis for a fair minded observer to reach such a conclusion. The
Appellant’s submission is that a finding in the earlier
case was wrong and
that it followed that the presiding member is incompetent. Even if the finding
was incorrect as asserted, and
we note that the impugned finding was held to be
in favour of the Appellant’s case in the earlier proceedings, we consider
that a fair minded observer would not consider that the error would lead the
presiding member to decide the current case other than
on its legal and factual
merits. Further, the Appellant has not articulated a logical connection between
the asserted error in the
earlier proceedings and his concern that the presiding
member might not apply appropriate merits-based decision-making methods to
determination of the issues in these proceedings. Given the impugned finding was
considered to favour the Appellant’s case
in the earlier proceedings we do
not consider that there is one.
To the extent that the Appellant now asserts that the presiding
member should recuse himself as a result of having an actual bias
against him as
demonstrated by his personal political beliefs or an alleged deliberate decision
to make an incorrect finding in the
decision in the earlier proceedings we do
not consider that this ground is made out. A claim of actual bias requires proof
decision maker approached the issues with a closed mind or had
prejudged the matter and, for reasons of either partiality in favour
or some form of prejudice affecting the decision, could not be swayed by the
evidence in the case at
. Actual bias is
assessed by reference to conclusions that might reasonably be drawn from
evidence about the actual views and behaviour
of the decision maker and requires
clear and direct evidence that the decision maker was in fact biased. In the
absence of an admission
of guilt or a clear and public statement of bias from
the decision maker, actual bias will be difficult to
Appellant’s claims of actual bias are rejected. They are not supported by
any evidence as to the actual views or conduct
of the presiding member.
Finally, the Appellant submits that the Commission itself is a
corrupt institution as a result of all of its members having personal
commitments and that this would lead to an apprehension of bias. This criticism
is directed at all members of the Commission
and not just the presiding member.
Taken to its logical conclusion, if this submission was accepted, then all
members of the Commission
would be required to recuse themselves from dealing
with all applications. We reject this submission. We do not consider that the
Appellant has made out either of the elements required to meet the test in
We are also mindful of the observation in
important that decision makers discharge their duty to sit and an application
such as the current application should not
be acceded to too readily.
We do not consider a basis for disqualification has been made out.
The Appellant has failed to make out a case that a fair minded
observer might
have a reasonable apprehension that the presiding member might not bring an
impartial and unprejudiced mind to these
proceedings.
The application that the presiding member be disqualified from
involvement in the Appeal proceedings is dismissed.
Orders for Production
The Appellant makes application for an order that the Respondent
produce documents in three categories. First, documents that relate
business relationship between the Respondent and entities that are described as
associated entities. Second payroll documents
of the Respondent and of the
entities described as associated entities. Third, documents relating to a person
identified elsewhere
as “the Follow Up Caller”.
In the proceedings the subject of Mr McKerlie’s application
for permission to appeal, Commissioner Sloan upheld a jurisdictional
that Mr McKerlie was not protected from unfair dismissal because he had not
served the minimum employment
. The minimum
employment period for an employee employed by a small business employer is 12
months. An employer is a small business
employer if it employs fewer than 15
employees at the time of dismissal. The number of employees employed includes
employees in an
associated entity. The contest before the Commission was whether
the Respondent was a small business employer. The Respondent contended
had only 14 employees at the time of the dismissal and that it had no associated
entities. The Appellant’s case was
that the Respondent’s assertion
as to the number of employees was wrong.
An order to produce was issued by the Commissioner at the
Appellant’s request. The Appellant complained that the Respondent
properly responded to the order to produce. The Commissioner accepted that the
Respondent had not completely complied with
decision of the Commissioner recorded that the fault in the production was that
contracts that were provided in response to
the order concerning a number of
persons working in the business described as independent contractors were not
properly executed
and that the Appellant asked that the contracts provided not be received. The
Commissioner received them and regarded the fact that
they were unsigned as a
matter of weight. The Commissioner found that he was not satisfied the persons
working under the contracts
Consideration – Orders for Production
Sections 589
empower the Commission to exercise
discretionary powers in determining the procedure to be followed in matters
before it and how
it informs itself in relation to those matters. The power of
the Commission under
to “inform itself in relation to any matter
before it in such a matter which it considers appropriate”, which under
includes requiring production of copies of documents and records to
the Commission, is expressed in very broad terms. Accordingly,
the Full Bench
has power to make the orders sought. The power is to be exercised as a broad
discretion informed by whether it is
appropriate that we be informed by ordering
the Respondent to produce the documents.
The Appellant confirmed that the orders sought in these proceedings
differ from the orders sought at first instance. The differences
included that
the orders now sought to correct what were described by the Appellant as errors
he made in the orders sought at first
The Appellant’s grounds of appeal include the following:
3. Commissioner Sloan erred as a matter of law and pursuant to
the Code of Conduct which governs the conduct of members of the Commission
admitting into evidence and "attaching weight" documents which were completely
without substance and in otherwise failing to compel
the Respondent to comply
with an Order to Produce which he himself had made.
In submissions in support of the production order application, the
Appellant characterised the appeal proceedings as a complete rehearing
argued that the Full Bench needs the documents sought in the proposed order to
determine whether the Respondent had 15 or more
employees at the relevant time.
The current proceedings are to consider the question of whether
permission to appeal should be granted to appeal the decision of Commissioner
Sloan. The principles that we are required to apply are well known. They were
recently stated by the Full Bench in
Rhylie De Graff v Uconnex Pty Ltd
[3] An appeal may only be brought with the permission of the
Commission under
Section 604(2)
provides that the Commission must
grant permission to appeal if it is satisfied that it is in the public interest
to do so. Consideration
of the public interest involves a broad value judgment
Coal & Allied Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler and others
FCR 78 at [44]). Matters that may engage the public interest include issues of
importance and general application, a diversity
of decisions at first instance,
or where the decision manifests an injustice (
GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty
Ltd v Makin
[2010] FWAFB 5343
(2010) 197 IR 266
). Where the public interest is not
engaged, the Commission may grant permission to appeal on general discretionary
grounds. In deciding
whether to grant permission to appeal, it is unnecessary
and inappropriate to conduct a detailed examination of the appeal grounds
Trustee for the MTGI Trust v Johnston
[2016] FCAFC 140
However, it is necessary to engage with the appeal grounds to consider whether
they raise an arguable case of appealable error.
An appellant must ordinarily
demonstrate that there is such a case in order to be granted permission to
appeal, as an appeal cannot
succeed in the absence of error (
Allied Operations Pty Ltd v AIRC
(2000) 203 CLR 194
at 204). However, the
fact that a member at first instance may have made an error is not necessarily a
sufficient basis to grant
permission to appeal.
In these proceedings, the Appellant will need to establish an
arguable case of error to advance his case for permission to appeal.
relevant ground in his appeal asserts that the Commissioner erred by admitting
into evidence and attaching any weight to documents
which did not comply with
orders made. To make good that claim, the Appellant simply needs to point to the
orders made by the Commissioner,
the documents produced, and the reasons given
by the Commissioner for their admission. We can see no reason to issue the
orders sought
for the purposes of the appeal. As the Full Bench said in
it is unnecessary and inappropriate for us to conduct a detailed
examination of the appeal grounds. We are instead required to engage
grounds to consider whether they raise an arguable case of appealable error. We
consider in this case we can determine
the question of whether there is a case
of arguable error that the Commissioner was wrong to admit and attach weight to
produced under the notice without issuing a notice that other
documents be produced. There appears to be no utility in doing so.
The Appellant contends that the documents are necessary as appeal
proceedings in the Commission are by way of rehearing and so it
is necessary for
the Full Bench to have before it all evidence going to the issue to be
determined. The Appellant is correct that
appeals under
of the Act are
appeals by rehearing. However, the Appellant’s submission confuses an
appeal by rehearing with an appeal
It is well established that a
rehearing on appeal is different to an appeal
The Full Bench in
James Chol v Vivesco Pty Ltd T/A Vivesco Landscape Services
described the nature of an appeal under
of the Act.
Robinson Helicopter v McDermott
Helicopter),
the High Court, citing
Fox v Percy
“A court of appeal conducting an appeal by way of rehearing is bound to
conduct a "real review" of the evidence given at first
instance and of the
judge's reasons for judgment to determine whether the judge has erred in fact or
law. If the court of appeal
concludes that the judge has erred in fact, it is
required to make its own findings of fact and to formulate its own reasoning
on those findings. But a court of appeal should not interfere with a
judge's findings of fact unless they are demonstrated to be
‘incontrovertible facts or uncontested testimony’, or they are
‘glaringly improbable’ or ‘contrary
to compelling
inferences’”.
[18] These principles have consistently been applied to appeals in the
Commission. On appeal, the factual findings made by a member
at first instance
should generally stand, unless it can be shown that the member has failed to use
the advantage of the hearing of
the evidence or has acted on evidence which was
inconsistent with facts incontrovertibly established by the evidence or which
“glaringly improbable”. An appeal to a Full Bench exists for the
correction of error. It is not a hearing de novo. There
are natural limitations
that apply to the hearing of an appeal by a Full Bench and the member at first
instance is usually in a better
position than the appeal bench to make findings
(References omitted)
For these reasons, we do not consider it necessary or appropriate
to issue the order to produce documents sought by the Appellant
application for orders is dismissed.
On 7 October 2025, the Full Bench adjourned the proceedings to
prepare written reasons for refusing the application that the Presiding
be disqualified and to consider the application for orders for production. The
application for permission to appeal will proceed
to be heard on 4 November
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
Mr C McKerlie, the Applicant on his own behalf.
Mr J Varone for the Respondent.
Hearing details:
Via Microsoft Teams Video
Id at [18](e)
Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
205 CLR 337
Re Medicaments
and Related Classes of Goods
[2000] EWCA Civ 350
[2001] 1 WLR 700
Sun Zhan Qui v
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1997] FCA 1488
; 81 FCR 71
Colin McKerlie
v Private Fleet Group
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (2.22 MB)
Signed PDF/A format