Mann & Prewett [2013] FMCAfam 314 (5 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[2013] FMCAfam 314
FAMILY LAW – Parenting – consideration
of the threshold question posed by
Rice & Asplund
as a preliminary
issue – by agreement hearing on basis of submissions – finding as to
appropriate change of circumstances
– finding as to possibility of
significant change to previous orders.
Family Law Act 1975
Rice and Asplund
(1979) FLC 90-725
Freeman and Freeman
[1986] FamCA 23
(1987) FLC 91-857
Miller and Harrington
[2008] FamCAFC 150
Marsden v Winch
[2009] FamCAFC 152
SPS and PLS
[2012] FamCAFC 5
[2010] FamCAFC 53
Mazorski v Albright
[2007] FamCA 520
McCall & Clark
[2009] FamCAFC
AMS and AIF
(1999) 24 Fam LR 756
Respondent:
File Number:
SYC 645 of 2008
Judgment of:
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Legal Solutions
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Schonell
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Paul & Paul Lawyers
(1) That the Response filed on 8 January 2013 be
dismissed in so far as it seeks a dismissal of the mother’s application
on the 21 December 2012.
(2) That the father file and serve an amended response setting out with
particularity parenting orders sought by him together with
an affidavit in
support of thereof within 21 days from this date.
(3) Pursuant to
section 68L
Family Law Act 1975
an Independent
Children’s Lawyer be appointed for the child X born (omitted) 2004 and the
Legal Aid Commission of New South
Wales is requested to provide such
representation. The parties are to provide to the Legal Aid Commission at PO
Box K847, HAYMARKET
NSW 1238 or DX 5 SYDNEY forthwith all documents thus far
filed by them in these proceedings together with all existing orders and
of any relevant reports.
(4) Leave is granted to the Independent Children’s Lawyer to issue such
Subpoena as they consider relevant to the issues before
(5) Leave is granted to the Independent Children’s Lawyer to have
photocopy access to documents produced on Subpoena in these
proceedings.
(6) The Independent Children’s Lawyer, being a party to these proceedings
in receipt of a grant of Legal Aid, be exempt from
fees by reason of Rule
Family Law (Fees) Regulation 2012
(7) Leave be granted to the Independent Children’s Lawyer to re-list the
matter on short notice by communication with the Court
in Chambers in
appropriate circumstances.
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment under the
Mann & Prewett
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYC 645 of 2008
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Proceedings
are parenting proceedings commenced by the applicant mother by application filed
on 21 December 2012.
that application the mother sought orders that in summary provided
dated 5 March 2008 be discharged;
the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for the subject child X
born on (omitted) 2004;
the child live primarily with the mother;
the child spend time with the father for alternate weekends during school term,
defined periods during school holidays, otherwise
for special days and various
specific issues orders as to mutual notification of information as to the child,
a restraint as to non-denigration
and telephone communication with each
8 March 2013 the mother filed an amended initiating application that sought
orders similar to the original application but further
orders as to the child
attending (omitted) school from term one 2014.
father in his response filed on 30 January 2013 sought orders that the
mother’s application be dismissed and that she pay
the father’s
costs on an indemnity basis.
proceedings first came before the court on 29 January 2013. On that date the
court ordered the parties to attend a child inclusive
conference with a family
consultant on 19 February 2013. Proceedings were adjourned for further
directions to 22 February 2013.
22 February 2013 the court ordered by consent that pending further order the
parties do all necessary things to enable the subject
child to continue
confidential counselling with her school counsellor and that no subpoena issue
in relation to that counselling.
court otherwise with the agreement of the parties ordered that proceedings be
adjourned to 13 March 2013 for interim hearing on
Rice and Asplund
issue as a threshold determination on submissions. The parties were ordered to
file and serve any further updating material by 8
March 2013.
matter proceeded to hearing on the threshold issue on 13 March 2013 on the
agreed basis of submissions only and judgment was reserved
to a date to be
Short Background
applicant mother is 42 years of age. She presently lives with her current
husband in (omitted) in the (omitted) area south of
Sydney for seven nights a
fortnight and otherwise in rented premises at (omitted) in Sydney’s
eastern suburbs.
mother has a new child of her present marriage who is presently about 12 months
father is 45 years of age and resides at (omitted) in Sydney’s eastern
suburbs. He has re-partnered and has a new child
of that relationship.
subject child X is the only child of the parties’ relationship.
parties were married on (omitted) 2004 and separated in (omitted) 2005 when the
subject child was only seven months of age.
Subsequent to separation the child
resided primarily with the mother.
late 2007 the mother relocated her residence to the (omitted) area south of
Sydney to be closer to her family who live in the general
Litigation History
the 25 February 2008 interim orders were made on a contested basis by Altobelli
FM as follows:
parents have equal shared parental responsibility for the child X, born
(omitted) 2004 (“the Child”).
mother Ms Mann is restrained from:
the child to (omitted) or to any other location outside the Eastern Suburbs of
Sydney; and
or causing or permitting the continued enrolment and attendance of X at any Day
Care Centre or pre-school outside the Eastern
Suburbs of Sydney;
the mother is to do all things necessary to
implement this order no later than 3 March 2008.
the event the mother elects to reside in (omitted) or otherwise outside the
Sydney Metropolitan area, X live with the father in
Sydney, and spend time with
the mother as follows:
alternate weekend from 4.00pm on Friday until 11.00am on Monday; with the mother
to collect X from the father at the commencement
of such weekend and return X to
the father at the conclusion of such weekend;
Wednesday at 10.00am to Thursday at 5.00pm (at the mother’s election)
provided that the mother collect the child from,
and return the child to, the
any further periods agreed between the parents from time to
the event that the mother elects to return to Sydney and reside in Sydney
(“mother’s alternative election”) which
election shall be
evidenced by the mother relinquishing, or otherwise sub-letting, the premises
she presently leases in (omitted)
in the (omitted) of New South Wales (or as the
parties agree) then the child X, immediately upon the resumption of residence in
is to spend time with the father on the following basis:
the first week of the fortnight; from 10.00am Thursday until 5.00pm Friday;
the second week of the fortnight, from 10.00am Thursday until 10.00am on the
following Monday; and
one week during each of the autumn, winter and spring school holidays in 2008
being the first week of such holidays unless the
parties otherwise agree;
two weeks during the summer school holidays in 2008 being the last two weeks
unless the parents otherwise agree;
Father’s Day falls on a weekend where the child is not living with the
father, the mother shall cause the child to be
delivered to the father at 6.00pm
on the Saturday preceding Father’s Day and the father will return the
child to the mother
at 9.00 am on the following Monday;
the child’s or the father’s birthday falls on a day when the child
is living with the mother, then the father will
spend time with the child for a
period of up to four (4) hours on that day, such hours to be agreed between the
parents, but failing
agreement to be from 3.00pm to 7.00pm;
Mother’s Day the father’s time with the child is suspended from
5.00pm on the day preceding Mother’s Day.
child live with the mother at all other times.
14 days of this order the parents do all things necessary to consult an
appropriately qualified person to advise them about
whether X is developmentally
prepared and suitable for pre-school in 2008, and if so for what period each
week. If the parents are
unable to agree about whether X is ready for pre-school
in 2008, they will abide by the recommendations made by the qualified person
above, and do all things necessary to implement the same. The father is to pay
the costs of X’s attendance at pre-school or
day-care as the case may be.
The parents are otherwise to share equally in the costs of implementing this
the mother resides within the Eastern suburbs of Sydney, in order to give effect
to these orders the father is to collect the child
at the commencement of time
spent with X, and the mother is to collect the child from the father at the
conclusion of the time X
spends with the father, except where the child is to
attend pre-school or day care in accordance with these orders in which case
father is to deliver her to pre-school or day-care as the case may be.
matter be adjourned to 18 June 2008 at 10.00am for a two day final
a week or so later and on 5 March 2008 the parties entered into consent orders
as to parenting on a final basis. Those orders
in summary provided
parties to have equal shared parental responsibility;
the child live with the mother;
the child spend time with the father until 1 June 2009 as follows:
9.30am Thursday to 3.00pm Friday each alternate week with the mother to deliver
the child to the father’s residence and
to collect the child from the
child’s pre-school;
other week from 9.30am Thursday to 11.00am Monday with the mother to deliver the
child to the father’s residence and the
father to return the child to the
mother’s residence;
defined times on the Father’s Day weekend, the child’s birthday, the
father’s birthday and the Christmas festive
the child spend time with the father from 1 June 2009 to January/February 2010
as follows:
after pre-school Wednesday to 3.00pm Friday every alternate week with the father
to collect the child from pre-school and the
mother to collect the child from
pre-school on Friday;
other week from 9.30am Thursday to 11.00am Monday with the mother to deliver the
child to the father’s residence in Sydney
and the father to return the
child to the mother’s residence;
for defined times on the Father’s Day weekend, the child’s birthday,
the father’s birthday and the Christmas
festive period.
the father’s time between June 2009 and January/February 2010 be suspended
during pre-school holidays and that
the child spend time with the father for the
first week of the autumn, winter and spring holidays in 2008 and 2009 and for
as agreed in the summer school holidays in 2008 and 2009 and otherwise
on Mother’s Day weekend, the mother’s birthday
and specific times
during the Christmas festive period;
from the commencement of school in 2010:
alternate week from after-school Thursday to before school Monday, Tuesday if a
long weekend, with the father to collect the
child from school on Thursday and
return the child to school on Monday, or Tuesday if a long weekend;
other week from after-school Thursday to before school Friday with the father to
collect the child from school on Thursday and
return the child to school on
for defined times during the Christmas festive period the Father’s Day
weekend, the child’s birthday and the
father’s birthday and for half
of the school holiday periods.
the mother be permitted to reside with the child in (omitted) until mid-January
2010 at which time she and the child shall return
to live in Sydney;
the mother be restrained from enrolling the child in day care, pre-school or
school outside the Eastern suburbs of Sydney, unless
otherwise agreed in
the parties do all things necessary to enrol the child in a pre-school in the
(omitted) suburbs on Wednesday and Friday of each
and every week of preschool
the parties do all things necessary to enrol the child at (omitted) School or
such other private school as agreed;
the father pay the cost of all pre-school fees and private school fees and
school expenses relating to the child;
is of interest to note that orders made on 5 March 2008 were orders by consent
and in their terms required the mother to reside
in Sydney from mid-January 2010
once the child commenced formal schooling.
child is as contemplated by the orders of presently attending (omitted) School
at (omitted).
orders were made on the 5 March 2008. The child was 3 years of age.
April 2009 the mother commenced further parenting proceedings seeking a
variation of the previous orders that would facilitate
the child residing
primarily with her in (omitted).
24 September 2009 the mother’s application was summarily dismissed by the
court in a judgment delivered by His Honour Justice
Fowler in the Family Court
of Australia in a detailed consideration of the threshold issues raised by
Rice and Asplund
(1979) FLC 90-725.
is of note that when the mother commenced further proceedings in April 2009 and
at the time when His Honour on delivered judgement
in September 2009 the child
had not as yet commenced school as foreshadowed by the earlier consent
obligation cast upon the mother to relocate her residence to Sydney upon the
child commencing formal schooling in early 2010 was
considered by Fowler J.
commencing at [44] in his reasons for judgment. His Honour said:
is no evidence before me which in my view indicates that a performance of the
obligation of the mother to comply with
the orders to which she consented would
not operate to further the child’s best interests. Such compliance would
render easier
the continued development of the child’s experience with the
father and afford him by reason of geographical proximity the
opportunity to
fulfil his obligations to the child and contribute in the context of his joint
parental responsibility in a real and
effective way to the child obtaining her
maximum potential.”
the obligation cast upon the mother by reason of the consent orders was to
relocate her residence to Sydney. In practical
terms she could move to reside
anywhere in the greater Sydney metropolitan area.
current orders provide that during school term the child reside primarily with
the mother being for seven nights in each fortnightly
cycle and with the father
for five nights in each fortnightly cycle.
Current Background
to the orders the mother has rented four different properties in Sydney and was
recently renting at (omitted) at a rental
of $700 per week.
a consequence of the financial impact of maintaining her home in (omitted) and
rented premises in (omitted) the mother has recently
moved to the maternal
grandmother’s home where she stays whilst in Sydney.
mother’s present husband is employed by (omitted) in (omitted).
as to comply with the current orders on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday
nights the mother, her new child and X stayed at
the rented (omitted) home and
now at the maternal grandmother’s home. On Thursday nights the child stays
with the father and
the mother returns to (omitted) so that her new child can
spend time with his father. The mother returns to (omitted) on Monday to
X from school and on Thursday morning she returns to her home in (omitted) with
the father collecting the child from school
that day. The mother then collects
the child from school on Friday afternoon and returns with the child to
mother complains of the travel burden not only on her but also on the child in
maintaining in effect three residences in order
that the current orders,
particularly as to schooling can be complied with.
mother further gives evidence as to the child’s complaints in this regard,
the father’s lack of engagement in the
child’s school activities and
the father without consultation enrolling the child in extracurricular
activities. The mother
asserts that the child is under pressure from the father
to excel, is unhappy at school and has expressed wishes to live primarily
the mother.
is no doubt that the relationship between the parties is one of growing
animosity and conflict.
mother further asserts that in January 2013 the father has shown the child
documents relating to these proceedings and the child
has confronted the mother
asserting that the mother has betrayed the child’s confidences. The mother
further asserts that since
this incident the child has “disconnected
herself from me”.
child has recently engaged with her school counsellor Ms G and the parties have
contemplated having the child engage with a private
psychologist for therapeutic
intervention.
mother relied upon an affidavit by Ms R, her treating psychologist, who sets out
a detailed history as to the mother in her psychological
assessment report dated
25 January 2013. She notes the mother’s moderate to high levels of
distress as a consequence of the
current circumstances. Ms R noted the
mother’s various concerns in relation to the child X and the nature of the
relationship
between the mother and the father.
The Family Consultant’s Memorandum
19 February 2013 the parties and the child then aged eight years eight months
attended a child inclusive conference with a family
consultant. At that
conference the consultant spoke independently with the child and then
individually with the mother and then the
respondent father and then with both
parties together.
family consultant noted the issues in dispute as being:
the child can relocate with the mother to live in (omitted) and attend school
the child spends time and communicates with each of the parents.
father asserted that current arrangements were generally working well for the
child, describing the child as happy, bubbly and
confident. The father expressed
concerns that the mother was trying to manipulate outcomes so as to allow the
child to relocate her
residence to (omitted) by asserting a degree of conflict
between them and problems existing for the child.
mother, noted the family consultant, asserted that the current arrangement was
not sustainable and that the child’s emotional
and psychological
well-being and health were being negatively impacted. The mother further
asserted that the father can be controlling
and authoritarian in his approach
towards the child and at times and emotionally abusive towards the child.
interview with the child the family consultant noted that the child is aware of
each parent’s preference. The child presented
as a sensitive caring young
girl who is aware of everyone’s feelings. She seemed careful to try and
present both parents in
an equally favourable light.
things the child appears to find it difficult in having a number of
“homes” and the practical and logistical issues
involved in getting
from one place to another are:
child’s perception that there is a degree of conflict between the mother
and father,
child’s experiences in organising and transferring her belongings between
various households in Sydney and between Sydney
geographical distance between Sydney and (omitted),
to the different pattern of care each parent provides,
the emotional adjustment of moving between her parents and the respective
households.
family consultant observes that there is some suggestion that the child
perceives her father to have very high expectations of
her and sometimes she
finds these expectations difficult to manage meaning that she worries and/or
becomes anxious about disappointing
her father or letting him down.
child also expressed some age-appropriate discontent about the impact of her new
half brother on her relationship with her mother.
No doubt this will also now
occur in the father’s household. The child also expressed some
difficulties in getting to sleep
at night because she starts thinking about
child confirmed that whilst in her father’s care she has seen a court
document that included information about things her
mother had said to the
father or to the court about things that the child had said to the mother. The
child appears, observes the
family consultant to have found aspects of what she
read upsetting due in part to her feeling like her mother has betrayed her
The child expressed positive feelings about her engagement with the
school counsellor.
the family consultant notes that while the child seems to have a basic
understanding of the various proposals of each of her
parents, initial
assessment appears to suggest that her understanding of the emotional impact of
any significant change in the circumstances
appears relatively immature, due in
part to her younger age.
family consultant noted that issues impeding resolution are as
quality and nature of the post-parental relationship which both parents report
has deteriorated/become cooler since the mother’s
application;
geographical distance between the primary residence of the mother and
mother’s concerns about the child’s health and
well-being;
mother’s position that her current situation is financially and
emotionally unsustainable;
father’s concern that the mother’s proposal confines his involvement
to largely leisure activities during weekends
and holidays and limits his
ability to be as involved in the child’s education and school life as he
would ideally like to
both parents are trying to take into consideration and accommodate the needs of
the current partners and another child as well
as balance work and family
commitments.
to the threshold issue the court is required to be satisfied that there has been
some changed circumstance or factor that would
justify the court again examining
substantive parenting orders made in relation to that child and how the welfare
of the child should
best be served (
Rice and Asplund
(1979) FLC 90-725).
Freeman and Freeman
[1986] FamCA 23
(1987) FLC 91-857
Strauss J said at
and seemingly endless and inconclusive litigation is usually emotionally
damaging to the litigants and is likely to affect
the children adversely. It
impairs the ability of the custodian, in this case the wife, to deal with the
present and plan for the
future of the family. It is financially burdensome. For
these and like reasons the court may, in an appropriate case, scrutinise
some care an application such as the one in question here when a party applies
for what is, in effect, the reversal of an order
made a short time previously.
The court may enquire what the facts and circumstances are before it embarks on
what might be a lengthy
and costly hearing: The welfare of the children is, in
this case, as in any others concerning custodial arrangements, the paramount
consideration. But once the court, either after a full hearing or by a consent
order, has settled the question of custody, it is
usually in the interests of
the children that the order made by the court is treated as determining the
dispute and be given the
necessary support. Stability in the lives of children
and also in the lives of adults is an essential prerequisite to their
well-being.
important reason for approaching with some care an application to overturn such
a recent order is that the proper and orderly
administration of the law in the
community of which these children are part requires that orders made in this
be not overturned unless sufficiently weighty new facts and
circumstances are shown to exist which throw sufficient doubt on the
desirability of continuing the custodial arrangements brought about by the
order. Each case must depend on its own facts, but, as
a general proposition, it
might be said that those new facts and changed circumstances should be such as
to necessitate a fresh investigation
to safeguard the best interests of the
Rice and Asplund
(1979) FLC 90-725
the leading judgment was given by
Evatt CJ, with whom Pawley SJ and Fogarty J expressed their agreement. Having
discussed certain
authorities Evatt CJ said:
principles which, in my view, should apply in such cases are that the court
should have regard to any earlier order and to the
reasons for and the material
on which that order was based. It should not lightly entertain an application to
reverse an earlier
custody order. To do so would be to invite endless litigation
for change is an ever-present factor in human affairs. Therefore, the
would need to be satisfied by the applicant that, to quote Barber J, (Gilder v.
Gilder VSC Barber J. 17 February 1967) there
is some changed circumstance which
will justify such a serious step, some new factor arising or, at any rate, some
factor which was
not disclosed at the previous hearing which would have been
material ... These are not necessarily matters for preliminary submission,
they are matters that the judge should consider in his reasons for decision. It
is a question of finding that there are circumstances
which require the court to
consider afresh how the welfare of the child should best be served. These
principles apply whether the
original order is made by consent or after a
contested hearing.
The way they apply and the factors which will justify the
court in reviewing a custody order will vary from case to case
court is satisfied that there is a new factor or a change in circumstances, then
the issue of custody is to be determined
in the ordinary way. (emphasis added)
The court must apply the principles of sec 64 and weigh up the factors for and
against the
proposals for each party, having regard to the welfare of the child
as the paramount consideration. One of these factors is the length
of time the
child has been in a particular situation. Another is any earlier decision of the
court, and the reason for that decision.
The possible advantages or
disadvantages of a change in custody need consideration along with all the other
usual factors. While
the court should give weight to any earlier decision and,
in particular, to any findings of fact, the judge is not bound by the earlier
court's assessment of the parties or views as to the best interests of the
child. These are matters which cannot be determined by
any fixed or absolute
court also has had regard to the consideration of the application of the so
called “rule” in
Rice and Asplund
by the Full Court in
Miller and Harrington
[2008] FamCAFC 150
commencing at
be, however, that neither the expressions “summary dismissal” or
“striking out” is the best term
to describe the procedure when, in a
parenting case, the rule in Rice and Asplund is considered at a preliminary
stage. This is because,
as we seek to emphasise, at whatever stage the rule in
Rice and Asplund is applied, the court is bound to take into account best
interests considerations and also because specific requirements, including
legislative requirements, apply.
application of the rule occurs within proceedings to which the provisions of
Division 12A of
of the Act apply. More specifically, the application of
the rule occurs as part of “child-related proceedings” within
Accordingly, the court hearing argument as to the
application of the rule at a preliminary stage is bound to apply the provisions
of Division 12A of the Act.
74. Included
among the mandatory requirements upon a court are: the obligations to (as seen)
“decide which of the issues in
the proceedings require full investigation
and which may be disposed of summarily”
(1)(a)) and to
“deal with as many aspects of the matter as it can on a single
(s 69ZQ(1)(g)).
provisions of
(1), empower the court to “make a finding of
fact in relation to the proceedings”, to “determine a matter arising
out of the proceedings” and to “make an order in relation to an
issue arising out of the proceedings” if the court
considers that
“it may assist in the determination of the proceedings”. The section
goes on to provide
(s 69ZR(2))
that the court may do any of the matters
mentioned “... at the same time as making final orders”.
of the Act, which set out the “principles for
conducting child-related proceedings” also apply to a hearing in which
rule in Rice and Asplund is applied at a preliminary stage. In particular,
and (5) provide:
first principle is that the court is to consider the needs of the child
concerned and the impact that the conduct of the
proceedings may have on the
child in determining the conduct of the proceedings.
third principle is that the proceedings are to be conducted in a way that will
child concerned against
violence, child abuse and child neglect; and
parties to the proceedings against family violence.
Warnick J said:
in strict logic, if a judge is unable to determine on the papers if a change of
circumstances, sufficient to embark on
a fresh hearing of a parenting issue
exists, then what the judge should embark upon is a hearing directed to that
question, not one
directed to “how the welfare of the children should best
be served”..
ellipsis in logic or not, subsequent authority has clearly reiterated that if
the rule is not applied as a preliminary matter,
then the hearing that follows
is a full hearing of the “custody dispute”.
78. Warnick
J goes on to say:
In reality, the facts that relate to the best interests of children per se and
to the determination of such questions
as whether there has been a change of
circumstances of sufficient magnitude to justify a fresh consideration of
parenting arrangements
are likely to be identical or at least intertwined and to
the extent that the facts are otherwise, they may well not be susceptible
identification or assessment for weight until all of the evidence bearing upon
factors that relate to a child’s best interests
are before a court. The
nature of the hearing that follows if the Rice v Asplund rule is not applied as
a preliminary matter, as
described by authority, may well be the wise and
practical choice.”
His Honour says:
in my view, when the threshold question described in Rice and Asplund is
determined as a preliminary matter, it remains
a determination “on the
merits”. Where an application is dismissed at a preliminary stage, it is
not dismissed for some
technical reason, such as the failure of the party to
appear or some lack of compliance with form and procedure, but rather because,
assuming the evidence of the applicant is accepted, there is an insufficient
change of circumstance shown to justify embarking on
a hearing. Though sometimes
unstated, the underlying conclusion will, or ought be, about the interests of
the child in not being
subjected to further litigation, is more powerfully in
the child’s welfare, than to allow the application to
view, that passage need not be taken as saying that the only way in which the
rule in Rice and Asplund can be applied
at a preliminary stage is on the basis
that the case of the applicant for parenting orders is taken at its
81. Nor, as
presently advised, do we think that the authorities cited by Warnick J in
SPS preclude the possibility that, in a “preliminary”
hearing for
the purpose of ascertaining if an application for parenting orders should go no
further because of the rule in Rice and
Asplund, some resolution of factual
disputes may occur, for example, whether a change of circumstances has or has
not occurred.
82. However,
the qualitative question of whether a change that has occurred is or is not
sufficiently significant to justify a full
further hearing of a parenting issue
may be one much more difficult to answer in a preliminary hearing involving
resolution of only
some disputed facts.
observation may be behind the approach that either the case of the applicant for
parenting orders is, at a preliminary stage,
taken at its highest, or the
hearing embarked upon is an enquiry into all matters relating to the best
interests of the child or
Marsden v Winch
[2009] FamCAFC 152
the Full Court agreed with the observation of
Warnick J in
SPS and PLS
that the application of the rule in
Rice and Asplund
closely connected with the nature and degree of change sought to the earlier
the Full Court recently observed in
[2012] FamCAFC
legislation itself now expressly directs judicial officers to have regard to the
potential impact of proceedings on the
welfare of children. As the Full Court
pointed out in Miller & Harrington
[2008] FamCAFC 150
(2008) FLC 93-383
, the provisions of 69ZN
of the Act, which prescribes “principles for conducting child-related
proceedings”, apply to
a hearing in
Rice and Asplund is invoked.
provides (our emphasis):
principle is that the court is to consider the needs of the child concerned and
the impact that the conduct of the proceedings
may have on the child in
determining the conduct of the proceedings.
are, of course, cases where it is necessary, in the interests of the child, for
a court to revisit “final orders”,
whether made by consent or
following a defended hearing. As Evatt CJ said in Zabaneh and Zabaneh
[1986] FamCA
18; (Fogarty
and Renaud JJ agreeing):
The welfare
of children may ultimately demand that issues concerning access, custody and so
forth, and so on, be reconsidered, but
only when there is some evidence of an
underlying change in the circumstances, whether that be in the attitudes of the
parties, or
the needs or circumstances of the children. The fact that time has
elapsed or a considerable time, may be relevant, but it is not
the only factor
to take into account.
69. ......the
and Asplund authorities were reviewed in SPS and PLS, where Warnick J
recognised that the purposes that can be served by the
“rule” differ
depending upon the stage of the proceedings at which it is sought to be applied.
For example, in the event
it is addressed as a preliminary matter it is clearly
more effective in discouraging “endless litigation” than if it
applied at the conclusion of the hearing.
70. Warnick
J observed (at 87,451) that “at whatever stage of a hearing the rule is
applied, its application should remain
merely a manifestation of the ‘best
interests principle’”. His Honour also recognised that “the
application
of the rule is closely connected with the nature of, and degree of,
change sought to the earlier order”. We respectfully adopt
observations, with the latter being of particular importance in the
determination of this appeal.
71. Warnick
J’s views were also endorsed by the Full Court in Marsden v Winch), where
Bryant CJ, Finn and Cronin JJ went on
summary, the best interests issue arises because there are so many changes in
the lives of families that the changed circumstances
that will permissibly allow
re-litigation of a decision must be circumscribed, otherwise there would exist
in some cases the spectre
of endless litigation finalising only when the child
attains 18 years of age and the courts no longer have jurisdiction.
49. However,
even that simple formulation must be subservient to the nature of the
application itself. This is the genesis of the
Rice & Asplund and as Warnick J says it is founded on the
notion that continuous litigation over the child or children is not
generally in
their interests. It is usually hoped that the determination of a controversy
concerning children by a court will result
in at least a reasonable period of
stability of those arrangements and freedom from the stressful and conflictual
effects of litigation
on both parents and children. In addition, recent research
demonstrates that conflict between parties is itself harmful to
50. Nevertheless,
there are significant changes that occur and which do require a court to
reconsider decisions previously made.
Whether in a particular case a court
should be willing to embark upon another hearing concerning the child and
parent, or whether
to do so would itself be demonstrably contrary to the best
interests of the child, is a decision to be made in each particular case.
that decision to be made? The court must look at:
past circumstances, including the reasons for the decision and the evidence upon
which it was based.
(2) Whether
there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result
of a new hearing.
there is such likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed
against the potential detriment to the child or
children caused by the
litigation itself. Thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient
benefit to compensate for the
disruption caused by significant
re-litigation.
Honours continued:
that the application of the rule should always remain a manifestation of the
best interests principle, we do not think
that that principle can be given its
full weight by restricting the application of the rule
Rice and Asplund to two choices, either application of the
rule by taking the applicant’s case at its highest, or a full
view, depending upon the facts of each case, a broader range of processes should
always be considered. This is because
the decision is one which must be made in
the best interests of the child but may also be because of the need to provide
fairness in the manner in which the court determines how the rule
will be applied. ...
Full Court then described a two step process to be followed when
Rice and Asplund “rule” is invoked.
Their Honours said:
...there is a requirement:
prima facie case of changed circumstances to have been established; and
consideration as to whether that case is a sufficient change of circumstances to
justify embarking on a
from the issues identified in the family consultant’s memorandum above and
the issues canvassed by the parties in their
respective affidavits, the factual
resolution of which remain to be tested, it is difficult for the court to ignore
the circumstance
that the child does, as contemplated by the orders, reside
during school term primarily with the mother.
obligation somewhat unusually cast upon her by the consent order was to relocate
not only the child’s residence but her
residence to Sydney commencing in
early 2010. The extent to which the mother has complied with this obligation is
problematic.
position is that she simply now cannot afford to maintain two places of primary
residence, one in respect of which she and her
partner have mortgage obligations
and the other she previously had paid rent on until more recently moving to her
premises which she asserts are inappropriate for the long-term
accommodation of herself and the child if she is obliged to live in
part or indeed all of the school week.
is clear that the subject child needs to have a primary residence so as to
either continue her attendance at school in Sydney as
initially contemplated by
the parties in the current orders and in that circumstance perhaps live
primarily with the father or the
mother be permitted to relocate the residence
and schooling of the child to the (omitted) area.
overarching consideration as to whether the court should permit a re-litigation
of the issue of primary residence falls to be
determined by reference to the
best interest considerations set out in
Best Interests
the Full Court preferred in
Collu & Rinaldo
[2010] FamCAFC 53
court turns to look at the best interests considerations set out in
should firstly consider the additional considerations.
The Additional Considerations
expressed by the
factors (such as the
's maturity or
level of understanding) that the
thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the
parties to some extent give evidence as to their perceptions as to the
child’s views. However, as observed by the family
consultant, initial
assessment appears to suggest that the child’s understanding of the
emotional impact on her of any significant
change in her circumstances appears
relatively immature, due in part to her young age. The court affords little
weight to this factor.
nature of the relationship of the
persons (including any grandparent or other
It is clear that
the child has well formed relationships with both parents. It is regrettable
that those relationships are overshadowed
by the present parental conflict
generated by their respective views as to the appropriateness of the
child’s circumstances.
The child spends during school term a majority of her time with the mother
but substantial and significant time with the father. The
child is of an age
that regular and frequent contact such as may be appropriate for a child of
tender years is not necessary to facilitate
the maintenance of the parent-child
relationship.
The child’s relationship with the mother has been disrupted to some
extent by the father permitting the child to become enmeshed
in the current
proceedings by facilitating or otherwise inadvertently allowing the child not
only to see but to read the content
of documents relating to these
proceedings.
extent to which each of the
has taken, or failed to take, the
opportunity;
participate in making decisions about
major long-term issues
in relation
spend time with the
communicate with the
Whilst the mother
makes some criticism of the father in this regard in particular in terms of his
day-to-day involvement in the child’s
schooling and other activities it is
clear that both parties have taken the opportunity available to them as
contemplated by this
ca) the extent to which each of the
has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the
's obligations to maintain the
There is no particular evidence before the court in relation to this factor
such that a consideration of it is of no assistance in
the present
determination.
likely effect of any changes in the
circumstances, including the likely effect on the
of any separation from;
of his or her
, or other person (including any
grandparent or other
), with whom he or she has been
In the context of the present application this
factor looms large. The mother is seeking to relocate her residence and the
residence to the (omitted) with the child to attend school in that
area. The reasons for such application are referred to above.
The effect of the
mother’s application would be to provide to the child a primary residence
as distinct from the present fractured
circumstance the child finds herself in
by reason of the mother’s compliance (or partial compliance) with her
obligations under
the present orders.
Clearly this would impact upon the father’s time with the child but
only as to mid-week time currently provided for in the orders.
The father’s present proposal is that the mother’s application be
dismissed and that the mother be required in her present
circumstances to seek
to comply with her obligations under the orders and the child’s continuing
attendance at school in Sydney.
The effect of the father’s proposal is to expose the child to the
continuing conflict between himself and the mother, a conflict
of which the
child is all too aware. The mother exhibits distress as to her current
circumstances as to accommodation and travel
and is clearly concerned as to her
relationship with the child by reason of the child whilst in the father’s
care becoming
enmeshed in these proceedings.
The present circumstance needs to be resolved one way or the other. If the
mother is not able to relocate her residence to the (omitted)
with the child
then the alternative may be that the child live primarily with the father in
Sydney and spend time with the mother
as she would have the child spend with the
father should the child be living with her.
In any event the current position needs resolution.
Either way it is probable that the present orders will be varied in a
significant way.
This factor clearly favours the mother’s application proceeding.
practical difficulty and expense of a
spending time with and communicating with a
and whether that difficulty or expense will
substantially affect the
's right to
maintain personal relations and direct contact with both
on a regular basis;
physical circumstances in which the mother finds herself in complying to some
extent with obligations under the orders as to residence
in Sydney, the cost to
her of compliance both financially and emotionally and the impact of these
factors on her relationship with
the child and indeed the father requires the
present circumstance to be resolved.
The practical difficulty and expense in fact is a result of the present
obligations cast upon the mother by reason of the present
orders that were made
well prior to the child commencing formal schooling, by consent without judicial
determination and probably
with little foresight as to the issues that have
subsequently arisen.
capacity of:
other person (including any grandparent or other
to provide for
the needs of the
, including emotional
and intellectual needs;
Both parties raise issues in this regard. However this is a factor of little
weight in terms of the present application and if appropriate
will await a
fuller determination.
maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and
traditions) of the
and of either of the
, and any other characteristics of the
thinks are relevant;
factor is only relevant in the context of the family consultant’s
observations as to the child’s understanding of
the emotional impact on
the of any significant change in her circumstances as noted above and as such
has little relevance in the
present determination.
or a Torres Strait Islander
's right to enjoy his or her
Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander culture
(including the right to enjoy that culture with
other people who share that culture); and
likely impact any proposed
under this Part will have on that right;
This is not a relevant consideration.
attitude to the
, and to the
responsibilities of
, demonstrated
by each of the
Some of the factors
previously considered touch upon this issue.
family violence
involving the
This factor is not
applicable.
family violence order
applies, or has applied, to the
's family--any relevant inferences that can be
drawn from the order, taking into account the following:
nature of the order;
circumstances in which the order was
evidence admitted in
proceedings
proceedings
for, the order;
other relevant matter;
This factor is not
applicable.
it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to
the institution of further
proceedings
in relation to the
This factor is not applicable by reason of the discrete issue
for determination by the court.
other fact or circumstance that the
thinks is relevant.
There is no other fact or circumstance that
the court considers relevant.
The Primary Considerations:
primary considerations are:
benefit to the
of having a meaningful
relationship with both of the
need to protect the
from physical or
psychological harm from being subjected to, or
family violence
applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the
is to give greater weight to the consideration
set out in paragraph (b).
Section 60CC(2)(a)
– “meaningful” relationship
Mazorski v Albright
[2007] FamCA 520
; Brown J considered ordinary definitions of the term
“meaningful” and observed:
these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the
context of “meaningful relationship”,
is synonymous with
“significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for
“important” or “of
consequence”. I proceed on the basis
that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the
principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is
one which is important, significant and valuable to the child.
qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. Quantitive concepts may be
addressed as part of the process of considering
the consequences of the
application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the
requirement for time with
children to be, where possible and in their best
interests, substantial and significant.
McCall & Clark
[2009] FamCAFC 92
the Full Court at 83,476 accepted as
appropriate this interpretation by Brown J of “meaningful
relationship”.
the child’s relationship with each parent is clouded by the underlying
conflict between them and the unresolved issue
as to the child’s primary
residence in circumstances where the parties in reality reside some distance
a circumstance cannot be conducive to the child having a meaningful relationship
with her parents in that those relationships
are important, significant and
valuable to the child.
all probability the child is uncertain as to her primary residence arrangements,
spending part of the fortnight with her father
in Sydney, part of the fortnight
with her mother in the (omitted) and part of the fortnight with her mother in
various accommodations
historically in Sydney. The child also was exposed to the
rigours of travel between the (omitted) and Sydney on an all too regular
by reason of the operation of the present orders. The physical impact of this on
the child and the mother’s household
is clear from the mother’s
consideration of this factor is clearly indicative of a further determination
being appropriate so as to avoid the present most
unsatisfactory arrangements
continuing.
Section 60CC(2)(b)
– need to protect
need to protect the
from physical or
psychological harm looms significant in the context of the present proceedings.
By reason of the family consultant’s
memorandum it is clear that the child
is struggling in the context of the present dispute.
reasons that are not yet clear the child has engaged with her school counsellor
and it would be surprising to find that the present
dispute was not one of the
main considerations for the child doing so. This may become clearer in due
to allow the present position to remain unresolved places the child in a
circumstance where she is caught between the wishes
and desires of each of her
parents as to residence and schooling arrangements and in the parental conflict
that has developed.
final resolution of the issue may well see one or indeed both parents not
realise the orders that in all probability would be sought
by each of them.
However the child would have finality with orders being made in circumstances
where she is now at school and is
entitled to have the dispute between her
parents resolved once and for all.
determining the outcome of parenting matters the court must consider the best
interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
that is the paramount consideration it is not the only consideration. In
(1999) 24 Fam LR 756 His Honour Justice Kirby said:
......a statutory instruction to treat the welfare or best interests of the
child as the paramount consideration does
not oblige a court, making the
decision, to ignore the legitimate interests and desires of the parents. If
there is conflict between
these considerations, priority must be accorded to the
child’s welfare and rights. However, the latter cannot be viewed in
abstract, separate from the circumstances of the parent with whom the child
court is conscious of the deteriorating relationship between the mother and
father in respect to which it is clear from the family
consultant’s
memorandum has enmeshed the child.
importantly the obligation cast upon the mother in the present orders to
relocate her residence Sydney was entered into well
prior to the child
commencing formal schooling, shortly after the mother met her current husband,
well prior to the mother’s
marriage to her present husband and well prior
to the child of that relationship W, X’s half sibling, being born on
in the father’s household X now has a new half sibling born most
there have been substantial changes in each of the parent’s households
representing a significant change in relationships
for the child.
considering the best interest considerations set out in
the court is
satisfied that there has been a prima facie change or new factor sufficient to
warrant the mother’s application
proceeding.
all the circumstances the court is satisfied that it is in the best interests of
the child to permit the mother’s application
to proceed.
Accordingly
the response filed by the respondent father on 30 January 2013 will be dismissed
in so far as it seeks a dismissal of
the mother’s application.
court will make orders accordingly.
I certify that the preceding
eighty-one (81) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of Foster
Date: 5 April 2013
RTF format (355 KB)
Signed PDF/A format