'AYO' and Department of Home Affairs (Freedom of information) [2025] AICmr 168 (12 September 2025)
‘AYO’ and Department of Home Affairs
information)
[2025] AICmr 168
(12 September 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of Rocelle Ago, General Manager Freedom
of Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian
Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Department of Home Affairs
Decision date
Application number
Freedom of Information —
Respondent to process request following removal of practical refusal reason claim
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(the FOI Act), I set aside
the deemed access refusal decision of the Department of Home Affairs (the
Department). In considering
the Department’s indication that it can
process the applicant’s revised request, I substitute my decision that a
refusal reason does not exist.
of this decision the
Department must process the applicant’s request and notify the applicant
of its decision in accordance
with s 26 of the FOI Act. The Department must also
advise whether it has fully implemented my decision.
decision sets aside the Department's access refusal decision where the
Department no longer maintains a practical refusal reason
Reasons for decision
Scope of IC review
14 August 2024, the applicant applied to the Department for all documents and
evidence explaining what an Australian Citizenship
Certificate (ACC) Number is
and other information about the applicant’s ACC. The request was deemed to
have been refused by
the Department on 13 September 2024.
19 October 2024, the applicant sought IC review of the Department’s deemed
access refusal decision.
Department initiated a request consultation process with the applicant. The
parties engaged throughout this process however the
request was not revised. On
13 December 2024, the Department made a purported decision to refuse the
applicant’s request under
s 24(1) of the FOI Act. Section 24 of the FOI
Act enables an agency or Minister to refuse access to a document where the
undertaken a request consultation process in accordance with s 24AB
of the FOI Act, and after that process the agency or Minister
is satisfied that
the practical refusal reason still exists.
case management by the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner, the
applicant revised their request to a document
outlining the allocation of ACC
numbers to the batch of certificates printed for the citizenship ceremony that
the applicant attended,
which the Department indicated it will be able to
assist with the timely resolution of this IC review, this matter has proceeded
to a decision under s 55K of the FOI Act.
on the information before me, I am satisfied that the practical refusal reason
no longer exists. The Department must now process
the applicant’s request
and notify the applicant of its decision within 30 days of receipt of this
Rocelle Ago
General Manager, Freedom of Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review Tribunal
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
Accessing your information
If you would like access to the information that we hold about you, please
FOIDR@oaic.gov.au
information is available on the
information
page on our website.
On the question of the
processing timeframes that now apply, see
Fletcher and Prime Minister of
[2013] AICmr 11
RTF format (22 MB)
Signed PDF/A format