URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1972/35.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Collins v Livingstone Shire Council [1972] HCA 35; (1972) 127 CLR 477 (30 June 1972)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
COLLINS v. LIVINGSTONE SHIRE COUNCIL
[1972] HCA 35
; (1972) 127 CLR 477
Compulsory Acquisition (Q.)
High Court of Australia
Barwick C.J.(1), Menzies(2), Walsh(3), Gibbs(4) and Stephen(5) JJ.
Complusory Acquisition (Q.) - Land - Compensation - Assessment - Buildings
and plant - Works constructed by resuming authority prior
to resumption -
Reservoir and fence partly on acquired land and partly on other land - Measure
of compensation - Whether cost of
works - Whether value of improvements -
Estimation of value - The Public Works Land Resumption Acts, 1906 to 1955
(Q.), ss. 22 (2),
23 - Local Government Act, 1936 (Q.), as amended, s. 32
Brisbane, 1972, May 29; June 30. 30:6:1972
APPEAL from the Supreme Court of Queensland.
The following written judgments were delivered :-
BARWICK C.J. The appellants since 1962 have been the registered owners of an
respondent shire. In 1966 the council resolved upon
a town water supply which
involved the construction of a reservoir for reticulation purposes on an
elevated area of land at Emu Park.
It decided upon a site which included some
Crown land, a portion of a street and a portion of the said allotment owned by
the appellants.
Without obtaining the consent of the appellants, the
respondent proceeded to construct the reservoir, placing a substantial portion
of the structure on the said allotment. Apparently it also constructed what is
described as an eight feet high manproof fence on
a portion of the said
allotment. The construction of the reservoir and the erection of the fence
were completed before the end of
1966, and probably by 14th October 1966. On
13th January 1967, the respondent gave the appellants notice of its intention
to exercise
its powers of compulsory acquisition under the Public Works Land
Resumption Acts, 1906 to 1955 (Q.) ("the Act"). Thereafter a proclamation
duly made pursuant to the former Acts declaring that the respondent had taken
an area of the said allotment as from 12th August
1967 for water supply
purposes. (at p481)
2. The appellants served on the respondent on 10th May 1968 a written claim
for compensation. As found by the Land Court the respondent,
on 30th May 1968,
made a written offer to the appellants to pay the sum of $100 by way of
compensation. (at p481)
3. On 20th June 1968 the appellants' solicitors wrote to both the respondent
and to the Registrar of the Land Court a letter in
the following terms :
"re Public Works Land Resumption Acts, 1906 to 1955 re
Claim for Compensation by J. D. and P. J. Collins to the
Livingstone Shire Council
We refer to the above and wish to advise that we are acting
on behalf of Messrs. P.J. and J.D. Collins.
The claim for compensation was served upon the Livingstone
Shire Council on the 10th May 1968. We understand
that a statutory offer of $100 has been received and a copy of
this letter will be forwarded in due course.
We enclose herewith the following : -
(a) Copy of Claim lodged in this matter.
(b) Copy of Proclamation published in the Govenment
Gazette on the 12th August 1967.
(c) Photostat copy of Certificate of Title No. C49525,
Volume 294, Folio 28.
We should be grateful if you would kindly acknowledge
receipt of these documents. A copy of this letter is being
forwarded to the Council's solicitors, Messrs. Watt and Connolly."
Apart from this letter, no other letter or written notice was sent by or on
behalf of the appellants rejecting the abovementioned
offer of compensation.
4. The Land Court entertained the appellants' claim for compensation,
deciding that the appellants had effectively rejected the
respondent's offer
of compensation. On 16th October 1969 it assessed the total compensation
payable to the appellants in respect
of the compulsory acquisition of their
land at $660, comprising $300 for the value of the unimproved land and $360
for improvements
being the assessed value of the fencing to which I have
referred. (at p481)
5. The appellants appealed to the Land Appeal Court pursuant to s. 23(3) of
the Act. By majority the Land Appeal Court assessed
the total compensation
payable by the respondent at $20,000 of which $19,342 represented the
proportion of the total expenditure
of the respondent in the construction of
the whole reservoir which was attributable to the construction of that part of
occupied that part of the appellants' land which had been
compulsorily acquired. (at p482)
6. On 11th March 1971 the Land Appeal Court stated a case for the opinion of
the Supreme Court, asking three questions as follows
"(1) Whether the Land Court had jurisdiction to entertain
(2) If yes to (1), whether the proper measure of compensation
is the unimproved value of the resumed land plus the
cost incurred by the council in erecting the portion of
the reservoir and fencing which stand upon it.
(3) If no to (2), what is the measure of compensation
payable ?" (at p482)
7. In that case, apart from the facts I have so far mentioned, it was said :
"10. The estimated cost of the construction of that part of
the reservoir which is erected on Lot 1 is $19,342. The
estimated cost of the erection of that part of the fencing
which is on Lot 1 is $360.00. The total cost of
construction of the whole reservoir and all the fencing was
$40,988.81.
11. The section of the reservoir erected on the claimants'
land could not be put to any profitable use as a separate
entity and the cost of removing that section would exceed
the value of the land on which it stands. The
unimproved value of the resumed land at the date of
resumption was $300.
12. The cost of construction of the fixtures was borne by te
council and the claimants contributed nothing towards
their cost.
13. There were other sites on hills at Emu Park on which it
would have been possible to build a reservoir and at the
chosen site the reservoir could effectively have been
constructed in a different position adjoining the claimants'
14. The reservoir cannot be put to use by any person or body
other than the council as part of its water reticulation
scheme for Emu Park and Yeppoon. At the date of
resumption there was no other potential purchaser of
the land which was resumed but the council.
24. . . . The ground of the decision of the majority" (i.e.
of the Land Appeal Court) "was that the portion of the
reservoir and fencing erected on the claimants' land
formed part of their land, and that the proper measure
of compensation, the council being the only possible
purchaser, was, and as a matter of alw was required to
be, the value of the land taken as though unimproved
plus the cost of making the structures forming part of
it." (at p482)
8. The Supreme Court answered the questions asked of it as follows :
(3) No answer."
and ordered that the matter be remitted to the Land Appeal Court. (at p483)
9. The appellants, by notice of appeal dated 24th September 1971, appealed to
this Court, seeking the reversal of the answer of
the Supreme Court to the
second question on the ground that it ought to have been answered in the
affirmative. (at p483)
10. The respondent, by notice dated 12th October 1971, cross-appealed,
claiming that the Supreme Court had erroneously answered
the first question.
The respondent also, on 6th October 1971, gave notice of objection to the
competency of the appellants' appeal.
11. The objection to competency having been set down for hearing, the appeal
and cross-appeal and the objection to competency came
on for hearing, at which
time the appellants sought special leave to appeal. The Court heard argument
as if on an appeal, reserving
its decision on competency, upon the application
for special leave and upon the appeal and cross-appeal, should special leave
given. (at p483)
12. Little need be said, in my opinion, as to the Supreme Court's answer to
the first question. That answer was, in my opinion,
clearly right. The
the respondent's offer of compensation
had been rejected, the Land Court
clearly had jurisdiction to entertain the appellants' claim for compensation.
The effect of the
non-rejection of the offer was not to deprive the Land Court
of jurisdiction but merely to deem the offer to have been accepted.
the amount had not been paid, so that non-rejection could only affect the
quantum of compensation which could properly be
awarded. Whether or not there
had been a rejection was a matter of fact which the Land Court had
it did so, holding that there had been
an effective rejection of the offer. (at p483)
13. In my opinion, the answer given by the Supreme Court to the second
question was correct. Whilst, as will appear, I think that
the structure on
the appellant's land at the date of the compulsory acquisition formed part of
the land in respect of which compensation
had to be awarded, it is, in my
opinion, undoubtedly clear that the appellants were not entitled as a matter
of law to have the structure
valued at the proportionate cost expended by the
respondent in its construction. There is no warrant whatever, in my opinion,
this Court's decision in Geita Sebea v. Territory of Papua
[1941] HCA 37
; (1941) 67 CLR
544 for such a conclusion. So much I say,
not because of
any differences in
the facts of that case and this ; nor
do I think that proposition
insupportable because to accept
it would involve
the conclusion that it treats
the respondent, not as
a willing purchaser but as a purchaser under compulsion
buy ; nor because
to accept the proposition would be to give to the
an increase in value of the land acquired, due to
"the realized
undertaking
as it exists in the hands of the undertaker", to use
the language
used in Cedars Rapids Manufacturing and
Power Co. v. Lacoste (1914)
p 577 . I do so because cost and value
are not necessarily coterminous,
however much, in some
circumstances, cost may
be persuasive of value. Nothing
decided or said in
the case of Geita Sebea v. Territory of Papua
; (1941) 67 CLR
544 would support
the proposition that, as a matter of law, the cost of
construction was necessarily and inevitably
the value of the structure. (at
14. It is the refusal of the Supreme Court formally to give an answer to the
third question, having answered the second, which,
to my mind, poses the
problem in this case. Of course the Court ought formally to have answered that
question for apart from all
else, it was apparent that the Land Appeal Court,
if the second question were answered negatively, was seeking guidance for its
consideration of the matter. Whether the failure formally to give an
answer in all the circumstances of the case would afford a sound
appeal need not be considered having regard to views I am about to express.
15. Although the Supreme Court gave no express answer to the third question,
it is apparent to my mind that, in the reasons of the
majority, they did in
substance do so ; and, with an important qualification, did so correctly. (at
16. To make this clear it is necessary to set out a number of passages from
the reasons given by the majority. Having observed upon
the facts, as I have
outlined them, their Honours said this (1972) Qd R, at pp 198-200:
"We do not doubt that a tribunal which has the function
of assessing compensation payable to the respondents should
consider that the material section of the reservoir forms part
of the resumed land. It is a corollary to this proposition that
such tribunal should have regard, in order to ascertain the
price a willing pruchaser would pay for the land with the section
of the reservoir already constructed on it, to the likelihood that
the appellant, as a willing purchaser, may be willing to pay
more for the land as a potential reservoir site with part of a
reservoir built on it than it may otherwise pay if the land
lacked such partially erected structure.
In our opinion the erection of this reservoir for reticulation
purposes on its present site forms part of the scheme of water
supply to which we have referred. Because it is part of the
scheme, in considering the amount of compensation to be
awarded, the tribunal should not consider that the resumed
land has been enhanced in value due to the fact that part of
the reservoir has already been constructed by the resuming
authority on land which adjoins the resumed land, because to
do so would have the consequence that the award of
compensation would be increased by a factor the existence of
which is entirely due to the scheme underlying the compulsory
acquisition . . . . In other words, the tribunal should not
consider that the value of parcel P was enhanced by the fact
that a reservoir was wholly constructed on land adjoining
it. Therefore, we think that the majority of the members of
the Land Appeal Court erred in taking into consideration, as
an element which added value to the resumed land, that part
of the reservoir was erected on allotment 5 and on Hawke
Street. The proper approach is to look at the respondents'
land with its part reservoir thereon and to disregard the fact
that the other portion of the reservoir was completely erected,
in so far as it could be done, on the adjoining land. That half
of the structure on the adjoining land, was, as we have said,
part of the scheme underlying the acquisition and any increase
in value to the respondents' land by reason of the carrying
out of some of the works involved in the scheme on the
adjoining land should not have been taken into consideration.
To put it another way, we think that there is inherent in the
view of the majority of the Land Appeal Court the proposition
that the value to the respondents of their land (together with
its part of the completed reservoir) is a proportional part of
the value of the realised undertaking as it exists in the hands of
the appellant council. The view that we have taken does not
mean that the Land Court should not take into consideration
the fact that the land may have special value for the appellant
council, and for it alone, nor does it follow that the giving of
consideration to that special value will allow the existence of
the scheme to enhance the value of the land."
Their Honours concluded(1972) Qd R, at p 201:
"In our opinion the case should be remitted to the Land
Appeal Court which should, in assessing the price which a
willing purchaser would pay to a willing vendor, have regard
to the principles to which we have referred including the
potentiality of the land as a reservoir site and whether such
potentiality has been increased at all by the fact that a part
of the reservoir is already constructed upon it." (at p486)
17. So far, in my opinion, this was an answer to the question as to the
"measure of compensation payable" using the expression "measure
compensation" as meaning the manner of approach to the assessment of
compensation in this case, a meaning, evidently intended,
in my opinion, by
those who framed the question. (at p486)
18. To round out such an answer I would have expected that, having regard to
the answer given to the second question, it would have
been pointed out that,
in applying the directions given, the Land Appeal Court in treating the
respondent as a willing but not anxious
purchaser and in estimating what it
would reasonably give and the appellants accept for the land with the
structure thereon, could
have regard to the cost of constructing that
structure, i.e., the partially complete reservoir as on the appellants' land,
a measure of the price, but as some, though not an overwhelming,
indication of what the price might be. But I would not regard its
add these considerations as being itself a ground of appeal. (at p486)
19. But the reasons of the majority did not stop at the point where I have
ended my quotation. They proceeded, immediately following
that quotation, as
follows (1972) Qd R, at p 201:
"By reason of the fact that the section of the reservoir
erected on the respondents' land could not be put to any
profitable use as a separate entity, and on the basis that the
Land Court should not have regard to the part erected on the
adjoining lands, it seems to follow that there is no advantage
for the appellant to acquire the respondents' land (with a
section of the reservoir erected on it and the remaining section
not constructed) rather than to acquire vacant land and go
to the expense of erecting an entirely new reservoir on that
land." (at p486)
20. In this passage their Honours, in my opinion, entered upon ground upon
which they were not entitled to tread. In truth, they
proceeded to decide the
facts : and, in my opinion, erroneously. It did not follow that because the
assessment of compensation had
to be approached on the footing that only the
part of the reservoir which was on the appellants' land had been constructed
as it stood, it could not be properly used, that the respondent as a
willing purchaser would have given nothing for it. Whether the
would have done so or not, or whether it would have preferred to look for land
elsewhere, were matters of fact not committed
to the decision of the Supreme
Court. Conformably with the earlier parts of their Honours' reasons which I
have quoted, it was for
the Land Appeal Court to consider whether the
respondent would have purchased and what it would have given in a concluded
negotiation
between itself and the appellants, each being a willing but not
anxious participant in the negotiation. (at p487)
21. In the result, I would be content with the answer which I think the
Supreme Court in substance gave to the third question, it
being understood
that the Land Appeal Court were entitled to regard the respondent as a willing
buyer, though the only buyer, and,
if they saw fit, to have regard to the cost
of construction of the part of the reservoir constructed on the appellants'
fact in the consideration of what the respondent as such a purchaser
would give and the appellants accept for the land and all the
improvements
thereon, including the partially completed section of the reservoir. (at p487)
22. I turn now to what order the Court should make. In my opinion, the
appellants were not entitled to appeal as of right : nor
was the respondent so
entitled to cross-appeal. The answers given by the Supreme Court did not in
themselves, and the order resolving
the matter did not, constitute a final
judgment : nor were they otherwise within
(1) (a) of the
Judiciary Act
- 1969 (Cth).
23. Consequently, special leave to appeal was necessary. The Supreme Court's
answers to questions one and two were plainly right.
Question three was in
substance answered : the answer given was in point of law clearly correct. But
an associated opinion on a matter
of fact was both beyond the scope of the
questions answered and was erroneous. Because beyond the questions asked, it
obiter and not binding on the Land Appeal Court, which is, in my
opinion, entitled to disregard it and to consider for itself the
questions of
fact doing so conformably to the directions in law which the answers to the
questions and the reasons of the court so
far as they relate to those
questions involve. (at p487)
24. I see no matter of general public importance in the addition of these
obiter dicta to the reasons for judgment in this case.
I would not be prepared
in these circumstances to grant special leave to appeal. However, I understand
that that view is not shared
by a majority of the Court hearing the case.
Thus, special leave to appeal being given, in my opinion, the appeal should be
the answer of the Supreme Court to the third question set aside and
in lieu thereof order that that question be answered, as follows
: (at p487)
25. Compensation is to be assessed for the land and all its improvements
including the structure of the partially completed reservoir.
It is to be
supposed that the balance of the reservoir had not been built at the date of
the compulsory acquisition. The respondent
may be regarded as a possible
purchaser. The compensation will in this case be that sum which the Land
Appeal Court decides that
the respondent if a purchaser would give and the
appellant accept, for the land and all its improvements, each being willing
not anxious respectively to buy and to sell and without being under any
compulsion to do so. In estimating the price which would
be so agreed, the
Land Appeal Court may have regard along with any other relevant evidence to
the cost of constructing the partially
completed reservoir, not as a measure
of price or value but as a fact to be weighed in making the estimate. (at
26. The objection to competency should be sustained. Special leave to appeal
having been given by majority, the appeal should be
allowed, the third
question asked in the stated case answered as I have indicated and the
cross-appeal should be dismissed. (at p488)
MENZIES J. I consider that in this case the Court should grant special leave
to appeal from the judgment of the Full Court of Queensland
and vary that
Court's order by answering question 3 specifically. (at p488)
2. I will state my reasons for this conclusion by reference to and without
repeating what the Chief Justice has written about the
facts of the case and
the proceedings in the courts below. I also share his opinion about the
correctness of the answers to questions
(1972) Qd R, at p 192 and
[1941] HCA 37
; (1941) 67
CLR 544 (at p488)
3. My reading of the judgment of the learned Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court of Queensland is that His Honour decided that the
Council could not, at
the date of acquisition, be regarded as a willing purchaser of the land
belonging to the appellant so that
what it would be prepared to pay for the
appellant's land with a section of the reservoir upon it would not be a
material consideration
in assessing its value. His Honour said (1972) Qd R, at
p 192 : "The law contemplates a willing vendor and also a willing
purchaser--not
a purchaser under a 'pressing need' to acquire the land."
Again, in referring to the decision of this Court Geita Sebea v. Territory
[1941] HCA 37
; (1941) 67 CLR 544 , his Honour said (1972) Qd R, at p 193 : ". . . in
Geita's Case
[1941] HCA 37
67 CLR 544 the Court was not faced
with the situation in
this case where, to preserve the value of the asset of its own land,
council is obliged to acquire the
other land." The decision of Hoare and W. B.
Campbell JJ. relating to the assessment of the
of the land is, I think,
found in the following statement (1972) Qd R, at p 201:
"In our opinion the case should be remitted to the Land
Appeal Court which should, in assessing the price which a
willing purchaser would pay to a willing vendor, have regard
to the principles to which we have referred including the
potentiality of the land as a reservoir site and whether such
potentiality has been increased at all by the fact that a part
of the reservoir is already constructed upon it. By reason
of the fact that the section of the reservoir erected on the
respondents' land could not be put to any profitable use as a
separate entity, and on the basis that the Land Court should
not have regard to the part erected on the adjoining lands, it
seems to follow that there is no advantage for the appellant
to acquire the respondents' land (with a section of the
reservoir erected on it and the remaining section not
constructed) rather than to acquire vacant land and go to the
expenses of erecting an entirely new reservoir on that land." (at p489)
4. The observations which I have quoted amount in substance, although not in
form, to an answer to the third question and I think,
with great respect, that
they are wrong (1) in so far as they indicate that the section of the
reservoir on the appellant's land
cannot be regarded as adding to the value of
the land ; and (2) in so far as they direct that what the council would be
to pay for the land with the section of reservoir thereon must be
disregarded in the assessment of its value. (at p489)
5. In my opinion, the compensation payable is the value as at the date of the
acquisition of the appellant's land with the section
of reservoir constructed
thereon but without regard to the section of the reservoir constructed upon
other land. In arriving at this
value, the council should be regarded as a
willing purchaser. The Cost of the construction of that section of the
reservoir upon
the appellant's land can be taken into account in determining
the value, but that cost does not of itself determine the amount by
unimproved value of the land has been increased because there was constructed
on it a section of the reservoir. Accordingly,
regard should be had to any
relevant evidence of the value of the land at the date of the acquisition. (at
6. The decision appealed from does, I think, involve important questions of
land valuation, although the circumstances are such
that one might hope that
the particular problem will not arise again. It is therefore a fit case for
special leave. I would accordingly
grant special leave to appeal and would
vary the order of the Full Court by answering question 3 as follows: The
measure of compensation
payable is what a willing purchaser, including the
council, would pay for the land as it was at the date of acquisition with a
of reservoir constructed thereon but without regard to the
construction of so much of the reservoir as was not upon that land. (at
7. This answer is, I think, substantially in accord with that proposed by the
Chief Justice in which I am ready to join. (at p490)
WALSH J. The facts and the course of the proceedings in this matter are set
out in the judgment of the Chief Justice. In my opinion
an appeal as of right
did not lie from the decision of the Supreme Court of Queensland. But if
special leave to appeal, rather than
leave to appeal, was necessary, I am of
opinion that special leave to appeal should be granted. (at p490)
2. I agree with the reasons given by the Chief Justice for holding that the
answer given by the Supreme Court to the first question
in the stated case was
correct. (at p490)
3. The second and third questions in the stated case are related questions.
The Supreme Court answered the second question "No"
and did not answer the
third question. I agree with the reasons of the Chief Justice for concluding
that the answer of the Supreme
Court to the second question was correct. I am
in agreement also with the answer which he has formulated as that which should
given to the third question. I shall state my reasons for my conclusions
relating to the second and third questions. (at p490)
4. In my opinion, it is clear that the portion of the reservoir and the
portion of the fence which were on the acquired land at
the date of the
acquisition had become part of the land and were owned by the appellants. I
have had the benefit of reading what
my brother Gibbs has written relating to
the submissions on behalf of the respondent based upon certain provisions of
Local Government
, as amended, (Q.) and I agree with him that none
of those provisions operated to prevent the improvements from becoming
of the appellants. (at p490)
5. What had to be assessed was the value at the date of acquisition of the
land with any improvements then upon it. The value of
the land to the owner
had to be ascertained, by considering "the price which a willing vendor might
reasonably expect to obtain from
a willing purchaser". In Raja Vyricherla
Narayana Gajapatiraju v. Revenue Divisional Officer, Vizagapatam (1939) AC
302, at p 312
, their Lordships, after using the expression which I have just
quoted, went on the say:
"The disinclination of the vendor to part with his land and
the urgent necessity of the purchaser to buy must alike be
disregarded. Neither must be considered as acting under
compulsion. This is implied in the common saying that the
value of the land is not to be estimated at its value to the
purchaser. But this does not mean that the fact that some
particular purchaser might desire the land more than others
is to be disregarded. The wish of a particular purchaser,
though not his compulsion, may always be taken into
consideration for what it is worth."
Later their Lordships said(1939) AC, at p 313 that if land possesses special
features as regards its position or its potentialities,
what has to be
ascertained by the arbitrator as best he may from the materials before him is
what a willing vendor might reasonably
expect to obtain from a willing
purchaser "for the land in that particular position and with those particular
potentialities". Their
Lordships decided, also, that that principle applies
where there is but one potential purchaser and it applies if that potential
purchaser is the authority which possesses compulsory powers of acquisition.
6. Those principles were applicable, in my opinion, to the assessment of
compensation for land acquired under the statutes which
authorized the
acquisition of the land in this case. In carrying out the difficult task of
estimating, in accordance with those principles,
the amount which the owners
as vendors might have reasonably expected to obtain, it seems plain that many
factors might properly
be taken into account. Therefore, unless the decision
of this Court in Geita Sebea v. Territory of Papua
[1941] HCA 37
; (1941) 67
CLR 544 requires
a different conclusion, it seems clear that the tribunal assessing
compensation was not bound as a matter
to determine it
by adding to the
unimproved value of the land the cost of the erection of the portion of the
reservoir and
which stood upon
it and accordingly, it seems clear that
an affirmative answer could not be given to the second question
in the stated
case. However,
the majority in the Land Appeal Court were of opinion that the
compensation was required as a matter
of law to be
determined in that
the Supreme Court the decision in the Geita Sebea Case
[1941] HCA 37
; (1941) 67 CLR 544 was
as inapplicable to the circumstances
of the present case. There are,
however, statements in the judgments
in that case which could
be taken as
assertions that the method
of assessing compensation there approved was the
only method which
could properly be applied
in circumstances not materially
from those existing in this case. The Geita Sebea Case
[1941] HCA 37
; (1941) 67 CLR
merits therefore some further examination. (at p492)
7. The case stated to this Court in the Geita Sebea Case
[1941] HCA 37
; (1941) 67 CLR 544
did not ask what was the proper method
of taking into
account the improvements
on the land. It did not ask whether
the cost of the improvements was
necessarily to be included
in the amount
of compensation. It did ask whether
the potentialities
of the lands for use as an aerodrome should be taken into
the lands. It asked, also, whether the claimants were
entitled to claim compensation for their interest in the "works"
and in the buildings on the lands. When the questions
set out (1941)
67 CLR, at p 546 and the answers given (1941)
67 CLR, at p 555
are examined it
is plain, in my opinion, that no part
of the actual decision of the Court
depended upon the proposition
matter of law the cost of the
construction had to be
included as such in the value assigned to the lands.
8. It appears that the only evidence relevant to value that was placed before
the Court of first instance in the Geita Sebea Case
[1941] HCA 37
; (1941) 67 CLR 544 was
evidence of the value of the lands "without regard to any potentiality as an
aerodrome" and
evidence of the
"value" of the work done in making the
aerodrome and in erecting buildings (see (1941) 67 CLR, at p 546 ). In those
circumstances,
Starke J. said (1941) 67 CLR, at p 554 that as there was no
market and as some artificial method had to be adopted,
satisfactory"
method was to take the agricultural value of the land plus an
addition measured by what it would cost to
make or establish the improvements
and structures forming part of the land, but taking into account a proper
deduction for obsolescence
or depreciation. Those observations
regarded, in my opinion, as being no more than statements of his Honour's
the facts of the case. Again, in the
judgment of Williams J. (1941)
67 CLR, at p 558 , there appear statements or assumptions of
fact, not of law,
which led his Honour
to his conclusion that the value was to be assessed as
the agricultural value of the land
plus the value of the expenditure on the
improvements. When his Honour said that "the vendors would know that the Crown
this amount but no more" and that "the Crown
would know that the
vendors could reasonably expect this price" he did not state a proposition
law but an assumption of fact which
could, and in his opinion should, be made
in estimating what price would be fixed upon a sale
by the vendors, considered
vendors, to the Crown considered as a willing purchaser. It may be
added that an examination
of the cases cited (1941) 67 CLR, at
pp 554, 558 in
support of the statements to which I have referred reveals, in my opinion,
those cases were concerned with particular
problems arising out of
particular statutory provisions and that they contain nothing
which requires
the adoption in the present
case of a rule that the amount by which the value
of the land was increased by the placing
on it of improvements was necessarily
equated with the cost of construction less depreciation. (at p493)
9. The Supreme Court decided not to answer the third question. It is provided
by s. 47 of the Land Acts, 1962 to 1968 (Q.) that
the Full Court when a case
is transmitted to it "shall hear and determine every question of law arising
thereon". The Full Court
understood the third question as using the expression
"measure of compensation" to mean the method of arriving at the value of the
land and as being based upon an assumption that there could be only one such
method. Since in my opinion the Court did provide in
substance, although not
in form, an answer to the third question, I need not decide whether or not the
Supreme Court was correct
in declining to give an answer to that question. As
the joint judgment of two members of the Court contained observations which,
in my opinion, did constitute in effect an answer to the third question which,
although in a large measure correct, was in part erroneous,
I am of opinion
that it is proper for this Court to intervene and to give an answer to the
question and, in my opinion, it should
answer it in the terms which the Chief
Justice has formulated. I agree with the opinions of the Chief Justice
relating to the passages
which he has set out from the joint judgment in the
Supreme Court and his Honour's reasons for those opinions, in so far as they
affirm the correctness of part of that judgment and explain why part of it was
considered by his Honour to be erroneous. But I am
of opinion that the Land
Appeal Court would have endeavoured to give effect in its further
consideration of the case to the whole
of what the Supreme Court had said and
would not have considered itself free to disregard that part of the joint
judgment which was
in my opinion erroneous. Therefore I think that this Court
should give an answer to the third question. (at p493)
10. In my opinion, special leave to appeal should be given and orders should
be made as proposed by the Chief Justice. (at p493)
GIBBS J. This is an appeal from a judgment of the Full Court of Queensland
by which answers were given to two of three questions
submitted for the
decision of that Court by a case stated by the Land Appeal Court under s. 45
of the Land Acts 1962 (as amended)
(Q.). The appellants conceded that in the
circumstances of this case no appeal lay as of right and sought leave, or if
special leave, to appeal. The questions involved in the case are in
my opinion of sufficient importance to warrant the grant of special
for that reason I shall assume, and need not decide, that the appellants
require special leave rather than merely leave
to appeal. (at p494)
2. The circumstances of the case have been set out in the judgment of the
Chief Justice, which I have had the advantage of reading.
The first question
asked in the case stated was whether the Land Court had jurisdiction to
entertain the appellants' claim for compensation.
It was contended by the
present respondent that the appellants had not served on the respondent a
notice in writing rejecting its
offer of compensation and that in consequence
the Land Court had no jurisdiction to determine the appellants' claim for
compensation.
The argument was based on s.22 (2) and s.23 (1) of the Public
Works Land Resumption Acts, 1906 to 1955 (Q.) ("the Resumption Acts"),
notwithstanding their repeal by the Acquisition of Land Act of 1967 (Q.),
continued to govern the present case. Those sections
provided as follows:
"22 (2). A claimant upon whom an offer of compensation
is made pursuant to subsection one of this section, may,
within sixty days commencing on the date of the making of
the offer of compensation, serve on the constructing authority
a notice in writing rejecting the offer.
If a notice in writing rejecting the offer is not served within
the time aforesaid, the offer of compensation shall be deemed
to be accepted by the claimant and the constructing authority
shall forthwith settle the compensation in accordance with
that offer.
23 (1). If the constructing authority within the time
prescribed by and otherwise in accordance with subsection one of
section twenty-two of this Act makes no offer, or if the claimant
within the time prescribed by and otherwise in accordance
with subsection two of section twenty-two of this Act rejects the
offer, the amount of compensation to be paid shall be
determined by the Court, and the following provisions shall have
Sub-section (2) of s. 23 provides, inter alia, that the claimant shall file a
copy of his claim and of all notices and other particulars
in the office of
the registrar of the Land Court, and sub-s. (4) provides, inter alia, that
"the Land Court shall have jurisdiction
to hear and determine all matters of
compensation arising under this Act". It is apparent that it was within the
the Land Court to decide whether a claimant had rejected an
offer made by a constructing authority, and that if the Land Court made
erroneous decision on that point it would nevertheless be acting within the
limits of its jurisdiction (cf. Parisienne Basket
Shoes Pty. Ltd. v. Whyte
[1938] HCA 7
; (1938) 59 CLR 369 ). Moreover, the decision of the Land Court, affirmed by the
Land Appeal
Court and the
Full Court, that the appellants
had served on the
respondent a notice in writing rejecting the offer made by the respondent
in my opinion, erroneous. The
action of the appellants in lodging with
the registrar of the Land Court a letter enclosing
of their claim and
other documents
was obviously taken in purported pursuance of s. 23 (2) and
was intended to commence proceedings
in that Court for the determination
compensation ; it implied that the offer was rejected. On the same day, the
appellants served
on the respondent's solicitors a
letter enclosing a copy of
the letter lodged with the Registrar and this could only be understood
notice that the appellants rejected
the respondent's offer. The affirmative
answer given by the Full Court to the first question
raised by the case stated
was therefore
correct. (at p495)
3. The substantial questions that now arise are as to the basis on which the
Courts should have assessed the compensation payable
to the appellants in
respect of the compulsory taking of their land under the Resumption Acts. At
the date of the proclamation by
which the appellants' land was taken there was
erected on the land portion of a reservoir built by the respondent for the
of providing a water supply for the townships of Emu Park and Yeppoon.
The reservoir was a circular structure with a concrete base
and concrete
retaining walls ; about two-thirds of it were upon the subject land and the
rest was on some adjoining land. The reservoir
was surrounded by a high wire
fence part of which was on the subject land. The respondent, with a brave
disregard for legal niceties,
had built the reservoir and the fence without
obtaining the consent of the appellants and before giving to the appellants
of its intention to exercise its powers of compulsory acquisition. (at
4. There can be no doubt that the parts of the reservoir and of the fence
that were built on the appellants' land were fixed to
the soil and had thereby
become subject to the ownership of the appellants. The respondent in its
submission to the contrary relied
on certain provisions of the
Government Act, 1936
(as amended) (Q.,), which it was said had the effect that
if a local authority
carried out construction work of a kind which it was
authorized to perform on land which remained in private ownership at the time
when the work was done, the work would nevertheless
become the property of the
local authority. In my opinion, however, the provisions
to which we were
referred fall short of achieving
the result desired by the respondent. Section
32 (12) of the
Local Government Act
provides that "the materials of all roads,
bridges, ferries, wharves and jetties, and other public works under the
control of the
Local Authority, and all things appurtenant thereto, shall
belong to the Local Authority". These general words must refer to public
lawfully carried out and cannot be construed as giving the local authority a
right to the ownership of works wrongfully constructed
on lands in other
ownership. Section 50 (2) of those Acts provides, inter alia, as follows :
"(2) (i) For the purposes of exercising and performing
any of the functions of local government under this Act or
any other Act, the Local Authority may provide any works,
matters, or things as are necessary on, through, across, or under
any road, and may also on making compensation therefor
carry any such works, matters, or things into, through,
across, or under any other land.
(ii) In the exercise and performance of the functions
of local government under this Act or any other Act, the Local
Authority . . . may at all reasonable times enter upon any
land, structure, or premises to carry any works, matters, or
things into, through, across, or under any land and to execute
any work, matter, or thing in any structure or premises . . . "
It will be noted that the sub-section refers to works provided "on" a road but
not to works done "on" other land. It is unnecessary
to discuss the scope of
this sub-section or to consider whether payment of compensation is a condition
precedent to the exercise
of the powers conferred by par. (i) in relation to
land other than a road, because the sub-section clearly does not authorize the
erection of a permanent structure such as a reservoir upon the surface of land
in private ownership. Finally, reference was made
to s. 51 (3), which deals
with the case where work is done on land after the local authority has given
notice of its intention to
acquire the land. That sub-section obviously has no
application to the present case where the work was completed before such
was given. In support of its submission, the respondent relied upon the
judgment in Commissioner of Main Roads v. North Shore Gas
[1967] HCA 41
; (1967) 120
CLR 118,but the observation in that case (1967) 120 CLR, at p 127, that, when
a statute empowers
someone other
owner of land to affix things in the
soil and yet retain ownership of the things so affixed, the fixtures
part of the
freehold, has no application to the present case where the
work was done illegally and not in the exercise
of any statutory
5. Section 19 of the Resumption Acts provides, inter alia, that compensation
shall be assessed according to the value of the land,
estate or interest of
the claimant on the date of the proclamation taking the land. In the present
case the land had to be valued
as it was at the date of the resumption, that
is, with part of the reservoir and the fence erected upon it. If the value of
had been increased by the erection of the fixtures the appellants are
entitled to the increased value notwithstanding that the fixtures
had been put
on the land by the respondent at its own expense. The respondent would not be
the first local authority which has been
required to pay for resumed land
compensation which has been fixed by reference to the increased value given to
the land by work
carried out thereon by the local authority prior to the date
of the resumption : Willoughby Municipal Council v. Valuer-General (1934)
LGR (NSW) 41 ; Cheyne v. Council of Shire of Landsborough (1944) 20 CLLR (Q)
42 . Geita Sebea v. Territory of Papua
; (1941) 67
CLR 544 is a similar case,
although there the improvements were made by the Crown and its licensees
during the term
a lease and
not in unauthorized anticipation of a
resumption. (at p497)
6. But although the appellants are entitled to the value of the land with the
structures thereon, it does not follow that the structures
must be valued as
though they formed part of a completed reservoir. In Pointe Gourde Quarrying
and Transport Co. Ltd. v. Sub-Intendent
of Crown Lands (1947) AC 565, at p 572
, Lord MacDermott said:
"It is well settled that compensation for the compulsory
acquisition of land cannot include an increase in value which
is entirely due to the scheme underlying the acquisition. As
it was put by Eve J. in South Eastern Railway Co. v. London
County Council :
(1915) 2 Ch 252, at p 258 'Increase in value consequent on the execution
of the undertaking for or in connexion with which
the purchase is made must be disregarded'."
The principle there laid down has been discussed and applied in many cases, of
which the most recent appears to be the decision of
the House of Lords in
Rugby Joint Water Board v. Shaw-Fox (1973) AC 202 . In the present case the
scheme underlying the acquisition
provided for the construction of a complete
reservoir. In so far as the work done in pursuance of that scheme was done on
of the appellants, I have already pointed out that it cannot be
disregarded for it affected the condition of the land itself. However,
far as the work done under the scheme on other land had the effect of further
enhancing the value of the appellants' land,
it has to be disregarded. In
other words, the appellants were entitled to be awarded the value of the land
in its actual condition
at the time of resumption and with all the
potentialities it had at that date, but without any increase in value due to
that the construction of the reservoir and fence had been completed.
The Land Court and the Land Appeal Court were therefore required
to indulge in
a flight of the imagination and to value the land on the assumption that no
part of the reservoir or the fence had
been erected on the adjoining lands.
The facts stated in the case show that the section of the reservoir erected on
the subject land
could not have been put to any profitable use by itself and
that the cost of removing it would have exceeded the value of the land
which it stood. Nevertheless it is possible, if not probable, that an
uncompleted portion of the reservoir standing on the appellants'
have been extended into a complete reservoir by the doing of further work on
the adjoining lands. If so, this potentiality
for development had to be
valued. The case stated does not reveal whether, or with what difficulty or
cost, an uncompleted concrete
retaining wall and base could have been used in
the construction of a complete and usable reservoir, but evidence on this
of the matter would be necessary to enable a court to assess the value
of the potentiality of the portion of the reservoir to be
converted into a
whole. Obviously no difficulty existed in relation to the extension of the
fence. (at p498)
7. It appears from the case stated that there were other sites in the area on
which a reservoir could have been built. However,
if it would have been
possible to put the part of the reservoir on the appellants' land to
substantial use in the construction of
a complete reservoir, this potentiality
would obviously have given the appellants' land an advantage over vacant lands
in the area.
It further appears from the case stated that the reservoir could
not have been put to use by anyone other than the respondent. The
the respondent would have been the only possible purchaser of the land with
its potentialities for development into a completed
reservoir does not mean
that the appellants must only be allowed the unimproved value of the land.
That this is so is now well established.
In Raja Vyricherla Narayana
Gajapatiraju v. Revenue Divisional Officer, Vizagapatam (1939) AC 302, at p
323 , in a well-known passage,
Lord Romer said that :
"even where the only possible purchaser of the land's
potentiality is the authority that has obtained the compulsory
powers, the arbitrator in awarding compensation must ascertain
to the best of his ability the price that would be paid by a
willing purchaser to a willing vendor of the land with its
potentiality in the same way that he would ascertain it in a
case where there are several possible purchasers . . . "
In Geita Sebea v. Territory of Papua (1) this Court acted on the same view.
8. The determination of the question what a willing vendor might reasonably
have expected to obtain from a willing purchaser for
the land in its condition
at the date of resumption and with those potentialities for use in the
construction of a completed reservoir
as it may be found to possess is one of
considerable difficulty. The Land Court awarded the appellants the unimproved
value of the
land and the full cost of erecting the portion of the fence
theron, but allowed nothing for the value of the reservoir. In the course
its judgment the Court said that the part of the reservoir erected on the
appellants' land had no economic value, and that there
were engineering
difficulties which would have precluded it from being converted into a water
reservoir, by which was meant a reservoir
constructed entirely within the
appellants' land. The Court, however, appears to have overlooked that the
reservoir in its notionally
uncompleted state could have been completed by
work done on the adjoining lands. The ground of the decision of the Court was
by saying that "that part of the structure erected on the resumed
land by the respondent is not deemed to be an improvement which
had any value
at the date of resumption". The Land Court was in error in viewing the matter
in that way. On appeal the majority of
the Land Appeal Court, applying, as
they thought, the decision of this Court in Geita Sebea v. Territory of Papua
[1941] HCA 37
; (1941) 67 CLR 544
, awarded in addition the full cost of construction of that
portion of the reservoir which was situated on the
appellants' land.
allowed nothing for obsolescence or depreciation because the reservoir had so
recently been constructed. The
learned judges
of the Full Court, in their
decision of the questions arising on the case stated, took a different view ;
that it was wrong
to regard the cost of construction as the measure
of compensation and accordingly answered in the negative the
second question
in the stated case. Their Honours, however, declined to answer the third
question, by which they were asked
what was the measure
of compensation
payable, apparently regarding it as dealing with methods of valuation and as
involving matters
of fact and evidence
rather than of law. (at p499)
9. I do not regard Geita Sebea v. Territory of Papua
[1941] HCA 37
; (1941) 67 CLR 544 , as
laying down any principle that would
require a court,
in assessing
compensation in a case such as the present,
to allow the unimproved value of
the land plus the cost
of establishing
the improvements thereon less any
proper deduction for obsolescence
or depreciation. It seems that the
observations
of Starke J.
(1941) 67 CLR, at p 554 , and Williams J. (1941) 67
CLR, at p 558 ,
as to the way in which land should be valued were
the matter to which they were directed does not appear to have been
directly raised by the questions in the case stated
set out in the
report (1941) 67 CLR, at p 546 ). In any case, their
Honours said no more than
that the method there approved
suitable to be applied in the circumstances
of that case, which are
distinguishable from those of the present, where the
improvements
must be regarded as having been fragmentary and useless until
into a finished reservoir and not, as in Geita Sebea v. Territory
[1941] HCA 37
; (1941) 67 CLR 544 , completely erected and ready for use. The method
adopted in Geita Sebea v. Territory
[1941] HCA 37
67 CLR 544 , is familiar
enough to courts concerned with valuation matters and provides a useful
of arriving at the
a structure or improvement in many cases. However
where, as in Geita Sebea v. Territory of Papua
[1941] HCA 37
; (1941) 67 CLR 544 , and in the
case, the relevant statute requires compensation to be assessed with
to the value
of the land acquired, evidence of the
improvements (whether of actual cost or of what the cost would be at the
of valuation)
may be relevant to the value
of the land in its improved state,
but it is the value and not the cost that is the
matter for ultimate
determination. Some improvements
increase the value of land to a greater
extent than the cost, but in other circumstances
of an improvement
may greatly exceed
its value, e.g., because its wasteful design renders it
unnecessarily expensive to
or because it is redundant or out of
place and cannot be put to profitable use having regard to its situation.
of a partially completed structure may
exceed its value
because additional expense may be occasioned by commencing construction
and the total cost of a structure
erected in two stages may be more than if
the construction had proceeded from the beginning
interruption. In the
case, where it is necessary to imagine that at the date of resumption
the portion of the reservoir
the resumed land was the only
existence, the valuation has to be made on the assumption that the respondent
when it acquired
the land could only get a
useful reservoir by extending the
walls and base on to the adjoining land. In making a valuation on the
would be relevant
to consider evidence as to the feasibility of completing the
unfinished reservoir in this way, as to any
engineering or constructional
difficulties that would be likely to be presented and as to what extent, if
any, the costs of linking
the notionally existing portion
with the newly
constructed portion would diminish the value of the existing structure. It was
for the Land Appeal Court
to regard the cost of construction as the
proper measure of value ; the cost was only one of the facts
to be considered
in arriving
at the value and the weight to be given to it would depend on the
other evidence, including any evidence
as to the matters to which
I have just
referred. On the other hand, two of the learned judges in the Full Court also
fell into error
in saying that there was
no advantage for the respondent to
acquire the appellants' land (with a section of the reservoir erected
and the remaining
section not constructed) rather than to acquire vacant land
and go to the expense of erecting an entirely
new reservoir on that land.
observation suggests that the additional value given to the land by the
section of the reservoir
erected upon it may be disregarded,
suggestion is contrary to the principles I have already discussed. (at p501)
10. For these reasons, I consider that the answer given by the Full Court to
question (2) was correct. However, I consider that
question (3), on its true
meaning, sought a judicial decision as to the legal principles to be applied
by the Land Appeal Court in
making the valuation, and that in the
circumstances of the case it ought to have been answered. I would now answer
the question in
the manner suggested by the Chief Justice. (at p501)
11. I would grant special leave to appeal and allow the appeal. (at p501)
STEPHEN J. I have had the advantage of reading the reasons for judgment of
the Chief Justice and, for the reasons stated by him,
would have refused
special leave. I agree also with the remainder of his reasons for judgment
and, since special leave is to be given,
would allow this appeal, set aside
the answer to the third question asked and substitute for it an answer in the
form set out in
the reasons of the Chief Justice and dismiss the cross-appeal.
2. I wish only to add this : although the cost of constructing that portion
of the reservoir situated on the respondents' land is
no doubt one fact to
which the Land Appeal Court may have regard, I regard the reference to this
particular fact in the answer to
the third question as dictated rather by the
inference which might otherwise flow from the answer to the second question
any particular weight to be given to the cost of construction as a
factor in assessing compensation. The cost of construction is
a fact which has
achieved prominence in this case due, no doubt, to the decision in Geita Sebea
v. Territory of Papua
; (1941) 67 CLR
544 . However, in that case a complete
entity, a fully constructed aerodrome, was in question and in the
circumstances
there existing
the cost of erecting the improvements of which
that aerodrome consisted, less an allowance for depreciation, was clearly
importance. What is here involved is an incomplete portion of a
structure ; its incorporation as an integral part of a completed
reservoir may
perhaps pose substantial engineering problems affecting its value to the
respondent as a possible purchaser. The tribunal
of fact will no doubt assess
the weight to be given to the cost of construction in the light of this. (at
Objection to competency upheld. By majority special leave to appeal granted.
Appeal allowed. Order of the Full Court of the Supreme
Court of Queensland
varied by ordering that the third question asked in the stated case be
answered as follows:
"Compensation is to be assessed for the land
and all its improvements including the structure
of the partially completed reservoir. It is to be
supposed that the balance of the reservoir had not
been built at the date of the compulsory
acquisition. The respondent may be regarded as a
possible purchaser. The compensation will in
this case be that sum which the Land Appeal
Court decides that the respondent if a purchaser
would give and the appellants accept, for the land
and all its improvements, each being willing
but not anxious respectively to buy and to sell and
without being under any compulsion to do so.
In estimating the price which would be so agreed,
the Land Appeal Court may have regard along
with any other relevant evidence to the cost of
constructing the partially completed reservoir,
not as a measure of price or value but as a fact
to be weighed in making the estimate"
and by deleting the order for costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter