A v Complainant and the Secretary, Department of Defence [1993] PrivCmrACD 1 (22 December 1993)
Case Citation
Determination No. 1 of 1993
Between, "A", Complainant and the Secretary, Department of Defence,
This determination relates to a complaint lodged by, "A", in July 1991 under
against the Secretary, Department of Defence,
regarding an alleged unauthorised disclosure of personal information about
1. Evidence
While the Respondent has not formally accepted the facts of the complaint, I
note that he has not made any representations to me in
relation to the facts
following the notice issued by me under
section 43(5)
However, the Respondent has requested me to deal with the issues and law and any
remedies by way of determination.
In December 1990 A applied for a job as a sales representative with a finance
company in Newcastle. He was interviewed on a Friday
afternoon and immediately
offered the position to start the following Monday. In the course of the
interview he advised that he had
previously been enlisted in the Army. As he had
not provided a discharge certificate the employer contacted the Townsville Army
after the interview. The employer has confirmed that the Townsville Army
Base advised that A had been discharged the previous January
because he had been
Absent Without Leave for greater than six months. On arrival at work the
following Monday morning the employer
dismissed him and angrily asked him to
leave immediately. A subsequently ascertained that his Army record had been
disclosed to the
The usual practice of the Army on discharge is to provide the member with a
certificate setting out the soldier’s rank and period
of service but no
reason for discharge is given. In this case, as the member was Absent Without
Leave at the time of discharge, I
accept that this procedure could not be
The rules which apply to disclosures to third parties about a former
member’s service are contained in the Army Manual of Personnel
Administration (MPA) Volume 1 Chapter 2. These rules were not observed in this
case, at this base on this occasion; in particular
in that details of the basis
of discharge were given.
The disclosure was unauthorised and is affected by two Information Privacy
Principles (IPPs), 4 and 11. IPP 4, so far as is material,
"A record-keeper who has possession or control of a record that contains
personal information shall ensure:"
(a) that the record is protected, by such security safeguards as it is
reasonable in the circumstances to take, ... against unauthorised
disclosure,"
IPP 11.1 contains two basic propositions: one, a record keeper [the Army] has
a duty not to disclose any information to any third
party; and two, that duty is
subject to certain exceptions, being those contained in (a) to (e) of IPP
In this case the exceptions have no relevance as the disclosure was not in
accordance with established policy setting out what is
permitted to be disclosed
and in what circumstances. It appears clear, in light of the employer’s
information that an employee
of the Department of Defence disclosed the
information. The employer said that the information was obtained from the
Townsville Army
Base by telephone.
of the Act states that "an act done ... by ... a person employed by
... an agency in the performance of the duties of a person’s
shall be treated as having been done ... by ... the agency ...".
I consider that in dealing with complaints of unauthorised disclosure I
should treat an agency as bound by an employee’s act,
within the meaning
, unless there is persuasive evidence that an employee had
intentionally sought to act outside the scope of employment by, for example,
flagrantly breaching accepted agency standards or defying specific directions.
No such evidence was placed before me in this case.
3. Findings
I find that the respondent agency did not in the circumstances ensure that
the record was protected by such security safeguards as
it was reasonable to
take against unauthorised access, or disclosure or other misuse as required by
Information Privacy Principle
4; and that the disclosure was not authorised by
IPP 11. Accordingly, I find A’s complaint substantiated in that, in my
there has been a breach of Information Privacy Principle 4 and, as a
consequence, also of IPP 11.
A. Economic Loss
A had, at the time the disclosure took place, been offered a position with a
finance company. Probably, as a result of that disclosure
he lost the
opportunity to establish a career in which he was interested and which he
expected to find fulfilling. A was dismissed
before he had the opportunity to
commence work and it is my view that his dismissal was a probable result of the
unauthorised disclosure.
The position which A had gained carried an annual salary of $28,000, a car
(including a private use component) and the opportunity
for travel. I consider
that A is entitled to a sum of money in compensation for lost wages. I
appreciate that there is no guarantee
that A would have continued in the job.
However, a probationary period of at least one month would be the normal
expectation of a
person who had gained such a position. I therefore consider
that A is entitled to be compensated for the loss of 30 days’ salary.
is also entitled to be compensated for the loss of the use of a vehicle for that
time. The total amount of economic loss is $2,500.
B. Non-economic Loss
A also suffered considerable humiliation and embarrassment. A states that on
the day he reported to commence work the manager refused
to shake his hand, told
him to leave the office and that this caused him considerable embarrassment and
distress. His representations
to my office include a number of references to the
humiliation he felt when he was dismissed from his employment. I consider that
the events of that day and the humiliation and embarrassment suffered by A were
a direct consequence of the disclosure by the Army.
While the ramifications of
the disclosure were serious for A, they do refer to an isolated incident and the
damage is, in my view,
restricted to that event. I am of the view that having
regard to all the circumstances of the case, compensation in the amount of
$2,500 for non-economic loss would be appropriate.
4. Determination
I declare, in accordance with
section 52(1)(b)(iii)
that A is entitled to $5,000 as compensation for the embarrassment caused by the
disclosure, and for the wages lost as a result
of the disclosure. I also
declare, in accordance with
section 52(1)(b)(ii)
Department of Defence should pay A the amount of $5,000 as compensation for the
interference with his privacy.
Dated 22 December 1993
KEVIN O’CONNOR
No downloadable files available