Tyler & Fortini [2021] FamCAFC 168 (25 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Tyler & Fortini
[2021] FamCAFC
Appeal from:
Consent Orders
Appeal number(s):
SOA 39 of 2021
File number(s):
MLC 2148 of 2019
Judgment of:
STRICKLAND J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – PROPERTY
– Where the final property settlement orders were made by consent –
Where the appeal
is misconceived – Where no appealable error by the
primary judge is demonstrated – Appeal dismissed.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Melbourne via telephone link to Adelaide
The Appellant:
Solicitor-Advocate for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Morgan Legal Pty Ltd
MLC 2148 of 2019
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
STRICKLAND J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The Notice of Appeal filed on 24 June 2021 be dismissed.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Tyler & Fortini
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
EX TEMPORE REASONS
FOR JUDGMENT
1 This is a further hearing in relation to a Notice of Appeal filed by Mr
Tyler (“the appellant”) on 24 June 2021, appealing
against final
orders for property settlement made by consent on 27 May 2021.
2 There was a hearing listed in this matter on 17 August 2021, but
unfortunately, for reasons which I do not need to address, the
appellant did not
appear and I adjourned the hearing to today. The appellant has appeared today
and I understand that he wishes
to pursue this appeal. However, in my view, the
appeal is misconceived and must be dismissed, and, indeed, that is the oral
application
made today on behalf of Ms Fortini (“the
respondent”).
3 I should note one other thing though before I proceed, and that is that
although the appellant did not appear at the hearing on
17 August 2021, I made
certain remarks for the purpose of the transcript as to the appeal, and I
arranged for the Appeal Registrar
to provide the parties, including the
appellant, with the transcript of that hearing. My purpose in doing that was to
alert particularly
the appellant to my views in relation to the appeal, and that
it was misconceived.
4 In any event, the hearing has proceeded today.
5 I have confirmed the view that I formed in relation to this appeal with the
appellant and, of course, counsel for the respondent,
and the appellant has made
oral submissions in an attempt to keep the appeal alive. However, they were
unpersuasive and I remain
of the view that the appeal is misconceived. My
reasons for that are as follows.
6 First, the orders, as I have said, are final orders for property
settlement, and they were made on 27 May 2021. At that hearing,
both parties,
including the appellant, were represented by counsel, and according to the
transcript of that hearing, at the commencement
of the hearing time was sought
by counsel for the appellant to meet with him to discuss the matter, and the
primary judge gave that
time. The matter was adjourned at 10:40am, having
commenced at 10:36am.
7 According to the transcript, the hearing resumed at 2:35pm, when her Honour
was advised by both counsel that the matter had settled,
and they had minutes of
consent order to present to her, which they did. They were handwritten minutes,
and her Honour had some
difficulty in reading some of the handwriting, but
as is apparent from the transcript, her Honour clarified that, received
appropriate
responses as to those issues, and her Honour then said this
following that toing and froing, as I describe it, between bar and bench,
the precise terms of the minutes of consent order:
HER HONOUR: Thank you. I have read the materials. Mr
Baume, is there anything further that you wanted to say in relation to these
consent orders?
And I interpolate to say, that Mr Baume was the counsel who appeared for the
appellant husband. So continuing:
MR BAUME: No, your Honour.
HER HONOUR: All right, then. Thank you, Mr Baume. All right, then, well,
having read the consent orders and having read the documents
in the files, and
in particular, the documents that have been filed on behalf of the applicant
wife, in particular the updated case
outline dated 24 May 2021, and the
Chronology and the table Assets Liabilities Contributions and Future Needs, I am
satisfied that
in the circumstances of this case these orders are just and
equitable and the Court will make those orders accordingly. ...
(Transcript 27 May 2021, p.8 lines 15–26)
And her Honour then went on to make the orders.
8 In the Notice
of Appeal filed on 24 June 2021, there are four orders appealed, namely, orders
5, 6, 7 and 8. And under the heading
Grounds of Appeal, the appellant, who it
seems prepared this Notice of Appeal himself, without any legal assistance, set
1. From my understanding I agreed to accept $35,000 from
the joint asset pool after the joint debt of $38,000 had been paid off.
2. There was no discussion of my Australian Super Fund. I did not consent to
paras 5 and 7, 8, 9.
3. My ex-wife is actively pursuing my UK Pension in contradiction to paragraph
4. My legal representatives have been disingenuous.
9 I note that none of those so-called grounds of appeal can, in fact, be
described as such, given in particular that they do not demonstrate
appealable error by the primary judge. That, of course, is what an appeal is
needs to demonstrate that the
primary judge has made an appealable error such that the appeal should be
allowed. Thus, the Notice
of Appeal does not, to repeat, demonstrate any
appealable error by the primary judge, and, indeed, in the circumstances of the
given how it was finalised with consent orders, none of the complaints
raised under the heading Grounds of Appeal can be, to use
the vernacular,
sheeted home to the primary judge. Her Honour, in making the consent orders,
has carried out her duty and responsibility
in satisfying herself on the
documents before her that the consent orders were just and equitable.
10 The appellant argued that her Honour had prejudged the matter by making
certain comments during the hearing. Those comments were
as follows:
HER HONOUR: ...But I’m very conscious of the fact
that this matter has been listed for final hearing, I think, on no less than
three occasions, and there is a degree of inevitability of the outcome, in my
view, of this particular matter. ...
(Transcript 27 May 2021, p.3 lines 30-32)
And further:
HER HONOUR: Yes. Thank you. Mr Baume, given the
difficult [sic] we’ve had getting your client here today and that this
has been adjourned on, I think, three occasions, a period of time for you
to confer with your client but not to extend it. Because
if agreement
can’t be reached, in my view, there’s a fairly inevitable outcome to
this case, I will probably call the
matter on and we will proceed.
(Transcript 24 May 2021, p.3 lines 42-46)
11 These comments were made in the context of her Honour allowing counsel
time to confer with the appellant and explore a negotiated
settlement. They do
not indicate prejudgment, but reveal that her Honour had formed a preliminary
view of the outcome, being familiar
with the matter. It was not only quite
appropriate for the primary judge to make such comments, but indeed, it was
incumbent on
her to do so in the circumstances.
12 Thus, to repeat, in my view, the appeal is misconceived and must be
13 However, as I have indicated to the appellant, he may have two other
courses of action. One is to file an application pursuant
s 79A(1)(a)
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), alleging a miscarriage of justice and seeking
to either set aside the orders or vary the orders on that basis. The other
course of action I have identified that may be open to the appellant, is an
action against his legal representatives because, as
is plain from what he has
set out under the heading of Grounds of Appeal, at least three of those matters
relate to his legal representatives
on the day.
14 In any event, they are matters for the appellant to consider, and all I am
dealing with is this Notice of Appeal, which for the
reasons that I have
indicated, I propose to dismiss.
I certify that the
preceding fourteen (14) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
Judgment of the Honourable Justice
Dated: 31 August 2021
RTF format (302 KB)
Signed PDF/A format