Santos NSW Pty Ltd and Another v Gomeroi People and Another [2025] NNTTA 12 (19 May 2025)
NATIONAL NATIVE TITLE TRIBUNAL
Santos NSW Pty Ltd and Another v Gomeroi People and Another
[2025] NNTTA
(19 May 2025)
Application No:
NF2021/0003-0006
IN THE MATTER of an inquiry into a future act determination
application
Gomeroi People (NC2011/006)
(native title party/Gomeroi)
Santos NSW Pty Ltd and Santos NSW (Narrabri
Gas) Pty Ltd
(grantee parties/Santos)
State of New South Wales
(Government party/State)
FUTURE ACT DETERMINATION THAT THE ACT MAY BE DONE SUBJECT TO
President Smith; Member Eaton; Member Kelly
Catchwords:
native title – future act – future act determination
application – remittal – engagement with expert –
evidence – s 39 criteria considered – effect of act on native title
rights and interests – enjoyment of
native title rights and interests
– particular significance – public interest in doing of act –
effects of climate
change – decisions and recommendations of other bodies
– cultural heritage protection under State legislation
Legislation:
and Torres Strait Islander Heritage Protection Act 1984
Conservation Act 2016
Change (Net Zero Future) Act 2023
(NSW) s 3(1)
Environmental
Planning and Assessment Act 1979
(NSW) s 4.41
Environmental
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
Environment
Protection Legislation Amendment (Stronger Regulation and Penalties) Act
Greenhouse and Energy Reporting Act 2007
(Cth) ss 7, 22XJ
Greenhouse and Energy Reporting (Safeguard Mechanism) Rule 2015
Safeguard Mechanism
Parks and Wildlife Act 1974
Parks and Wildlife Regulations 2019
Title Act 1993
(Cth) ss 3(a), 29(2), 35, 36(2), 38, 39, 41, 50
Native Title Act
of the Environment Administration Act 1991
of the Environment Operations Act 1997
Australian Potash Limited and Another v
Kalman Murphy and Ors on behalf of Waturta
Australian Potash
Bonnington Castings Ltd v Wardlaw
[1956] UKHL 1
[1956] AC 613
Bonnington Castings
Callychurn and Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Callychurn v ASIC
Coalpac Pty Ltd/State of New South Wales/Gundungurra Tribal Council
Aboriginal Corporation #6 (NC97/7), Wiray-dyuraa Maying-gu (NC11/3),
Warrabinga-Wiradjuri People (NC11/4)/State of New South Wales
Connell v Santos New South Wales Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWLEC 1
(2014) 199 LGERA 84
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 46 FLR 409
Environment Council of Central Queensland Inc v Minister for the
Environment and Water
[2024] FCAFC 56
Living Wonders
Evans v Western Australia
(1997) 77 FCR 193
FMG Pilbara Pty Ltd v Yindjibarndi Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC
(2014) 227 FCR 182
FMG v Yindjibarndi
Gomeroi People v Santos NSW Pty Ltd and Santos NSW (Narrabri Gas)
principal reasons
Gomeroi People v Santos NSW Pty Ltd and Santos NSW (Narrabri Gas)
Pty Ltd (No 2)
Jagroop and Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2015) 67 AAR 288
Kanak v National Native Title Tribunal
(1995) 61 FCR 103
Magnesium Resources Pty Ltd; Anthony Warren Slater/Puutu Kunti Kurrama
and Pinikura People; Puutu Kunti Kurrama and Pinikura People
[2011] NNTTA 80
Magnesium Resources
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR 24
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Wang
215 CLR 518
Minister for Lands, State of Western Australia and Another v
Buurabalayji Thalanyji Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC
Minister for Mines (WA) v Evans
(1998) 163 FLR 274
Milirrpum v Nabalco Pty Ltd
(1971) 17 FLR 141
Muccan Minerals Pty Ltd and Another v Allen and Others on behalf of
Mullaley Gas and Pipeline Accord Inc v Santos NSW (Eastern) Pty Ltd
(2021) 252 LGERA 221
Mullaley Gas v Santos
O’Sullivan v Farrer
168 CLR 210
Re Koara People
[1996] NNTTA 31
(1996) 132 FLR 73
Santos NSW Pty Ltd and Another v Gomeroi People and
2022 Determination
Shi v Migration Agents Registration Authority
(2008) 235 CLR 286
Silver v Northern Territory of Australia
(2002) 169 FLR 1
Smith v Western Australia
(2001) 108 FCR 442
Top End (Default PBC/CLA) Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Kess Diamond
Marstella & Core Uranium Pty Ltd
Top End v Kess Diamond Marstella
Top End (Default PBC/CLA) Aboriginal Corporation v Northern Territory of
Walley v Western Australia
(1999) 87 FCR 565
Watson on behalf of Nyikina & Mangala v Backreef Oil Pty Ltd
Watson v Backreef
Western Australia v Thomas
(1996) 133 FLR 124
Western Desert Lands Aboriginal Corporation v Western Australia
(2009) 232 FLR 169
Western Desert Lands
Wildlife Preservation Society of Queensland Proserpine/Whitsunday Branch
Inc v Minister for the Environment and Heritage
(2006) 232 ALR 510
Wildlife Preservation
Yindjibarndi Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v FMG Pilbara Pty
Ltd and Another
Yindjibarndi v FMG
Representatives of the native title party:
Fiona McLeod SC, Dr Angus Frith and Winsome Hall, Counsel
Mishka Holt
and William Scott, NTSCORP Limited
Representatives of the grantee parties:
Raelene Webb KC and Marc McKechnie, Counsel
Rebecca Hughes, Alice Jiang
and Clare Lawrence, Ashurst Australia
Representatives of the Government party:
Henry El Hage SC and Melita Parker, Counsel
Karen Smith, NSW Crown
TABLE OF CONTENTS
DETERMINATION SUMMARY
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
INTRODUCTION
THE TASK OF THE PANEL
DETERMINATION UNDER S 38
Project description
The Aboriginal cultural heritage protection regime in
Consideration of section 39(1)(a)
Climate change
Section 39(1)(a)(i) – the effect of the acts on the
enjoyment of Gomeroi of their native title rights and interests
[103]–[122]
Section 39(1)(a)(ii) – the effect of the acts on Gomeroi
way of life, culture and traditions
[123]–[171]
Section 39(1)(a)(iii) – the effect of the acts on the
development of Gomeroi social, cultural and economic structures
[172]–[181]
Section 39(1)(a)(iv) – the effect of the acts on Gomeroi
freedom of access to the land and waters, and freedom to carry out
ceremonies or other activities of cultural significance
[182]–[190]
Section 39(1)(a)(v) – the effect of the acts on any area
or site, on the land or waters concerned, of particular significance
native title parties in accordance with their traditions
[191]–[237]
Pilliga as a place of significance
[195]–[203]
Yarrie Lake
[204]–[207]
Bohena Creek
[208]–[212]
Wombat Rock and Yaminbah
[213]–[220]
Effect of the proposed future acts on Yarrie Lake
[221]–[229]
Comments in relation to the Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Management
[230]–[237]
Consideration of section 39(1)(b) – the interests,
proposals or wishes of the native title party in relation to the in relation
the management, use or control of land or waters that will be affected by the
[238]–[248]
Consideration of section 39(1)(c) – the economic or other
significance of the act to Australia, the State, the area where the
located, and Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait Islanders who live in that
[249]–[265]
Contentions and evidence
[257]–[261]
Consideration
[262]–[265]
Consideration of section 39(1)(e) – any public interest
in the doing of the act
[266]–[386]
Public benefits and public detriments
[281]–[284]
Counterfactual
[285]–[299]
Direct and indirect
[300]–[312]
Contentions and evidence
[313]–[346]
EIS and related evidence
[315]–[323]
Energy security (supply)
[324]–[328]
[329]–[333]
Impacts of climate change: expert evidence
[334]–[341]
Impacts of climate change: Gomeroi witnesses
[342]–[346]
Regulatory regime
[347]–[356]
Safeguard Mechanism
[347]–[349]
NSW legislation
[350]–[351]
IPC conditions
[352]–[356]
The weighing of public interest
[357]–[386]
[363]–[365]
Energy security and affordability
[366]–[373]
Environmental protections
[374]–[380]
Social impacts
[381]–[386]
Consideration of section 39(1)(f) – any other relevant
[387]–[397]
[398]–[402]
[403]–[418]
DETERMINATION
ANNEXURE 1 – MAP OF PETROLEUM PRODUCTION LEASE
APPLICATIONS 13, 14, 15 & 16
ANNEXURE 2 – MAP OF CLAIM AREA
DETERMINATION SUMMARY
This decision is made
under s 38 of the
Native Title Act
and concerns whether certain future
acts, being the grant of several petroleum production leases to Santos NSW Pty
and Santos NSW
(Narrabri Gas) Pty Ltd, may be done.
Santos proposes to conduct a gas extraction operation on the leases, known as
the Narrabri Gas Project. The proposed leases are 95,000ha
in size, located to
the south and west of Narrabri and overlapped entirely by the registered Gomeroi
native title determination application.
In December 2022, following an initial inquiry into the grant of the leases,
the National Native Title Tribunal determined the acts
may be done subject to
conditions.
In January 2023, Gomeroi lodged an appeal of the 2022 determination with the
Federal Court of Australia. The Full Court of the Federal
Court unanimously
rejected Gomeroi's five grounds of appeal relating to good faith. The appeal was
however allowed on Ground 3, with
the Full Court finding the Tribunal erred in
concluding it was prohibited from considering environmental matters except in
to a ‘particular environmental concern having particular effect
on native title’. The Full Court observed that under
s 39(1)(e), whether
features or characteristics of the future act that might be broadly described as
‘environmental’
weighed for or against the public interest in the
doing of the act ought to have been properly considered.
Accordingly, in April 2024 the 2022 determination was set aside, and the
lease applications were remitted back to the Tribunal for
hearing and
determination according to law.
Approximately 70% of the total area of the leases overlap the northeastern
portion of an area known as the Pilliga, an important cultural
landscape of the
Gomeroi people. The Pilliga is a conglomeration of forested areas that total
more than 500,000 hectares, and the
leases overlap approximately 13% of this
cultural landscape.
The Narrabri project is the construction and operation of a gas field which
includes refining facilities, gas and water processing,
and associated
infrastructure. Gas is to be extracted from coal seams between 300 and 1200
metres below ground, produced from up
to 850 new wells on a maximum of 425 well
Given the nature of the project, its sensitive location for the Gomeroi
people, and the lengthy approvals history to date, the evidence
in this matter
has been extensive and the panel has carefully considered and weighed up all the
material before it.
The public interest criteria set out at s 39(1)(e), and consideration of
environmental or climate change impacts, was a large focus
of the appeal and
resultingly this remittal decision.
There was broad consensus between the experts for Gomeroi and Santos
regarding current climate science. This was of assistance to
the panel. It is
not controversial that there is more than one source of greenhouse gas
emissions, and more than one cause of global
warming, and it would be an error
for the Tribunal to attribute every consequence of global warming to the
proposed future act. Instead,
the panel has taken into account, based on the
evidence before it, the greenhouse gas emissions of the project and the
consequential
effects of those emissions, including any contribution to global
warming. Gomeroi’s expert and traditional owner evidence demonstrates
climate change will contribute to local and regional risks and impacts. The
contribution of the project to the effects of climate
change is a serious
detriment to be considered.
When considering public interest, the panel placed significant weight on the
project providing energy reliability if all the gas produced
is made available
to the domestic market as intended. The evidence in this matter has shown that
if the leases are not granted, there
will likely be a gap in the available
supply of reliable, secure energy on Australia’s east coast, which would
have significant
short-to-medium-term detrimental impacts upon the wider
community, including Gomeroi people.
Weighing the public interest evidence, including the evidence addressing
environmental matters, the panel has found the Project offers
a net public
benefit, particularly where conditions are imposed to address the environmental
and social impacts.
The panel has also carefully undertaken the broader task set out at s 39,
weighing the likely effect of the project on the matters
set out in s 39(1)(a),
particularly the likely effect on: the enjoyment by Gomeroi of their registered
native title rights; Gomeroi
way of life, culture and traditions; freedom of
access to the lease areas overlapped by the important cultural landscape and
of the Pilliga; and the risk to significant sites Yarrie Lake and
Bohena Creek. This was considered alongside the expressed wishes
of the Gomeroi
people that the Project does not proceed in the absence of their consent (s
39(1)(b)), the broader economic significance
of the Project (s 39(1)(c)), and
all other factors required under s 39.
The panel has determined the leases may be granted, subject to various
conditions to be complied with by the parties under s 38(1)(c).
The imposed
conditions go to three broad categories:
there to be a net weighing that the project is in the public interest, all of
the gas recovered must be used for domestic supply
strengthening of Aboriginal cultural heritage protections, as the evidence
demonstrated identified risks to cultural heritage,
including as a result of the
project’s classification as a State Significant Development.
implementation of a ranger program covering the Pilliga Forest, to manage
Country, protect the environment, and monitor and manage
ecological threats.
These conditions go to the cultural concerns and obligations of Gomeroi people,
but also cultural safety and
environment as important matters of consideration
under public interest.
This summary in no way affects or varies the
detailed reasons which appear below.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
INTRODUCTION
decision concerns whether the
ales may grant
pplications 13, 14, 15 and 16 (
grantee parties
NSW Pty and Santos NSW (Narrabri Gas) Pty
Ltd. Santos proposes to conduct a gas extraction operation on the leases,
described as
the Narrabri Gas
[2] President
Kevin Smith, Member Lisa Eaton and Member Glen Kelly were appointed to form a
and constitute the National Native Title
purpose of this remitted determination.
[3] PPLA13 is
located approximately 31 km south-west of Narrabri NSW and comprises of an area
approximately 266 sq km. PPLA14 is located
approximately 20 km south of Narrabri
NSW and comprises of an area approximately 153 sq km. PPLA15 is located
approximately 22 km
west-south-west of Narrabri NSW and comprises of an area
approximately 264 sq km. PPLA16 is located approximately 343 km west of
NSW and comprises an area of approximately 241 sq km. The leases cumulatively
comprise an area of approximately 924 sq km
to this determination is a map
showing the approved Project area as described in the
ommission of NSW Development Consent.
September 2020, the IPC granted development consent for the Project, subject to
134 conditions. On 18 October 2021, that
decision was upheld by the Land and
Environment Court of NSW.
[5] The panel
has given due regard to the findings of the IPC concerning the Project. To give
some context to these findings, the
relevant aspects of the key impacts of the
Project identified by the IPC are summarised
Groundwater and agriculture:
The IPC imposed conditions requiring
further information to improve the groundwater impact modelling before the
Project proceeds to
Phase 2. The imposed conditions relating to groundwater do
not permit Santos to establish the production field (Phase 2) if the revised
groundwater model predicts an exceedance of the water management performance
measures identified in the consent. The IPC put the
burden of proof on Santos to
demonstrate any adverse direct impact to water supply is not due to its
activities and strengthened
the obligation to supply compensatory water or
provide other compensation for attributable impacts. Santos must develop a Water
Plan to be approved by the Planning Minister addressing water
management performance measures including negligible changes to groundwater
level and quality, a negligible change to surface water quality in any
watercourse, and implementation of all reasonable and feasible
measures to
minimise risk of leaks and spills.
GHG Emissions:
The IPC acknowledged it had received submissions that
the direct emissions of the Project had been underestimated, ‘which would
jeopardise the expected greenhouse gas emissions advantage of CSG over
coal’. As such, the IPC imposed a condition requiring
that Santos ensure
all reasonable and feasible avoidance and mitigation measures are employed so
that greenhouse gas (
) emissions generated do not exceed certain
criteria listed in its reasons. The IPC also required Santos develop cumulative
forecasts over the 25-year lifetime of the Project and it must monitor
and publicly report on the actual GHG emissions against those
forecasts and ensure that any exceedances are 100% offset within one year after
the reporting periods. The IPC only considered
‘Scope 1’ and
‘Scope 2’ emissions finding that that ‘Scope 3’
emissions were outside the direct
control of Santos and therefore not able to be
reasonably conditioned.
Biodiversity:
The IPC acknowledged the
high biodiversity value of the Pilliga but found that the Project would take
place in a portion only. The
IPC considered the relevant guidelines and offsets,
along with the Santos’ proposal for dealing with vegetation fragmentation,
and found that with the imposition of conditions it was satisfied the Project
would provide for the ‘appropriate management,
mitigation and monitoring
of the potential biodiversity impacts’. The conditions require that well
pads be placed a certain
distance apart, that infrastructure avoid certain
identified conservation areas and water resources, and that the total area of
disturbance
be limited. The conditions also attempt to limit the extent of
disturbance by requiring that impacts to identified ecosystems be
offset through
a ‘biodiversity credit’ system.
Waste Management:
The IPC considered the Project’s waste
generation and management and imposed conditions requiring Santos develop
appropriate
arrangements for the disposal of waste, a waste management plan and
minimise the on-site storage of waste.
The IPC noted that
enforceability of these conditions had been confirmed by the NSW
Aboriginal Cultural Heritage:
The IPC was satisfied that the
ssessment and
consultation has been undertaken in accordance with the relevant guidelines.
Several conditions were imposed, including
that the Project not directly or
indirectly impact heritage items identified in the consent, and providing
processes surrounding
the discovery of, or suspicion of, Aboriginal objects or
places during the Project. The conditions also provided for the creation
Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Advisory Group and the development of an
Bushfire risk:
The IPC identified four bushfire risks posed by the
Project, being: fire ignition risks posed from flaring activities; hazards posed
by methane (
) gas in the event of a bushfire; risks to the
facility from catastrophic bushfire events; and potential increases in the
and severity of bushfire events due to climate change. The IPC imposed
a condition requiring that the safety flare stack be 50 m
in height, which along
with appropriate clearance measures, and the development of Bushfire Management
Plan, they found would render
bushfire risks manageable.
Economic Impacts:
On balance the IPC found the Project will provide a
net economic benefit for the local community, region and State including through
potentially improving gas security for Australia's east coast domestic market.
The IPC based its finding on the economic modelling
found in the
nvironmental
tatement as assessed by the
Department of Planning and Environment and the Department’s independent
Social and health:
The IPC found that the Project was unlikely to be
a source of significant physical health impacts, and that conditions could
and enhance local community services and facilities. It imposed a
condition that Santos develop and implement a Social Impact Management
[6] On 4 June
2015, the State gave notice under s 29 of the
Native Title Act
(Cth), of the relevant Minister’s intention to grant to Santos,
the leases on land entirely subject to a native title determination
application
People NC2011/006. Gomeroi, as the registered native title
claimant, is the
native title party
in relation to the area of the
determination is a map of the native title claim area.
[7] On 5 May
2021, Santos lodged an application with the Tribunal for a
determination
that the proposed
acts may be done.
On 19 December
2022, then-President Dowsett determined that the acts may be done subject to
conditions (
Determination
[8] The panel
notes then-President Dowsett’s summary of the procedural history set out
at [1]-[77] of the 2022 Determination,
excluding statements relating to the
question of good faith.
January 2023, Gomeroi lodged an appeal of the 2022 Determination with the
Federal Court of Australia. On 6 March 2024, the
Federal Court of Australia gave
principal reasons
allowing the
On 12 April 2024, the 2022
Determination was set aside and
applications
NF2021/0003, NF2021/0004,
NF2021/0005 and NF2021/0006 were remitted to the Tribunal for hearing and
determination according to the
[10] Importantly,
the remittal judgment
(a) the matter is to be determined by the Tribunal without further evidence,
subject only to proper cause being shown for the adducing
of further evidence
and the Tribunal being satisfied it is appropriate to permit further evidence to
be adduced; and
(b) the parties are precluded from making any claim
that any other party did not negotiate in good faith.
1 May 2024, the panel were appointed. The panel convened a preliminary
conference in this matter on 24 May 2024. At the preliminary
conference the
parties indicated they may wish to submit further contentions and evidence. As
such, the Tribunal made directions
allowing all parties to lodge any statement
of contentions they wished to make addressing the request to submit further
on or by 7 June 2024. At the request of the parties, the Tribunal also
convened a short hearing on 1 August 2024 for oral submissions
[12] Following
the oral hearing, and having considered all the material before it, the panel
was satisfied it was appropriate to permit
limited further evidence be adduced.
On 9 August 2024, parties were provided with a draft of the proposed directions,
with reasons
for decision, and given the opportunity to comment. Final
directions were then issued on 19 August 2024. Such directions provided
the parties may concurrently lodge one expert report addressing any topic
related to climate change and relevant to the matters
the Tribunal must consider
in this inquiry. The native title party was also directed to provide updated lay
evidence of its three
witnesses who gave evidence in the initial inquiry,
relating to the effect of climate change impacts caused by the proposed grant
the leases.
[13] Parties
were given the opportunity to make submissions outlining any basis upon which
they were of the view that the remitted
inquiry cannot be adequately determined
on the papers per s 151 of the
Native Title Act
. On 3 December 2024, the
native title party and grantee parties provided submissions. Following a case
management conference on 9
December 2024, the panel made directions for a
conclave of experts, further submissions and a hearing. The reasons for this
were provided to parties on 19 December 2024.
January 2025, the panel conducted a conclave of experts. The conclave was held
in two parts, with Professor Karoly and
Doctor Mitchell addressing the topic of
climate change science, and Messrs Kelp and Mudge addressing the topic of energy
consultation with parties, an oral hearing was listed on 14 February 2025.
Following the oral hearing, and having regard
to submissions made by the
parties, the panel considered the issue of whether any additional evidence
should be permitted. The panel
decided that no further evidence, including any
further responsive expert evidence, was required. On 21 February 2025, a letter
circulated to parties providing reasons for this decision.
evidence in this matter has been extensive. In addition to the voluminous
material put before the Tribunal in the 2022 Determination,
the parties lodged
the following updated or further material:
(a) For Gomeroi-
further report addressing climate
including chapters from
Professor David Karoly,
Professor Brendan Mackey,
Evan Mudge,
Associate Professor
Nina Lansbury
and Dr Karl
of Jason Wilson;
of Steven Booby;
of Suellyn Tighe;
summary of contentions and statement of
contentions;
contentions
in reply with summary;
submissions prior to closing oral
on conditions;
(b) For Santos-
expert report addressing climate
including chapters from
Mr Owen Kelp
and Dr David
of contentions and statement of
contentions;
submissions
prior to closing oral
on conditions;
(c) For the State-
of contentions;
contentions of the Government party submitted in the original
submissions prior to closing oral
on conditions.
[17] For the
avoidance of doubt, the panel has had regard to all the material lodged in the
2022 Determination, in addition to the
material set out above. A summary of some
of the evidence provided in the initial inquiry can be found in the 2022
Determination,
particularly at [95]–[104]. Due to the sheer volume of
material before the Tribunal in this matter not all the evidence the
had regard to has been set out or specifically referred to.
[18] At the
request of Gomeroi, and following consultation with the parties, the panel made
directions prohibiting the disclosure
of identified culturally sensitive parts
of the statements of Ms Tighe, Mr Booby and Mr Wilson lodged in this remittal,
to specified persons for the purposes of this inquiry or any related
Nothing in those
directions prevents the panel from stating any findings of fact on which this
determination is based, however the
Tribunal has refrained from disclosing the
restricted evidence wherever possible and has particularly avoided setting out
details of cultural matters.
affidavits of Ms Tighe, Mr Booby, Mr Wilson and Mr Kumarage lodged in the 2022
Determination were also subject to non-disclosure
directions and are also
restricted evidence for the purposes of this
[20] On 28 March
2025, the panel notified parties that it had reached the preliminary view that
the act may be done subject to conditions
pursuant to s 38(1)(c) of the
Native Title Act
. Before finalising any determination in this matter, the
panel offered parties the opportunity to make any comments they wished to
regarding the proposed condition categories. On 11 April 2025, all parties made
submissions addressing the proposed conditions, which
the panel had regard to in
making this determination.
THE TASK OF THE PANEL
set out above, the 2022 Determination was set aside by the Full Court and
remitted to the Tribunal to be determined afresh
by this panel, save that the
parties are precluded from making any claim that any other party did not
negotiate in good faith.
accordance with the Orders of the Full Court, no party made any claim relating
to good faith in the remittal and the panel
is not prevented from making a
determination on the applications per s 36(2).
[23] The panel
has had regard to all of the evidence and material put forward by the parties in
the 2022 Determination, including
the transcripts of oral hearings, save for any
such evidence which solely related to the issue of good faith. The panel
with the parties that this would be the approach adopted, and parties
were invited to address their contentions to all of the evidence
and material
before the panel, that is; any evidence adduced in the 2022 Determination
together with any additional evidence lodged
over the course of this inquiry.
[24] The panel
is not bound to make the same findings made in the 2022 Determination; that
depends on the view formed by this panel
conducting the remitted
Further, the parties on
a remittal hearing are entitled to put arguments not raised on the original
application and are not limited
to matters raised on the
In some instances,
counsel for Santos and the State appeared to suggest the panel could not disturb
findings made in the 2022 Determination
where such findings were not raised in
appeal, however this submission is
In respect of this
remittal, the Tribunal is required to take into account all of the evidence
before it relating to all the factors
set out in s 39.
[25] Further,
as noted by the Full Court in the remitter, the Tribunal ought as a matter of
general principle be considering what
is the correct outcome on the most up to
date and relevant material available to
The panel must make the
correct and preferable decision having regard to the law and facts as it stands
at the date of the remittal
hearing, not as at the date of the original
DETERMINATION UNDER S 38
[26] Section
38(1) of the
Native Title Act
provides that, unless s 37 applies, the
panel must make one of the following determinations:
(a) a determination that the act must not be done;
(b) a determination that the act may be done; or
(c) a determination that the act may be done subject to conditions to be
complied with by any of the parties.
exceptions set out in s 37 of the
Native Title Act
do not apply in this
matter, as no agreement of the kind mentioned in s 31(1)(b) has been made, and
no determination under s 36A
has been made.
[28] Section
39(1) of the
Native Title Act
sets out the matters that the panel must
take into account in making a determination. The mandatory criteria in s 39
requires the
panel weigh potentially conflicting
with the weight to be
afforded dependent on the
considering the effect of the acts on the matters listed in s 39(1)(a), the
panel must also take into account the nature and
extent of existing non-native
title rights and interests in relation to the land or waters concerned and
existing use by persons
[30] Importantly,
Native Title Act
is a beneficial statute
and the future act right to negotiate regime is an element of the protection of
native title, one of the
main objects of the Act. That protection is not to be
narrowly construed.
[31] As noted by
Justice O’Bryan in the Full Court’s
principal reasons
right to negotiate was included in the
Native Title Act
as an important
element of the protections afforded to native title, but which also balanced the
interests of the broader Australian
[32] Within this
context, the mandatory criteria set out at s 39 of the
Native Title Act
requires the Tribunal have regard to the native title party when considering
sub-section, including when considering sub-paragraphs (1)(c), (e) and
(f), depending on the evidence before it.
[33] The Full
Court referenced this requirement throughout the remittal decision itself.
Justice O'Bryan observed that relevant paragraphs
relating to the economic or
other significance of the act, also requires the Tribunal ‘take into
account the interests, proposals,
opinions or wishes of the native title parties
in relation to the management, use or control of the lands or waters
concerned’.
observed paragraph 39(1)(f) requires the Tribunal ‘take into account any
other matter that it considered relevant,
which could be a matter relevant to
the interests of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples who hold, or
might hold, native
title rights and interests in land and waters affected by the
future act, or the interests of the broader Australian
community’.
[34] In relation
to 39(1)(e), the public interest criterion was a large focus of the appeal to
the Full Court and resultingly this
remittal decision. In the principal reasons,
Justice O’Bryan observed the phrase ‘any public interest in the
act proceeding’ necessarily requires consideration of the
public benefits
arising from the proposed act in order to assess whether there is
a net public interest in the act proceeding. His Honour went on
to note that
this net outcome must then in turn be weighed against any negative impact upon
the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples who hold, or might hold,
native title rights and interests in the affected land and
The Chief Justice also
affirmed the reasoning of Justice O’Bryan in relation to the weighing
exercise required under s
[35] Indeed,
each of the mandatory considerations in s 39 must be assessed by the Tribunal as
to whether it weighs for or against
a determination allowing or refusing the
doing of the act. As an administrative body, the Tribunal then has the
discretion to attribute
such weight to the evidence adduced before it as the
Tribunal considers
appropriate.
[36] For the
reasons set out below, and based on a careful consideration and weighing of all
the evidence before the Tribunal, the
panel has determined the act may be done
subject to various conditions to be complied with by the parties.
Project description
noted previously at
, the leases
comprise of an area approximately 924 sq km. Approximately 70% of the total area
of the leases overlap the northeastern
portion of a broader area known as the
Pilliga. The Pilliga is described as a conglomeration of forested areas that
total more than
500,000 hectares or
The leases overlap approximately 13% of the Pilliga, not an
insubstantial portion.
[38] The Project
is the construction, operation and subsequent decommissioning of a gas field
which includes refining facilities,
gas and water processing and associated
infrastructure.
[39] Gas is to
be extracted from coal seams between 300 and 1200 metres below ground, depending
on the formation.
This would be
produced from up to 850 new wells on a maximum of 425 well
with a footprint that may
affect up to approximately 10 sq km of native vegetation within the broader 950
sq km Project area.
km area is asserted by Santos to be conservative, providing an upper limit to
vegetation disturbance which they say is
more likely to be 27-67% of this upper
[40] Santos
state that the general location of each well would be dependent on the location
of gas reserves
with specific
location being subject to a Field Development Protocol which considers
geological, environmental, heritage, hydrological
and other factors, including
conditions imposed by the IPC. Santos gives evidence that location decisions
would also include consideration
of existing infrastructure such as roads and
tracks for co-location.
contend that existing access tracks are extensive due to previous timber
harvesting and gas exploration occurring since the
[41] Following
the identification of well pad location, Santos describe a process labelled
‘micrositing’ whereby detailed
site surveys are undertaken to
minimise the risk to ecological and heritage features. It is said that this
process provides flexibility
to relocate infrastructure in the event Aboriginal
sites or sensitive areas are
identified.
[42] Santos
gives evidence that each new drill pad requires the clearing of approximately 1
ha of land (100 by 100 metres) for
installation,
this cleared area
is reduced to approximately 50 by 50 metres six months following installation
and then the area is
[43] Water is
proposed to be extracted from each well reducing pressure and allowing the
liberation of gas. The water located in the
Project area has a salinity
approximately 40% that of ocean
This water and gas is
intended to be transported via field pipelines to either the Leewood central gas
processing facility or if
from the southern portion of the field, to the
Bibblewindi infield compressor station, which located within PPLA13 in the
forest, before then being piped to the Leewood facility for final
processing.
The Leewood facility
is located outside of, but contiguous to, the Pilliga forest.
[44] Santos
gives evidence that pipelines will be placed a minimum of 750 mm underground and
‘where practical’ will be
co-located along existing roads and access
indicating some clearing
for pipeline purposes will also be necessary.
[45] Prior to
the installation of gas field infrastructure, a Field Development Plan is
required to be developed
approved by the Planning Secretary of the Department of Planning, Housing and
Infrastructure.
According to
Condition D8 of the IPC Development Consent, Santos is required to submit an
annual review of environmental performance
and be audited for environmental
performance after one year and then every subsequent three
[46] The Project
is said to occur over four phases where Phase 1 is final planning, further
exploration and appraisal activities and
installation of ancillary
infrastructure, Phase 2 is developing the field itself (drilling, infrastructure
development), Phase 3
is operation and Phase 4 is
decommissioning.
[47] When wells
are decommissioned, Santos gives evidence that they are to be plugged and
isolated through the use of cement as the
sealing material by filling the total
depth of the well.
This, Santos
asserts, ensures protection of groundwater resources and isolation of coal seam
formations from other
formations.
rehabilitation work is required consistent with development consent conditions
set out by the IPC.
[48] Due to the
nature of the Project, emissions are a key component of both its operation and
this consideration. In accordance with
Australian and international standards,
emissions are expressed as scope 1, 2 or 3. Scope 1 emissions are those that are
directly from or by the operations of a project, scope 2 are indirect
emissions generated from the operation of a project through
the consumption of
energy from external sources and scope 3 are indirect emissions that occur
outside of the boundary of a project
or organisation that are a result of the
actions of that organisation or
[49] Emissions
estimates are provided in the
EIS. At the outset the panel notes that the
figures referred to in the EIS in relation to the GHG emissions estimates appear
at Appendix
R, which is dated August 2016 and based on data from
2013–2014. Unfortunately, no updated evidence on emissions estimates was
led, nor sought to be led, by Santos in relation to the Project so the evidence
available to the panel is now approximately 10 years
[50] The scope 1
figures contained in the EIS provide emissions broken into three stages of the
Project being construction, operation
and decommissioning and across six
categories of emissions in each of these stages being fuel combustion for
electricity generation,
flaring, venting, carbon dioxide (
venting, fugitive emissions and vegetation clearing. These are further expressed
in two options, option 1 where electricity is self-generated
or option 2 where
electricity is sourced from the national
[51] Across
these stages and categories, estimated annual scope 1 emissions for option 1 is
0.96 million tonnes (
) of carbon dioxide equivalent
) per annum, totalling a cumulative 26.3 Mt over the
life of the project. For option 2, the estimated annual scope 1 emissions is
-e per annum or a cumulative 15.5 Mt over the life of the
[52] If option 2
is preferred, scope 2 emissions for the project are estimated at 0.72 Mt
-e per annum amounting to 18 Mt over the life of the project.
Based on these figures, option 2 would have combined scope 1 and 2 emissions
-e over the life of the Project. There are no scope 2
emissions generated for option 1 given the internal generation of
electricity.
EIS also provides an estimate for scope 3 emissions, which would arise from
customers combusting purchased CH
for electricity generation or
other industrial purposes. These are provided to be 3.77 Mt CO
which equates to a
cumulative amount of 94.25 Mt over the course of the Project. Based on the EIS,
the total emissions from the Project
over its entire operation would be
approximately 121 Mt CO
-e for option 1 or approximately 128 Mt for
considering emissions, and the regulatory framework for the Project, it
important to consider the state and federal emissions
regimes. The relevant
emission regimes formed part of the panel’s consideration of both s
39(1)(a) and s 39(1)(e), however
it was particularly relevant to the
consideration of public interest and is considered in greater detail from [347]
to [351] below.
The Aboriginal cultural heritage protection regime in
noted by the parties, Aboriginal cultural heritage in NSW is primarily protected
but also a network of other pieces of legislation at both
the State and Commonwealth levels. This network involves the following
legislation:
National Parks and Wildlife Regulations 2019
Heritage Act 1997
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Heritage Protection Act 1984
Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
[56] Section 85
provides that the Chief Executive is responsible for the
protection of Aboriginal places and objects with s 86 of the
setting out offences for harming or desecrating Aboriginal objects or places.
Gomeroi contend that under the
there is little protection of
intangible Aboriginal cultural heritage and that it does not function to allow
Aboriginal people to
enforce the protections of culture and
The Gomeroi
contentions describe how the regime functions in a way that appears to be
similar to other heritage protection regimes
around the country; that is by
relying on deterrence by operating punitively following the occurrence of harm
rather than identifying
and protecting intangible cultural heritage before
damage occurs.
[57] Santos also
provides a general regime for the protection of
Aboriginal cultural heritage in NSW principally by establishing offences for
to Aboriginal objects and places as well as establishing the
ystem database to record Aboriginal objects and
Similar databases are in
existence in other states and territories across Australia. Santos also explains
that Aboriginal places
and objects may also be separately listed on the State
Heritage Register established under the
Heritage Act 1977
Gomeroi contend that
AHIMS may not include certain sites of importance to them for various reasons
and Santos does appear to acknowledge
[58] Santos
contends that the Project is also subject to extensive conditions under the IPC
Development Consent pertaining to the
protection of Aboriginal cultural
heritage, which are all reflected in the ACHMP which has been developed by
Santos in consultation
with Gomeroi
The State also points to
the conditions under the IPC Development Consent as mitigating risk to
Aboriginal cultural heritage by the
[59] While the
State initially made contentions about its cultural heritage protection regime
within GVP Amended Contentions at [30]
to [36], strangely the State resiled from
those statement (amongst many others from the GVP Amended Contentions) and
stated they
should not be taken into
In fact, in the updated
version of the GVP Amended Contentions lodged on 8 November 2024, those
paragraphs were redacted from the
document. It is unclear to the panel why this
choice was made by the State, but it appears that State has resiled from the
made in those redacted paragraphs and the panel has not taken them
into account.
[60] Relevantly,
Aboriginal object
deposit, object or material evidence (not being a handicraft made for sale)
relating to the Aboriginal habitation of the
area that comprises New South
Wales, being habitation before or concurrent with (or both) the occupation of
that area by persons
of non-Aboriginal extraction, and includes Aboriginal
[61] Section 84
The Minister may, by order published
in the Gazette, declare any place specified or described in the order, being a
place that, in
the opinion of the Minister, is or was of special significance
with respect to Aboriginal culture, to be an Aboriginal place for
the purposes
of this Act.
definition of ‘Aboriginal object’ speaks of ‘...any deposit,
object or material evidence...’. Any
commonsense reading of this
definition points to physical, tangible aspects of cultural heritage. The term
‘object’ itself
denotes something physical and tangible. On the
other hand, the definition of ‘Aboriginal place’ set out in s 84 of
appears to be broader in terms of the potential to consider
intangible heritage, giving discretion to the Minister to take into account
places of special significance with respect to Aboriginal culture. This wording
appears to encompass both tangible and intangible
aspects of cultural
[63] The panel
also notes that, as the Project is classified as a State Significant Development
by the State, an
is not required and the offences relating to the desecration and harm of
Aboriginal objects and places do not
This exclusion could have
serious consequences for the Gomeroi people and their cultural heritage.
mechanics of the Aboriginal cultural heritage protection regime and the IPC
conditions appear to function through the ACHMP
and the processes contained
within that document. As noted from [230] to [237] below, the panel has
identified various issues with
the ACHMP, many of which were raised by the
native title party, which do not give the panel faith in its ability to properly
Gomeroi cultural heritage in the lease areas. For these reasons the
panel has decided to impose conditions to augment and supplement
the ACHMP in
order to strengthen the protection of Gomeroi cultural heritage in the lease
Consideration of section 39(1)(a)
[65] Section
s 39(1)(a) of the
Native Title Act
expressly requires the Tribunal to
consider the effect of the act on the matters listed in s 39(1)(a)(i)–(v).
The Tribunal
must form a view as to the activities proposed to be undertaken by
a grantee party, and considering the evidence before it, determine
the impact on
the mandatory considerations of s
evidence provided as to the s 39(1)(a) criteria is extensive. While it is
in this determination, the original evidence provided by
the parties is set out in the 2022 Determination from [563] onwards.
[67] The updated
affidavit evidence of the Gomeroi claimants focuses on the effects of the
Project in terms of contended climate change
impacts. Given much of the evidence
addressing s 39(1)(a) is restricted, these reasons avoid specificity or
locations where possible.
[68] Relevant to
this criterion, the evidence from Gomeroi covers two broad areas of focus. The
first is the direct physical impact
of the construction and operation of the
proposed gas field which includes concern regarding a range of environmental
impacts and
how this relates to the s 39(1)(a) criteria. The second relates to
indirect impacts and is focused on the impact of climate change
as a result of
the emissions of the Project, and by extension, the impact on factors that
relate to the s 39(1)(a) criteria. Both
broad focus areas require examination in
each of the criteria.
relevant evidence can be broadly grouped into four themes:
(a) the broader cosmological view possessed by the Gomeroi people, including the
relationship of this view to the Pilliga;
(b) Gomeroi culture and cultural values relating to both people and land;
(c) water and the cultural values surrounding water, waterways and water
sources; and
(d) the way Gomeroi contend the act, both directly and indirectly, will impact
upon the physical environment and the flora and fauna
of the area.
evidence relating to cosmological matters effectively provides the foundation
from which the other types of information from
Gomeroi is cast. It is difficult
to paint a full picture of this information due to evidence restrictions however
it can be said
this topic traverses a broad range of information that relates to
the broader Gomeroi group. This includes astronomical, cultural
and cosmological
information, information on ancestor and spiritual beings and the manner in
which they are embedded or otherwise
manifest in the landscape, ideas of layered
realms in land and above including the interconnectedness between them, the
which these things generate cultural views and practices such as
respect and avoidance and the knowledges that are given rise to.
[71] While the
evidence provides a broader Gomeroi view, it also specifically addresses the
Pilliga region and Project area, and includes
a range of cultural and
traditional information and knowledge that is related to the Pilliga. The native
title party has also provided
evidence in relation to the exercise of native
title in the relevant area and its vicinity, and the way of life of the Gomeroi
and how it relates to
the Pilliga.
[72] Much of the
evidence in this topic relates to the Pilliga more broadly, an important area
which encompasses the lease areas.
Gomeroi also provide evidence as to ideas of
interconnectedness relating to cosmological matters and incorporating Country.
from this view, Gomeroi assert that from a cultural perspective, the
Pilliga is viewed as an indivisible whole rather than being
able to be reduced
for consideration into smaller divisible
The panel accepts this
contention. This perspective was also noted by the Full Court in its
principal reasons
. Whilst acknowledging the unique relationship between
native title claimants or holders and the lands in which they hold rights and
interests, Justice O’Bryan referenced Justice Blackburn in the matter of
Milirrpum v Nabalco
fundamental truth about the aboriginals’ relationship to the land is that
whatever else it is, it is a religious relationship.
This was not in dispute. It
is a particular instance of the generalization upon which I ventured before,
that the physical and spiritual
universes are not felt as distinct. There is an
unquestioned scheme of things in which the spirit ancestors, the people of the
particular land and everything that exists on and in it, are organic parts
of one indissoluble whole.
reasonable to accept that the evidence provided as to cosmology, tradition and
values regarding the entire Pilliga is also
applicable to the particular portion
of the Pilliga that is directly impacted by the future acts. In any event,
Gomeroi give evidence
of a number of features and factors that apply
specifically to the area overlapped by the Project, with evidence also
specifically
mentioning the linkage between cosmology, the landscape and people.
[74] Significant
effort is also taken by each of the Gomeroi witnesses to provide evidence and
information on cultural matters and
values and how these things provide the
basis for their views addressing the s 39(1)(a) criteria. There is a broad suite
that Gomeroi provide evidence on including:
(a) cosmological and spiritual matters;
(b) matters surrounding Gomeroi society and people and the way people relate to
Country in a spiritual and physical sense;
(c) the exercise of native title rights, including traditional knowledge
practices, the collection and use of bush tucker and bush
medicine, the
collection of materials for the manufacture of traditional implements such as
boomerangs, shields, clap sticks, spears
(d) the transmission of traditional and cultural knowledge and the activities
that support this;
(e) caring for Country as a cultural activity and the cultural obligations that
give rise to this; and
(f) restrictions and/or prohibitions on certain activities or places, including
gender restricted places and
[75] The main
observation to make is that cultural focus and interest runs through all
components of the Gomeroi evidence, whether
it concerns the direct or indirect
effect of the proposed future act. Further or more specific detail is provided
within consideration
of each criteria below.
clear theme in the Gomeroi evidence is that surrounding water, which each of the
Gomeroi witnesses dedicate significant portions
of their material to. Submitted
material regarding water covers a range of topics which includes but is not
limited to:
(a) traditional knowledge of water resources as it relates to water courses and
the broader landscape;
(b) cosmological and spiritual matters relating to water;
(c) water quality and its physical impact on Country as well as on cultural
values associated with Country;
(d) the impact of extreme weather events caused by climate change, including
flooding or drought; and
(e) concern regarding subsurface water systems.
[77] This theme
alone gives rise to a significant body of evidence addressing both the direct
and indirect impacts of the proposed
future acts.
Booby describes springs and river systems in a way which highlights their vital
role in the carriage of water to sustain the
This evidence also
shows that the native title party associates a component of the cultural
significance of the Pilliga itself to
the fact that the area contains so many
This notion was
addressed in the affidavits lodged in the 2022 Determination and in this
[79] Within this
theme, a significant body of information is provided surrounding the importance
of Bohena Creek. This is a seasonal
waterway that runs from south to north
through the entirety of PPLA13 and a significant portion of PPLA15. It is
understood that
most, if not all, of the remainder of the leases, that is PPLA14
and PPLA16, are within the catchment of Bohena Creek, which runs
into the Namoi
River rear Narrabri, which then flows into the Barwon River at Walgett and
ultimately into the Darling River near
Bohena Creek is seasonal and is for a large part of the year a dry bed, it is
not an inconsequential waterway. While the
width of the bed looks to generally
be around 30–40 metres, it also looks to reach in excess of double this in
parts of PPLA13
and PPLA15. Additionally, according to Gomeroi evidence,
although it may be dry for significant parts of the year, the creek retains
water which can be accessed through
phenomenon is described as the waterway being an ‘upside-down’
or an underground
although this term is
also used to refer to springs and
Ms Tighe describes the
origin of this in cultural terms and in doing so, makes a culturally based point
underscores the evidence provided by all the
Gomeroi witnesses on this
[82] Ms Tighe
also points to important cultural responsibilities for water and water sources
in and for one’s own country, and
for those peoples who are downstream and
receive water from Gomeroi
[83] In the 2022
contentions, Gomeroi contended that ‘[w]ater, both above and below ground
is of great cultural and spiritual
significance to the Gomeroi
Summarising
the evidence, the native title party points to evidence deposing that water,
water courses and water bodies have spiritual
significance and value, ceremonial
association, and provide drinking water while accessing the
Gomeroi also submit
that the exercise of their native title rights and interests ‘such as
practicing ceremony, hunting, fishing
and gathering natural resources, flora and
fauna is dependent on the health of the river systems and
waterways’.
[84] It is clear
from the evidence provided that the Gomeroi place great value in water and the
water resources of the Pilliga and
Project area, and the panel accepts such
Climate change
strong focus of the remittal has been the impact of climate change, particularly
in relation to s 39(1)(e) addressing any public
interest in the doing of the act
however, climate change evidence is also relevant for consideration of s
39(1)(a), which directs
the panel to consider the effects of the act. The
summary of evidence here focuses on the updated material submitted by Gomeroi
to the effects of the act relevant for consideration under s 39(1)(a) as
it relates to GHG emissions and climate change.
[86] Climate
change expert for Gomeroi, Professor David Karoly, provides a comprehensive
outline of the science of climate change
and its impacts, including discussion
on the analytical and calculation tools used by authorities such as the
ntergovernmental
hange. A metric
of significance in Professor Karoly’s reporting is one adopted by the IPCC
known as the transient climate response
to cumulative carbon dioxide emissions,
. This observes that the increase in the Earth’s temperature
has an almost linear relationship with CO
emissions with the IPCC
estimating there is an increase in global temperature of 0.45
or minus 0.18
C) for every 1000 gigatonnes of additional
the TCRE, and based on the total estimated cumulative GHG emissions of the
proposed future act over the course of 25 years,
Professor Karoly states that
this would ‘lead to a best estimate increase of global temperature ... of
C ... if the Project
also notes that during the expert conclave the expert for Santos confirmed he
agreed with Professor Karoly’s evidence
on this point whilst noting the
accepted figure was, in his opinion, in any event extremely
[88] Professor
Karoly outlines the broader impact of climate change on Australia, drawing from
the Australia’s State of the
Environment 2021 report. In doing so,
Professor Karoly summarises
(a) Climate change is continuing and is increasing the impacts of other
pressures on our environment;
(b) In the past decade, climate change in the form of more severe drought,
extreme weather events, fire and habitat modification
is becoming a new driver
for habitat change and species loss in terrestrial ecosystems;
(c) Coupled with more gradual climate change shifts, extreme events have
resulted in lifecycle shifts, changing species abundances,
and range expansions
and contractions;
(d) Approximately two-thirds of threatened species in Australia are threatened
by changing fire regimes (usually in concert with
other pressures); and
(e) Range shifts and extensions can be complicated as different species have
different abilities to shift their location and range
in order to cope with
[89] Professor
Karoly also makes specific observations regarding the Narrabri region
encompassing the lease areas and sets out, in
summary, that due to climate
(a) Average maximum temperature in the Narrabri region increased by about
1.4°C from 1951-60 to the most recent decade 2011–2020;
(b) The number of hot days (maximum temperatures greater than 35°C) at
Gunnedah has increased statistically significantly from
18.8 days per year in
1951–1980 to 26.0 days per year in 1991–2020;
(c) The number of very hot days in Gunnedah (maximum temperatures greater than
40°C) had increased significantly from 0.9 days
per year in 1951–1980
to 2.3 days per year in 1991–2020; and
(d) The average number of heavy rain days (> 25 mm per day) each year in
Narrabri has increased substantially from an average
of 4.9 days per year in
1966–1990 to 6.7 days per year in the most recent period available
[90] What is
evident from Professor Karoly’s expert report is that there is a real and
measurable increase in extreme weather
events linked to climate change, both in
the number of days of extreme temperatures per year, as well as an increase in
days of heavy
rain in the Narrabri region. Offset from this are periods of drier
than usual weather. This paints a picture of a landscape that
is likely to be
placed under stress through increasing extremes in weather patterns, with
increased risk of both wildfires during
dry and extreme hot weather, as well as
floods during increased periods of heavy rainfall.
portions of Professor Karoly’s evidence were contested by the other
parties. There was a broad consensus between the
experts for Gomeroi and Santos
during the conclave regarding the current climate science. The State did not
lodge its own evidence
on this issue or contest these aspects of the evidence.
Santos however did lodge written contentions pointing to the lack of scientific
consensus in relation to the use of IPCC models at a project specific level, and
suggested the Tribunal should place limited weight
[92] Professor
Brendan Mackey provided expert evidence for Gomeroi concerning the ecological
risks posed to the Pilliga by the impacts
of climate change. Professor Mackey
provides a useful characterisation of these impacts as acute and chronic, where
acute impacts
are those that involve extreme events such as bushfire, floods,
heatwaves and storms, while chronic are those which arise slowly
through impacts
such as temperature increases and shifting patterns in rainfall seasonality.
Professor Mackey states that these acute
and chronic impacts are related in that
chronic impacts, otherwise known as climate trends, drive an increase in the
frequency, severity
and duration of severe
[93] Professor
Mackey notes that the climate risks to biodiversity are a function of the
climate hazards themselves, the extent of
exposure to these hazards and the
vulnerability of the species or system. Professor Mackey further states that
this vulnerability
is a function of current conservation status and condition of
habitat, relative to the extent it has been
[94] With this
framework, Professor Mackey’s evidence focuses on threatened species and
there are 107 species and ecological
Biological Conservation
(NSW), 53 of which are similarly listed in the
Environmental
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act (1999)
(Cth) that are found
within the Pilliga region.
Given climate hazards and other types of environmental degradation, Professor
Mackey concludes these species and communities are
highly vulnerable and are at
high risk from climate change
[95] Professor
Mackey also provides evidence on water, stating that in his expert opinion the
Project will to some extent, directly
and indirectly impact on the
region’s water resources and therefore impact on biodiversity. This,
Professor Mackey states,
will be due
observed climate impacts and projected climate risks for the region which
include ongoing reduction in winter rainfall, higher
temperatures, increase in
extreme climate events including droughts, bushfires and heat waves, will
increase stresses on the Narrabri
region's water resources through reducing
winter flows, increasing evaporation especially in summer, disrupting continuity
and impacting on water quality.
[96] Professor
Mackey then concludes it is entirely feasible the proposed future act will
potentially impact on the region’s
of Professor Mackey’s evidence was contested by the other parties.
[98] Associate
Professor Nina Lansbury provided evidence relating to health and wellbeing
impacts of climate change. Drawing from
the most recent IPCC report (AR6),
Associate Professor Lansbury describes direct and indirect pathways of climate
sensitive diseases
and health outcomes. Direct pathways are those that have an
effect on people directly such as through extreme heat, bushfire deaths
cyclone damage, whereas indirect are:
those that are
mediated through natural systems, such as air and water pollution and changing
conditions for infectious disease, and
those mediated through social systems,
such as mental health conditions, disrupted food supply chains, and
climate-forced migration.
[99] Associate
Professor Lansbury cites work which notes the close relationship between the
condition of the physical environment
with cultural
and explains that this
interconnectedness of Aboriginal people, community and Country makes them
uniquely vulnerable to the social,
cultural, spiritual and environmental impacts
of climate change.
Professor Lansbury further explains that Aboriginal people, including the
Gomeroi people, are more vulnerable than other
Australians to the impacts of
climate change due to an existing and significantly greater ‘burden of
disease’ paired
with lower financial
[100] Ultimately
Associate Professor Lansbury concludes that Aboriginal people ‘are likely
to be more negatively impacted as
compared to the general Australian population
for three reasons that will be detailed below: more closely reliant and
connected to
Country and thus more affected by changes; lower general physical
health and wellbeing status and thus greater vulnerability; and
‘compounding and cascading’ nature of climate change impacts that
exacerbates existing
vulnerabilities’.
[101] None of
Associate Professor Lansbury’s evidence was contested by the other
extensive set of new information was also provided by Gomeroi witnesses
addressing climate change. In summary, citing the
expert and Gomeroi witnesses,
Gomeroi contend that climate change will have some of the following
(a) The reduction in winter rainfall, higher temperatures and increase in
extreme climate events such as droughts, bushfires and
heat waves will increase
stress on the Narrabri region’s water resources through reducing winter
flows, increasing evaporation
in summer, disrupting continuity of supply,
impacting on water quality and increasing variability in the flow of the
ephemeral rivers
and streams. This may impact on the region’s hydrology,
including the Pilliga region recharge zones for the Great Artesian
Basin and the
Pilliga Sandstone (which underlies the Pilliga forest), an intake area for
aquifers that are utilised for irrigation.
(b) There is a large number of listed threatened species and ecological
the observed and
projected climate impacts of severe drought, extreme weather and fire events
leading to habitat change and species
loss. Extreme heat events may trigger the
mass death of wildlife populations.
(c) Climate change has direct physical human health impacts via increased
drought, flooding and heat exposure. Aboriginal people
living in the Narrabri
region have a higher burden of disease, and lower financial resources, than the
general Australian population
which increases vulnerability to health impacts
from climate change. In addition, climate change impacts mental health and
particularly for Indigenous peoples. It also impacts cultural health
and wellbeing, as it can lead to loss of sacred sites, reduced
ability to live
on country. and impacts on food gathering and ceremony, and spiritual health and
wellbeing, with impacts being felt
as a result of reduced river flows.
Section 39(1)(a)(i) – the effect of the acts on the
enjoyment of Gomeroi of their native title rights and interests
[103] Consideration
of this criterion is focused on the effect of the act on the enjoyment of the
registered native title rights and
interests through examination of the evidence
relating to the enjoyment of these rights in the area, and considering the
characteristics
of the future act and the effect these may have. The Tribunal is
directly concerned with the effect of the future act, but this effect
considered in the context of the whole
[104] While the
parties make various remarks on what the Tribunal should assume regarding the
exercise of native title rights and
interests, the panel makes no assumptions
whether there
will or will not be particular effects. Rather the assessment of
the effects is determined on the evidence before the Tribunal in
[105] Gomeroi
refer to the list of rights and interests that are within the Register of Native
Title Claims and contend they are currently
exercised and enjoyed in the lease
Gomeroi also contend
that it may be assumed that these rights are practiced throughout the claim area
as they have been established
prima facie
basis when claim
registration occurred.
[106] Much of
the evidence from Gomeroi regarding the enjoyment of native title rights and
interests relates to the broader Pilliga.
Nonetheless, while the portion of the
overall Pilliga overlapped by the leases is relatively contained, being around
13% it is not
insubstantial. Further, the registered Gomeroi claim area overlaps
the leases entirely.
[107] In the
statements provided, Gomeroi witnesses provide evidence as to visitation to the
Pilliga for the teaching of cultural
knowledge and the collection of bush
to collect materials
for and to manufacture traditional
and to collect
Some of the
descriptions of the collection of bush foods are from the western side of the
Pilliga, some 50 km from the areas overlapped
[108] Gomeroi
contend there are two main areas of impact on the enjoyment of registered native
title rights and interests, the physical
impact of the construction and
operation of the Project, and the impacts of climate change as a result of the
operation of the Project.
regard to physical impact, Gomeroi contend that the exercise of native title
rights and interests is predicated on the ability
to access country and
Referring to the
evidence of Mr Kumarage, Gomeroi contend that infrastructure associated with the
Project will permanently affect
landscape values and entirely prevent Gomeroi
people’s access to parts of the Project area due to the fencing that is
to be erected around
facilities.
Gomeroi further
argue that, while some areas will remain accessible, the dispersed nature of the
Project Santos have outlined will
have effects on the entire
addition, Gomeroi contend the Project will have a permanent effect on the area
due to above and below ground infrastructure
that will remain
permanently,
including well
caps that would remain in place 1.5 m below the ground, and likely also piping
infrastructure.
further contend that physical impacts may include a loss of flora and fauna due
to habitat loss and the promotion of feral
[111] Further
risks related to potential contamination or spills are also raised, addressed in
the statements of Gomeroi witnesses
surrounding a saltwater spill that occurred
This evidence
focuses on water and water health, and reinforces the strongly held belief that
the ability to practice native title
rights and interests for the Gomeroi is
dependent on the health of the river systems and
submissions going to climate change largely address the effect of the act on the
exercise of native title in the broader
native title claim
Although consideration
in this criterion is generally taken to be within the footprint of the future
Native Title Act
itself makes no restriction on geographical
area. While other parts of s 39 and s 38 of the
Native Title Act
the lands and waters affected, s 39(1)(a)(i) simply states the Tribunal must
consider ‘the effect of the act on the
enjoyment by the native title
parties of their registered native title rights and interests’. The
contended effects do, however,
need to be properly substantiated with
effects of climate change contended by Gomeroi include several phenomena cause
by climate change itself, as referred to
in the previous summary of submissions
on climate change. These include fire, drought, flash flooding due to heavy rain
increased temperature bringing increased fire risk, amongst other
events. This is contended to bring about landscape change including
a reduction
of important plant and animal species, change in the flowering and fruiting
behaviour of bush food limiting opportunities
for gathering, change to trees and
plants used for raw cultural materials, and totemic trees plants and animals
being reduced and
removed from the
This, Gomeroi
contend, will limit the ability of their native title rights and interests being
contentions of Santos mainly focus on the area that is directly overlapped by
the lease areas and, citing previous Tribunal
determinations, focus on the
requirement for there to be sufficient material to demonstrate the enjoyment of
the native title rights
and interests by Gomeroi and then how this enjoyment
will be affected if the act is
Santos and the State contend the statement by Gomeroi that it should be assumed
by the Tribunal that all registered rights
are practiced throughout the claim
area as they have been accepted
prima facie
should not be
Rather, Santos says
the exercise of native title rights is a matter of evidence to be provided by
the native title party, with evidence
to have probative
[116] Based
on this notion, Santos contend the evidence presented by Gomeroi does not
demonstrate the exercise of native title rights
within the area of the future
The inference here is
that the Tribunal cannot find there is an extensive effect on the exercise of
native title as there is little
or no evidence of this enjoyment in the first
[117] In any
event, Santos contends the Project will have an impact that is limited,
manageable and acceptable,
and that the physical impact of the Project would be minimal due to the
relatively small portion of the area that would be impacted
by vegetation
[118] Further,
Santos contend that any access restrictions that may be in place at any one time
would be considerably smaller than
this as a result of the progressive nature of
the development of the
Santos also contend that other than the immediate operation area of each well
pad, and presumably other infrastructure, no fencing
These contentions
are repeated by Santos in its 2024
contentions.
[119] Santos
also contend the Project is designed to minimise impacts on native title through
its flexibility of well locations and
use of micrositing, to either avoid or
minimise impacts on heritage.
They give evidence of further available mitigation measures including minimising
surface disturbance by having multiple wells on
a well pad, maximising use of
previously cleared areas, locating major infrastructure in the Leewood facility
outside the Pilliga,
and locating pipelines along existing tracks and
State initially made contentions which, in effect, mirrored the contentions made
by Santos, however in the remitter the
State stated those parts of their earlier
contentions should not be taken into account for reasons unclear to the panel.
assessment of the impact of the grant of the leases on Gomeroi’s native
title rights and interests must be based on
evidence before the panel. The
evidence before the panel must also be considered in the context of the evidence
as a whole. Some
of the evidence before the panel, whilst not directly contended
under s 39(1)(a)(i), has nonetheless assisted the Tribunal in its
includes evidence of the collection of wood to make shields and weapons for
hunting, the gathering and use of natural
resources, managing natural resources,
conducting ceremonies and rituals, and the transmitting of traditional
[122] Considering
all the evidence before the panel, we are satisfied that the leases will affect
the enjoyment by Gomeroi of their
registered native title right and interests.
However, we are also satisfied that the manner in which the Project is to be
constructed
and operated as discussed above, together with conditions imposed in
this determination, will mitigate these effects to a sufficient
Section 39(1)(a)(ii) – the effect of the acts on Gomeroi
way of life, culture and traditions
[123] Gomeroi
have provided a more extensive body of evidence to address their way of life,
culture and traditions and of the effect
of the proposed act on them,
particularly relating to the three areas of focus examined previously:
cosmology, culture and water.
[124] Strong
emphasis is placed upon cosmological information within the Gomeroi evidence.
This includes evidence surrounding celestial
bodies and the way these are
connected to the Country in question, including in relation to totemic
structures, plants and animals.
It also includes information regarding the
cultural aspects of lands and waters in addition to descriptions of spiritual
[125] Evidence
is also provided around more specific activities such as teaching and passing on
of culture, law and custom,
the gathering of food,
traditional woodworking and the collection of raw materials for this
and information
pertaining to ceremony and birthing
[126] As in the
previous criteria, evidence is focused on the Pilliga more broadly rather than
specifically on the lease areas however
as already addressed, the Gomeroi
contend that from a cultural perspective, the Pilliga is viewed as an
indivisible whole
and that an
effect in one area has an effect to the whole area.
general contentions of Santos and the State here again focus on the need for
Gomeroi to adduce evidence of way of life,
culture and traditions and the effect
of the act upon these things.
The contentions of Santos again point to a lack of focus on effects within the
lease areas specifically, whereas Gomeroi argue that
effects of the act impact
the entire, indivisible, Pilliga, and will be more broadly felt because of the
disbursed physical infrastructure
and operations, and due to the nature of
climate change effects arising the future
[128] Similarly
to s 39(1)(a)(i), s 39(1)(a)(ii) does not restrict consideration of the effect
to the footprint of the future act.
Rather, it provides that the Tribunal must
consider the effect of the act on the way of life, culture and traditions of the
title party. Due to the nature of the future acts that come before the
Tribunal, this consideration has generally focused on the
area of the physical
footprint of a project given this is where most, if not all, of any effect is
both generated and felt. This
is not determinative however, rather, it is the
contended effect of the act and whether this can be substantiated that is.
[129] The topics
addressed in this category of evidence deal with culture, tradition and ways of
life, each of which encompass notions
broader than simple physical phenomena,
leading Gomeroi to describe the Pilliga through a cultural lens. Within the
statutory framework
of s 39(1)(a)(ii), the panel accepts that evidence provided
as to cosmology, tradition and values regarding the entire Pilliga also
the portion of the Pilliga directly impacted by the future acts. Importantly,
the evidence provided must be read in the
context of all the evidence provided,
and in the context of the statutory framework.
[130] Gomeroi
contend two types of effects, direct and indirect. In terms of direct effects,
Gomeroi again contend that the physical
infrastructure and operation of the
Project will affect the ability of the Gomeroi people to move around, use and
enjoy the area
for cultural activities, impair access to water resources,
inhibit the ability to gather natural resources and undertake ceremony,
places of cultural significance, to share cultural knowledge and more generally,
practice cultural and spiritual
activities.
[131] Relevant
also to this criterion are contentions regarding access. As previously outlined
at [109] to [110], Gomeroi contend
that infrastructure associated with the
Project will permanently affect landscape values and entirely prevent Gomeroi
access to parts of the Project area and the Pilliga due to
required fencing. Additionally, Gomeroi assert that while some areas will
accessible, the dispersed nature of the Project effects the entire
[132] Gomeroi
further contend that the future act poses a threat to native flora and fauna
caused by the direct loss of habitat and
the promotion of feral pests and
This, Gomeroi say,
will have social effects on the Gomeroi due to them being unable to fulfil their
caring for Country
responsibilities.
Additionally, Gomeroi contend the loss of habitat as well as damage to the
physical and cultural landscape will impact upon the spiritual
beings which
occupy the Pilliga, beings that form an important part of Gomeroi
[133] Matters of
direct impact are also raised by Gomeroi in relation to the effect of the
Project on water and waterways and the
way these affect their ways of life,
culture and tradition. The evidence addresses both the immediate physical impact
upon waterways
and the way this will impact on the cosmological, cultural and
traditional aspects and values surrounding water and waterways. Further
addresses the more medium and long-term effects of climate change impacts to
water and waterways.
[134] While some
concern in the evidence is raised about subsurface
the Great Artesian
and springs, to a
larger extent the Gomeroi evidence focuses on waterways and surface waters.
Chief amongst the concerns raised in
this area are potential pollution impacts,
degradation of water quality in waterways and siltation due to clearing and the
operation of the Project. To summarise the concerns of the Gomeroi,
should these impacts come to pass, the effect on culture and
traditions will be
significant due to the central role that water, waterways and rivers play within
their tradition, culture and
way of life.
[135] In their
2022 evidence, all of the Gomeroi witnesses refer to a spill that occurred in
2011 when exploration was being conducted
by Eastern Star Gas in the Project
area. The panel notes the spill appears to have occurred in the area covered by
the petroleum
assessment licence, PAL2, now the area comprising PPLA13 and the
assessment lease held by
This incident
involved a spill of saline water from a test well into the surrounding area.
Each of the Gomeroi witnesses attest to
this spill killing surrounding
vegetation, with rehabilitation efforts having limited or no success. Gomeroi
witnesses give evidence
of this damage to Country bringing up strong feelings of
hurt, sadness and disgust and raising concern about the risk of potential
contamination or future
of the concern regarding water, particularly surface water, run off, pollution
and water quality degradation focuses on
Bohena Creek in the Project area. As
set out from
above, Bohena Creek is the main
waterway in the area and runs through PPLA13 and PPLA15 with most, if not all,
the remaining lease
areas being within the
na Creek catchment.
a strong and visible feature of the area of the proposed future act and given
the extent of the evidence provided regarding
the cultural and traditional
features and values of water and waterways, it is no surprise that Gomeroi place
heavy emphasis on this
main waterway which traverses the lease areas.
overarching contention of Santos in respect of s 39(1)(a)(ii), is again that the
impact will be minimal as the leases cover
only 0.85% of the overall Gomeroi
native title claim area and the physical footprint of the Project would only
impact up to approximately
1% of the lease
Santos also contend
the areas where access would be restricted are limited as a result of the
progressive nature of the development
of the Project, and any fencing required
will only exist for a temporary 25 year
[138] Santos
again points to the fact that the location of the wells is sufficiently flexible
to avoid or minimise effects, referring
micrositing.
Santos provide
that in addition to this, a further suite of mitigation measures have been
included in the design of the Project aimed
to minimise potential impacts
(a) minimising surface disturbance through lateral well stacking;
(b) maximising use of previously cleared areas;
(c) co-locating linear infrastructure (essentially, gas and water pipelines);
(d) positioning field infrastructure away from sensitive biodiversity values
where possible;
(e) progressive partial rehabilitation of cleared areas; and
(f) implementation of a protocol for the control of pest plants and animals.
[139] Santos
contend the regulatory environment is a further mitigating factor on the effect
of the future act, which includes State
heritage, environmental and planning
laws in addition to Commonwealth statutes. This contention also includes
reference to the body
of conditions that have been placed on the Project within
the State approvals processes, which includes a variety of environmental
heritage-based
conditions.
[140] Overall,
Santos contend, the effect of the Project on the way of life, culture and
traditions of Gomeroi would be limited, manageable
acceptable.
State initially made contentions which noted the Project would be subject to the
State’s regulatory regime and the
requirements of the IPC Development
Consent. The State has since resiled from those statements and stated they
should not be taken
into account for reasons unclear to the panel.
evidence of the Gomeroi witnesses in relation to climate change is pertinent due
to the emissions generated by the Project.
Their evidence focuses on the impacts
of change to Country bought about by climate change, with a strong emphasis on
the effect of
change to waterways.
[143] Ms Tighe
speaks of cultural activities that occur in the Pilliga such as visitation for
the transmission of knowledge about
Country, sharing of stories and traditional
knowledge, the physical aspects of caring for Country, and stating that not
to go to a place and see it in its natural state would represent a
cultural loss.
Ms Tighe gives
evidence that climate change will impact the ability of Gomeroi people to do
these things because of the impact it
will have on Country, the availability of
bush foods and medicines and material for tool manufacture due to more frequent
weather events.
Tighe also gives evidence addressing how climate change resulting from GHG
emissions will affect vegetation changes in the
Project area, induced by drought
and acute events such as fire. She states this will impact the vegetation mix
and reduce the number
of these key plants used by the Gomeroi
Providing an example,
Ms Tighe discusses a bush food ‘Five Corners’, stating:
[t]he impact of
bushfires will be that there will be less of them; we won’t be able to
access it as easily. When I was growing
up you’d spend the whole day
eating Five Corners; now you spend the majority of your day
Five Corners.
[145] Mr Wilson
also gives evidence addressing changes to Country as a result of climate change.
He discusses changes to plant fruiting
behaviour due to increased
temperature,
concerns regarding changes to species abundance within a changing
environment,
and the impact
on flora and fauna species in general.
[146] Uncontrolled
or wildfire is raised as a particular topic of concern by Mr Wilson, noting the
impact of uncontrolled fires on
trees of importance to Gomeroi
Mr Wilson gives
evidence of regular cultural burning, remarking on the impact of traditional
land management on the landscape.
Wilson’s evidence regarding the management of land, both today and
traditionally, makes it clear that Mr Wilson holds
the view the re-establishment
of traditional land management practices of the Gomeroi people is an important
step to mitigate the
effects of climate change and to overcome, or minimise, the
effects on culture, tradition and ways of life. The panel accepts this
and has determined conditions should be imposed to address this and various
other matters raised in evidence.
[148] Mr Booby
also gives evidence going to the issue of landscape and environmental change as
a result of climate change and the
effect of this on tradition, culture and way
of life for the Gomeroi people. He discusses the impact and risk of uncontrolled
wildfire as well as the impact of drought due to increased rainfall
variability. His evidence includes extensive testimony on how
this would impact
upon cultural values, practice and knowledge and Gomeroi traditions and ways of
making submissions regarding climate change in the remittal process,
considerable focus is placed by each of the Gomeroi
witnesses on water,
waterways and water quality. This reflects notions previously discussed
surrounding the cultural values and traditions
linked to water and waterways,
including broad scale cosmological and spiritual components, as well as the
physical environment itself.
The evidence makes the importance of these issue to
the Gomeroi people clear to the panel.
[150] In both
the original and remittal evidence, the Gomeroi witnesses also make statements
regarding caring for Country and the
management of land. While this is a
physical activity that occurs on land, Gomeroi present evidence that it is based
on obligations
that exist within culture and is therefore a cultural activity as
much as a physical one. This is perhaps best summarised in the
2022 affidavit of
Ms Tighe who sets out the importance of the ongoing generational obligation to
care for and protect Country and
underscores the relationship between Gomeroi
and the natural
environment.
[151] Information
regarding caring for Country is dispersed throughout the statements of the
Gomeroi witnesses, both in the original
and remittal materials, making the
emphasis on this notion, its cultural basis and its significance for the
practice and transmission
of traditional and cultural knowledge in addition to
the health of the Country, clear.
a culture and traditions perspective, Mr Booby provides a useful summary of this
effect in stating that:
If we start talking
of it. If I don’t have the
opportunity to care for Country, and act as the
keeper or whatever else, then I’ve lost control. I’ve lost control
that balance, I’ve lost control of my ability to disseminate this
information, to share it, to renew it, to redo it.
[153] Some of
the evidence asserted by Gomeroi under s 39(1)(a)(i) go to health and wellbeing
and are of relevance in considering
(ii). The contention chiefly made is that
impacts of climate change, including changes to Country and environmental
degradation,
will have an adverse impact on the health and wellbeing of the
Gomeroi people due to the interrelationship between Country, culture,
and ways of life.
[154] These
contentions draw heavily from the reporting provided by Associate Professor
Lansbury contained within the Gomeroi expert
report. Lansbury cites the State of
the Environment 2021 report which explains the close relationship between the
condition of the
physical environment on a group’s traditional lands and
the cultural health of traditional owners of such lands. She gives
evidence that
there is a positive link between caring for Country activities and the physical
health and wellbeing indicators of
the traditional
Lansbury reports
similar findings in relation to spiritual health and
[155] Associate
Professor Lansbury also makes note of the IPCC’s recognition of the health
of the physical environment being
recognised as a contributor to human health by
the IPCC, stating that the most recent IPCC assessment report notes in its
health-focused
chapters that environmental health is a contributor to subjective
wellbeing. Lansbury further reports the IPCC recognises this contribution
further enhanced in Indigenous populations over the general population, noting
that an Indigenous perspective on wellbeing typically
incorporates a
relationship with the natural
In her evidence,
Lansbury draws attention to a number of components within the Gomeroi witness
affidavits that outline positive health
and wellbeing outcomes from maintaining
culture, connection to County and caring for Country activities that are
relevant to the
assessment of this criteria and the imposition of
conditions.
evidence of Associate Professor Lansbury was not disputed by Santos or the
summary, the evidence of Gomeroi states the effects of the act
(a) they will not be able to exercise their cultural obligations, including to
feed their Elders, if fruit are not available at the
expected time. Traditional
dietary options will be limited;
(b) tree loss due to environmental change will mean less opportunity to do
traditional woodwork and make traditional tools and weapons;
(c) climate change will impact totemic trees, plants and animals, reducing their
numbers and removing them from the landscape, which
will affect the culture,
identity and sense of being of Gomeroi people;
(d) climate change and reduced access will take the
opportunity from Gomeroi people to build relationships with each other, with
Country and to continue to do their cultural practices, including by
telling stories in the Pilliga;
(e) impacts on the Pilliga will throw the moiety system out of balance,
disrupting Gomeroi roles and responsibilities under that
system. Climate change
will disrupt the balance between people and Country, which will mean that
Gomeroi people will lose control
of their ability to look after Country;
(f) more droughts will break Gomeroi connections to
stories and watercourses, as landscape and stories are connected to Gomeroi.
in the availability of surface water and of shallow and deeper
groundwater will affect important stories of connection to Country.
If there is
no water, Gomeroi cannot tell the stories for places associated with water;
(g) Gomeroi people will not get the chance to use the tools they used to use to
manage Country to manage the effects of climate change.
[158] Santos do
not challenge the evidence about the harmful effects of climate
Instead, it contends
that, given an assessment in s 39(1)(a) concerns the effect of the act, unless
it can be established that the
impacts can be caused by the grant of the leases
then this evidence should be given little
Related to this
point, Santos contended that the impacts of climate change cannot be causally
linked to the Project as they pre-date
and that it would be an
error to ‘weigh all of the impacts of climate change on the assumption
that all of those impacts are
caused by the
[159] Instead,
Santos contend that the impact of the Project on climate change is so small as
to be insignificant, and that in any
event, on the evidence of Santos it will
lead to a net reduction in emissions based on a counterfactual
This counterfactual
concept is discussed in more detail later in these reasons.
another way, Santos contends that when the effect of the future act is weighed,
the actual impact on climate change is either
zero, if the counterfactual is
accepted and it is further accepted the Project will lead to a net emission
reduction, or is immeasurably
The inference here is that there will be no effect on the way of life, culture
and traditions of the Gomeroi in the way contended.
State’s contentions regarding public interest matters address climate
change and are worth briefly mentioning here.
In summary, they contend it is not
controversial that there is more than one source of GHG emissions and more than
one cause of global
warming, but that it would be an error for the Tribunal to
attribute every consequence of global warming to the proposed future act.
Instead, the State contends the Tribunal must take into account, based on the
evidence before it, the GHG emissions of the Project
and the consequential
effects of those emissions, including any contribution to global
The panel agrees with this general proposition, as reflected in these reasons.
[162] Climate
change impacts, and the impacts of the regulatory regimes surrounding climate
change, is discussed in more detail from
[334] to [351] below.
summary, the evidence presented by the Gomeroi witnesses is robust and thorough
for the purposes of s 39(1)(ii). The panel
has taken into account the large body
of information that was submitted both in the original inquiry and this
remittal, from all
parties. This includes, but is not limited to, the IPC
determination and conditions, the reporting produced by the Water Expert Panel
established by the Department of Planning, Industry and Environment, the
environmental impact assessment, and the lay and expert
evidence presented by
Gomeroi. The Project is subject to a large number of conditions imposed through
various approvals processes.
[164] Based
on the evidence before it, the panel accepts there will be a direct impact of
the proposed future acts on the way of life,
culture and traditions of the
Gomeroi within the area of the leases. The panel is however satisfied that the
manner in which the
Project is to be constructed and operated, coupled with the
conditions placed upon the Project through the approvals process, together
conditions imposed in this determination by the Tribunal, will mitigate these
effects to a sufficient level.
panel notes that although a limited amount of clearing is allowed to occur, that
the level of clearing is not inconsequential,
even though the area has been
previously impacted by forestry and other activities. The impact of this
clearing and the siting of
well pads is dispersed through the landscape, which
Gomeroi contend leads to an impact on the entire landscape. The dispersed nature
of the infrastructure does mean there will be impacts and effects felt over a
broader area. However, given that it is only the area
immediately surrounding
each well site that is to be fenced, and an overall 50 by 50 metre area that
remains cleared during the operation
of the gas field, the effect is mitigated.
On the evidence, Gomeroi will not be prevented from accessing most of the area
leases and access should be completely restored following the
rehabilitation of each well pad upon the closure of the
[166] Further,
given the evidence surrounding the previous pollution event, and the particular
significance of water and Bohena Creek
to the Gomeroi people, the panel has
determined that further measures, in the forms of conditions, are required to
protect Bohena
Creek and other important areas. The panel is imposing a
condition that Santos will not undertake any future ground or surface disturbing
work on or within 500 metres of Bohena
potential impacts of climate change are not contested, and having considered the
materials before us, the Tribunal broadly
accepts the predicted impacts of
climate change set out by the Gomeroi expert witnesses and the Gomeroi witnesses
themselves.
Tribunal note there remains imprecision within the predictive modelling
available regarding climate change, however we accept
the confidence levels for
temperature rise and impacts set out by the IPCC as being more than sufficient
to justify consideration
of GHG emissions and climate change as a key component
in decision making considerations.
this regard, the central contention of both Santos and the State is, in effect,
that the cumulative impacts of climate change
cannot be attributed to this
Project as any emission and impact that has occurred to date has been in the
absence of it. This is
a logical point to make, however it must be acknowledged
that the cumulative impact of climate change was not contested by any of
parties and must be taken into account when considering the direct and indirect
effects of the act.
panel accepts that new emissions of GHG will contribute to climate change. It
would however be an error to attribute all
the consequences of climate change to
the doing of a single project. Rather, the panel has focused on the demonstrated
the matters to be considered under s 39(1)(a)(ii).
discussed in relation to s 39(1)(a)(i), there is persuasive evidence before the
panel surrounding the management of Country
and how this might mitigate impacts.
Having considered this evidence, the panel has formed the view there is strong
utility in having
increased engagement of Gomeroi people in the management of
the Pilliga to assist to mitigate effects from the proposed future act,
including climate change. Given this, the panel determined a condition should be
applied requiring the resourcing of a Ranger Program
development by the Gomeroi
people to manage Country, protect the environment, and monitor and manage
ecological threats. See [417]
and conditions 13 to 18 below.
Section 39(1)(a)(iii) – the effect of the acts on the
development of Gomeroi social, cultural and economic structures
Gomeroi contentions for this criterion have similar themes to s 39(1)(a)(i) and
(ii) above, with the central notion being
that Gomeroi societal structure and
culture are, in particular, linked to place and
[173] Gomeroi
build a picture of society being expressed through the practice of culture and
native title rights and interests, outlining
the cosmological and spiritual
aspects of their society, and through a cultural obligation to care for
This is woven
through the evidence of the Gomeroi witnesses and it is clear the natural
environment of the Pilliga is integral to
the Gomeroi totemic structure of their
society and culture.
[174] Mr Booby
speaks of the connection between Gomeroi people and animals and nature, and how
this creates responsibilities to them
and ties into the Gomeroi totemic
structure and moiety system that underpin Gomeroi society. He goes on to explain
how impacts on
one plant or animal have consequential impacts that affect other
aspects of the ecosystem as well as Gomeroi
Gomeroi evidence focuses on the interconnectedness of society, culture and the
landscape and environment. Witnesses depose
that stories and connection to place
cannot be relocated, and destruction and damage to the landscape and ecology has
a direct negative
effect on the wellbeing of the Gomeroi people. The witnesses
also give evidence that the proposed Project area is of particular significance
as it is one of the last, and one of the largest, remaining areas of undeveloped
land in the Gomeroi claim
[176] As in the
previous criteria, the native title party addresses things that directly impact
Country and the environment, in addition
to indirect impacts of the proposed
future acts which Gomeroi contend will result in various types of environmental
change and degradation,
thereby affecting the culture and society.
[177] In the
remittal contentions, Gomeroi outline several effects they contend will be
brought about by the effects of climate change
including financial, health and
wellbeing and cultural distresses. This is contended to result from direct
effects of increased temperatures
in addition to indirect effects, that is, the
effect of secondary phenomena brought about by climate change such as drought,
and environmental
[178] Mr Booby
explains how changes to weather systems and the impacts to the natural
environment affect the Gomeroi totem and moiety
systems. He details how the
moiety system relates to balance of all things and that climate change is
impacting this balance, upsetting
Gomeroi moiety systems and cultural
responsibilities.
[179] On the
other hand, Santos contends that the act has the potential to have a positive
impact on the development of social, cultural
and economic
structures.
Santos says
micrositing and Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Advisory Group processes can
facilitate a return to Country. They also point
to the additional heritage
research project, and Gomeroi people potentially benefiting from training and
employment opportunities,
in addition the broader economic and public benefit
which Santos contends will arise from the
[180] As already
discussed at
[163], the panel has
taken into account the large body of information that was submitted both in the
original proceedings and this
remittal. The panel repeats its considerations at
as the same considerations in
relation to s 39(1)(a)(ii) apply here.
[181] Based on
the evidence before us, the panel accepts that the Project will have an effect
on the social, cultural and economic
structures of the native title party.
However, having regard to the applicable regulatory regimes, the conditions
imposed by the
IPC, and the conditions set out in this determination, the effect
of the act on the development is unlikely to be substantial and
can be mitigated
to a satisfactory extent.
Section 39(1)(a)(iv) – the effect of the acts on Gomeroi
freedom of access to the land and waters, and freedom to carry out
ceremonies or other activities of cultural significance
evidence provided by Gomeroi has provided the panel with a strong account of the
significant activities that Gomeroi
access the land for and provides a useful account of that access for the
purposes of this assessment.
[183] In terms
of contentions, these understandably also bear strong commonality with previous
criteria falling under the broad umbrella
of s 39(1)(a). In summary, Gomeroi
contend the Pilliga, including the lease areas, are accessed for a variety of
cultural activities,
exercise of native title rights and interests is predicated on access to sites
and Country,
and that fencing
would prevent access to cultural
[184] Gomeroi
repeat that the dispersed nature of the infrastructure of the Project will have
effects across the whole landscape of
the Pilliga and lease areas, thereby
having an impact on access across that landscape impacting the ability to
maintain culture.
[185] In the
remittal evidence, Gomeroi also make the contention that more hot summer days
due to climate change impacts will further
limit the ability for people to
access Country for health and safety reasons. The impact of this is contended to
be less opportunity
for ceremony and to impart cultural knowledge, in particular
for Elders, who are more vulnerable to
[186] Santos
repeat their contentions made for s
39(1)(a)(i)
stating that any
effect will be limited, manageable and acceptable due to the limited area of the
Gomeroi claim affected, the limited
area approved for clearing and the limited
access restrictions at any one time due to the progressive nature of the
development of
the Project. Critically, Santos contend, there will be no fences
preventing access to the Pilliga other than operational
[187] The State
contend similarly to Santos and say that any access restrictions will be to
particular parts of the leases and for
limited periods of
[188] Based on
all the evidence before us, the panel accepts there will be a direct effect on
the freedom of Gomeroi to access to
the lease areas, and their freedom to carry
out rites, ceremonies and other cultural activities on the land and waters,
also accept that this will be mitigated by some of the factors
outlined by Santos, such as the staged nature of the Project’s
development
and the limited and relatively temporary nature of the fencing required.
[189] As such,
Gomeroi people should be able to maintain access to almost the entirety of the
lease areas, excepting those portions
where infrastructure such as well pads,
processing plants, water tanks and the like may be fenced. Importantly, impact
to significant places will be further mitigated by the conditions set
in this determination, including the condition that Santos
will not undertake
any future ground or surface disturbing work on or within 500 metres of
identified sites of significance without
their prior written consent, and any
right of the native title party to access or use the lands is not to be
restricted except in
relation to those parts used for productive operations or
for safety or security reasons related to those activities.
[190] The panel
also accepts there is likely to be access limitations bought about by
environmental factors, such as an increase in
very hot days as contended by
Gomeroi. As discussed throughout these reasons, the panel accepts the Project
will produce GHG emissions
which will contribute to climate change, resulting in
various indirect effects that must be considered in the weighing of all the
evidence. Similarly to the direct physical effects considered above, having
regard to the applicable regulatory regimes, the conditions
imposed by the IPC,
and the conditions set out in this determination, the effect is unlikely to be
substantial and can be mitigated
to a satisfactory extent.
Section 39(1)(a)(v) – the effect of the acts on any area
or site, on the land or waters concerned, of particular significance
native title parties in accordance with their traditions
expression ‘particular significance’ when considering areas or sites
is also used in s 237(b) of the
Native Title Act
when making an inquiry
into the application of the expedited procedure statement, and the meaning of
the terms has been considered
extensively in such inquiries.
[192] If an area
or site is of particular significance, it must be known, must be able to be
located and the nature of its significance
must be explained to the Tribunal. An
explanation of a site’s particular significance need not be lengthy;
however, it does
need to go beyond mere claim and the nature of the significance
in accordance with the native title party’s traditions must
meaning of ‘particular significance’ was also recently considered by
the Federal Court in the matter of
Top End (Default PBC/CLA) Aboriginal
Corporation v Northern Territory of Australia
[2025] FCA 22.
Importantly,
Justice Moshinsky
legislation does not in terms
require the native title holders
to provide an
explanation
of the particular significance (in
accordance with their traditions) of the site. Nor does it implicitly require
this. The relevant
provision (s 237(b)) needs to be read in context... That
a site is of particular significance (in accordance with the traditions
native title holders) may be established in a variety of ways. Those ways do not
necessarily require an explanation of the
particular significance of the site.
For example, it may be sufficient to show (with cogent evidence) that the site
is considered
to be of special or more than ordinary significance (in accordance
with the traditions of the native title holders), without providing
explanation of why the site is so regarded. Indeed, it may be very difficult to
explain why the site is so regarded
evidence presented by the Gomeroi witnesses generally, particularly in relation
to s 39(1)(a)(ii), is replete with relevant
information in relation also to
areas or sites of particular significance. It is from this evidence the panel
has been able to extract
information as to important sites or areas on or in the
vicinity of the leases which are considered below.
Pilliga as a
place of significance
[195] The native
title party has submitted compelling evidence regarding the importance of the
Pilliga in accordance with their laws
and traditions. The evidence paints a
picture of the Pilliga as a cultural landscape where Gomeroi cosmology is alive
and the celestial
bodies, animals, plants, lands and waters interact with
Gomeroi people. Gomeroi totemic structures are linked to this landscape,
is evident the place the Pilliga holds in the hearts of Gomeroi people as one of
the last relatively untouched places they
can practice their culture.
[196] Ms Tighe
speaks of the Pilliga as a place of ceremony for both men and women, with
connection to some of the most important
aspects of Gomeroi life. She speaks of
Gomeroi stories that are archived in the landscape of the Pilliga and that,
while those stories
may be told elsewhere, they only make sense and have purpose
when told in the landscape of the
Ms Tighe emphasises
the importance of the Pilliga as a whole to Gomeroi people, not just parts of
the forest.
[197] Mr Booby
speaks of the Pilliga as a living, breathing landscape that provides health and
nourishment not only to Gomeroi people
but also those who live downstream from
It is evident to the
panel from Mr Booby’s evidence that the interconnected natural systems of
the Pilliga are deeply connected
to Gomeroi people and their cosmology.
[198] Ms Tighe
speaks of birth-associated places being located throughout the Pilliga and the
importance of these to Gomeroi people
Other places within
the Pilliga are also spoken about as being particularly important, such as
Yarrie Lake and Wombat Rock.
[199] From the
evidence it is clear to the panel that within the Pilliga’s overarching
cultural landscape lie various places
of importance to the Gomeroi people. The
Pilliga also appears to be a place of important cultural protocols and potential
as the evidence speaks of the presence of creatures and phenomena, areas
that people must not go, and designated areas where it is
safe to camp
All of this
evidence paints the picture of a rich cultural landscape.
Tribunal has previously found that cultural landscapes are of particular
significance to the native title
As set out in
End v Kess Diamond Marstella
, the term cultural landscape appears in
Burra Charter: The Australia ICOMOS Charter for the Conservation of Places of
Cultural Significance, 2013
The Burra Charter
). The Burra Charter
defines place to mean a geographically defined area that may include elements,
objects, spaces and views, having
tangible and intangible dimensions. The
explanatory notes give further context, and detail that place has a broad scope
and includes
natural and cultural features for example; a cultural landscape, a
road or travel route, a community meeting place, and sites with
spiritual or
religious connections.
evidence demonstrates the Pilliga is a cultural landscape where important places
and things reside; a place where the cosmology,
culture and law of the Gomeroi
can be seen to operate. While the Pilliga is clearly an important cultural
landscape, this does not
necessarily mean the Tribunal can find it is of
particular significance for the purpose of s 39(1)(a)(v).
[202] Approximately
500,000 hectares in size, the Pilliga is an enormously large area to be found to
be of particular significance
in its entirety. On the evidence before the
Tribunal, it is clear the Pilliga is an important cultural landscape which is
to contain numerous sites or areas of particular significance.
evidence put before the Tribunal speaks deeply of a place where the way of life,
culture and traditions of the Gomeroi people
is very much alive. While this is
important for the purposes of s 39(1)(a)(ii), this does not make the entire
Pilliga a place of
particular significance but rather an important cultural
landscape in which the world of the Gomeroi is able to
Yarrie Lake
[204] Yarrie
Lake is located in the very northern tip of the lease areas. Ms Tighe notes it
as an important place for both men and
women and associated with both
men’s business and women’s
She acknowledges
she cannot speak about the men’s business due to gender protocols around
knowledge and responsibilities but
confirms that those places exist at Yarrie
[205] Ms Tighe
is able to give more information regarding the importance of Yarrie Lake in the
context of women’s business and
the activities that make Yarrie Lake a
place of clear importance to Gomeroi people and Gomeroi women in
particular.
It is clear that
the women’s activities at Yarrie Lake make the area stand out in terms of
its significance to Gomeroi people,
being associated with birth and related
women’s business.
[206] Santos
does not appear to dispute the significance of Yarrie Lake. Mr Haydn Kreicbergs
notes that the grantee parties have designated
a 200 m buffer zone around the
Yarrie Lake Reserve.
Dunn also refers to this buffer zone around Yarrie Lake in his affidavit and
notes it as an identified
[207] Based on
the evidence before us, the panel accepts that Yarrie Lake is a place of
particular significance to the Gomeroi people
in accordance with their
traditions.
Bohena Creek
previously discussed from [79][] to [81]
above, Bohena Creek runs from south
to north through the Project area and is a seasonal waterway. The Gomeroi people
refer to it
as an important ‘upside down river’ within the rich
cultural landscape of the Pilliga. When Bohena Creek is not flowing,
people still access its water by digging in the creek bed.
[209] Ms Tighe
refers to Bohena Creek as important in relation to Gomeroi creation stories as
well as the cultural knowledge that
is passed on
. She also refers
to the importance of Bohena Creek in relation to men’s activities
occurring along it relating to the crafting
of cultural
Kumarage, informed by a Gomeroi elder, also highlights the importance of Bohena
Creek in his evidence, referring to several
important story lines for the moiety
system that travel along the
[211] It is
evident that water and waterways are incredibly important to Gomeroi people in
relation to their way of life, culture
and traditions as has previously been
discussed. Bohena Creek itself has particular significance to Gomeroi people in
with their traditions.
[212] Because of
this, the panel is imposing a condition in regard to Bohena Creek to ensure a
level of protection that is more to
the satisfaction of the
Wombat Rock and Yaminbah
[213] Mr Booby
refers to a place called Wombat Rock as being an important site within the
Pilliga associated with emu and kangaroo
It is described as a
Gomeroi art site associated with men’s law. Mr Booby speaks of Wombat Rock
as a place associated with
the conduct of men’s business and the passing
on of Gomeroi law.
also associates Wombat Rock with a story related to kinship laws.
[214] Mr Booby
identifies Wombat Rock as being located within the Pilliga, however it is not
clear from the evidence whether it is
located on the lease areas. His evidence
described that it is found by following waterways. The panel accepts it is known
to be located by the Gomeroi people, however under s 39(1)(a)(v) we
must find determinately that it is located on the leases.
a place of men’s business and associated with the passing on of cultural
law, the panel accepts Wombat Rock is an important
place to Gomeroi people. The
nature of the site and the evidence provided by Mr Booby does make Wombat Rock
stand out as a site of
particular significance located within the important
cultural landscape of the Pilliga.
[216] Mr Booby
also mentions a place called
that is located near Wombat Rock.
Mr Booby associates
with the Gomeroi creator
as a ceremonial ground associated with totems and Gomeroi-made
Mr Booby locates
along Yaminbah Creek, which is a sandy creek line. Based on
mapping prepared by the Tribunal’s geospatial team, Yaminbah Creek
to be located within the Pilliga but outside the lease areas.
[217] There is
little information given by Mr Booby in relation to the significance of
. While there is clearly some importance with it being a
ceremonial ground associated with
, the native title party has
provided little information that would allow the panel to be satisfied it is a
site of particular significance.
[218] Another
key issue in relation to both Wombat Rock and
relates to the
requirement of s 39(1)(a)(v) that the site or area be located on the lands or
waters of the proposed future act.
[219] Based on
the evidence before it, the panel is unable to be satisfied that either Wombat
are located within the lease
areas. On this basis, we are unable to find that Wombat Rock or
are places of particular significance for the purposes of s 39(1)(a)(v) of the
Native Title Act
[220] However,
based on the evidence before us, the panel is satisfied that these important
places should be included in some of the
protections afforded by the conditions
imposed in this determination. Importantly, the panel accepts both Wombat Rock
are known and able to be located by the Gomeroi people. If
they are not located within the lease areas then their inclusion in the
conditions will be of no impact to Santos in respect of the Project.
Effect of the proposed future acts on Yarrie Lake and Bohena
[221] The work
Santos expect to undertake on the lease areas has been outlined from [37] to
[53]. The panel must now consider the
effect of the proposed act on Yarrie Lake
and Bohena Creek found to be sites of particular significance to Gomeroi.
considering the effect, interference that may appear trivial to a person not a
member of a native title party, may be substantial
having regard to the native
title party’s
traditions.
[223] Yarrie
Lake is a ceremonial site associated with sacred men’s and women’s
business and involving cultural aspects
of Gomeroi life. As demonstrated in the
evidence, the lake is subject to important cultural restrictions based around
well as knowledge and practices that are culturally integral to
Gomeroi women and men and is an important part of the cultural structure
ties of Gomeroi people.
Tighe’s description of the importance of Yarrie Lake to women and the
identity of Gomeroi people, and the activities
that occur there, means that any
ground disturbance in the area of Yarrie Lake is likely to cause interference
that would greatly
distress Gomeroi people. Further, intrusion by non-Gomeroi
people on both men’s and women’s practices at Yarrie Lake
constitutes serious interference through the wrong people gaining access to
cultural knowledge that is restricted to certain people
based on Gomeroi law and
establishment of any infrastructure around Yarrie Lake will involve ground
disturbance, including the removal of trees which
are linked to the
women’s business that is conducted there.
[226] As already
noted, under current approvals Santos must establish a 200 m buffer zone around
the Yarrie Lake Reserve which will
prevent the grantee parties from installing
any surface infrastructure within this
On the facts before us,
it would be possible for the grantee parties to place a well pad or other
related infrastructure right up
to the boundary of this buffer zone. When
considering a map of the area, including Yarrie Lake and the buffer zone, it
seems entirely
likely that there will be trees and other parts of the area that
are likely to be of significance as part of the women’s business,
extend past the buffer zone. Nor does the currently proposed buffer zone seem
sufficient to provide privacy to Gomeroi women
and men engaged in their cultural
business at Yarrie Lake.
[227] Given the
nature of the culturally sensitive activities at Yarrie Lake, and the importance
the trees and other features in the
area hold, the panel does not consider the
200 m buffer zone sufficient to mitigate the risk of interference with Yarrie
[228] Similarly,
Gomeroi witnesses identify Bohena Creek as significant due its connection to
Gomeroi creation stories and the men’s
ceremonial activities that occur
along it, including relating to the crafting of cultural objects. Any ground
disturbance in the
area of Bohena Creek is likely to cause interference that
would greatly distress Gomeroi people. Further, intrusion by non-Gomeroi
on the men’s practices occurring there would constitute serious
interference.
[229] For these
reasons, the panel has imposed a condition that Santos will not undertake any
future ground or surface disturbing
work on or within 500 metres of Yarrie Lake
or Bohena Creek without the prior written consent of the native title
Comments in relation to the Aboriginal Cultural Heritage
Management Plan
purpose of the ACHMP is to assist Santos to manage Aboriginal cultural heritage
in the lease areas so as to meet the requirements
of the NSW cultural heritage
protection regime. The NSW cultural heritage protection regime is discussed from
[55] to [64] above.
guiding principles underlying the ACHMP are the avoidance principle and the
precautionary principle. The ACHMP defines these
Project Activities will be designed such that, to the greatest extent
possible, there is no impact on Aboriginal cultural heritage.
Where impact
cannot be avoided then the Project Activity will be designed to minimise impact
on Aboriginal cultural heritage, and
other reasonable and feasible management
measures, as appropriate, are to be implemented to minimise or mitigate
Precautionary Principle:
(i) the implementation of actions that are reasonable and practicable to
minimise causing harm to known Aboriginal objects; and/or
(ii) identifying Aboriginal cultural heritage so they can be managed in
accordance with the provisions of relevant legislation and
regulations; and
implementing reasonable and practicable management measures for these Aboriginal
cultural heritage items.
[232] The focus
of the ACHMP appears to be on tangible cultural heritage rather than intangible
cultural heritage. It breaks down
the lease areas into different zones with only
some zones considered as requiring heritage clearance surveys (called
‘pre-clearance
provides that pre-clearance surveys to do not need to be conducted in areas
where the grantee parties will not be undertaking
ground disturbing work, on
areas where there has already been significant disturbance, or on areas where
previous surveys have been
problematic for a number of reasons.
[233] At its
heart, this exemplifies the focus on tangible cultural heritage rather than
intangible cultural heritage and assumes
that only ground disturbance can cause
interference with Aboriginal cultural heritage. As demonstrated in relation to
Yarrie Lake,
there are both tangible and intangible elements of Aboriginal
cultural heritage that contribute to the particular significance. For
Lake, intrusion by culturally unauthorised people into sensitive men’s and
women’s business constitutes interference
and affects Gomeroi people.
[234] The panel
has received evidence from Gomeroi of different places of significance within
the Pilliga. It is acknowledged by the
parties that there are likely to be many
more places and items that are culturally significant to Gomeroi people, noting
the important
cultural landscape that is the Pilliga, which the Project sits
entirely within. For this reason, the ACHMP must include provision
conducting of pre-clearance surveys.
[235] Further,
excluding areas where surveys have previously been carried out is short-sighted.
Surveys can be carried out for a number
of different reasons in anticipation of
various types of activities. This can affect how the survey is approached and
conducted as
well as what information is reported. There is also no guarantee
that Gomeroi people or people with the right knowledge for that
Country were
involved in conducting any previous surveys. To rely on these without
appropriate consideration of their circumstances
risks failure to identify and
protect Aboriginal cultural heritage that may exist in previously surveyed
[236] Under the
provisions of the ACHMP an Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Working Group is to be
established with responsibility for
assisting with the implementation of the
Despite the importance
of this working group in protecting the cultural heritage of the Gomeroi people,
there is provision for only
four members of the ten-person group to be Gomeroi
people. This means that, as currently proposed, the majority of the people
the Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Working Group are not required to be
people with traditional cultural responsibility and knowledge
for the Project
[237] It is
clear to the panel that there are significant issues with the ACHMP that inhibit
its ability to effectively protect Aboriginal
cultural heritage in the Project
area. The conditions set out in this determination seek to address these issues
having due regard
to the evidence before the panel.
Consideration of section 39(1)(b) – the interests,
proposals or wishes of the native title party in relation to the in relation
the management, use or control of land or waters that will be affected by the
clear and consistent position of the native title party throughout their lengthy
engagement with Santos in relation to the
Project, is that the Project should
not proceed, or in the event it does, it should only proceed with the full free,
prior and informed
consent of the Gomeroi native title claim
contentions of Santos note this position of the native title party, and note
that in the context of negotiations, Gomeroi
had previously indicated
in-principle agreement subject to final negotiations regarding a production
levy. Santos concede an agreement
preferable.
[240] The State
contends similarly, noting that an agreement would be a desirable outcome,
however agreement from the Gomeroi people
is not a precondition for the Tribunal
to make a determination that the acts may be
position is correct, the Tribunal is not prevented from making a determination
that the act may be done in the absence
of agreement from the native title
party. However, under s 39(1)(b), the panel must take into account the
interests, proposals or
wishes of the native title party in relation to the in
relation to the management, use or control of land or waters that will be
affected by the act.
discussed at [407] below, the Tribunal must give a full and final determination
of the matters before it and cannot impose
a condition that defers or delegates
the determination of any issues to the parties. As such, the Tribunal cannot
make a blanket
condition that an agreement must be reached in accordance with
the wishes of the native title party.
considering this criterion more generally, the panel have taken an overall view
of the evidence and contentions provided
by the native title party, including
where such evidence was not directed to the panel for consideration of s
39(1)(b) but is relevant
in considering its proposals, opinions and wishes, and
assists the Tribunal in its task.
[244] In doing
so, we note that the Gomeroi witnesses express strong interest in the management
of Country and provide testimony as
to the obligation to care for Country,
maintain sites, preserve flora and fauna and undertake spiritual
expressed as
cultural obligations. The Gomeroi witnesses also give evidence that the
inability of Gomeroi to protect Country creates
a feeling of despair and
hopelessness among the Gomeroi
[245] The panel
also notes the extensive contentions and evidence before it from Gomeroi in
relation to water and water resources,
as described above in these reasons. This
evidence demonstrates Gomeroi have a clear wish to protect key water courses and
resources, expressed for cultural and cosmological reasons in addition to
being a component of the responsibility to care for Country.
[246] The panel
has given due regard to this evidence and considered it in the context of the
proposed operations of the Project.
[247] Considering
this evidence, the panel has imposed conditions aimed at addressing the key
expressed wishes and concerns of the
native title party, focusing on enhancing
the protections for important places, provide support for caring for Country
through the development of a Ranger Program, and enhanced heritage
protection measures.
conditions which arise from our consideration of the mandatory criteria set out
at s 39(1)(b) are discussed extensively
at [403] to [418] below.
Consideration of section 39(1)(c) – the economic or
other significance of the act to Australia, the State, the area where the
Project is located, and Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait Islanders who live
in that area
[249] Under
s 39(1)(c) the panel is required to take into account the economic or other
significance of the leases to Australia, the
State, the areas in which the
leases are located and to the Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait Islanders who
live in those areas.
This requires an evaluation of the economic or other
significance of the leases, rather than consideration of the significance of
exploration or mining
[250] As set out
in the background to this decision, following the remittal of this matter from
the Full Court the parties were invited
to lodge any statement of contentions
they wished to make addressing any request to submit further evidence. At the
request of the
parties, the Tribunal also convened a short oral hearing on the
issue, following which the panel provided written reasons for their
[251] Importantly,
no party sought the opportunity to provide updated economic evidence going to
the matters to be considered under
s 39(1)(c) particularly, despite some of the
key evidence being approximately 10 years old by the time it needed to be
again by this panel.
[252] Having
regard to the full context of this matter, the panel has not drawn an
unfavourable inference in relation to the failure
to update this evidence,
however the age of the evidence is a relevant consideration as to its weight.
[253] Despite no
party directly updating evidence going to the economic or other significance of
the act, Santos and Gomeroi each
made contentions against the other, suggesting,
in effect, that aspects of the expert evidence of Mr Mudge and Mr Kelp went to
category and/or went outside of the scope of directions, and therefore
required the opportunity for further responsive evidence.
particular, the native title party pressed that the evidence of Mr Kelp went to
the criteria set out in s 39(1)(c) and was
outside the scope of the directions
issued on 19 August 2024. During the oral hearing held on 14 February 2025
counsel for Santos
confirmed that they only sought to rely on Mr Kelp’s
evidence in relation to s
This concession and
clarification removed the need for further procedural processes.
parties have made forensic decisions about how they wish to conduct the
remittal. The panel will consider the expert evidence
of Mr Mudge and Mr Kelp
lodged in the remittal in relation to s 39(1)(e).
Allen, of which Mr Kelp is an employee, had a role in preparing the EIS,
particularly the macroeconomic modelling, forming
a part of the economic
evidence before the Tribunal in the 2022 Determination and considered by this
panel under s 39(1)(c). The
economic assessments of the EIS were the subject of
further examination by an independent economist engaged by the NSW Government
part of the IPC inquiry and was the subject of subsequent findings on the
economic impact.
Contentions and evidence
[257] While
this remittal is
the summary of then-President Dowsett is useful
in understanding the evidence that was before him and considered by this panel
Then-President Dowsett’s summary of the s 39(1)(c) material can be
found from [934] to [942] of the 2022 Determination.
grantee parties contend the Project will generate an estimated $5.4 billion (net
present value) in revenue which will flow
through to the Narrabri community
through payment of royalties to the Gas Community Benefit Fund, and to Santos
shareholders through
A further $3.1
billion is expected to go to the NSW Government through royalties and tax
The Project is
expected to create approximately 1300 temporary jobs during the construction
phase and sustain a further 200 ‘direct
and indirect’ jobs during
the operational phase.
submit that the Project will likely stimulate the local Narrabri economy and
that compensation agreements will offset any
potential loss of income on
agricultural properties.
grantee parties suggest that any attempt to attribute the economic costs of
climate change are ‘entirely unrealistic’
as to do so would
attributes all the negative impacts of climate change to the Project rather than
working out which impacts are
actually caused by
[259] Gomeroi
contend the Project will be less economically significant than suggested by
Santos for several reasons summarised
(a) the economic reports which the grantee parties rely on date from 2020 noting
there has been ‘transformational change in
the Australian energy
market’ since then;
(b) the jobs figures provided have not been updated
since the EIS was prepared in 2014;
(c) even if the now outdated figures are accepted, the real economic output will
impact, with only 200 ‘long term’ jobs
created and the majority being retained by Santos or limited to shareholders;
(d) examining the NSW Treasury
figures for 2023, Gomeroi notes the Project will only contribute 0.07% of the
State’s annual GDP;
(e) the Commonwealth’s Safeguard Mechanism will capture the Project,
requiring Santos offset emissions above a certain ‘baseline’.
Safeguard Mechanism is considered in more detail in relation to the
panel’s consideration of the public interest below;
(f) any effect that the Project would have on gas prices is uncertain and if
there is any impact it is likely to be limited in duration;
(g) any economic benefit remains contingent on receiving approval for the
construction of two third-party pipelines, approvals which
have not yet been
received; and
(h) the application of the
eduction results in an entirely different cost-benefit analysis. This
contention is linked to expert evidence received in the remittal
and the panel
has considered this evidence only in the context of s 39(1)(e) for reasons set
out above. In any event, for reasons
explained from [318] to [321] below, the
panel is not convinced the IVER is the correct tool through which the Project
[260] The State
contentions addressing s 39(1)(c) were brief and largely focused on the panel
accepting the findings of the IPC and
the evidence contained in the EIS. In
effect, the State contends the panel should accept, as the IPC did, that on
balance, the Project
will provide a significant net economic benefit for the
local community, the region and the State through increased investment and
economic activity, as well as securing existing and future industries through
the provision of a local gas supply and increased gas
supply to the East
[261] The panel
also notes that the EIS provides an Aboriginal Engagement Strategy will be
implemented to maximise employment opportunities
for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples, in addition to the economic benefits they are entitled
to access as members of
Consideration
[262] Based
on the evidence before us, the panel accepts the high level of uncertainty
associated with the energy market, specifically
leading conversely to
an uncertainty of economic benefits going to market pricing.
[263] However,
while the panel acknowledges that the economic evidence set out in the IPC
reasons and contained in the EIS is relatively
old, which must be considered
when weighing such evidence, we agree with the contentions of the State that
this evidence is persuasive
and should be accepted.
[264] The panel
also notes it must consider the effect of the act on the matters set out in s
39(1)(c), not the effect of the Hunter
Gas Pipeline and the Narrabri Lateral
Pipeline which will need to undergo their own approvals processes including as
future acts
Native Title Act
balance, and having regard to all the evidence and contentions made by the
parties, the panel is satisfied the Project will
provide an economic benefit to
the local community, including the Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait
Islanders who live in those
areas, Australia, and the State, for similar reasons
found by the IPC, that is; through increased investment and activity in the
area, the generation of some employment, and increased gas supply to the East
Australian market.
Consideration of section 39(1)(e) – any public
interest in the doing of the act
[266] Section
39(1)(e) of the
Native Title Act
requires the Tribunal to consider
whether there is any public interest in the grant of the leases.
[267] As set out
by the Full Court in the
principal reasons
, in the 2022 Determination the
Tribunal took the view, as a matter of statutory construction, that the 1998
amendments had the consequent
effect of narrowing the matters comprehended by
the public interest criterion in s 39(1)(e) to exclude any evaluation by
the Tribunal
of the environmental effects of a future act. The Full Court found
this was an error. Where the Tribunal erred, the Full Court found,
conflating the removal of the environmental assessment function by the 1998
amendments, with the removal of
requirement for it to consider, under
s 39(1)(e) of the
Native Title Act
, whether features or
characteristics of the future act broadly described as
“environmental” weighed for or against the
public interest in the
doing of the future act.
[268] The Full
Court also noted that despite the Tribunal considering the environmental and
climate change evidence in the 2022 Determination,
it did so only to emphasise
that the task of evaluating the effects on climate change from the Project, and
evaluating whether allowing
a Project which increased emissions was in the
public interest at all, was no part of its function, referring also to
then-President
Dowsett stating in his reasons that this was a matter “for
government” and not his task under s
[269] Santos
appeared to repeat some tenets of this overturned position adopted by
then-President Dowsett in this remittal, contending
that the Tribunal is not
tasked with assessing the public interest in preventing climate change, or the
public interest in changing
Australia’s energy policy, and the Tribunal
cannot make a determination that Australia should do more to stop climate change
as such questions are matters of government
When making
contentions about Professor Karoly’s evidence, Santos stated that the
native title party is, in effect, asking
the Tribunal to adopt a policy position
that a new gas production project is,
, not in the public
The native title
party did not necessarily agree with this characterisation of its position.
[270] As noted
by the Full Court, it is well established that Parliament’s use of the
phrase “any public interest”
confers a wide discretionary value
judgment function. The phrase is not, and is not intended to be, susceptible of
precise definition,
nor is it appropriate to set out lists of matters that might
fall within its scope. It tasks a body such as the Tribunal to look
at interests
common to or held amongst a wider community, but not necessarily across an
entire community, or
State of Western Australia and Another v Buurabalayji
Thalanyji Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC
[2014] NNTTA 85
contains useful
discussion around the requirements of s 39(1)(e):
Section 39(1)(e)
requires the Tribunal to determine whether the proposed future act is ‘in
the public interest’. This
expression imports a discretionary value
judgment made by reference to undefined factual matters, and only confined by
the subject
matter, scope and purpose of the legislation (see
Gundungurra Tribal Council
at [141], citing the High Court in
O’Sullivan v Farrer
at 216). There can be a public interest in the
act proceeding or not proceeding, and the public interest is not limited to
considerations:
Western Australia v Thomas
[272] It is also
worth quoting here the comments of Chief Justice Mortimer in the Full Court
point made by the Gomeroi applicant in its submissions to the Tribunal was that
the Tribunal
should strike a
under the NTA [
Native Title Act
] to the one
struck by the State and its agencies through the environmental assessment
process. The Gomeroi People, through the Gomeroi
applicant, were entitled to ask
the Tribunal to do that. The Tribunal’s function is independent of State
government and conferred
for quite a different purpose; namely
to examine the
future act from the perspective of the holders (or putative holders) of native
title, as well as from the perspective
of other members of the community as set
out in s 39(1)
. As I explain below, it must perform that function
in a statutory context where, despite the recognition of native title in the
and waters concerned (or putative recognition through registration), native
title holders or claimants do not have any veto over
future acts on their
country. Rather, Parliament has given the capacity of veto to the Tribunal. It
is a specific function, in which
similar considerations taken into account by
State government and their agencies might be evaluated quite differently, in the
performance
of a different legislative function, one informed by the objects of
the NTA and the values set out in the Preamble.
The Preamble informs the content of the “public
interest” when that phrase is used in the NTA. The legislative scheme
of the NTA requires the Tribunal to form its own views on where the
public interest lies both as a separate consideration and as
part of a holistic
exercise, reflecting on all the factors in s 39(1)
. In performing
that function it is no part of the Tribunal’s role to defer to government,
state or federal. (emphasis added).
examined from [30] to [31] above, the
Native Title Act
is a beneficial
statute and the future act right to negotiate regime, which includes the scope
of this inquiry, is an element of
the protection of native title and not to be
narrowly construed.
[274] The panel
is of the view that the relevant community or public, whose interests must be
considered for the purposes of s 39(1)(e)
in respect of the Project, should be
construed broadly as one comprising of all those that hold a common interest as
community who
will be effected by the benefits and detriments of the doing of
the act, applying a predictive assessment.
summary, in construing the public interest within the context of s 39(1)(e) the
panel has considered the line of High Court
authority that holds the
‘public interest’ is only confined by the subject matter, scope and
purpose of the legislation.
The panel has also had regard to Chief Justice Mortimer’s statement that
the ‘Preamble informs the content of the “public
when that phrase is used in the
The Preamble
provides relevantly that in the
Native Title Act
of Australia intend:... to ensure that Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait
Islanders receive the full recognition and
status within the Australian nation
to which history, their prior rights and interests, and their rich and diverse
culture, fully
entitle them to aspire.
[276] Equally,
the objects of the
Native Title Act
include to ‘provide for the
recognition and protection of native
The panel is
therefore of the view that their consideration of the ‘public
interest’ must recognise the common Australian
interest in recognising and
protecting native title, as well as protecting and preserving the rich and
diverse cultures of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
[277] Importantly,
the Full Court found there was ample material before the Tribunal in the 2022
Determination, and therefore also
in this inquiry, to make good the proposition
that a matter of public interest in connection with the Project was the fact
would generate substantial GHG emissions, in an undisputed factual
context of the connection between GHG emissions and global warming,
increased harm to people and the environment that comes from global warming. The
Full Court also noted the terms of the
Departmental report itself make good that
this was a matter of public interest as it referred to ‘the
community’ raising
significant concerns about the Project saying:
... it would damage
the region’s water resources, cause significant biodiversity impacts on
the Pilliga State Forest, generate
substantial greenhouse gas emissions, and
adversely affect the health, safety and cohesion of the local community...
[s]ubmissions
were as much about the ongoing use of fossil fuels and gas in Australia
were about the project.
uncontested evidence before the Tribunal includes the fact that an increase in
the concentration of GHGs in the atmosphere
leads to a warming effect at the
Earth’s surface and in the lower
atmosphere.
This is also
commonly known as ‘global warming’. As a result of increased GHGs in
the atmosphere, largely coming from
anthropogenic emissions, global surface
temperature has increased by 1.1º C since
evidence, particularly that of the native title party’s climate science
expert Professor Karoly, describes how increased
global surface temperatures are
associated with a number of key climate impacts including rising ocean
temperatures, a decline in
sea-ice and permafrost, increases in humidity and
changing precipitation patterns around the
Climate change is also
associated with an increase in the frequency, size, and intensity of weather
events, including ‘extreme
temperatures and heatwaves, weather conditions
conducive to bushfires, extreme daily rainfall and associated flooding, drought
some areas, and coastal storm surges and associated
while there is variability in how this manifests, the evidence shows that
climate change has caused, and is likely to
continue to cause, widespread damage
to ecosystems.
This evidence
was not contested by the other parties.
[280] The panel
accepts the expert evidence concerning both the causes and effects of
anthropogenic climate change. It is within this
context that the consideration
of the public interest will take place.
Public benefits and public detriments
[281] Justice
O’Bryan, with whom the Chief Justice agreed, framed this task of weighing
benefits and detriments to ascertain
where the public interest lies for the
purpose of s 39(1)(e), in the following
“any public interest in the proposed act proceeding” necessarily
requires consideration of the public benefits
and the public detriments arising
from the proposed act in order to assess whether there is an overall (or net)
public interest in
the proposed act proceeding...
[282] The panel
agrees with and adopts this assessment of its task in relation to s 39(1)(e).
[283] This task
must be applied by a non-scientific Tribunal within the statutory framework the
Native Title Act
and considering the evolving challenge of anthropogenic
climate change caused by global GHG emissions in the atmosphere attributed
the effect of a Project – where molecules or emissions have no boundaries.
This requires the panel undertake a complex and
nuanced predictive assessment
using the evidence before it.
[284] The global
challenge presented by climate change has initiated numerous monitoring and
regulatory regimes, including international
agreements such as the Paris
Agreement referred to by the parties in their evidence, and forms the common
objective of several pieces
of domestic federal and state policy and
legislation.
The challenge
interacts with abstruse energy markets, that are influenced by and interact with
broader international trade.
Counterfactual
[285] Against
this complex backdrop, much time has been spent by both Santos and Gomeroi
encouraging the panel to consider hypothetical
scenarios that may occur should
the act not proceed. This is not a criticism of the parties, indeed this is
reflective of the complexity
of the task associated with undertaking a
predictive assessment where the Tribunal is being asked to consider an
unprecedented future
act determination, which effectively applies the Full Court
decision and expands the previous understanding of the scope of s 39(1)(e).
[286] Both the
native title party and the grantee parties referred to the
Living Wonders
case in their submissions.
While acknowledging that the
Living Wonders
case does take place in a
different statutory context, the panel has found the
Living Wonders
to be instructive and it is worth extracting the following portion of Justice
Transposing
his Honour’s reasoning to the present context, it may be accepted that the
Minister was required to
identify the direct and indirect consequences of the
proposed action, and not to hypothesise what might happen in a future
in which the proposed action is not taken.
But that did
not preclude the Minister from having regard to the “variables” that
might be relevant to the events or
circumstances resulting from proposed action
– here, the enlargement or extension of the existing coal mines. The
was engaged in a predictive exercise, in which it was necessary to
determine whether and to what extent the accepted impacts of climate
MNES [Matters of National Environmental Significance] would be caused by the
proposed action.
panel is of the view that it is exactly this hypothetical exploration of what
‘future world(s)’ might exist
if the proposed act
proceed which the panel has been urged to undertake. Whereas the statutory task
required of the panel is to consider the public interest
on the basis that the
proceed. The predictive assessment required to be undertaken is
complex enough without introducing a range of hypotheticals premised
counterfactuals. We must consider the effect of the acts should they proceed.
The counterfactual exercise urged on the panel is
so filled with conjecture,
hypothesis and speculation as to be unhelpful.
[288] For these
reasons, the panel agrees with the submission of the native title party
comparison for the Tribunal in undertaking its task to consider the public
interest is to comparing [sic] the Project’s
emissions over its projected
lifetime with zero emissions from the Project not being approved.
[289] Nevertheless,
the panel must consider the ‘variables’ relevant to its task and
this does involve some consideration
of the ‘hypothetical’
contentions of the parties. For Santos, the hypothetical contentions focused on
whether a projected
shortfall in gas would require the utilisation of energy
sources in NSW likely to cost more and result in higher emissions if the
does not proceed.
[290] While
Gomeroi generally reject the proposition of future hypothetical
Mr Mudge, an
expert witness for the native title party, gave evidence on a range of
non-fossil fuel alternatives and how each might
meet any unmet demand if the
Project does not proceed.
[291] One of the
alternative options put forward by Mr Mudge was biogas, which involves the use
of naturally occurring CH
from biological sources such as crops and
waste, minimising the additional CH
entering the carbon
Mudge’s evidence also addressed the development or advancement of greater
energy storage capacity though the use of
batteries or pumped hydro, including
as part of a broader ‘mix’ of renewable power generation and storage
facilities.
In relation to
batteries, Mr Mudge particularly drew the panel’s attention to the speed
at which battery costs are
difficulty with these submissions, as noted repeatedly by the grantee
parties’ energy expert Mr Kelp, is that none
of these options are
currently operating within NSW at a scale sufficient to cover the projected
power needs of the State for the
[294] During the
expert conclave, Mr Mudge himself conceded that the biogas referenced was not
currently going into the system, though
with investment it
Similarly, while Mr
Mudge identified a number of hydrogen projects, he also acknowledged that they
were not presently operating at
the scale necessary to substitute other sources
[295] The panel
found the same difficulties with the counterfactual evidence of Santos. Mr Kelp
and the grantee parties asked the
panel to accept that should the Project not
proceed, not only would the alternative energy sources put forward by Mr Mudge
viable, but that the likely shortfall in the energy market would likely
mean coal plants in NSW would need to stay
operational.
[296] Mr Kelp
points to the modelling of the
perator, which predicts a small supply gap emerging from 2026–2027
and likely increasing, and says any gap in supply means that
should the Project
not proceed imported gas will be required, which Mr Kelp says will be more
costly and likely produce higher
Mr Kelp also
suggests that these factors would likely delay the retirement of coal generated
power plants, citing Eraring Power Plant,
or incentivise industrial users such
as steelworks to continue using coal
[297] The supply
gap referred to by Mr Kelp is based on extreme peak day demand, characterised by
1-in-20-year highs in daily demand
from residential, commercial and industrial
customers and 1-in-10-year high daily gas requirements for gas-powered
generation.
difficulty with these supply gap predictions is the uncertainty and contingency
of them. Indeed, the panel notes AEMO produces
its forecasts based on modelling
only, and as the parties addressed in evidence, these predicted shortfalls in
gas supply have previously
eventuated.
Reflecting the
fluidity and unpredictability of the energy market, AEMO updates its forecasting
regularly and did so again following
the closing of submissions in this
The evidence before
the panel regarding the energy market is replete with tenuous predictions and
estimates, particularly where it
attempts to assert what may occur over the next
20–30 years.
[299] Whilst the
panel has had regard to these variables contained in the counterfactual evidence
put forward by the parties, for
the reasons set out above, the task of this
panel is to consider the direct and indirect consequences of the Project, and
the emissions
it is predictively assessed to produce, not to hypothesise what
might happen in a future world in which the Project does not proceed.
Direct and indirect
[300] Although
the panel does not agree with the grantee parties’ full contentions on the
applicability of
Living Wonders
, the panel accepts that the direct and
indirect consequences of the Project are relevant to consider in undertaking its
assessment.
[301] In this
case, the Tribunal has before it uncontroverted expert evidence that GHG
emissions produced by the Project over its
lifetime (a direct consequence) will
contribute to a rise in global temperature. The expert evidence going to the
direct and indirect
consequences of the doing of this Project are based on
scientific forecasting largely not in dispute between the parties.
[302] Throughout
the course of this matter different arguments concerning causation were urged on
the panel. Gomeroi contended that
if a standard of causation was to be accepted,
which it said should not be, the appropriate test should be ‘material
contribution’,
following the
concerned a pursuer who had developed pneumoconiosis through
exposure to multiple sources of silica dust, with one of these sources
poorly maintained equipment of his employer. The question in this instance was
not what ‘the most probable source
of the disease was’ but rather
whether the silica dust from his employer’s poorly maintained equipment
‘materially
contributed’.
contrast Santos drew the panel’s attention to the
Living Wonders
case with its ‘substantial cause’ test, albeit noting that the
legislative schemes were different and the ‘requirement
of an action being
the “substantial cause” of harmful effects is different to a
consideration of whether the act is in
[304] The panel
found neither of these submissions helpful in considering causation. Rather the
panel accepts the contention of the
Government party on this
factual context where it is not controversial that there is more than one source
of GHG emissions and more than one cause of
global warming, it would be an error
for the Tribunal to attribute every potential consequence of global warming to
the Project.
Rather, the Tribunal must take into account, based on the evidence
before it, the Project’s estimated contribution to GHG emissions
consequential effects of those emissions, including any contribution to global
warming. It is in this context that the Project’s
contribution to global
temperature increases and representative percentages of total impacts should be
taken into account: see paragraph
[28] of the Contentions and paragraph [32] of
the GP Contentions. It is a matter for the Tribunal to balance the potential
caused by the contribution of the Project’s GHG emissions and
the other public interest considerations.
[305] Ultimately,
all three parties acknowledged during oral submissions that there should be no
particular test for causation under
As counsel for the
grantee parties correctly submitted, what is required of the Tribunal is a
balancing exercise in assessing the
[306] The panel
accepts that there must be a causal link between the doing of an act and the
direct and indirect consequences that
flow but does not find it is helpful to
introduce a test of ‘substantial’ or ‘material’
causation. Common
sense is necessary in considering both causation and
proportionality and this will always depend upon on the specific facts and
circumstances
under consideration.
[307] It is
accepted on the evidence that the Project will contribute to provide energy to
the wider community. It is also accepted
on the evidence, that the Project will
result in GHG emissions which will cumulatively contribute to adverse climate
change impacts.
[308] Climate
change is a serious threat for the public interest we must consider. All GHG
emissions contribute to global temperature
rises, which will have, based on the
scientific modelling in the various IPCC reports, a sliding scale of impacts
depending upon
whether the global temperature rise is equivalent to 1.5, 2 or
4°C, with the level of rise impacted by a range of looming risks.
risks include climate ‘tipping points’ or temperature increases
beyond which serious and irreversible damage to
the world’s ecosystems
will occur.
[309] Gomeroi
expert witness, Professor Karoly, estimates that the emissions generated by the
Project, calculated based on figures
contained in the EIS, will result in a
global temperature increase of 0.00005°C over the course of its 25-year
lifespan. The
native title party contends that this temperature increase, as a
contributor to the broader global temperature rise, presents a range
that are too high, and the impacts too dire, to justify the doing of the
While not directly
contesting the temperature increase presented by the native title party, Santos
contended that such a temperature
increase is ‘immeasurably small’
so as to be
The State also
does not appear to challenge the figure presented, contending that, even
accepting this figure, it comprises a 0.0033%
contribution by reference to the
aim of the international community to keep warming below
[310] The panel
accepts the native title party’s contention that any contribution of GHG
emissions leading to a rise in global
temperature would have negative impacts
for the planet and the public. The panel further accepts that the expert
evidence demonstrates
a link between the doing of the Project to a range of
specific local and regional risks, even if the links take a circuitous route
through a series of direct and indirect consequences. It does not matter if the
same carbon and CH
molecules generated by the Project directly cause
the potential risks to the Narrabri region, this is the unique nature of the
of the act as molecules have no boundaries, yet contribute to the
cumulative impacts caused.
[311] Of course,
any emissions which arise from the doing of the future act must be understood in
the context of the totality of global
emissions. It would be an error to
attribute all the consequences of climate change to the doing of a single
project. Section 39(1)(e)
directs the panel to consider the doing of
future act.
[312] The panel
does not accept any characterisation that the projected emissions of the
Project, which the panel accepts, based on
the evidence before it, will result
in an approximately 0.00005°C increase in global temperatures, is
‘immeasurably small’.
Such a figure is measurable, as reflected in
the evidence of the experts. Even though this figure appears ‘small’
of context, as noted by Professor Karoly, these emissions are significant
when you have regard to the fact that these emissions are
from a single source
and the contribution of emissions will remain in the atmosphere for decades, and
contribute to the cumulative
impacts and risks that are, in turn, potentially
catastrophic and irreversible for the planet, including the Narrabri region and
the wider community of Australia. Such consequences are not
de minimis.
Contentions and evidence
Project has been declared a Strategic Energy Project for
The NSW Government identified the projected gas
, finding the Project will strengthen
energy security and reliability, as a key basis for this
declaration.
assessment of the Project, the Department of Planning, Industry and Environment
also found that the Project would serve to
increase competition in the domestic
gas market, clarifying at the public hearing however that it did not expect the
price of gas
on the market to decrease, due primarily to the small size of the
Project relative to the broader gas
addition to the Project’s role in securing gas supplies for NSW, during
the course of submissions the State encouraged
the panel to have regard to the
role of gas in the transition to ‘net
In making this
submission the State took the panel to the Commonwealth Gas Strategy which
identifies gas as a ‘bridging fuel’,
allowing for the closure of
coal powered power plants.
EIS and related evidence
discussed at [49] above, the evidence contained in the EIS is now nearly 10
years old. A key criticism of the EIS, other
than simply on account of its age,
comes from Mr Mudge who criticises that the EIS does not properly account for
the fugitive emissions
generated by the Project.
[316] Mr Mudge
gives evidence that the fugitive emissions would be some 10 times greater than
those reported in the EIS, stating in
the delivery of the Narrabri Gas in preference to the biogas and hydrogen
substitutes that Jemena is proposing to largely
displace fossil fuel gas over
the Narrabri Gas Operating Period imposes rapidly escalating methane leakage
liabilities on the NSW
gas network operator that would lead to:
a) fossil fuel sourced gas such as the Narrabri Gas production falling outside
the NSW network’s Gas Specification and therefore
not being able to be
transported or
b) the Narrabri Gas Project being obliged to compensate the NSW Gas Network for
incremental methane emissions attributable to transporting
fossil fuel gas from
the project.
This finds a base emissions arising from the Narrabri Gas Project that is
approximately 10 times that estimated by Santos in its EIS
analysis, with an
economic cost almost 10 times higher than for the Santos analysis.
Mudge’s calculation and methodology are disputed by Mr Kelp and
[318] Related to
this, Mr Mudge then uses the IVER formula to come up with an economic cost of
the Project of some $30 billion. As
referenced by Mr Mudge, the IVER is a
formula intended to measure ‘the dollar value per tonne of avoided
greenhouse gas emissions
in order to operationalise emissions reduction as a
component of the national energy
objectives’.
[319] Based on
all the evidence before us, the panel is not satisfied that the fugitive
emissions are approximately 10 times that
estimated in the EIS analysis, nor is
the panel satisfied as to the appropriateness of applying the IVER methodology
to the Project
in the manner Mr Mudge suggests. On this point Santos
is not intended to be used to calculate the economic cost of emissions from
individual projects. Rather, it is clear from
the very source cited by Mr Mudge
in support of his analysis that it was developed as a tool to evaluate
regulatory change proposals
in the energy sector.
[320] In support
of this contention Santos point to the documents Mr Mudge cites in his
discussion of the IVER. These documents provide
that IVER is to be ‘used
by a government or regulatory entity in considering or applying the national
energy objectives’
and ‘measures the dollar value per tonne of
avoided GHG emissions in order to operationalise emissions reduction as a
of the national energy
objectives’.
[321] Counsel
for the native title party submitted that Mr Mudge’s expert evidence was
the only evidence before the panel that
relates to the current costs of
emissions. Whilst it is the case that the EIS figures are now aged, the panel
accepts Santos’
submission that based on the plain reading of the use of
the IVER formula, it is a methodology used by governments to set policy
following contentions from the parties on the issue
the panel decided the expert
reports of Mr Mudge and Mr Kelp lodged in the remittal would be considered in
relation to s 39(1)(e).
Regardless, whatever subsection this evidence was
considered under, our finding would remain, that is; based on the evidence
us we are not convinced of the appropriateness of the IVER formula in the
manner posed by Mr Mudge.
[322] Returning
to the EIS directly, the panel notes Chapter 24 deals with the GHG emissions of
the Project, as discussed from [50]
to [53] above. Over the 25-year lifetime of
the Project the EIS anticipates ‘direct’ emissions of either 26.3 Mt
equivalent (
) with self-generated electricity, or 15.5 Mt CO2-e
with electricity sourced from the national
The above consideration is of the ‘Scope 1’ emissions, or those
emissions which arise directly from the activities of
the grantee parties in the
Project. In the event that the Project does source electricity from the national
grid there will be a
18 Mt CO2-e
of ‘Scope 2’ emissions,
resulting from the generation of electricity by third parties where Santos is
the end user.
For the sake of
completeness, the EIS provides that if the Project uses self-generated
electricity there will be no ‘Scope
[323] ‘Scope
3’, or to use the language of the EIS ‘downstream emissions’,
resulting from the combustion of
the gas coming from the Project would be
expected to be much higher and the EIS provides for approximately 3.77 Mt CO2-e
Over the 25 years
of the Project this comes to approximately 94.25 Mt
security (supply)
[324] There is
an identified need for gas reserves within the Australian east coast domestic
gas network. The panel considers that
it does not need to determine whether a
predicted shortfall will eventuate. Rather, it accepts the contention of the
State that the
addition of a further energy source will provide ‘a
separate benefit which should be attributed significant weight in the assessment
of the public
mirrored in Santos’ contention that the Project will ‘directly
support energy stability in NSW via the domestic
evidence shows the Project is anticipated to meet some 47% of NSW current gas
Further, the evidence
of Mr Kelp is that the Project is the most ‘shovel ready’ of all the
prospective gas projects within
the Australian domestic market and that
‘other projects would be significantly later than
Mr Kelp also
reports that existing reserves in NSW and Victoria are rapidly declining as more
productive and economic sources of
gas are depleted over the next
This depletion has
resulted in predicted shortfalls in gas as demand begins to outstrip supply in
the period 2028 to 2043.
[326] Gomeroi
challenge this predicted shortfall, noting that previous predicted shortfalls
have not eventuated.
gave evidence during the expert conclave that in forecasting expected gas demand
AEMO uses an ‘extreme peak day’
model, ‘which is a
one-in-20-years forecast, for the residential, commercial, industrial customers,
and then overlay on top
of that a one-in-10-year forecast for gas-fired power
generation’.
[327] There is
evidence before the panel that gas offers some benefits over other sources of
available energy. Santos contends that
the most obvious of these is gas as
‘an alternative energy source/firming power to address energy requirements
where an intermittent
renewable source is not
available’.
evidence Mr Kelp states:
For industry, gas is
generally the preferred fuel where processes require a lot of energy, high heat
or as a feedstock. It is used
in the manufacture of pulp, paper, chemicals,
glass, processed foods and bricks. It is a chemical feedstock to produce ammonia
fertilisers and explosives, which play a major role in Australia’s
fertiliser and mining sectors.
[328] There is
also evidence before the panel that Australia already produces a significant
amount of gas capable of meeting domestic
demand, however most gas produced in
Australia is exported. In 2022–2023 some 4,976 PJ of domestically produced
gas was exported
while 1,083 PJ was used for domestic
Much of this
exported gas appears to be tied up in long term international supply agreements
with a number due to expire around 2035,
although there is no certainty that
this gas would then become available
domestically.
[329] There was
much contradictory evidence before the panel concerning the impact that the
Project would have on gas prices. Indeed,
in their own consideration the IPC
Department’s AR [Assessment Report] describes how the Project will result
in increased competition in the domestic
gas market and put downward pressure on
gas prices, the Department acknowledged at the Public Hearing that it did not
price of gas to decrease, due primarily to the small size of the
Project relative to the broader gas market.
[330] This view
appears to be bolstered by Mr Kelp’s evidence that while his firm ACIL
Allen did not have access to detailed
cost information concerning the Project
expect the cost of the gas produced from the field to be more expensive than
most comparable coal seam gas production fields
in Queensland as the NSW coal
seams tend to be deeper and have a lower permeability (the ability to gas to
flow within the coal seam).
This will tend to make the gas production rates
lower per well than for similar Queensland Surat/Bowen Basin developments and
more expensive on a $/GJ basis when unitised.
[331] Mr Kelp
also noted that increasingly domestic gas prices are affected through prevailing
international prices though ‘netback’
pricing, noting particularly
the effect rising Qatari and United States LNG supply might be expected to have
in coming years.
[332] Despite
this, Mr Kelp opined that the Project would have an effect in two principal
ways, ‘bringing in a lower cost source
of supply’, and ‘an
incremental competition impact from having Santos Gas supply in the market that
wouldn’t otherwise
[333] Based on
the evidence before it, the panel is not satisfied that this Project will have
any major impact, positive or negative,
on energy market pricing. However, for
reasons set out below at [372], the panel is satisfied that securing domestic
gas will assist to prevent upward pressure on gas prices providing a
marginal benefit.
Impacts of climate change: expert
[334] There is
no contest in this matter that the direct impact of the Project proceeding will
be the contribution of GHG to the atmosphere.
This will have the indirect impact
of increasing climate change. The panel accepts this. The evidence of the native
title party’s
expert and lay witnesses concerning the impacts of climate
change is both compelling and unchallenged (other than Mr Mudge’s
which has been dealt with above).
[335] Professor
Karoly estimates that the emissions generated by the Project, calculated based
on figures contained in the EIS, will
result in a global temperature increase of
0.00005°C over the course of its 25-year lifespan. As discussed above at
[309], this
evidence was not directly contested by the other parties.
[336] On the
topic of climate change, both expert witnesses Professor Karoly and Dr Mitchell
were largely agreed.
Mitchell noted his agreement with the emissions figures found in the
Project’s EIS.
that based on these figures the emissions for the Project comprised
approximately 0.2182 per cent of the total Australian
emissions for
Dr Mitchell provided an
overview of the most recent IPCC modelling, however noted that the modelling did
not allow for the linkage
of ‘a single molecule of CO
into the atmosphere by a particular local facility, such as the Narrabri Gas
Project, to a specific fractional rise in global
atmospheric temperature’
or to particular extreme weather events which might occur as a result of climate
With respect to Dr
Mitchell, the panel did not find this analysis concerned with linking
‘molecules’ to particular temperature
increases particularly helpful
for reasons set out in this determination. It is also worth emphasising that Dr
Mitchell took no objection
to Professor Karoly’s calculation of
C global temperature rise as a result of the Project,
although he characterised it as ‘tremendously
[338] Professor
Brendan Mackey provided evidence concerning the ecological risks posed to the
Pilliga by the impacts of climate change,
including the 107 listed threated
species to be found in the Pilliga which he notes are ‘highly
vulnerable’ to climate
This evidence was
examined from [92] to [97] above and was not contested by the other parties.
[339] Associate
Professor Nina Lansbury gave evidence addressing the health and wellbeing
impacts of climate change, breaking them
down into physical, social and
emotional, cultural, spiritual, economic and environmental. This evidence was
examined from [98] to
[101] above and was not contested by the other
[340] Dr Karl
Mallon provided a climate risk report which identified a number of risks to
properties within the Narrabri region. Dr
Mallon noted both direct risks such as
increased chance of fire, flood, as well as secondary or consequential risks
such as rising
insurance costs and lessening insurability/access to
In calculating
these figures Dr Mallon selected a particular climate ‘pathway’
which he considered ‘consistent
with a policy environment in which new
fossil fuel reserves are being developed and exploited - such as the one being
then modelled the likelihood of a number of climate risks across the period to
2100, finding significantly increased risks
of riverine flooding, surface water
flooding, forest fire, soil movement and extreme wind in some or all of the
properties within
[341] Overall Dr
Mallon found that insurance costs in his area of study would rise by 72% due to
climate change this century.
Impacts of climate change: Gomeroi witnesses
[342] The native
title party also provided compelling evidence from traditional owners concerning
the potential impacts of climate
[343] Ms Suellyn
Tighe discusses the potential impacts of climate change in a number of different
dimensions. Firstly she discusses
the impact of climate change on the
Gomeroi’s ability to undertake wooden tool manufacture, with a particular
focus on how
trees used to make coolamons are affected by an increasing
frequency of bushfires.
also discusses the impact of greater frequency of bushfires on the
Gomeroi’s ability to gather bushtucker and the impacts
a warming climate
is having on the seasonality of plants and animals, with warmer winters leading
to plants fruiting earlier and
not reaching full
[344] Ms Tighe
discusses the potential impacts of climate change on the waterways of the
Gomeroi in some detail and it is worth extracting
these portions in their
through the Rainbow Serpent, provided water for people. If
you want to keep that water system going, Gamilaraay have responsibility
maintain it, through usage and through sustainable practices. For instance, not
just going there and just bucketing out water
for the sake of it, or pumping it
or things like that. Because it's been provided, we have a responsibility to
maintain that. And
we know that droughts are going to come at some stage, to
have those chains of pools maintained just makes sense.
If water levels drop because there 's more droughts because of climate
change, that means we can't exercise that responsibility. It's
our cultural
mandate to look after that. Because these chains of pools are sandstone, if we
see a drying out of that sandstone to
the point where it collapses, that affects
that water source and the flow of water. That would impact the story of the
It also shows that actions have consequences. That's a common
theme throughout a lot of stories: actions have consequences.
[345] The second
lay witness, Mr Booby, comments on the effect climate change will have on the
Gomeroi’s ability to go out on
country and transmit cultural knowledge as
well as the impacts greater fire events will have on significant
Mr Booby also
discusses the impact of climate change, noting how increased temperature in
particular, raised the likelihood of longer,
more intense droughts in his
rain events introduce flash flooding. Flash flooding has an enormous impact on
how the water's filtered, and clog the streams
with leaves and vegetation. Flash
flooding would create issues for the Pilliga, including the trees, shrubs,
plants, animals. The
impact of these flash flooding events would also be on
particular animals that were a bit slower and couldn't get away fast. You'd
to look at the breakdown within the moiety system and how those are impacted
within that moiety. If this animal belongs to this
moiety group and it can't
access fresh water because the filtration system's been clogged up, then that's
breaking down those linkages
within that system.
It's my role and responsibility to look after the water system and the Namoi.
Part of that cultural responsibility is that I don't
send shit downstream to
poison my brother's Country. Doing that takes away our right to be reciprocal in
the way in which we treat
Country with the people downstream. Wee Waa, Pilliga,
where that Namoi system flows til it gets out at the gate (Walgett). It gets
the way down to the Murray, to the Murray Darling, to the actual Coorong. It's
Brewarrina, it's Broken Hill, Wentworth, all those
[346] Mr Wilson
also discussed the impacts of climate change, particularly focusing on the
impacts of droughts and increasing fires
on the ability of the Gomeroi to access
Country as well as the transmission of cultural
discusses how climate change will affect the landscape and the impacts this will
have on the cultural landscape of the
Pilliga, including the sites, spiritual
beings and stories that reside
are other ways climate change might disturb or destroy or affect different types
of ' sites. These extreme weather events; I
had never seen lightning storms in
the last couple years like I have seen out at Narran. That happens in the
Pilliga too, and everybody
shits themselves because there's full on big alerts,
big fires. Fire can be generated through too much vegetation in an area or the
amount of material that's on the ground. From a climate change point of view,
the way that vegetation has changed in the Pilliga
means it's hard for us to try
and manage how to use that Country and look after sites. Some of these pine
trees ' are extremely important
to some of the mob. And even some of the other
; that's where the Pilliga gets its
name from. We used those trees in different ways. If through human intervention
they go from the
landscape, it's very difficult for us to continue to do our
culture there. But from a climate change point of view, if they're dying
there's a lack of water or there's a massive number of fires, we start to worry
our native title, but our cultural
landscapes.
Drought is another big killer. It's one of those processes that through
Gamilaraay and my Yuwaalaraay heritage, we have relationships
with, like with
the trees. Drought: we don't give it a name. It's either a good season or a bad
season. Drought is a beast that we've
learnt to embrace. It's longer, and it's
hotter, even the winters are hotter, when you have droughts for over five years,
in this Country. You really feel it's getting cooked and burnt and
dying, through drought. So, you look for refugia, but you also
look to assist
pain relief in some of these areas within the Pilliga, within the Santos Project
Area. So that's a real climate change
massive screw that has been turned. But
we're not able to use any of the tools that we used to put in place to help
Country through
that period of drought, because we've been taken off the
Country. The fences are up. We're not able to access these places, plus
have our own cultural mapping of the place done properly don't have the
opportunity to apply our methodologies because we're
being kept off Country.
There's been a massive break in between us managing Country.
Regulatory regime
Safeguard Mechanism
Project will be subject to the Federal Government’s Safeguard Mechanism
which serves to manage the emissions of Australia’s
most significant
emitters with a view to reaching ‘net zero’ by
Safeguard Mechanism is given effect by
National Greenhouse and
Energy Reporting Act 2007
). The safeguard mechanism
applies to all facilities that emit more than 100,000 tonnes CO
covered emissions in a financial
These ‘Safeguard
Facilities’ must either keep their emissions below a certain
‘baseline’ or manage the excess
emissions which exceed that
‘baseline’. The baseline is calculated by reference to Rule 29 of
the Safeguard Mechanism
‘baseline’ falls by 4.9% each year to 2030 (following which the
number will be set in five-year blocks by the
Department of Climate Change,
Energy, the Environment and Water). Under the mechanism there are four principal
ways a responsible
emitter can manage excess emissions:
(a) surrender
Australian carbon credit units
Safeguard Mechanism credit
(b) apply to become a trade-exposed baseline-adjusted facility;
(c) apply to borrow baseline from the following year;
(d) apply for a multi-year monitoring period (
) whereby a facility
proposes to reduce emissions across an extended period so that they fall beneath
the baseline over the lifetime
of the MYMP (eg beneath 300,00 if the MYMP was
for 3 years, 400,000 if it was for 4 years etc).
NSW legislation
[350] In their
written contentions the State provided:
in determining the
conditions of environment protection licences pursuant to
Protection of the Environment Operations Act 1997
the EPA must take into account the objectives of the EPA as referred to in
Protection of the Environment Administration Act 1991
). Since the enactment of the
Environment Protection
Legislation Amendment (Stronger Regulation and Penalties) Act
2024 (NSW) on
3 April 2024, those objectives include “taking action in relation to
climate change” to “reduce the
risks to human health and prevent the
degradation of the environment”: PEA Act, s 6(1)(b).
[351] During
the course of oral submissions the State noted that Santos would need to seek a
revision or variation of the Environmental
Protection Licences it currently
holds before it can conduct any further activities as the licences it currently
holds only relate
to the conduct of exploration
activities.
Although the
State could not advise what the particular conditions would be, they did note
that the EPA would be required to consider
the objectives of the EPA, including
taking action in relation to climate change. It must also consider any pollution
caused or likely
to be caused and practical measures that could be taken to
prevent, control, mitigate that
As noted by the
State, the conditions which could be imposed are found at Part 3.5 of the
and ‘include conditions about monitoring, certification, provision
of information, mandatory environmental audits, pollution
studies, production
programs, and conditions relating to
[352] The panel
has already summarised the conditions to which the Project is subject to
pursuant to the IPC’s Development Consent
at [4] above. These conditions
are extensive and cover a range of issues, however particularly relevant to the
consideration of the
public interest in this context are conditions B20 and
[353] Condition
B20 requires that the grantee parties ‘must ensure that all reasonable and
feasible avoidance and mitigation
measures are employed so that GHG emissions
generated by the development do not cause exceedances of the criteria listed
a table identified as ‘Table 6’. These criteria apply only
to ‘Scope 1’ and ‘Scope 2’ emissions
and, in total, add
up to 33.45
-e over the lifetime of the
[354] Condition
B21(a) requires that the grantee parties must ‘develop cumulative maximum
forecasts (the total of which may
not exceed the criteria in Table 6) for the
GHG emissions of the development’ over the 25-year lifetime of the
Project. Santos
monitor and publicly report... the
development's actual greenhouse gas emissions against the cumulative
forecasts’ and ‘ensure
that the actual greenhouse gas emissions
generated by the development at the end of the periods which exceed the
forecasts for those
periods... are 100% offset within one year after those
[355] The IPC
noted in its statement of reasons that the conditions had been imposed in light
of submissions that the direct emissions
of the Project had been underestimated,
‘which would jeopardise the expected greenhouse gas emissions advantage of
further noted that Scope 3 emissions were not included in those conditions as
they were ‘outside the direct control
of the [grantee parties] and
therefore not able to be reasonably
conditioned’.
[356] The IPC
also imposed a range of conditions designed to manage the environmental
consequences of the Project. These conditions
included restrictions on the
location and extent of gas wells limiting well pads to 250 m apart, as discussed
above at the panel’s
consideration of s 39(1)(a).
The weighing of public interest
already discussed, the panel’s task is to weigh public interest, by
considering any public benefits and detriments
arising from the Project and
assessing whether there is a net public interest in the act proceeding.
Importantly, the Gomeroi people
are also members of the wider community or
public to be considered. It must then follow that this net public interest
then weighed against any negative impact upon the registered native
title rights and interests of the Gomeroi people, and other factors,
through the
process of weighing all the criteria under s 39(1).
the context of this inquiry, with its particular focus on climate change
impacts, this task necessarily includes examining
benefits and detriments that
span short, medium and long-term timeframes.
[359] The panel
notes a distinction must be made between the economic and other significance of
the Project under s 39(1)(c), and
the public interests of the wider community as
it relates to the energy market for the purpose of s 39(1)(e). This distinction
particularly relevant for our consideration of the evidence of Mr Kelp and
Mr Mudge lodged in this remittal.
[360] Where a
detriment is found to exist, the panel has considered what is the appropriate
proportionate response that should be
implemented to ameliorate the detriment so
that the doing of the act may balance in the public interest.
summary, the three key areas of public interest identified in this matter based
on the evidence before us are:
(a) energy security and affordability;
(b) environmental protection; and
(c) social impact.
[362] As has
already been noted the evidence in this matter has been extensive and
voluminous. Of principal use to the panel in their
consideration of the public
interest was the evidence adduced in the original inquiry, specifically the EIS
and the IPC decision
upheld on appeal. There are several key reports in evidence
before the Tribunal, including the latest IPCC report, alongside Commonwealth
and NSW regulatory, policy and strategy documents. Both Santos and Gomeroi
submitted lay and expert evidence reports. The panel also
had the benefit of
evidence adduced in the expert witness
[363] The EIS
lists the scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions from this Project in terms of
emissions over the life of the Project. When
considering the emissions, the panel has had regard to the cumulative emissions
notes that Scope 3 emissions within Australia would constitute an indirect
consequence of doing this act. However, it has been put
to the Tribunal that
Scope 3 emissions for the Project will be treated as the Scope 1 emissions of
other users and captured under
such users’ regulatory
obligations.
We also agree
with the contentions of the State that Scope 3 emissions are outside of the
control of the grantee parties.
[364] The IPC
noted that respondents to its inquiry expressed doubt about the Scope 1 and 2
emissions stated in the EIS. As was noted
during the consideration of the
evidence above, the panel did not accept the evidence of Mr Mudge that the
emissions figures in the
EIS should be dramatically uplifted. Considering all
the evidence, we are satisfied that the IPC condition B21 making Santos
responsible
for any exceedance of the emission levels in the EIS is sufficient.
Further the panel notes the Safeguard Mechanism, and additional
introduced in 2024,
regulate emissions and impose remedial steps upon the grantee parties.
[365] However,
it is not the emissions themselves of primary concern to the panel in this
inquiry, but rather the consequences of
these emissions. As such, it is
necessary to consider the implications of these emissions in light of the
evidence before the panel.
Energy security and
affordability
[366] The stated
rationale for the Project is to provide additional gas to the Australian
domestic gas market, in particular, to supply
the state of NSW. The evidence
demonstrates the role of gas is to act as both a transitioning energy source for
when coal-fired power
plants are eventually decommissioned, as well as a
‘firming’ energy source when there are gaps in a future energy
dominated by solar, wind and other non-fossil fuel alternatives. These
dual roles of gas are part of a broader national and NSW strategy
to achieve the
Paris Agreement goals of net zero by 2050.
[367] Santos’
evidence referred to AEMO projections that the
arket gas supply would experience shortfalls in the
future, as existing on and offshore gas wells reduced in gas levels and quality.
Mr Kelp also outlined in the quality, and duration of gas reserves and resources
for all current gas operations.
The forecast of a domestic gas shortfall is raised in unusual
circumstances, noting Australia has considerable gas capacity and is
largest exporters of LNG gas in the world.
[368] Overall,
the evidence highlighted the difficulty in forecasting supply, or indeed demand,
in volatile energy markets that are
influenced by many factors, including
international contracts and geo-political events.
[369] Nonetheless,
AEMO is the independent energy regulator, and the panel has accepted their
official forecasts in undertaking its
predictive task.
[370] The panel
notes that energy security in the short to medium term is subject to a high
degree of uncertainty and that there is
a significant portion of the NEM that
relies upon gas as a reliable, scaled energy source. The panel also heard from
Mr Kelp that
the Project was the most ‘shovel ready’ supply of gas
that could be brought online to meet the forecasted gas supply
shortfall and
would satisfy approximately 50% of NSW’s gas needs. This is, in and of
itself, a benefit for the wider community
and in the public interest.
[371] The panel
notes the report and evidence of the NSW Government before the IPC that it was
of the view that the Project is not
likely to reduce gas prices. Mr Kelp gave
evidence to the panel that there are many variables that could impact upon the
gas, including international gas prices in setting the domestic spot
price, climatic variability (for instance, warmer winters),
the competition for
gas as feedstock or manufacturing. Other variables include the supporting
infrastructure such as the availability
of distribution network to service a
[372] While the
panel cannot be satisfied that the Project will have the effect of reducing
prices, considering all the variables
identified above the panel is satisfied
that securing domestic sources of gas will assist to prevent upward pressure on
gas prices.
As such, the panel considers this will be a marginal benefit.
balance, the panel is satisfied that energy security and reliability is an
important benefit of this Project for the wider
community, provided the gas
produced is made available only for domestic consumption.
Environmental protections
[374] The panel
has considered extensive expert and traditional owner evidence, as well as the
IPC findings relevant to the environmental
impacts of the doing of the act.
the remitted inquiry, Gomeroi adduced extensive evidence not contested by the
other parties, addressing the local and regional
impacts caused by climate
change, including the ecological impacts of reduced winter rainfall, increased
droughts, bushfires and
Professor Mackey
provided evidence that global temperature rises would put further pressure on
some 107 listed threatened species
residing in the Pilliga region ‘highly
vulnerable’ to climate change.
evidence of the Gomeroi witnesses was that the impacts of natural disasters are
already affecting their traditional activities,
including trees being affected
by bushfires impacting wooden tool manufacturing, as well as native fruits not
reaching maturity due
to temperature
A Gomeroi witness
gave evidence of flash flooding affecting trees, shrubs, plants and animals
through flood debris clogging streams
and waterways in the Narrabri
Importantly for the
Gomeroi people, as set out in their witness evidence, the Pilliga contains
important tree species used to collect
‘Brigalow wood’, described as
being special ‘knotted’ wood, light and flexible, and the Gomeroi
wood culturally to make shields and
negative impacts on the natural environment presents a clear detriment to the
wider community, but also specifically to
the Gomeroi people forming a part of
such community having regard to their interwoven cultural connection to the
Pilliga, including
the lease areas.
[378] During the
IPC inquiry, members of the wider community raised a range of environment risks
associated with the Project. To address
those concerns the IPC introduced
conditions designed to increase monitoring of environmental and water supply
impacts. Further,
the IPC placed conditions on Santos to ensure saline water was
stored, prohibited pilot well flares to reduce the risk of bushfire
events, and
placed protective measures in place requiring expert monitoring of biodiversity
[379] The panel
accepts that there are environmental risks which arise as a direct and indirect
consequence of the doing of this act.
To manage these risks, the panel is of the
view that, consistent with the beneficial intent of the
Native Title Act
conditions should be imposed by the Tribunal to ensure that Gomeroi can actively
participate in the IPC processes, including participating
in the various expert
panels arising from the IPC conditions. Gomeroi people are experts in their
traditional knowledge systems as
they relate to the environment, and this
traditional knowledge will bolster and strengthen the regime which has already
in place to manage and mitigate the implications of the Project. This
traditional knowledge should also be applied to the amelioration
of the direct
environmental threats through the establishment of a Ranger Program, set out in
the determination conditions 13 to
[380] The panel
accepts that the Project presents environmental risks in the construction and
operation of the Project, as well as
climate change impacts due to the Project
emitting GHG that will contribute to global temperature increases. The panel
the IPC has imposed several conditions to address those concerns and
is of the view that, along with the imposition of conditions
of its own, these
effectively ameliorate the detriments.
Social impacts
[381] The panel
considered extensive evidence on the social impacts of the Project. This
evidence covers the direct and indirect consequences
of the act as well as the
benefits and detriments.
[382] The IPC
findings list the social benefits and risks associated with this Project
proceeding, as set out above at [5]. These
findings were based on over 11,000
public submissions,
submissions from various expert panels, the NSW Government departments, federal
expert bodies and Santos. Such submissions
dealt with the issue of public
interest within the context of the NSW planning legislation. The panel notes
these findings were made
in a different statutory context and are certainly not
determinative. Nevertheless, the panel considers the findings of the IPC
to its consideration of public interest, particularly noting the direct
access the IPC had to the views of the public through its
way of operating.
[383] The native
title party adduced evidence from experts, Associate Professor Lansbury and Dr
Mallon, in relation to the local and
regional impacts of global climate change.
Associate Professor Lansbury gave evidence of the specific impacts of climate
Gomeroi’s cultural wellbeing. Dr Mallon gave evidence on the
impact of climate change-related events and natural disasters
on the residents
of Narrabri and surrounding regions. The Gomeroi witnesses gave evidence that
the Project’s contribution to
climate change would impact totemic
structures, affect various cultural activities, impede responsibilities to
protect and transmit
cultural knowledge and uphold cultural duties, including in
relation to water. None of this evidence was contested by the other parties.
[384] The panel
accepts the native title party’s expert and traditional owner evidence
that climate change will contribute to
local and regional risks and impacts.
However, as the panel has indicated previously, while a direct link can be
established between
the Project and local risks and impacts of climate change,
the Project itself should not be held wholly responsible for all the
consequences
of climate change. Nonetheless, the contribution of the Project to
the effects of climate change is a serious detriment to be considered.
panel has formed the view that significant weight must be placed on energy
reliability as the absence of reliable, secure
energy has significant short to
medium term detrimental impacts upon the wider community, including Gomeroi
[386] Weighing
the evidence, the panel finds that the Project offers a net public benefit and
has formed the view that the act may
be done subject to conditions aimed at
addressing the environmental and social impacts discussed throughout these
Consideration of section 39(1)(f) – any other relevant
[387] Under
s 39(1)(f) the panel must take into account any other matters it considers
relevant. While this a broad criterion limited
only by relevance, the use of the
word ‘other’ necessarily excludes grounds that were covered by any
of the preceding
s 39 criteria.
[388] The native
title party and the grantee parties made contentions under s 39(1)(f) in the
2022 Determination largely going to
matters of cultural heritage already
considered under the broad umbrella of criteria set at s 39(1). This evidence
was not updated
or revisited in the remittal.
[389] Gomeroi
contend that the relevant future acts:
... are not proposed
to be done pursuant to a voluntary regime that would adequately protect the
native title interests in the cultural
heritage values of the land the subject
of the applications (s 39(1)(f) of the Act), and nor are those values adequately
by existing laws.
[390] In support
of this contention, they submit that:
... due to the
inadequacies of other statutory schemes relating to the identification and
protection of Indigenous heritage, the future
act provisions of the
provide an important opportunity for the identification and
protection of Indigenous cultural heritage as an incident of the recognition
protection of native title rights and interests under the Act.
[391] Gomeroi
contend that approaches, including the ‘avoidance principle’,
fencing and buffer zones, provided for in
the NSW heritage regime ‘fail to
account for the broader significance of landscape and the way in which the
proposed Project
as a whole will affect the geography of the region’ and
‘fails to protect sites and landscapes like waterways or forested
which are imbued with a more general
significance’.
they say, the measures proposed to preserve cultural heritage under the ACHA and
the heritage regime cannot ‘predict
location of culturally significant
intangible sites or
Gomeroi submit
there is no doubt that the Project will ‘affect the cultural
integrity’ of the
[392] Concerning
these issues Santos contends that additional measures, such as the Additional
Research Program, have been introduced
to promote the identification and
protection of intangible cultural heritage. They also contend micrositing
promotes the avoidance
of sites of intangible cultural heritage and assert
consultation with the Gomeroi has been ‘extensive... and will continue
throughout the life of the
[393] Gomeroi
also raise issue with Santos’s control over and management of cultural
heritage processes.
in expert evidence, that the in ACHMP the majority of the cultural heritage
provisions are directly controlled by Santos,
with Santos also controlling the
recording of Aboriginal cultural information and the processes of managing and
validating that
information.
[394] As set out
above, the panel was not satisfied that the whole of the Pilliga was a place of
particular significance for the purposes
of s 39(1)(a)(v). However, the panel
accepts that the Pilliga is an important cultural landscape for the Gomeroi
people. It is in
this context the panel considered the adequacy of the NSW
heritage regime to protect Aboriginal cultural heritage in the Project
Aboriginal cultural heritage protection regime in NSW is discussed from [55] to
[64] above.
[395] It is
first important to reiterate that while the panel was satisfied that only Yarrie
Lake and Bohena Creek are sites of particular
significance for the purposes of s
39(1)(a)(v), it also notes issues with the ACHMP and the
particularly regarding protection of intangible cultural
The difficulty in
the native title party’s contentions is that there is very little specific
evidence before the panel concerning
these intangible heritage values and how
they will be impacted by the Project. As noted above, Gomeroi contend the
Project will damage
the integrity of the cultural landscape but there is very
little information before the panel concerning how this will specifically
manifest or what the implications of the loss of integrity will be for the
cultural landscape.
[396] The panel
nonetheless accepts that cultural heritage constitutes tangible and intangible
dimensions that together form ‘one
indissoluble
and conditions
imposed to augment and supplement the ACHMP must be applied to both. The panel
has imposed a condition requiring the
Additional Research Program, including
identification of intangible cultural heritage, be undertaken before the
commencement of Phase
2 of the Project. The panel has also required the
inclusion of representatives of the Gomeroi in cultural heritage management
and the establishment of a Ranger Program to manage Country.
[397] There are
no other matters the panel considers relevant to their determination, beyond the
question of conditions which it will
turn to below.
panel is required to make a determination in this matter, having regard to all
the criteria set out in s 39 of the
Native Title Act
, and informed by the
facts before it and the material and evidence provided by the parties.
[399] The s
39(1) criteria reflect an attempt by parliament to strike a balance between the
protection of native title and the interests
of the broader community.
[400] A focus of
this remittal was consideration of s 39(1)(e). The panel placed significant
weight on energy reliability to find
that the Project offers a net public
benefit. This net outcome must then be weighed against any negative impact upon
the registered
native title rights and interests of the Gomeroi people, through
the weighing of all criteria under s 39(1).
[401] The panel
has weighed the likely effect of the Project on the matters in s
39(1)(a), particularly the likely effect on the Gomeroi
way of life,
culture and traditions; their freedom of access to the lease areas overlapped by
the important cultural landscape and
waterways of the Pilliga; and the risk to
Yarrie Lake, Bohena Creek and other important places to Gomeroi people, against
the expressed
wishes of the Gomeroi people that the Project not proceed in the
absence of their consent (s 39(1)(b)), the economic significance
of the Project
(s 39(1)(c)), the net public interest in the doing of the act (s 39(1)(e), and
other matters considered relevant by
the panel (s 39(1)(f)). The panel has also
taken into account the matters set out in s 39(2).
[402] Based on
the evidence before it, the panel is satisfied the negative effects of the
Project can be mitigated by appropriate,
comprehensive conditions and that on
balance the future acts should be done.
Tribunal possesses a broad power to determine that an act may be done subject to
conditions to be complied with by any of
the parties to the
[404] Where the
Tribunal makes a determination that an act may be done subject to
conditions,
this has effect,
if the act is done, as if the conditions were terms of a contract among the
negotiation parties.
[405] The power
of the Tribunal to impose conditions does have some limitations. As noted by
Justice Rangiah in the
principal reasons
of the Full
the Tribunal must not
determine a condition which has the effect of entitling the native title party
to any ‘profit-sharing’
The Tribunal is
also prohibited from making a determination as to the amount of compensation to
be paid to a native title party under
Division 5 of the
Native Title
The Tribunal may
however impose a bank guarantee or trust condition that an amount is to be paid
to secure any future determination
of compensation in relation to the
correctly noted by then-President Dowsett in the 2022 Determination, the subject
matter of conditions should be guided by
the criteria for making arbitral body
determinations listed in s 39 of the
Native Title
Tribunal must give a full and final determination of the issues before it. This
requirement also extends to conditions,
and the Tribunal cannot impose a
condition that would defer or delegate the determination of any issues between
the parties.
The evidence
adduced in the matter should also support the need for the imposition of any
conditions.
[408] With these
principles in mind and having regard to the facts and evidence before us, the
panel is of the view that three categories
of conditions should be imposed in
this matter.
[409] The first
condition category is domestic supply. The panel finds the acts may be done on
the condition that all gas extracted
from the Project must be used for domestic
supply only, to address the forecasted energy supply gap facing the Australian
gas market. See reasons set out at [324] to [328] above.
grantee parties and the State have put evidence and contentions before us to
demonstrate that the Project is in the public
interest as it is required to
secure domestic energy supply in NSW. Whilst acknowledging the detrimental
impact of the Project through
the contribution of GHG emissions and climate
change, those parties also assert it is critical to allow the transition away
reliance on coal-fired power plants to supply the NSW and Australian
domestic energy market.
Tribunal also has evidence before it that there is a more than adequate amount
of gas already being extracted nationally
to meet the energy market needs of NSW
and across the Australian domestic market, however such gas is contracted to
offshore customers
and is not readily available to meet the short-term
forecasted energy supply gap.
[412] Having
regard to all the evidence before us, for there to be a net weighing that the
Project is in the public interest, all
of the gas recovered must be used for
domestic supply only. We also note the grantee parties have made various broad
statements,
including as part of the IPC process, indicating that the gas to be
extracted from the Project is intended to meet the domestic supply
[413] The second
condition category of conditions relate to Aboriginal cultural heritage. The
panel is of the view that the Additional
Research Program, identified in the
must be implemented and completed prior to the commencement of Phase 2 of the
Project to ensure the protection and preservation of
cultural heritage. This was
also a condition in the 2022 Determination.
panel also agrees with native title party’s contentions that under the
current NSW heritage protection regime there
is insufficient protection when it
comes to intangible cultural heritage, and the
operating after
harm or desecration has already occurred, operating as a deterrent but not a
scheme to reduce any likelihood of damage
such as might be achieved by requiring
pre-clearance surveys be conducted by the traditional owners of the impacted
land and waters.
[415] Further,
also noted by Gomeroi, as the Project is classified as a State Significant
Development by the State, an AHIP is not
required and the offences relating to
the desecration and harm of Aboriginal objects and places do not
[416] Based on
the evidence before us relating to matters of cultural heritage, the panel has
imposed several conditions related to
matters addressed in the ACHMP, to address
the protection and preservation of cultural heritage. See reasons set out at
[237] above.
third condition category deals with a fully funded and implemented Ranger
Program covering the entire Pilliga Forest. The
program is to be implemented to
manage Country, protect the environment, and monitor and manage ecological
threats, including through
weed control, the protection of water, and cultural
burns aimed at minimising fire risk and damage. There is persuasive evidence
before the panel relating to the cultural concerns and obligations of the native
title party to care for Country across the important
cultural landscape of the
Pilliga Forest. These concerns and obligations are only heightened in the
current climate change environment
facing us all. Importantly, this evidence
also relates to cultural safety, and cultural safety is an important matter of
public interest.
This evidence was not contested by any of the parties. Nor did
the grantee parties or the State challenge the native title party’s
evidence going to health, environmental, and ecological risks and adverse direct
and indirect impacts of the
The Ranger Program
is intended to address these matters for the reasons set out in this
determination.
[418] As noted
earlier in these reasons, the parties were given the opportunity to comment on
the categories of conditions the Tribunal
intended to impose. All parties filed
contentions addressing this issue and the panel has had due regard to such
contentions.
DETERMINATION
Tribunal determines that the proposed future acts, being the grants
Petroleum Production Lease Applications 13, 14, 15 and 16 may be done, subject,
in each case, to the following conditions, pursuant
to s 38(1)(c) of the
Native Title Act
Domestic supply only
grantee parties must:
(a) supply all gas extracted in relation to the Project pursuant to the
petroleum production leases into the Australian domestic
gas market; and
(b) not supply the gas for export from Australia.
Cultural heritage
prior to commencing any activities on the leases, the grantee parties submits a
plan of proposed operations, application, approval,
or assessment, including in
relation to any pipelines, environmental or other matter related to the Project,
the grantee parties
must at the same time give to the native title party a copy
of the proposal, application or assessment, excluding sensitive commercial
and a plan showing the location of the proposed operations and related
infrastructure, including proposed access routes.
Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Working Group set out in Cl 5.3 of the ACHMP,
responsible for assisting in the implementation of
the plan, shall be comprised
of a maximum of 10 people. Up to 8 persons with traditional authority and
responsibility for the Pilliga
area must be members of, and nominated by, the
native title party or any prescribed body corporate determined to hold such
title rights and interests on trust. For the avoidance of doubt, this
condition applies notwithstanding any different, contrary or
alternative
composition provided for in the ACHMP.
Cultural Heritage Coordinator and any of the Cultural Heritage Officers referred
to in Cl 5.4 of the ACHMP
must be members
of, and be nominated by, the native title party or any prescribed body corporate
determined to hold such native title
rights and interests on trust. Such persons
must have traditional authority and responsibility for the Pilliga area and not
employee of the grantee parties. For the avoidance of doubt, this
condition applies notwithstanding any different, contrary or alternative
provided for in the ACHMP.
references to the Santos Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Site Register in the ACHMP
must be changed to and replaced with ‘Narrabri
Aboriginal Cultural
Heritage Site Register’.
grantee parties must acknowledge and agree that all cultural information
obtained and recorded in the Narrabri Aboriginal Cultural
Heritage Site Register
remains the intellectual property of the native title party and must only be
used as permitted by them in
relation to the Project and at all times the
Register must be used in accordance with any traditional laws and customs that
in relation to such information, such as gender restrictions on
grantee parties must provide the native title party with access to the Narrabri
Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Site Register maintained
for the Project whenever
requested. All requests from the native title party for access to the Register
must be made to the Cultural
Heritage Coordinator who must then obtain such
access from the grantee parties.
Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in Cl 5.8.4 of the ACHMP or otherwise, no
pre-clearance surveys or work programs
are required
when the area
has already been surveyed by the parties for the same scope of works and in
accordance with the ACHMP and these conditions.
Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in the ACHMP or otherwise, the grantee
parties will not undertake any future ground
or surface disturbing work on or
within 500 metres of the following sites of significance to the native title
party, without the
prior written consent of the native title party:
(a) Yarrie Lake; and
(b) Bohena Creek.
Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in Cl 7.2 and 7.3 of the ACHMP or otherwise,
where there is a dispute between the
grantee parties and the Aboriginal Cultural
Heritage Working Group or the native title party in relation to any aspect of
and the parties are unable to resolve the issue via a meeting, the
parties must jointly agree on a suitably qualified archaeologist
anthropologist, the Expert, to independently decide the matter. The Expert must
be funded by the grantee parties and written reasons
for the decision must be
provided to all parties within five (5) business days of any decision being
grantee parties must complete the Additional Research Program, identified in the
ACHMP, prior to the commencement of Phase 2 of
the Project and prior to any
future ground disturbing works, whatsoever, occurring.
part of its activities, the Additional Research Program must identify the
locations of Wombat Rock and
and determine whether those
locations are within the Project area. If Wombat Rock and/or
found to be located within the Project area, they must be included in Condition
9 above, and the grantee parties may not undertake
any future ground or surface
disturbing work on or within 500 metres of such sites without the prior written
consent of the native
title party.
Ranger Program
native title party will establish a Ranger Program for the purpose of monitoring
and managing the effects of climate change in
the Pilliga Forest, including the
Project area.
grantee parties must pay all reasonable costs, fees, disbursements and expenses
incurred in connection with establishment and
operation of the Ranger
Ranger Program will be established for the duration of the operation of the
Project, up to and including rehabilitation, and will
undertake the following
activities in the Pilliga Forest, including the Project area:
(a) biodiversity monitoring and research, including environmental
sustainability;
(b) traditional knowledge transfer and ceremony;
(c) cultural awareness;
(d) fire management and mitigation, including utilising traditional methods of
fire management and controlled burns;
(e) cultural site management, monitoring and reporting to the Aboriginal
Cultural Heritage Working Group anything relevant for their
(f) water management and monitoring; and
(g) feral animal and weed management.
grantee parties must cooperate with the native title party as required to ensure
the success of the Ranger Program, including
by granting any required access to
the Project area and sharing any information, not of a commercially sensitive
nature, which the
grantee parties have in relation to environmental, ecological
and water impacts of the Project.
grantee parties and the State must use all reasonable endeavours to ensure that
the native title party has an appointed representative
on, and is an active and
funded participant in, all committees to be established in relation to the
Project, including but not limited
(a) the local committee tasked with setting the direction of the Gas Community
Benefit Fund;
(b) the Community Consultative Committee referred to by the IPC;
(c) the Water Technical Advisory Group referred to
by the IPC;
(d) the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Advisory Group referred to by the IPC;
(e) the Biodiversity Advisory Group referred to by the IPC; and
(f) the Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Advisory Group referred to by the IPC.
grant of the leases, the grantee parties must ensure that all persons who are
not the native title party and who are engaged
directly or indirectly by or on
behalf of the grantee parties to work on the Project are given appropriate
information, provided
by the native title party through the Ranger Program, for
the following purposes:
(a) to familiarise such persons with the traditions and culture of the native
title party;
(b) to promote a knowledge and understanding of, and respect for, the traditions
and culture of the native title party; and
(c) to foster good relationships between the native title party and others
accessing the Project area.
right of the native title party to access or use the land the subject of the
leases is not to be restricted except in relation
to those parts of the land
which are used for productive operations or for safety or security reasons
related to those activities.
grantee parties shall take all reasonable action to ensure compliance with these
conditions by its employees, agents and contractors.
any assignment of the leases, the assignee shall by bound by these
conditions.
references to the native title party in these conditions shall include any
prescribed body corporate determined to hold such native
title rights and
interests on trust.
the avoidance of doubt, any or all of these conditions may be varied by the
parties by mutual agreement, in writing.
Kevin Smith
Mullaley Gas v Santos
[2021] NSWLEC 110.
Independent Planning Commission
Statement of Reasons for Decision
(30 September
2020), Ch 7
Statement of Reasons
); Independent Planning Commission NSW,
Development
(30 September 2020) (
IPC Development Consent
Native Title Act
Native Title Act
Native Title Act
2022 Determination
[2022] NNTTA
[2024] FCAFC 26.
Ibid OO 3 and 4.
Native title party,
Amended further report addressing climate change
, dated 30 September 2024
NTP Amended Remittal Expert Report
NTP Amended Remittal Expert
Report, Chapter 1,
Expert Report by Professor David Karoly
NTP Amended Remittal Expert
Report, Chapter 2,
Expert Report by Professor Brendan Mackey
NTP Amended Remittal Expert
Report, Chapter 3,
Expert Evidence Report – Energy Market Impact
Mr Evan Mudge (
Mudge Report
NTP Amended Remittal Expert
Report, Chapter 4,
An overview of health and health-related data: Expert
Report by Associate Professor Nina Lansbury
Lansbury Report
NTP Amended Remittal Expert
Report, Chapter 5, Expert Report by Dr Karl Mallon (
Mallon Report
Affidavit of Jason Wilson,
affirmed 11 October 2024 (
Wilson Remittal Affidavit
Affidavit of Steven Booby,
affirmed 11 October 2024 (
Booby Remittal Affidavit
Affidavit of Suellyn Tighe,
affirmed 11 October 2024 (
Tighe Remittal Affidavit
Native title party,
Amended summary of contentions and statement of contentions
October 2024, amended 17 February 2025 (
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions
Native title party,
Contentions in reply with summary
, dated 29 November 2024, amended 17
February 2025 (
NTP Amended Remittal Reply
Native title party,
submissions prior to closing oral hearing
, dated 10 February 2025 (
Remittal Closing Submissions
Native title party,
Native title party comments on conditions
, dated 11 April 2025 (
Remittal Condition Comments
Grantee parties,
expert report addressing climate change
, dated 30 September 2024 (
Remittal Expert Report
GP Remittal Expert Report,
Energy Market and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Export Report of Owen
Kelp Report
GP Remittal Expert Report,
Climate Science Expert Report of Dr David Mitchell
Mitchell Report
Grantee parties,
of contentions and statement of contentions
, dated 8 November 2024 (
Remittal Contentions
Grantee parties,
Submissions prior to closing oral hearing
, dated 10 February 2025 (
Remittal Closing Submissions
Grantee parties,
on conditions,
dated 11 April 2025 (
GP Remittal Condition
Government party,
Statement of contentions,
dated 8 November 2024 (
GVP Remittal
Contentions
Government party,
contentions of the Government party submitted in the original inquiry
15 December 2021, amended 8 November 2024 (
GVP Amended Contentions
Government party,
submissions prior to closing oral hearing
, dated 10 February 2025 (
Remittal Closing Submissions
Government party,
Comments on conditions
, dated 11 April 2025 (
GVP Remittal Condition
Directions of the panel,
dated 16 October 2024.
Directions of President
Dowsett, dated 8 October 2021.
Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs v Wang
[2003] HCA 11
, [18], [45],
Callychurn v ASIC
[2019] AATA 4600
, [62]–[65].
Transcript of the closing
submissions held 14 February 2025, Ms Parker, P-50/L32-37, Ms Webb, P-45/L30-36
Closing Transcript
[2024] FCAFC
, [14], citing
Shi v Migration Agents Registration Authority
235 CLR 286
, [37], [41]–[42] (Kirby J), citing
Minister for
Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 24 ALR 577
589 (Bowen CJ and Deane J).
Jagroop and Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2015] AATA 751
[2024] FCAFC 26
Principal reasons
[2024] FCAFC 26
Western Australia v
[1996] NNTTA 30
(1996) 133 FLR 124
Native Title Act
Smith v Western
[2001] FCA 19
, [23] (French J);
Kanak v National Native Title
[1995] FCA 1624
(1995) 61 FCR 103
(Lockhart, Lee and
Sackville JJ);
Re Koara People
[1996] NNTTA 31
(1996) 132 FLR 73
Native Title
Principal reasons
[2024] FCAFC 26
, [330] (O’Bryan J).
Ibid [339] (O’Bryan
Ibid [344] (O’Bryan
Ibid [345] (O’Bryan
Ibid [228] (Mortimer
Ibid [387] (O’Bryan
Native title party,
Statement of Contentions (revised)
, dated 26 November 2021, [188] (
Contentions
Affidavit of Todd Dunn,
signed 9 December 2021, affirmed 1 March 2022, [79] (
Dunn Affidavit
Dunn Affidavit, Exhibit TD-2, Department of Planning, Industry and Environment,
Narrabri Gas Project –
State Significant Development SSD
(June 2020), [20]–[22] (
SSD 6367 Assessment Report
Dunn Affidavit [19].
Dunn Affidavit [20].
Grantee parties,
Statement of Contentions
, dated 9 December 2021 [39] (
Contentions
); Dunn Affidavit [170(b)].
Dunn Affidavit [84].
Dunn Affidavit [89].
Dunn Affidavit [92].
Dunn Affidavit [93].
Dunn Affidavit [103].
Dunn Affidavit
[128]–[129].
SSD 6367 Assessment Report
SSD 6367 Assessment Report
Dunn Affidavit [82].
Dunn Affidavit [95].
Dunn Affidavit [95].
Dunn Affidavit
SSD 6367 Assessment Report
Dunn Affidavit [144].
Dunn Affidavit
[173]–[175].
Department of Climate
Change, Energy, the Environment and Water,
Australian National Greenhouse
Accounts Factors 2024
Dunn Affidavit, Exhibit
Environmental Impact Statement – Appendix R
EIS Appendix R, 19.
NTP Contentions [224]; GP
Contentions [59].
NTP Contentions [230].
GP Contentions [60].
GP Contentions [62].
NTP Contentions [237]; GP
Contentions [73].
GP Contentions [65].
GVP Contentions [36].
GVP Remittal Contentions
NTP Remittal Condition
Comments [22], referencing
section 4.41
Environmental Planning and
Assessment Act 1979
Watson v Backreef
[2013] FCA 1432
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions [5]; Tighe Remittal Affidavit [11]–[14].
Principal reasons
[2024] FCAFC 26
, [340] quoting
Milirrpum v Nabalco Pty Ltd
Affidavit of Steven Booby,
signed 7 October 2021, affirmed 21 February 2022, [35] (
Booby Affidavit
Tighe Remittal Affidavit [19].
Affidavit of Suellyn Tighe
signed 8 October 2021, affirmed 21 February 2022 [25], [28], [33], [34], [53]
Tighe Affidavit
Booby Affidavit [27],
Booby Affidavit [30].
Wilson Remittal Affidavit
Tighe Affidavit [38].
Tighe Affidavit [35] -
Booby Affidavit [30].
Booby Affidavit [18].
Tighe Affidavit [38].
Tighe Affidavit
NTP Contentions
NTP Contentions [204];
Booby Affidavit [15]–[16], [26]–[30], [39]; Tighe Affidavit
[17]–[19], [36]–[38],
[40], [46], [52], [54].
NTP Contentions [205];
Booby Affidavit [27]; Tighe Affidavit [82].
Karoly Report [111].
Karoly Report [112].
Transcript of the Expert
Conclave held 17 January 2025, Dr Mitchell, P-13/L7-23 (
Expert Conclave
Karoly Report [73].
Karoly Report
GP Remittal Statement of
Contentions [135].
Mackey Report [4].
Mackey Report [8].
Mackey Report [10].
Mackey Report [11].
Mackey Report [13].
Mackey Report [14].
Lansbury Report [34].
Lansbury Report [23].
Lansbury Report
[39]–[47], [49]–[53].
Lansbury Report
[12]–[14], [38].].
Lansbury Report [58].
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions [49]; Karoly Report [75]–[77]; Mackey Report [6], [10],
[12]–[14], [16]; Lansbury Report
[36], [38], [39], [41], [47], [51], [53],
See for example
[2013] NNTTA 2
Western Desert Lands
[2009] NNTTA
Western Australia v
[1996] NNTTA 30
[1996] 133 FLR 124
NTP Contentions
NTP Contentions
Tighe Affidavit
[59]–[63]; Affidavit of Jason Wilson signed 8 October 2021, affirmed 22
February 2022, [50] (
Wilson Affidavit
Booby Affidavit [35].
Booby Affidavit [36].
Wilson Affidavit
NTP Contentions [210];
Kumarage Report [27]; Booby Affidavit [15], [22], [35], [36], [39], [41]; Tighe
Affidavit [20], [21], [25],
[40], [46], [59]–[64], [66]–[68], [72];
Wilson Affidavit [50], [51], [59].
NTP Contentions [213];
Dunn Affidavit, Exhibit TD-12,
Environmental Impact Statement – Chapter
6 – Project description
, 6.3.3, 6.4.2 (
); Kumarage
Report [198]; Booby Affidavit [42].
NTP Contentions [220];
EIS Ch 6 6.7.3; Booby Affidavit [19].
NTP Contentions [217];
Booby Affidavit [21]; Tighe Affidavit [79]; Wilson Affidavit [52].
NTP Contentions [218];
Booby Affidavit [38]–[45]; Tighe Affidavit [84]–[85]; Wilson
Affidavit [54]–[55].
NTP Contentions [205];
Booby Affidavit [27]; Tighe Affidavit [82].
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions [55]; Tighe Remittal Affidavit [16]–[19], [21],
[22]–[29], [32]–[35], [37]–[39],
[49]–[52], [53], [60]–[66]; Wilson Affidavit [52], [53], [55], [61];
Wilson Remittal Affidavit [6]–[9],
[12], [20]–[25], [28]–[31],
[34]–[38], [40]–[43]; Booby Affidavit [15], [34], [35], [41], [43];
Booby Remittal
Affidavit [4]–[9], [23]–[25], [43], [56]–[58],
[61], [62], [64], [69], [70], [73], [74]; Lansbury Report [45].
Silver v Northen
[2002] NNTTA 18
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions [73]–[82].
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions [57]; Booby Affidavit [22]; Booby Remittal Affidavit
GP Remittal Contentions
GP Contentions [35]; GVP
Amended Contentions [25]; GP Remittal Contentions [42].
GP Remittal Contentions
GP Remittal Contentions
GP Contentions [37].
GP Contentions [38],
drawing from the Dunn Affidavit [170].
GP Contentions [40].
GP Contentions [42]; Dunn
Affidavit [114].
GP Remittal Contentions
[47]–[55]; Affidavit of Haydn Kreicbergs, dated 9 December 2021, [164]
Kreicbergs Affidavit
); Dunn Affidavit [20], [114], [170], [471];
Transcript 13 April 2022, Mr McKechnie, P-223/L21, P-226/L-24-27.
GP Contentions
[45]–[46], GP Remittal Contentions [56]–[57]; Dunn Affidavit
[45]–[50], [84]–[100].
GP Contentions [51]; Dunn
Affidavit [87].
See for example Booby
Affidavit [33]–[35]; Tighe Affidavit [36]-[39], [54]-[57]; Wilson
Affidavit [55]; Booby Remittal Affidavit
[61]-[64]; Tighe Remittal Affidavit
[15]-[19], [44], [46].
Tighe Affidavit
[12]–[24]; Booby Affidavit [17]–[29]; Wilson Affidavit
[52]–[53]; Wilson Remittal Affidavit [34]–[36].
Tighe Affidavit
[59]–[64]; Booby Remittal Affidavit [25], [31].
Tighe Affidavit
[61]–[64]; Tighe Remittal Affidavit [20]–[25]; Wilson Affidavit
Booby Affidavit
Tighe Affidavit
[52]–[54]; Tighe Remittal Affidavit [46]–[47], [67]–[71].
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions [10]; Tighe Remittal Affidavit [11]–[14].
GVP Amended Contentions
[27]; GP Remittal Contentions [39]–[76], [79].
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions [72]-[73], [87].].
NTP Contentions [210];
Kumarage Report [27]; Booby Affidavit [15], [22], [35], [36], [39], [41]; Tighe
Affidavit [20], [21], [25],
[40], [46], [59]–[64], [66]–[68], [72];
Wilson Affidavit [50], [51], [59].
NTP Contentions [213];
EIS Ch 6 6.3.3, 6.4.2; Kumarage Report [198]; Booby Affidavit [42].
NTP Contentions [217];
Booby Affidavit [21]; Tighe Affidavit [79]; Wilson Affidavit [52].
NTP Contentions [219];
Kumarage Report [20], [35]–[42], [54], [58]; Booby Affidavit [20], [21];
Tighe Affidavit [30], [74],
[76], [79], [83]; Wilson Affidavit [56], [60].
NTP Contentions [221];
Booby Affidavit [38]–[45].
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions [49]; Karoly Report [75]–[77]; Mackey Report [6], [10],
[12]–[14], [16]; Lansbury Report
[36], [38], [39], [41], [47], [51], [53],
Connell v Santos
NSW Pty Limited
[2014] NSWLEC 1.
NTP Contentions
[217]–[218]; Booby Affidavit [21], [38]–[45]; Tighe Affidavit [79],
[84]–[85]; Wilson Affidavit
[52], [54]–[55].
SSD 6367 Assessment
Report [91], Fig 2.
GP Remittal Contentions
[47]–[51]; Kreicbergs Affidavit [164]; Dunn Affidavit [20], [170], [471];
Transcript 13 April 2022,
Mr McKechnie, P-226/L-24–27.
GP Remittal Contentions
[52]–[54]; Dunn Affidavit [114]; Transcript 13 April 2022, Mr McKechnie,
P-223/L-21.
GP Remittal Contentions
[56]–[61]; Dunn Affidavit [84]–[100].
GP Remittal Contentions
[63]; Dunn Affidavit [87], Fig 1.
GP Remittal Contentions
[68]–[71]; Dunn Affidavit [50], [65], IPC Development Consent Conditions
B1-B6, B51, B53–B59.
GP Remittal Contentions
Tighe Remittal Affidavit
Tighe Remittal Affidavit
Tighe Remittal Affidavit
Tighe Remittal Affidavit
Wilson Remittal Affidavit
Wilson Remittal Affidavit
Wilson Remittal Affidavit
Wilson Remittal Affidavit
Tighe Affidavit
Booby Remittal Affidavit
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions [83]–[84]; Lansbury Report [36], [38], [39], [41], [53], [60];
Tighe Remittal Affidavit [71];
Booby Affidavit [42]; Booby Remittal Affidavit
[71], [72]; Wilson Remittal Affidavit [27].
Lansbury Report [23].
Lansbury Report [26].
Lansbury Report [31].
Lansbury Report [25],
[28], [32], [45].
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions [87]; Wilson Affidavit [52], [53]; Wilson Remittal Affidavit [7],
[9], [34]–[36], [40]–[43],
[49]–[49]; Booby Affidavit [21],
[22], [34], [35]; Booby Remittal Affidavit [19]–[22], [29]–[32],
[61], [62], [64];
Tighe Affidavit [22], [37]–[39]; Lansbury Report
GP Remittal Contentions
GP Remittal Contentions
GP Remittal Contentions
[48]; Kreicbergs Affidavit [164].
GP Remittal Contentions
Wildlife Preservation Society
[2006] FCA 736
GP Remittal Contentions
GP Remittal Contentions
GVP Remittal Closing
Submissions [14].
Dunn Affidavit [44],
[122]–[132]; Kreicbergs Affidavit [164].
See Condition 9 of this
determination.
NTP Contentions [198];
Booby Affidavit [17], [20]–[30]; Tighe Affidavit [12], [50], [64], [66];
Kumarage Report [50]–[51].
NTP Contentions
[199]–[205]; Booby Affidavit [15]–[22], [26]–[30], [39]; Tighe
Affidavit [12], [14]–[21],
[23], [25]–[34], [36]–[38], [40],
[44]–[47], [50], [52], [54], [58], [64], [70], [78], [82]; Wilson
Affidavit [52],
[53], [60]; Kumarage Report [50], [51], [61]–[73],
[82]–[88], [100]–[114].
Booby Affidavit
NTP Contentions
[210]–[221]; Kumarage Report [27], [127], [193]–[205]; Booby
Affidavit [15], [20]–[22], [27], [34],
[35], [36], [38]–[45]; Tighe
Affidavit [20], [21], [25], [30], [40], [46], [59]–[68], [72], [74], [76],
[79], [82]–[85];
Wilson Affidavit [50]–[52], [54]–[56], [59],
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions [88]–[89]; Booby Affidavit [42]; Booby Remittal Affidavit
[17], [18], [41], [53], [59], [60],
[71], [72]; Tighe Remittal Affidavit [48],
[71]; Wilson Remittal Affidavit [37], [38], [46]–[49].
Booby Remittal Affidavit
GP Contentions [81]; Dunn
Affidavit [69], [93].
Ibid. See also GP
Remittal Contentions [80].
NTP Contentions [207];
Booby Affidavit [35]; Tighe Affidavit [59]; Wilson Affidavit [50], [51].
NTP Contentions [210];
Kumarage Report [27]; Booby Affidavit [15], [22], [35], [36], [39], [41]; Tighe
Affidavit [20], [21], [25],
[40], [46], [59]–[64], [66]–[68], [72];
Wilson Affidavit [50], [51], [59].
NTP Contentions [241];
Kumarage Report [165]; Tighe Affidavit [69].
NTP Contentions [213];
EIS Ch 6 6.3.3, 6.4.2; Kumarage Report [198]; Booby Affidavit [42].
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions [76], [90]–[91], [93]; Tighe Remittal Affidavit,
[45]–[47]; Wilson Remittal Affidavit,
[6], [8], [12], [39]; Booby Remittal
Affidavit, [23]–[25], [46]–[51].
GP Contentions [83].
GP Contentions [37]-[42];
Kreicbergs Affidavit [159]-[164]; Dunn Affidavit [43]; IPC Development Consent
[1014]; See also GP Remittal
Contentions [82]–[84].
GVP Contentions [29].
Yindjibarndi v FMG
[2014] NNTTA 8
Top End (Default
PBC/CLA) Aboriginal Corporation v Northern Territory of Australia
Tighe Affidavit [83].
Tighe Affidavit [76].
Tighe Remittal Affidavit
Booby Remittal Affidavit
Tighe Affidavit [54].
Tighe Affidavit [25],
Tighe Remittal Affidavit [40]–[42].
Top End v Kess Diamond
[2023] NNTTA 25.
Tighe Affidavit
Tighe Affidavit [55].
Kreicbergs Affidavit
Dunn Affidavit
Tighe Remittal Affidavit
Kumarage Affidavit at
Booby Affidavit [37].
Booby Remittal Affidavit
Booby Remittal Affidavit
FMG v Yindjibarndi
[2014 FCA 1335
Dunn Affidavit [89]; Dunn
Affidavit, Exhibit TD-5, Santos,
Narrabri Gas Project – Field
Development Protocol
See Condition 9 of this
determination.
Dunn Affidavit, Exhibit
Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Management Plan Revision
(October 2021) cl 5.1 (
ACHMP cl 5.8.4.
ACHMP cl 5.3, sch 5.
NTP Contentions
[252]–[253]; Wilson Affidavit [42]; NTP Amended Remittal Contentions
GP Contentions [94],
[95]; Kreicbergs Affidavit [115]; GP Remittal Contentions [90], [91]; Kreicbergs
Affidavit [31];
[2024] FCAFC 49
, [309]–[310] and
[399(c)-(e)].
GVP Contentions [46].
NTP Contentions [203];
Booby Affidavit [21]; Tighe Affidavit [20], [21]; Wilson Affidavit [52],
NTP Contentions [217];
Booby Affidavit [21]; Tighe Affidavit [79]; Wilson Affidavit [52]; NTP Amended
Remittal Contentions [71],
[78], [81]; Booby Affidavit [15], [34], [41], [43];
Booby Remittal Affidavit [4]–[9], [61], [62], [69], [70], [73], [74];
Remittal Affidavit [37]–[39]; Wilson Remittal Affidavit [24], [25],
[34]–[36]; Lansbury Report [45].
Western Australia v
[1996] NNTTA 30
[1996] 133 FLR 124
Closing Transcript, Mr
McKechnie, P-56/L12-18.
SSD 6367 Assessment
Report [541]–[555]; IPC Statement of Reasons [337]–[350].
GP Remittal Contentions
GP Remittal Contentions
GP Remittal Contentions
GP Remittal Contentions
GP Remittal Contentions
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions [38]–[39], [67].
GP Contentions
EIS Table 26-8.
Dunn Affidavit, Exhibit
TD-27, ACIL Allen Consulting,
Narrabri Gas Project, Update of the
(6 August 2020), 12-13, 19-20; IPC Statement of Reasons.
Principal reasons
[2024] FCAFC 26
Principal reasons
[2024] FCAFC 26
GP Remittal Closing
Submissions [15], [23]. See also Closing Transcript, Ms Webb, P-35/L26-37.
GP Remittal Closing
Submissions [57].
Principal reasons
[2024] FCAFC 26
, [213]–[214].
Minister for Lands,
State of Western Australia and Another v Buurabalayji Thalanyji Aboriginal
Corporation RNTBC
[2014] NNTTA 85
Principal reasons
[2024] FCAFC 26
, [221] (Mortimer CJ).
Smith v Western
[2001] FCA 19
, [23] (French J);
Kanak v National Native Title
[1995] FCA 1624
(1995) 61 FCR 103
(Lockhart, Lee and
Sackville JJ);
Re Koara People
[1996] NNTTA 31
(1996) 132 FLR 73
Native Title
O’Sullivan v
[1989] HCA 61
Principal reasons
[2024] FCAFC 26
, [221] (Mortimer CJ).
Native Title Act
Native Title Act
Principal reasons
[2024] FCAFC 26
, [215]–[217].
Karoly Report [13]; see
also for example [124] of the GP Remittal Contentions.
Karoly Report [10].
Karoly Report
Karoly Report
Karoly Report
[66]–[67], [100].
, [345] (O’Bryan J).
See for example
Climate Change (Net Zero Future) Act 2023
Greenhouse and Energy Reporting Act 2007
GP Contentions [34],
[128]; NTP Amended Remittal Reply, [14].
Living Wonders
[2024] FCAFC 56
NTP Amended Remittal
Reply [34].
GP Remittal Contentions
[160]–[163]; See for example, Kelp Report [120]–[127].
NTP Amended Remittal
Reply [34].
Mudge Report
[173]–[178].
Expert Conclave
Transcript, Mr Mudge, P-48/L4-30, P-55/L43-47, P-56/L1-15, Mr Kelp and Mr Kelly,
P-71/L16-47.
Mudge Report [123],
[218], [220]; Expert Conclave Transcript, Mr Mudge, P-56/L7-35.
Mudge Report
Expert Conclave
Transcript, Mr Kelp, P-59/L1-23.
Expert Conclave
Transcript, Mr Mudge, P-58/L30-46.
Expert Conclave
Transcript, Mr Mudge, P-57/L43-47, P-58/L1-46, P-59/L42-47, P-60/L1-29; Mudge
Report [77], [169].
Kelp Report [97]; GP
Contentions [160].
Expert Conclave
Transcript, Mr Kelp, P-62/L42-46, P-63/L1-47.
Expert Conclave
Transcript, Mr Kelp, P-55/L28-35, P-68/L33-41.
Mudge Report
[160]–[162], referring to AEMO,
Gas Statement of Opportunities
(March 2024), 9, footnote 10; Expert Conclave Transcript, Mr Mudge,
P-61/L-24-38; referring to underlying assumptions within Kelp
Report eg Fig ES
1, Fig 2.9, Fig 2.10, Fig 2.15, Fig 2.26.
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions [39d]; Mudge Report [148].
Gas Statement of
Opportunities
(March 2025).
NTP Remittal Closing
Submissions [10]–[11].
Bonnington Castings
[1956] UKHL 1
[1956] AC 613
GP Remittal Contentions
GVP Remittal Closing
Submissions [14].
Closing Transcript
P-17/L10-14, P-25/L8-10, 34-45, P-38/L19-41.
See Closing Transcript
P-25/L7-11.
Karoly Report
[139]-[142].
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions, [4] citing IPCC, 2023, AR6 Synthesis Report Summary for
Policymakers, 24 [3016]; NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions, [11].
See Closing Transcript,
P-24/L25-35.
GVP Remittal Contentions
[28]; NTP Amended Remittal Contentions [28].
IPC Statement of Reasons
[44]; SSD 6367 Assessment Report [94].
SSD 6367 Assessment
Report [83]-[84].
SSD 6367 Assessment
Report, x-xi; IPC Statement of Reasons for Decision [342].
GVP Remittal Contentions
Mudge Report [60].
GP Remittal Contentions
[140], Expert Conclave Transcript, Mr Kelp, P-81/L1-11.
Mudge Report [34]-[35];
GP Remittal Contentions [106], Ministerial Council of Energy,
MCE statement
(28 February
MCE Statement
GP Remittal Contentions
MCE Statement 1, 3.
EIS, Chapter 24
Greenhouse Gases, 24-4.
EIS, Chapter 24
Greenhouse Gases, 24-3 – 24-4.
EIS, Chapter 24
Greenhouse Gases, 24-4.
EIS, Chapter 24
Greenhouse Gases, 24-4.
EIS, Appendix R
Greenhouse Gases, i.
GVP Remittal Contentions
GP Remittal Contentions
Mudge Report [163].
Expert Conclave
Transcript, Mr Kelp, P-64/L17-23; Mudge Report, Fig. 2.17.
Kelp Report
[51]–[54], Table 2.2, Attachment D-2.
Kelp Report
[112]–[115]; AEMO Gas Statement of Opportunity 2024, Figure 38.
NTP Amended Remittal
Contentions [39(d)].
Expert Conclave
Transcript, Mr Mudge, P-61/L24-27.
GP Contentions [110], GP
Remittal Contentions [124]; Dunn Affidavit [205]–[206].
Kelp Report [40].
Kelp Report [32].
Expert Conclave
Transcript, Mr Kelp, P-55/L8-20.
IPC Statement of Reasons
Kelp Report
[123]–[124].
Kelp Report
[45]–[46], [114].
Expert Conclave
Transcript, Mr Kelp, P-85/L1-6.
Expert Conclave
Transcript, Dr Mitchell P-8/L1-8 and Dr Karoly, P-9/L1-6.
Michell Report
CCR81-CCR82.
Michell Report CCR82.
Michell Report
CCR84-CCR85.
Expert Conclave
Transcript, Dr Mitchell, P-11/L10-34.
Mackey Report [10].
Mallon Report
Mallon Report
Mallon Report
Mallon Report [68].
Tighe Affidavit
Tighe Affidavit
Tighe Affidavit
Booby Affidavit
[24]–[25], [47]–[49].
Booby Affidavit [6],
Wilson Affidavit
[6]–[8], [43].
Wilson Affidavit [13],
[15], [51].
Wilson Remittal Affidavit
[15], [23].
GP Remittal Closing
Submissions [10], [58]; GVP Remittal Closing Submissions [19].
Safeguard Mechanism Rule r 8.
GVP Remittal Closing
Submissions [18].
Closing Transcript, Ms
Parker, P-37/L37-42.
Closing Transcript, Ms
Parker, P-38/L1-4;
Closing Transcript. Ms
Parker, P-38/L6-11.
IPC Statement of Reasons
[171]–[172].
IPC Statement of Reasons
Kelp Report [145].
GVP Remittal Closing
Submissions [18] citing
Environment Protection Legislation Amendment
(Stronger Regulation and Penalties) Act 2024
See Kelp Report, Table
2.2, Annexure D-2.
Mackey Report
Tighe Remittal Affidavit,
[16]–[19], [22].
Booby Remittal Affidavit
[6]–[8], [43].
Booby Affidavit
IPC Statement of Reasons
[150]–[151], [252]–[253], [280]; IPC Development Consent Condition
A11, B37, B69.
IPC Statement of Reasons
See for example Dunn
Affidavit [191], [198]; SSD 6367 Assessment Report 23; Dunn Affidavit, Exhibit
TD-18, NSW government,
NSW Gas Plan: Protecting what’s valuable,
Securing our future
, 2; Dunn Affidavit, Exhibit TD-19, NSW Government,
Future of Gas Statement
(2021), 3, 5; Dunn Affidavit, Exhibit TD-20,
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission,
Gas Inquiry 2017-2025
–Interim Report
(January 2020), 73, 76; Commonwealth of Australia,
Future Gas Strategy
(May 2024) 13-15, 40.
NTP Contentions
NTP Contentions
See for example NTP
Contentions [239], [241].
NTP Contentions [240],
citing Affidavit of Jitendra Kumarage, dated 18 February 2022, [159]
Kumarage Affidavit
NTP Contentions [243],
citing Kumarage Affidavit [167].
GP Contentions [50] &
See NTP Contentions
Kumarage Affidavit
[184]–[185].
See [55]–[64],
[230]–[237] above.
See for example
Principal reasons
[2024] FCAFC 26
Native Title Act
Native Title Act
Native Title Act
Principal reasons
[2024] FCAFC 26
, [309] (Rangiah J).
Native Title Act
Native Title Act
Native Title Act
ss 41(3), 41(5).
2022 Determination
, [1025], citing
Walley v Western Australia
Evans v Western Australia
[1997] FCA 741
Minister for Mines (WA) v Evans
[1998] NNTTA 5
(1998) 163 FLR
Evans v Western
[1997] FCA 741
Muccan Minerals Pty
Ltd and Another v Allen and Others on behalf of Njamal
[2018] NNTTA 24
Re Koara People
[1996] NNTTA 31
(1996) 132 FLR 73.
[2011] NNTTA 80
, [92]–[96].
See GP Remittal
Contentions [124(b)] and IPC Statement of Reasons [334].
Dated 21 February
NTP Remittal Condition
Comments [21]–[22].
Ibid [22] referencing
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
GP Remittal Contentions
RTF format (17.7 MB)
Signed PDF/A format