New South Wales v Wojciechowska [2025] HCA 27 (6 August 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAGELER CJ,
EDELMAN, STEWARD, GLEESON, JAGOT AND BEECH‑JONES JJ
STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES APPELLANT
PAULINA WOJCIECHOWSKA & ORS RESPONDENTS
New South Wales v Wojciechowska
[2025] HCA 27
Date of Hearing: 5 & 6 February 2025
Date of Judgment: 6 August
aside the declaration in order 2 of the orders made by the Court of Appeal of
the Supreme Court of New South Wales on 17 August
aside order 3 of the orders made by the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales on 17 August 2023 and, in its
place, order that prayer 1 of the
amended summons filed on 26 July 2022 as amended by order 1 of the Court of
Appeal dated 17 August
2023 is dismissed.
appellant pay the first respondent's costs of and incidental to the
On appeal from the Supreme Court of New South Wales
Representation
B K Lim with H D Ryan for the appellant (instructed by Crown Solicitor for
P Wojciechowska appeared in person
S J Free SC with Z C Heger SC appearing as amici curiae (instructed by Crown
Solicitor for NSW)
S P Donaghue KC, Solicitor-General of the Commonwealth, with
J D Watson and R S Amamoo on behalf of the Attorney-General of the
Commonwealth,
intervening (instructed by Australian Government Solicitor)
M J Wait SC, Solicitor-General for the State of South Australia, with
J F Metzer on behalf of the Attorney-General for the State of
Australia, intervening (instructed by Crown Solicitor's Office (SA))
N Christrup SC, Solicitor-General for the Northern Territory, with
L S Spargo-Peattie on behalf of the Attorney-General for the Northern
Territory, intervening (instructed by Solicitor for the Northern Territory)
G J D del Villar KC, Solicitor-General of the State of Queensland, with
F J Nagorcka and K J E Blore on behalf of the Attorney-General
State of Queensland, intervening (instructed by Crown Law (Qld))
C S Bydder SC, Solicitor-General for the State of Western Australia, with
J M Carroll on behalf of the Attorney-General for the State
Australia, intervening (instructed by State Solicitor's Office (WA))
A D Pound SC, Solicitor-General for the State of Victoria, with M G Narayan
on behalf of the Attorney-General for the State of Victoria,
intervening
(instructed by Victorian Government Solicitor)
Submitting appearances for the second to fifth respondents
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
New South Wales v Wojciechowska
Constitutional law (Cth) – Judicial power of Commonwealth – Where
resident of Tasmania sought administrative review of
decisions made on behalf of
Commissioner of New South Wales Police Force – Where New South Wales Civil
and Administrative Tribunal
("Tribunal") made order under s 55(2)(a) of
(NSW) – Where
order that public sector agency pay applicant damages by way of compensation for
any loss or damage suffered as
a result of conduct in contravention of
information protection principle – Where Tribunal not "court of a State"
within meaning
of ss 77(ii) and (iii) of
Constitution
State Parliament lacks legislative capacity to confer on State tribunal that is
not court of a State judicial power
with respect to any matter in
Constitution
Constitution
refers to "matters ... between a State and a resident of another
State" – Whether Tribunal exercised judicial power –
Brandy v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[1995] HCA 10
; (1995) 183 CLR 245
distinguishable.
Words and phrases – "administrative power", "administrative review",
"administrative standards", "administratively reviewable
"certificate", "compensation", "correct and preferable", "court", "damages",
"distinguishable", "information protection
principles", "internal review",
"judgment", "judicial decision", "judicial power", "jurisdiction", "legislative
capacity", "loss
or damage", "matter", "non-judicial", "norm of conduct",
"order", "privacy codes of practice", "public sector agency", "resident
another State", "tribunal".
Constitution
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
GAGELER CJ,
GORDON, EDELMAN, STEWARD, GLEESON, JAGOT AND BEECH-JONES JJ. In making an
order under
Protection Act 1998
(NSW) ("the
") that a public sector agency pay
to an applicant damages by way of compensation for any loss or damage suffered
as a result of conduct
in contravention of an information protection principle
specified in
, does the New South Wales Civil and
Administrative Tribunal ("the Tribunal") exercise judicial power?
Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of New South Wales (Kirk JA,
Mitchelmore JA and Griffiths A-JA agreeing) concluded that
Court's decision in
Brandy v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
could not be
distinguished and that
dictated an affirmative answer to this
determinative question.
Court of Appeal consequentially declared that the "Tribunal had and has no
the State of New South Wales
("the State") commenced in the Tribunal by Ms Wojciechowska, who is a
resident of Tasmania.
State was granted special leave to appeal against that declaration. According to
the State, the Court of Appeal erred in: (a)
construing the registration
and enforcement provision concerning an order of the Tribunal to pay money in
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) ("the
") as applying to an order under
(b) holding that
imparted to the Tribunal's power
the character of judicial power;
(c) failing to hold that the Tribunal's power under
did not involve a "matter" within the meaning of
Constitution
imparted to the
Tribunal's power under
the character of judicial
power, Ch III of the
Constitution
was nevertheless not infringed;
and (d) not characterising the Tribunal's power under
as non-judicial.
Attorneys-General for Victoria, Western Australia, South Australia, Queensland
and the Northern Territory intervened in support
of the arguments of the State.
Attorney-General of the Commonwealth intervened to argue that if
applies to an order under
Tribunal would be impermissibly purporting to exercise Commonwealth judicial
power which, by negative implication from the
provisions of Ch III of the
Constitution
, was not confined to a "matter".
curiae appointed by the Court made written and oral submissions against the
arguments for the State. Ms Wojciechowska made
written and oral submissions
and prosecuted a notice of contention contending that the Court of Appeal's
conclusions should be affirmed
on multiple bases.
necessary and sufficient conclusions in this appeal are that
distinguishable and that the determinative question must be answered in the
negative. The appeal is therefore to be allowed, and
the declaration and related
order set aside.
the reasoning of the Court of Appeal does not otherwise involve material error,
the relevant circumstances may be summarised in
short order relying on the Court
of Appeal's reasons.
The Court of Appeal's reasons
Kirk JA explained, Ms Wojciechowska had sought administrative review
by the Tribunal of several decisions, including decisions
made on behalf of the
Commissioner of the New South Wales Police Force under the
proceedings before the Tribunal in which she had claimed damages under
for conduct alleged to be in contravention of
information protection
principles.
Ms Wojciechowska then filed proceedings in the Supreme Court of New South
Wales alleging that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to
determine the
administrative review applications, including those in respect of which she
sought damages under
. The jurisdictional issue
was referred to the Court of Appeal for
determination.
correctly identified the relevant principle to be that stated in
Citta Hobart
Pty Ltd v Cawthorn
"that a State
Parliament lacks legislative capacity to confer on a State tribunal that is not
a court of the State within the meaning
of s 77(ii) and
Constitution
judicial power with respect to any matter of a
description in
Constitution
Constitution
"matters ... between a State and a resident of another State", the
determinative question was whether
, in enabling
the Tribunal to make an order for damages in favour of Ms Wojciechowska as
a resident of Tasmania, purported to invest
in a non-court State tribunal
judicial power with respect to any matter of a description in
Constitution
, which could be vested only in, relevantly, courts of a
State. It was not in dispute that: the Tribunal is not a court of a State;
Ms Wojciechowska was a resident of a State other than New South Wales; and
if the Tribunal, in making an order under
to exercise judicial power in a "matter", the matter would be between a State
and a resident of another State as referred to
Constitution
completed an orthodox review of the nature and characteristics of the statutory
scheme, Kirk JA concluded that the Tribunal
would be exercising judicial
power in making an order for damages under
because, once such an order was made,
would apply to
such an order by which, for the purposes of the recovery of any amount ordered
to be paid by the Tribunal, the amount
was to be certified by a registrar
); and if the certificate was "filed in the registry
of a court having jurisdiction to give judgment for a debt of the same amount
the amount stated in the certificate", the certificate would operate as such a
judgment of that court
concluded that:
"Given the conclusion that
can apply to orders made
, the decision in
materially indistinguishable. Here, as in that case, a decision of an
administrative body is given the effect of a decision
of a court. As
Mason CJ, Brennan and Toohey JJ said at 260, 'an order which
takes effect as an exercise of judicial power cannot
be made except after the
making of a judicial determination'. The character of the order affects the
characterisation of the power
being exercised by the Tribunal. No argument was
is distinguishable on the basis that non-federal courts
may be authorised by States to exercise non-judicial power.
The effect of s 78 on an order made under
of itself leads
to the conclusion that the Tribunal would be exercising judicial power if and
when such an order is sought. Section
78(1) is directed to 'recovery of any
amount'. It does not apply to non-monetary orders, and thus is not relevant to
orders made
otherwise than under para (a). However, if
and when an order is sought under
, in circumstances where the
claim is of a kind that otherwise falls within federal jurisdiction, then the
matter is outside the Tribunal's
The reasoning in
the complaint to the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
("the Commission") concerned alleged contraventions of prohibitions
discrimination contained in the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
applicable statutory provisions made it unlawful for a person to do one or more
of the proscribed matters. On the making
of such a complaint the Commission had
to inquire into the alleged contravening act or acts unless, for the reasons
specified, the
Race Discrimination Commissioner decided not to do so. The powers
of the Commission to hold an inquiry were to be exercised by a
single member of
the Commission who was legally qualified, or by two or more members of the
Commission at least one of whom was legally
qualified. After holding the
inquiry, the Commission could either dismiss the complaint or find the complaint
to be substantiated.
If it found the complaint substantiated, the Commission
could make a determination including, for example, "a declaration that the
respondent has engaged in conduct rendered unlawful by this Act and should not
repeat or continue such unlawful conduct" and "a declaration
that the respondent
should pay to the complainant damages by way of compensation for any loss or
damage suffered by reason of the
conduct of the respondent". Another provision
of the statute said that such a determination was "not binding or conclusive
any of the parties to the determination". Yet another provision,
however, said that where such a determination had been made the
Commission was
required as soon as practicable thereafter to lodge the determination in a
registry of the Federal Court and, thereupon,
a registrar was required to
register the determination. On registration, the determination had effect as an
order of the Federal
Court, subject to a period permitting review of a
determination by the Federal
Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ observed that it was "apparent that the
Commission's functions point in many respects to the
exercise of judicial
power", but the Commission could not be doing so because its decisions had no
binding force but for the registration
provisions. As their Honours put it, the
"situation [the non-exercise of judicial power] is ... reversed by the
registration provisions".
Mason CJ, Brennan and Toohey JJ reasoned that the "fact that the
Commission cannot enforce its own determinations is a strong factor
against the characterisation of its powers as judicial". As a result, the
holding of an inquiry and the making of a determination
could not of "itself be
seen as an exercise of judicial
However, their
Honours also concluded that the registration provision, which made the
determination enforceable as an order of the
Federal Court irrespective of
review by that Court, purported to do that which Ch III of the
Constitution
did not permit (that is, provide for an exercise of judicial
power by the Commission).
Characterising power as judicial or non-judicial
will be explained, there are several important distinguishing features between
the statutory scheme considered in
and that which applies in the
present case. The importance of these features is exposed by the many
observations in this Court concerning
the impossibility of exhaustively and
exclusively defining "judicial power not so much because it consists of a number
as because the combination is not always the same", so that "there
are functions which, when performed by a court, constitute the
exercise of
judicial power but, when performed by some other body, do
judicial decision: is a "binding and authoritative decision of controversies
between subjects or between subjects and the Crown
made by a tribunal which is
called upon to take
"determines
existing rights and duties and does so according to law", that is, "by the
application of a pre-existing standard rather
than by the formulation of policy
or the exercise of an administrative
discretion";
"authoritative determination by means of the judicial method, that is, an
enforceable decision reached by applying the
relevant principles of law to the
facts as found".
Kirby J put it in
Luton v Lessels
, a power may have a "double
in that it "may
take its character from the repository of the power – whether
judicial or administrative – so long as
the power, of its
nature, is not forbidden to
This reflects
the observation of Aickin J in
R v Quinn; Ex parte Consolidated Food
Corporation
that "some functions may, chameleon like, take their colour from
their legislative surroundings or their
recipient".
Dixon CJ and McTiernan J opined
"How a particular act or thing of this kind is treated by legislation may
determine its character. If the legislature prescribes
a judicial process, it
may mean that an exercise of the judicial power is indispensable. It is at that
point that the character of
the proceeding or of the thing to be done becomes
all important. Where the difficulty is to distinguish between a legislative and
a judicial proceeding, the end accomplished may be decisive."
and related statutory provisions
statutory provisions in the present case create "information protection
principles" (PPIP Act,
) and "privacy codes of practice" (PPIP Act,
which, in terms, apply only to a "public sector agency" (as defined
provides that a public sector agency
"must not do any thing, or engage in any practice, that contravenes an
information protection
principle" that applies to the agency (PPIP Act,
and "must comply with any privacy code of practice" that applies
to the agency (PPIP Act,
It also provides that nothing in
, which create information protection
principles and privacy codes of practice respectively, "gives rise to, or can be
account in, any civil cause of action, and without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, nothing in
– (a) operates to create in any person any legal rights
not in existence before the enactment of this Act, or (b) affects the
validity, or provides grounds for review, of any judicial or administrative act
or omission" (PPIP Act,
Section 69(1)
subject only to
of that Act (PPIP Act,
are the provisions which include, respectively, that the "contravention by a
public sector agency of an information protection
principle that applies to the
agency is conduct to which
applies" (PPIP Act,
"contravention by a public sector agency of a privacy code of practice applying
to the agency is conduct to which
applies" (PPIP Act,
provides for a scheme of internal review of conduct contravening
or alleged to contravene an information protection principle or
a privacy code
of practice. This scheme operates in substitution for the general provisions of
internal review of an administratively
reviewable decision of an administrator
in New South Wales under
Administrative Decisions Review Act
(NSW) ("the
") (PPIP Act,
The person entitled to
such an internal review is a person "aggrieved by the conduct of a public sector
agency" (PPIP Act,
, the conduct relevantly being the contravention
or alleged contravention of an information protection principle or a privacy
of practice (PPIP Act,
internal review is to be undertaken by the public sector agency concerned (PPIP
It is to be dealt with by an officer or employee of the
agency who was not substantially involved in any matter relating to the conduct
Following completion of the internal review in
accordance with
-(6), the public sector agency concerned may do one
of several things including taking no further action, making a formal apology,
taking such remedial action as it thinks appropriate (including paying monetary
compensation to the applicant for the internal review),
and implementing
administrative measures to ensure the conduct will not occur again (PPIP Act,
However, a public sector agency may not pay compensation to
certain persons (eg, a convicted inmate or a former convicted inmate)
"As soon as practicable (or in any event within 14 days) after the
completion of the review, the public sector agency must notify
the applicant in
writing of –
(a) the findings of the review (and the reasons for those findings), and
(b) the action proposed to be taken by the agency (and the reasons for taking
that action), and
(c) the right of the person to have those findings, and the agency's proposed
action, administratively reviewed by the Tribunal."
also contains
which, as relevant, provides as
"(1) If a person who has made an application for internal review under
is not satisfied with –
(a) the findings of the review, or
(b) the action taken by the public sector agency in relation to the
application,
the person may apply to the Civil and Administrative Tribunal for an
administrative review under the
Administrative Decisions Review
of the conduct that was the subject of the application under
section 53.
(2) On reviewing the conduct of the public sector
agency concerned, the Tribunal may decide not to take any action on the matter,
or it may make any one or more of the following orders –
(a) subject to subsections (4) and (4A), an order requiring the
public sector agency to pay to the applicant damages not exceeding
way of compensation for any loss or damage suffered because of the conduct,
(b) an order requiring the public sector agency to refrain from any conduct or
action in contravention of an information protection
principle or a privacy code
of practice,
(c) an order requiring the performance of an information protection principle
or a privacy code of practice,
(d) an order requiring personal information that has been disclosed to be
corrected by the public sector agency,
(e) an order requiring the public sector agency to take specified steps to
remedy any loss or damage suffered by the applicant,
(f) an order requiring the public sector agency not to disclose personal
information contained in a public register,
(g) such ancillary orders as the Tribunal thinks appropriate.
(3) Nothing in this section limits any other powers that the Tribunal has under
Division 3 of Part 3 of Chapter 3 of the
Administrative
Decisions Review Act 1997
(4) The Tribunal may make an order under subsection (2)(a) only
(a) the application relates to conduct that occurs after the end of the
12 month period following the date on which Division 1 of
commences, and
(b) the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant has suffered financial loss,
or psychological or physical harm, because of the
conduct of the public sector
(4A) The Tribunal may not make an order under subsection (2)(a)
(a) the applicant is a convicted inmate or former convicted inmate or a spouse,
partner (whether of the same or the opposite sex),
relative, friend or an
associate of a convicted inmate or former convicted inmate, and
(b) the application relates to conduct of a public sector agency in relation to
the convicted inmate or former convicted inmate,
(c) the conduct occurred while the convicted inmate or former convicted inmate
was a convicted inmate, or relates to any period
during which the convicted
inmate or former convicted inmate was a convicted inmate.
"administrative review" under the
as referred to in
involves the Tribunal exercising its "administrative review
respectively. As
"administratively reviewable decision" as a "decision" of "an administrator over
which the Tribunal has administrative
review jurisdiction", the definition of
"decision" in
and "administrator" in
are also engaged. By
, for the purposes of the
decision is made under enabling legislation if it is made in the exercise (or
purported exercise) of a function conferred or
imposed by or under the enabling
legislation". By
an "administrator", "in relation to an
administratively reviewable decision, is the person or body that makes (or is
taken to have
made) the decision under enabling legislation".
Section 8(2)
provides that the "person or body specified by enabling legislation as a person
or body whose decisions are administratively reviewable
decisions is taken to be
the only administrator in relation to the making of an administratively
reviewable decision even if some
other person or body also had a role in the
making of the decision".
of Pt 3 of Ch 3 of the
(referred to in
) contains, in addition to one other provision,
63 Determination of administrative review by Tribunal
(1) In determining an application for an administrative review under this Act of
an administratively reviewable decision, the Tribunal
is to decide what the
correct and preferable decision is having regard to the material then before it,
including the following:
(a) any relevant factual material,
(b) any applicable written or unwritten law.
(2) For this purpose, the Tribunal may exercise all of the functions that are
conferred or imposed by any relevant legislation on
the administrator who made
the decision.
(3) In determining an application for the administrative review of an
administratively reviewable decision, the Tribunal may decide:
(a) to affirm the administratively reviewable decision, or
(b) to vary the administratively reviewable decision, or
(c) to set aside the administratively reviewable decision and make a decision
in substitution for the administratively reviewable
decision it set aside,
(d) to set aside the administratively reviewable decision and remit the matter
for reconsideration by the administrator in accordance
with any directions or
recommendations of the Tribunal.
64 Application of Government policy
(1) In determining an application for an administrative review under this Act of
an administratively reviewable decision, the Tribunal
must give effect to any
relevant Government policy in force at the time the administratively reviewable
decision was made except
to the extent that the policy is contrary to law or the
policy produces an unjust decision in the circumstances of the case.
(4) In determining an application for an administrative review under this Act of
an administratively reviewable decision, the Tribunal
may have regard to any
other policy applied by the administrator in relation to the matter concerned
except to the extent that the
policy is contrary to Government policy or to law
or the policy produces an unjust decision in the circumstances of the case.
(5) In this section:
Government policy
means a policy adopted by:
(a) the Cabinet, or
(b) the Premier or any other Minister,
that is to be applied in the exercise of discretionary powers by
administrators.
66 Effect of administrative review decision
(1) A decision determining an application for an administrative review under
this Act of an administratively reviewable decision
takes effect on the date on
which it is given or such later date as may be specified in the decision.
(2) If any such decision varies, or is made in substitution for, an
administrator's decision, the decision of the Tribunal is taken:
(a) to be the decision of the administrator (other than for the purposes of an
administrative review under this Act), and
(b) to have had effect as the decision of the administrator on and from the
date of the administrator's actual decision, unless
the Tribunal orders
otherwise."
follows that, in respect of an application under
for an administrative review of the conduct or alleged conduct of the public
sector agency that was the subject of the application
for internal review under
, the review involves the Tribunal's "administrative
review jurisdiction" of an "administratively reviewable decision" in accordance
. By operation of those provisions,
read with the relevant "enabling legislation" (being the
in particular), the administrative review is of the conduct or alleged
conduct of the public sector agency that was the subject of
the application for
internal review under
, having regard to the findings
(if any) of the review by the internal reviewer under
, and the action (if any) taken or proposed to be taken by the
agency under
. Further, in determining such an
application for an administrative review, "the Tribunal is to decide what the
correct and preferable
decision is", as required by
The Tribunal is also to give effect to that decision by affirming or varying the
administratively reviewable decision or setting
it aside and either making a
decision in substitution or remitting the matter under
and, in so doing, has available to it the powers conferred on the Tribunal
further follows that any order that the Tribunal makes under
requiring a public sector agency to pay "damages ... by
way of compensation for any loss or damage suffered because of the conduct"
has the character of an order that the Tribunal makes in substitution for or in
variation of the public sector agency having
taken or proposed to take "such
remedial action as it thinks appropriate" under
As such, the decision of the Tribunal to make the order under
is deemed by
to be the decision of
the public sector agency.
otherwise may be noted that further features of the
speak against the
Tribunal exercising judicial power on an administrative review, including that:
the Tribunal need not be composed
of lawyers (CAT Act,
the Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence and can inform itself as it
thinks fit subject to the rules of natural
justice (CAT Act,
the Tribunal is required to act with as little formality as the circumstances of
the case permit and without regard to technicalities
or legal forms (CAT Act,
is distinguishable
this background, it can be recognised that the statutory provisions alleged to
have been contravened in this case are not
comparable to those the subject of
the complaint in
and in contrast to the statutory scheme in
create a norm of conduct binding on an individual or specify that conduct in
contravention of such a norm is "unlawful".
It creates norms confined in their
application to public sector agencies. The only consequence of contravention of
an information
protection principle or a privacy code of practice is that
applies to such conduct. While
, reflecting the terms of
, applies to the
"contravention" by a public sector agency of an information protection principle
or a privacy code of practice, "contravention"
being typical language of a
generally enforceable legal obligation, it is also relevant that the New South
Wales Parliament chose
to constitute the norms in the
as "principles"
and "codes of practice". These terms reflect the character of the obligations as
imposing administrative standards
on public sector agencies enforceable only
under and in accordance with
, and not otherwise.
Further, the fact that the information protection principles are subject to
modification by privacy codes of
practice under
indicates that the principles are not immutable. These differences from the
scheme of the legislation in
internal review process is manifestly an exercise of
administrative power by an administrative body or person.
Section 53(7)
gives a public sector agency a discretion to do any one or more of
the specified things including, for example, taking no action.
That is, an
internal review creates no enforceable right to a particular remedy.
refers to a "right" of the applicant for
internal review, the "right" is one only to have the findings of the employee or
on the internal review and the action proposed to be taken by the public
sector agency "administratively reviewed by the Tribunal".
In using this
language of "administrative review",
evinces the
manifest intention of the New South Wales Parliament that the review by the
Tribunal is within the Tribunal's "administrative
review jurisdiction". This
intention is reinforced by
, in identifying the
application to the Tribunal as for "an administrative review" under the
significance of the scheme of the
so operating is
that each key aspect of the scheme indicates against any exercise of judicial
power by the Tribunal. In making the
correct and preferable decision based on
the material then before it, the Tribunal is exercising a broad and evaluative
power which
must give effect to any relevant Government policy in force at the
time the "administratively reviewable decision" of the public
sector agency
alleged to have contravened the
was made. While the power in
is expressed in terms evocative of judicial
power (in referring to "damages ... by way of compensation for any
loss or damage suffered
because of the conduct"), the context is otherwise to
the contrary. The public sector agency itself is empowered by
to pay "monetary compensation" to an applicant for internal review.
Both the public sector agency and the Tribunal are prevented
from making any
such payment to specified persons (eg, convicted inmates) (PPIP Act,
(4A)). In other words, there is not a generally enforceable
"right" to such compensation available to any person who has suffered
damage because of a public sector agency contravening an information protection
principle or a privacy code of conduct. So
much is reinforced by the facultative
and discretionary "may" in
. That is, the Tribunal
may "decide not to take any action on the matter" or may, amongst other things,
decide to require the public
sector agency to pay to the applicant damages if
the applicant has suffered loss or damage because of the contravening conduct. A
finding of contravening conduct and a finding that the applicant has suffered
loss or damage because of such conduct does not give
an applicant any right to
damages. Rather, it enlivens the Tribunal's discretion across the full range of
observation of Gleeson CJ in
Attorney-General (Cth) v Alinta
is therefore apt.
His Honour said that in "decisions of this Court, there is a long history of
treating power as non-judicial where
an exercise of the power was, to use the
words of Kitto J, 'intended [by the Parliament] to be made upon
considerations of general
policy and expediency alien to the judicial
and again in consequence of these considerations and in contrast to the position
, nothing in the text, context or operation of the statutory
scheme to the point of the Tribunal making its decision convincingly
any exercise of judicial power. Contrary to an argument for the State, the
Tribunal's order on administratively reviewing
a decision of a public sector
agency under the
binds the public sector agency. There is
no provision equivalent to that in
which said that the decision of
the Commission was not binding on the parties. To the contrary,
provides to the effect that a person must not, without reasonable
excuse, contravene any order of the Tribunal (that is, any order
which is not a
designated order subject to
"made under this Act or any other
legislation". An order made under
order that a person must not, without reasonable excuse, contravene. That
circumstance, however, is common to many kinds
of non-judicial decision making
and is not determinative.
As the Court of Appeal perceived it, the decisive factor was the operation of
. As will be explained, that factor is not decisive
against the characterisation of an order under
as an exercise of administrative and not judicial power.
the State contended that the Court of Appeal erred in concluding that
applied to an order by the Tribunal for a public sector agency to
pay damages under
, this contention is
unsustainable. An order for the payment of damages under
results in an "amount ordered to be paid by the Tribunal" within the
. That an order under
is true. But this does not mean
that such an order, taken by
to be a decision of the public sector
agency, is not also an order of the Tribunal as referred to in
. That the New South Wales Parliament must have assumed that a public
sector agency would comply with any order of a Tribunal directed
to it may also
be accepted. But that does not mean that
excludes public sector agencies from its reach. Nor does the fact that
provides that the certificate must identify the
person liable to pay the certified amount implicitly exclude an order directed
a public sector agency under
s 78(1). It is for the registrar of the Tribunal to comply with
in accordance with its terms and irrespective of
whether the public sector agency has a separate legal personality from the
If it does not, the relevant person will be the State. Nor is there any
incoherence between
and the scheme of the
once it is accepted, as it must be, that the Tribunal's orders are all subject
being a civil penalty provision.
, however, is different from the registration provision
considered in
the Commission had to lodge the
Commission's determination in a registry of the Federal Court and a registrar of
the Federal Court
was required to register the determination; on registration,
the determination had effect as an order of the Federal Court. Under
, a registrar of the Tribunal is to certify any amount ordered to
be paid by the Tribunal (not including a civil or other penalty),
Tribunal's function is then completed. The Tribunal does not have to do anything
with the certificate.
Section 78(3)
merely provides that a
certificate that "is filed in the registry of a court having jurisdiction to
give judgment for a debt of the
same amount as the amount stated in the
certificate ... operates as such a judgment". That is, the critical act of the
the certificate in a registry of a court having jurisdiction to give
judgment for a debt of the same amount as the amount stated
in the certificate,
which is the end of the process, is not an end involving any act of the
Tribunal. If the "nature of the final
act determines the nature of the previous
the relevant
final act must be that of the body which conducted that inquiry. In the case of
an order by the Tribunal for payment
of an amount, that final act is the
registrar of the Tribunal certifying the amount ordered to be paid. While that
final act is for
the purposes of the "recovery of any amount ordered to be paid
by the Tribunal", it is the further and separate act of the filing
certificate, done by another person (if it is done), which deems the certificate
to operate as a judgment of a court.
as noted above, in
the Commission had to lodge the Commission's
determination in a registry of the Federal Court and a registrar of the Federal
had to register the determination and, on registration, the determination
had effect as an order of the Federal Court.
Section 78(3)
however, requires the person filing the certificate to ascertain the relevant
court in which the act of filing will engage the provision.
The certificate must
be filed in the registry of a court "having jurisdiction to give judgment for a
debt of the same amount as the
amount stated in the certificate". If the
certificate is filed in a court which does not have that jurisdiction,
is inoperative.
Accordingly,
is distinguishable and should be distinguished from the present
case. While, by operation of
, an order by the
Tribunal under
may become binding,
authoritative and enforceable as a judgment of a court, that status is conferred
on the registrar's certificate
certifying the amount ordered to be paid by the
Tribunal being filed in a court of the requisite jurisdiction by the taking of a
separate step by a person other than the Tribunal. If that step is not taken, or
the certificate is not filed in the requisite court,
the certificate will not be
enforceable as a judgment of a court.
and given the other features indicating that the Tribunal's power is
administrative, an order by the Tribunal under
does not involve a purported exercise of judicial power by the Tribunal and, in
consequence, does not engage Ch III of the
Constitution
Ms Wojciechowska is a resident of a State other than New South Wales.
these conclusions it is unnecessary and therefore
inappropriate
with the State's further argument that the conclusion in
namely, that
State legislative power does not extend to conferring on a tribunal that is not
a court of the State within the meaning
Constitution
judicial power with respect to any matter of a
description in
Constitution
, is confined to
such "matters", which do not exhaust the conception of judicial power.
these reasons, the appeal is to be allowed, the declaration made in order 2
of the Court of Appeal's orders dated 17 August 2023
is to be set aside,
order 3 of those orders is also to be set aside, and in lieu thereof it is
to be ordered that prayer 1 of the
amended summons filed on 26 July
2022 as amended by order 1 of the Court of Appeal dated 17 August 2023
is dismissed. In accordance
with the conditions of the order of this Court
granting the State special leave to appeal, the State is to pay
Ms Wojciechowska's
costs of and incidental to the appeal.
[1995] HCA 10
; (1995) 183 CLR 245.
Wojciechowska v Secretary,
Department of Communities and Justice
[2023] NSWCA 191
; (2023) 379 FLR 256 at 285-286
Wojciechowska v Secretary,
Department of Communities and Justice
[2023] NSWCA 191
; (2023) 379 FLR 256 at 259
[17]-[22], 263 [29].
Wojciechowska v Secretary,
Department of Communities and Justice
[2023] NSWCA 191
; (2023) 379 FLR 256 at 263
[2022] HCA 16
; (2022) 276 CLR 216.
(2018) 265 CLR 304.
[2022] HCA 16
; (2022) 276 CLR 216 at 224
referred to in
Wojciechowska v Secretary, Department of Communities and
[2023] NSWCA 191
; (2023) 379 FLR 256 at 264
Wojciechowska v Secretary,
Department of Communities and Justice
[2023] NSWCA 191
; (2023) 379 FLR 256 at 284
Wojciechowska v Secretary,
Department of Communities and Justice
[2023] NSWCA 191
; (2023) 379 FLR 256 at 285
[1995] HCA 10
; (1995) 183 CLR 245 at 253-255,
[1995] HCA 10
; (1995) 183 CLR 245 at 269.
[1995] HCA 10
; (1995) 183 CLR 245 at 257.
[1995] HCA 10
; (1995) 183 CLR 245 at 260, 262,
[1995] HCA 10
; (1995) 183 CLR
245 at 267.
[1995] HCA 10
; (1995) 183 CLR
245 at 268.
[1995] HCA 10
; (1995) 183 CLR
245 at 268.
[1995] HCA 10
; (1995) 183 CLR
245 at 258.
R v Davison
[1954] HCA 46
90 CLR 353 at 366, 368-370.
[2002] HCA 13
; (2002) 210 CLR 333 at 373
Pasini v United Mexican States
(2002) 209 CLR 246 at
253-254 [12].
[1977] HCA 62
; (1977) 138 CLR 1 at 18.
[1954] HCA 46
; (1954) 90 CLR 353 at 370.
[2008] HCA 2
; (2008) 233 CLR 542.
Attorney-General (Cth) v
[2008] HCA 2
; (2008) 233 CLR 542 at 550-551
R v Spicer; Ex
parte Australian Builders' Labourers' Federation
[1957] HCA 81
; (1957) 100 CLR 277 at
[1995] HCA 10
183 CLR 245 at 268;
R v Trade Practices Tribunal; Ex parte Tasmanian
Breweries Pty Ltd
[1970] HCA 8
; (1970) 123 CLR 361 at 403;
R v Hegarty; Ex parte City
of Salisbury
(1981) 147 CLR 617 at 627.
Prentis v Atlantic Coast
(1908) 211 US 210 at 227, quoted in
R v Davison
[1954] HCA 46
; (1954) 90 CLR
353 at 370.
Vunilagi v The
(2023) 279 CLR 259 at 278 [55].
(2018) 265 CLR 304.
RTF format (379 KB)
Signed PDF/A format