Warner v Kucera [2000] HREOCA 46 (10 November 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION ACT 1975
Matter No. H97/249
WAYNE WARNER
Complainant
ERICA KUCERA
FOR DECISION OF INQUIRY COMMISSIONER
PETER JOHNSTON
Date of Decision: 10 November 2000
Dates of Hearing: 5, 6 March 1998; 6, 7
Location of Hearing: Geraldton
Appearances: The
complainant was represented by Mr P Vincent, instructed by the Aboriginal Legal
Service of Western Australia (Inc.)
The respondent was represented by Mr J Redman, instructed by Gibson &
Gibson, Barristers & Solicitors
On 16 September 1996 Mr Wayne Warner, the complainant,
through the Aboriginal Legal Service of Western Australia (Inc.), lodged a
complaint with the Race Discrimination Commissioner (“the
Commissioner”) alleging that Mr and Mrs Kucera, as the owners
establishment called “Koochies Diner” in Geraldton, Western
Australia, had acted in breach of the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”). This was by displaying signs at the Diner on
the morning of 24 August 1996. The Diner had been seriously
damaged in a
disturbance involving a number of young people on the night of Friday, 23 August
1996. By way of example, one of the
signs stated, “Not open due to
destructive Aborigines”. The signs were claimed to be offensive,
insulting and humiliating
to the complainant, who is an Aboriginal person, and
to other members of the Aboriginal community in the town of Geraldton. The
signs were alleged to have been painted and displayed by Mrs Erica Kucera. Mrs
Kucera admitted painting some of the signs but denied
that she had been
responsible for writing all of the words on them, and in particular denied
having written some of the most offensive
expressions such as using the word
“nigger” and “F.... the parents: take it out of their(sic)
She also claimed that she had later painted over the signs.
After the Commissioner had attempted to settle the complaint by conciliation,
she advised the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Commission”) by letter dated 7 November 1997 that she was of opinion that
the complaint could not be so settled.
Accordingly the complaint was referred
to the Commission for inquiry pursuant to s.24E of the Act. I was appointed by
the Commission
to carry out the inquiry and I heard the evidence and submissions
of the parties on two occasions extending over a period of four
days. I now
give my decision and the reasons for it.
The complaint is said to involve a contravention of
of the Act. It reads:
18C Offensive behaviour because of race, colour or national or ethnic
(1) It is unlawful for a person to do an act, otherwise than in private, if:
(a) the act is reasonably likely, in all the circumstances, to
offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate another person
or a group of people; and
(b) the act is done because of the race, colour or national or
ethnic origin of the other person or of some or all of
the people in the group.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), an act is taken not to be done in
private if it:
(a) causes words, sounds, images or writing to be communicated to the
(b) is done in a public place; or
(c) is done in the sight or hearing of people who are in a public
(3) In this section:
public place
includes any place to which the public have
access as of right or by invitation, whether express or implied and whether or
charge is made for admission to the place.
Also relevant, in terms of possible defences (that is, exemptions) on the
part of the respondent, is
of the Act which reads:
18D Exemptions
Section 18C
does not render unlawful anything said or done reasonably and in
good faith:
(a) in the performance, exhibition or distribution of an artistic work; or
(b) in the course of any statement, publication, discussion or debate made
or held for any genuine academic, artistic or scientific
purpose or any other
genuine purpose in the public interest; or
(c) in making or publishing:
(i) a fair and accurate report of any event or matter of public
interest; or
(ii) a fair comment on any event or matter of public interest if the
comment is an expression of a genuine belief held by the
person making the
DISCONTINUANCE
OF COMPLAINT AGAINST MALE RESPONDENT
Mrs Kucera advised the
Commission that she was solely responsible for running the business of Koochies
Diner at the relevant times.
The business records submitted to the inquiry were
not clear on that matter. In the light of Mrs Kucera’s advice I made an
order with the consent of the parties discontinuing the complaint against the
male respondent, Mr Kucera. Accordingly, Mrs Kucera
is the sole respondent to
the complaint. No question of partnership liability for Mrs Kucera’s
actions therefore arises.
PRELIMINARY
OBJECTION TO COMPETENCE
At the commencement of the hearing Mr
Redman for the respondent submitted that the proceedings were incompetent and
that I therefore
should dismiss the complaint pursuant to s.25X of the Act. This
was because, in effect, the complainant, whilst he had made the complaint
own name, was not himself among the group of persons to whom the contents of the
signs could be taken to apply. It was submitted
that the complaint was
misconceived or lacking in substance because the acts of which he was
complaining were not aimed at him. He
was really bringing it as a representative
action on behalf of other members of the Aboriginal community in the town. The
could not proceed as a representative complaint because of the
conditions set forth in s.25L of the Act. Section 25L reads as follows:
25L Conditions for making a representative complaint
(1) A representative complaint may be lodged under section 22 only if:
(a) the class members have complaints against the same person; and
(b) all the complaints are in respect of, or arise out of, the same,
similar or related circumstances; and
(c) all the complaints give rise to a substantial common issue of law
(2) A representative complaint under section 22 must:
(a) describe or otherwise identify the class members; and
(b) specify the nature of the complaints made on behalf of the class
members; and
(c) specify the nature of the relief sought; and
(d) specify the questions of law or fact that are common to the
complaints of the class members.
In describing or otherwise identifying the class members, it is not necessary
to name them or specify how many there are.
(3) A representative complaint may be lodged without the consent of class
Mr Vincent, counsel for the complainant, in reply referred to s.22 of the
Act. So far as relevant it reads:
22 Complaints
(1) A complaint in writing alleging that a person has done an act that is
unlawful by virtue of a provision of
may be lodged with the
Commission by:
(a) a person aggrieved by the act, on that person's own behalf or on
behalf of that person and another person or other persons
aggrieved by the
(b) 2 or more persons aggrieved by the act, on their own behalf or on
behalf of themselves and another person or other persons
aggrieved by the act;
(c) a person or persons included in a class of persons aggrieved by
the act, on behalf of the persons included in that class
of persons; or
(1A) In the case of a representative complaint, this section has effect
subject to section 25L.
Mr Vincent submitted that the provision was wide enough to confer standing on
the complainant, in the first instance as a person who
had himself been
personally aggrieved by the alleged acts, and secondly because the wording of
s.22(1)(a) indicated an intention
to extend standing to allow him to bring the
action on behalf of other persons in the group similarly aggrieved, namely other
of the Aboriginal community in Geraldton. The complainant was not
bringing the action as a representative complaint.
In response I made a provisional ruling that the hearing should proceed as I
was not prepared to make an order dismissing the complaint
until I had heard
evidence from the complainant. But I left it open for the respondent to make the
application again at a later time,
if appropriate. In his final submissions Mr
Redman renewed the application for dismissal. I again ruled that I was not
to uphold the objection as a discrete ground for dismissing the
application. Having reserved my decision on the complaint in all
respects, I shall now address this threshold point first as part of my final
I reject the application to dismiss the complaint on the ground of
incompetence or lack of jurisdiction (as it was put for the respondent)
following reasons.
It seems to me that Mr Vincent’s submission in opposition to the
objection is correct. Having heard Mr Warner’s evidence
it is clear to me
that he was making the complaint in the first instance because of the personal
hurt and disgust that he felt on
reading the signs. There was, in my opinion, a
reasonable basis for him thinking the signs were aimed at a group wider than
the Aboriginal youths who had damaged Koochies Diner. He was relevantly a
person aggrieved by what he took the signs to mean when
he first read them. It
is undoubted that as a respected Aboriginal leader in the Geraldton community he
also felt a responsibility
to lodge the complaint as a protest on behalf of a
number of other Aboriginal persons who had contacted him and voiced their
sufficiently wide to encompass the grievance that Mr Warner
himself felt, and
also as one that he shared with others. The policy of the Act, reflected in the
broad terms of
itself, is to bring acts of racial vilification to account.
On a wide view of that provision a complainant need not be a member of
specific group of persons who are vilified on the basis of their race. The
Commission should certainly be slow to dismiss a
complaint as misconceived, not
involving an unlawful act, or otherwise incompetent, in circumstances where
there is a genuine grievance
expressed at the outset on the part of a
complainant like Mr Warner (see
McGlade v HREOC and Lightfoot
Federal Court 1477, 18 October 2000). I therefore have not been persuaded that
there is any ground for dismissing the complaint
under s.25X of the Act.
In order to deal with the substance of the complaint I turn to summarise the
FOR THE COMPLAINANT
5.1 Complainant
The complainant told the Commission that he was an Aboriginal person aged in
his early 40’s who had lived in Geraldton most
of his life. He had
complained to the Commissioner about the following matter. In company with Ms
Janice Strickland, his de facto
partner, he had gone to the vicinity of Koochies
Diner near the corner of Fitzgerald Street and Marine Terrace West, Geraldton,
the morning of Monday, 26 August 1996. The windows of the Diner were boarded
up and he saw a number of signs including some painted
on the boards. There
were also signs inside the window. He particularly noticed one: “Not
open due to destructive Aborigines”.
Though inside the premises, it was
clearly visible from outside. The sign as he read it did not refer to any
Aboriginal person
in particular and he had taken it to be a general reference to
Aboriginal people in the town.
He did nothing immediately but after a number of discussions with members of
the Aboriginal community, he went back to the Diner on
several occasions over
the next couple of days. Aboriginal people in the town were feeling very
strongly that something should be
done. He felt sick and offended because of
the collective reference to Aborigines. He had had nothing to do with what had
at the Diner himself.
The complainant had taken photographs of the signs on the Monday, 26 August
1996. The photographs collectively constitute Exhibit
C2. I shall refer to
particular aspects of the signs when making my findings on the evidence.
Mr Warner related something of the history of difficulties between young
Aboriginal people, traders and residents of Geraldton, and
the police.
Attempts, such as the setting up of a Police-Aboriginal Liaison Scheme and a
Prison Visiting Scheme, had been made to
solve the problem from the late
1980’s through to the period up to 1996.
The displaying of the signs was given considerable coverage in the media,
including articles in the “West Australian”
newspaper and an
interview with the respondent by a local TV station. Not only did Mr Warner feel
sick at the time when he first
saw the signs but they had a continuing adverse
effect on both his health and the way he had operated subsequently. Reading the
signs he had felt defeated and saw no sense in trying to improve the situation
regarding relations between Aborigines and others
in the town. This was in
relation to the way he felt about his job in Aboriginal Affairs. It seemed
nothing constructive was being
done about resolving the problems about race
relations in the town.
He had not had any discussions with the respondent at Koochies Diner
immediately after viewing the signs but later had phone conversations
This was followed by a visit by the respondent to his office at work. Mrs
Kucera had spoken to him on the phone and asked
whether they could meet.
In cross-examination he said that he had not seen Mrs Kucera put the signs
up. He did not deny that the business at Koochies Diner
had been destroyed.
When he had seen the reference to Aboriginal people he was aware that something
had occurred in relation to
the Diner but didn’t know the details. He
found the phrase “F... the parents” as especially offensive, and
expressed as “Guess who did this?” quite disgusting. He
understood the latter sign as clearly relating to Aboriginal
people having done
the damage and read the reference to “abstudy” also as pointing to
Aborigines. He felt that the signs
were unfair in that they could have focused
on other offenders.
Before he had gone to the Diner he had had a number of discussions with other
Aboriginal persons about the matter. Initially he had
not been directly
involved in discussions between other Aboriginal persons and Mrs Kucera about
removal of the signs. He had, however,
sat down with a number of Aboriginal
people at the office of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission
when Mr Ashley Taylor was trying to mediate with Mrs
He had seen the incident as raising racial discrimination issues and
therefore had got in touch with the Aboriginal Legal Service
to make a formal
5.2 Ms Mary Cowley
Ms Cowley, Regional Manager, Aboriginal Affairs Department, in Geraldton told
the Commission that on Sunday afternoon, 25 August 1996,
members of the
Aboriginal community had spoken to her about signs at Koochies Diner. She went
down and viewed the signs on Monday
morning. During the day there was a series
of phone calls to the Department’s office. There were a lot of irate
people ringing
in. Some were concerned that the signs would inflame tensions in
the town. She did not recall the exact content of the signs but
seeing one which said something like: “Closed due to destructive
Aborigines”.
She had accompanied police to a meeting with Mr and Mrs Kucera. Those
present included Inspector Gary Cox, Superintendent Bob Coops,
retailers from the West End district. The respondent was requested to take the
signs down and at first she said she wouldn’t.
There was a lot of emotion
at the meeting. At one stage it seemed that the parties were close to some kind
of an agreement but
an Aboriginal man came in and screamed at the Kuceras to
remove the signs. The meeting then broke up without any agreement.
Mrs Cowley said that the newspaper the following day had referred to
Aboriginal persons as having caused the damage. She understood
that passers by
had also been writing on the board and adding messages. Later in the week she
went down to Koochies Diner and saw
that someone had removed a sign referring to
Aboriginal persons from the footpath. When she had left the meeting with the
she was under the impression that the signs would not be removed. The
Kuceras had seemed to be very upset. Mrs Cowley also told
the Commission that
there had been a long history of problems around the vicinity, which had been
given the name “Terror Corner”
Her assessment was that the tension between Aboriginal people and others in
the town had been made worse because of the destruction
caused to the Diner and
the associated incidents. She had seen the Department’s role as seeking
to resolve the issues arising
from those incidents.
5.3 Mr Ashley Taylor
Mr Taylor told the Commission that at the time of the incidents regarding the
signs, he had been employed at ATSIC and was the chairperson
of the Yamatji Land
and Sea Regional Council (“the Yamatji Council”). He had received a
phone call from Mrs Kucera following
the incidents of 23/24 August 1996. She
had asked what he could do about the problem. She said that the Diner had been
as a leader he should see that the Aboriginal kids were given
Mr Taylor had agreed to see her and went down to the scene. Windows were
smashed and boarded up. He talked with Mrs Kucera about
how the damage had
happened and more generally about the problems of traders and youth in the area.
Mr Taylor described to the Commission
where the signs were located. His prime
concern was that the signs were not going to make anything better. He had
offered to buy
paint to paint over them. Mrs Kucera had said that she would get
the police if they were touched.
On the following Tuesday evening he had received another phone call from Mrs
Kucera inviting him to help paint over the signs. He
had gone to the premises
but found the media were there. Although it was suggested that this was a
chance to show unity he had thought
that it was not a good idea as it could
convey rather a negative view of the race issues involved by focusing solely on
the problem
of Aboriginal youth. Mr Taylor said he had problems with how the
media reported such things. His main concern was to get the signs
harm’s way. With the media there it was more like a circus and might give
the wrong impression.
As chairperson of the Yamatji Council he had spoken to a number of people
including Mr Warner about the tensions in the community
at the time. Prior to
the signs being painted over there were a lot of racist remarks being written on
the signs in different kinds
of felt texta or glow pens.
When he had seen Mrs Kucera on the Monday, 26 August, she had been highly
emotional and said she would not remove the signs. But she
had calmed down by
Tuesday evening. On Wednesday evening he had gone around to Koochies Diner
after football training and the signs
were painted over. Later on Mrs Kucera
had offered to provide pinball machines to occupy youth in the area.
5.4 Sergeant Anthony Edmonson
Sergeant Edmonson said he was a Sergeant in the Geraldton Police office.
According to the station records there had been an incident
on 23 August 1996
around 11.20pm at Koochies Diner. Some police officers had attended. A number
of arrests had been made. Four
juveniles had been charged as well as two adult
white males. The Aborigines had been charged with being disorderly. A man from
relating to the incident had been logged at the station
at 2315, 2318, 2320,
2324 and 2326. The first police vehicle had been dispatched at 2320. At the
time police were also attending
a brawl at the racecourse, and one at a
birthday party.
5.5 Ms Merrilyn Green
Ms Green, who was the manager of an organisation called the Geraldton
Aboriginal Streetworkers (“Streetworkers”), told
the Commission that
Streetworkers ran a bus service picking up Aboriginal children from the streets
and driving them home at night.
She was on duty on 23 August 1996. Late that
evening, after she had already taken two busloads of children home, she was in
vicinity of the corner of Fitzgerald Street and Marine Terrace. She
witnessed a confrontation involving two Aboriginal youths and
two adult white
males. The white males were threatening Aboriginal juveniles. It was across
the road from Koochies Diner. The
visual appearance of the white males
suggested that they had been drinking. They had gone up to the Aboriginal kids
in the park
and started a confrontation. Ms Green had immediately dialled the
emergency number. She counted 27 Aboriginal kids of whom about
involved in the conflict. She brought a group of Aboriginal boys onto the bus.
Just before the police had arrived some
white males ran across the road into
Koochies Diner and some young children began throwing stones at the Diner. The
Police arrived
and dispersed the group, making some arrests. Ms Green had got
as many children as possible onto the bus and driven them to their
her view the rock throwing would not have happened if the white adults had not
gone to the park.
She had been very distressed about what had happened and returned to Koochies
Diner on a later occasion. She had seen signs at the
Diner but she knew that
not just young Aboriginal people had been involved. When she saw signs with
words something like “caused
by Aborigines” and a reference to
“abstudy” she had read them as suggesting the problem was one
basically relating
to Aborigines. She thought signs of that nature would bring
out racism on both sides of the community. There was concern among
Aboriginal people in the community and one of them, Mr Warner, had called her to
a meeting at the ATSIC office in order
to try and get something done about the
problem. The meeting had broken up when an Aboriginal man had burst in and
abused the Kuceras.
In cross-examination Ms Green said that when the young white adults had run
into Koochies Diner she felt that some people inside were
trying to drive them
out. She saw Mr Kucera in the area with rocks being thrown but did not recall
seeing any rocks striking him.
Rocks were still being thrown when the police
5.6 Ms Janice Strickland
Ms Strickland told the Commission that she had known Mr Warner for 20 years.
She had been an Aboriginal liaison officer assisting
him at the Yamatji Council.
On 26 August 1996 she drove past Koochies Diner with Mr Warner. The premises
were heavily boarded up
and she saw writing on the boards. Particularly she
noted one which said “Aboriginal people did this”. Later on that
day she had gone back to the premises with Mr Warner when he had taken some
photographs of the signs. She said the signs had been
very upsetting and
disturbing to Mr Warner. They later had gone to several meetings to see if the
signs could be removed. She had
taken a number of calls at the Yamatji Council
relating to the matter. On several occasions Mrs Kucera had rung Mr Warner
she had come to his office to see him. They had talked about what
could be done with the signs. Mr Warner was worried about
effect on his
children when they were out and about the town.
In cross-examination she said that in relation to a number of calls that she
had received people were feeling very strongly about
the signs and she was
concerned that there might be fighting if they continued to be there. She was
worried that there might be
some retaliation and was concerned that media
coverage might make the matter worse.
FOR THE RESPONDENT
6.1 The Respondent
Mrs Kucera told the Commission that she was a housewife with three young
children. She had spent her early years in Geraldton and
after some years away
had returned to the town in 1988 with her husband Mr Richard Kucera. On 22
November 1992, they had acquired
an interest in what was then known as Koochies
24 Hour Diner. Mr Kucera had wanted to make it work. The Diner had not been in
good shape and they had spent a lot of money on it. They had worked very
long hours with a small staff to build it up until after
a few years it was
making about $650,000.00 in gross annual turnover. Mrs Kucera had worked 9am to
3pm Mondays to Fridays at the
Diner when the business first got going. Later
she had had to start working on Friday nights.
The area opposite the Diner was known as “Terror Corner”. As
long as she could remember there had always been problems
at the corner with
fights breaking out from time to time. There were many problems with young
Aboriginal youths stealing drinks from
the fridge and between 1994 and 1996 some
members of staff had been assaulted in the shop. There was often verbal abuse
from Aboriginal
youths and adults. Non-Aboriginal people were also involved in
the fights. Windows had been broken in the cars of staff parked nearby.
and her husband had tried for 2 years leading up to 1996 to have something done.
They joined with a number of other traders
in the area to set up a group called
West End Traders Association (“the Association”) with a view to try
and counter
the anti-social behaviour in the area. Mr Peter Johnson, the owner
of “Uglies Pizzas” was one supporter. Mr and Mrs
Kucera had tried
to sell the business at Koochies Diner but were unsuccessful. They had decided
to reduce from a 24-hour business
during the week but operated it 24 hours at
the weekend.
Leading up to the incident in August 1996 there had been some improvement in
the situation due to increased police presence but this
had fallen away after
some months. In the result, Mr and Mrs Kucera had been very disappointed with
the responses overall both from
the police and the Geraldton Town Council to
resolve the problem.
On the night of 23 August 1996 the respondent was working in the Diner. Late
in the evening something started to happen outside.
She looked out the window
and saw a large number of Aboriginal people in the vicinity. She estimated this
at about 60. A brawl
started to break out in the park. She and her assistant
had called the police three times. She thought that the third call was
through the glass window. A number of rocks
started to hit the premises.
People in the Diner began to panic. Her husband went outside to try and stop
the throwing. A white
male, Tony Higgins, otherwise know as
“Animal”, came to the door. She realised that the Aboriginal youths
him. Another person in a blue shirt tried to push in. They were
trying to fight Aboriginal youths. Mrs Kucera managed to get them
store and rocks continued to fly. She recalled crying to the police over the
phone around about 11.15pm. She was told
the police were trying to get
something there. When they arrived the rocks stopped being thrown and the
people in the Diner left.
Mrs Kucera told the Commission she did not know who had started the fighting
on the night of 23 August 1996. She saw Tony Higgins
being arrested and noticed
that the police took about four other youths away. Her husband had rung Mr
Benaim who had a shop nearby
in Fitzgerald Street. Mr Kucera said his shop had
been trashed and Mr Benaim had better come and protect his (Mr Benaim’s)
shop. There were still 20 to 30 youths around the area.
Mrs Kucera said that in the early hours of the following morning she felt
like a zombie and had started cleaning up glass on the road.
She felt that she
and her husband had lost everything and thought that the Aboriginal youths who
had thrown the stones were responsible.
Although she went home she did not get
to sleep. Her husband had gone to sleep about 5.30am but she had continued to
walk around.
She had stayed in the shop till after dawn and then had picked up
her children from her mother’s home.
They had approached a local glazier the next day but because the required
glass was not available the windows could not be fixed at
the time. The windows
in the shop remained broken until about 4pm on the Saturday afternoon. Since
there was not enough glass to
make the repairs, Mr Kucera and a friend boarded
up the windows.
The respondent had also gone back to the shop in the afternoon. It was then
that she painted some signs on the boards. She felt so
angry about the
Aboriginal youths that had damaged the shop that she wrote the signs. She said
however that she did not put any signs
on the footpath nor any outside the shop
nor wrote any of the words in texta; only the words in thick black writing. It
her intention to refer to all Aborigines; only the destructive ones.
She thought what they had done was totally unacceptable. She
had referred to
“destructive Aborigines” because that was what they were. They were
Aborigines. At the time she did
not think it would create problems and she did
not intend to refer to people like Mr Warner. It was not directed at him; only
certain Aboriginal youths. In her own words it was a “cry for
anti-social behaviour in the area by the Geraldton Town Council and the police
and nothing permanent had happened.
Later on she had telephoned ATSIC and had spoken to Mr Taylor. She had
spoken to him about help for Aboriginal youth. He had asked
her to take the
signs down but at first she had refused. She telephoned Mr Taylor on Tuesday.
She had agreed to paint over the
signs and wanted to become positive about the
matter. On Monday morning she had received a phone call from Mrs Karen Adams
that her children were being blamed for the damage. Mrs Hilder
Kickett, a young woman called Michelle, and some Aboriginal youths
came down to
Mr and Mrs Kucera had closed Koochies Diner initially but had reopened for
three weeks about five weeks after the damage. Mr Kucera
had worked at the
Diner until he found another job. Mrs Kucera had carried on for a while with
another lady who had helped her for
no pay. Financially, they were
substantially in debt to the bank when the business closed and had still been
struggling at the time
of the hearing. Eventually Mrs Kucera decided to close
the business altogether. She sold it on terms of vendor finance on 31 July
Regarding the content of the signs, Mrs Kucera insisted that she had not
written any of the small writing on them. She also said
that it was not her
intention to offend Aboriginal people. Until the premises were damaged she felt
that no help had been received
from the town. Things had improved for about six
months after she had contacted Superintendent Reginald Driffel in Perth and
police patrols had been commenced.
In cross-examination, Mrs Kucera said that her intention in writing the signs
had not been to harm Aboriginal children. She had been
trying to attack the
problem and help Aboriginal children when she had written the sign “Guess
who did this?”. She was
upset because no one seemed to be stopping the
things that were happening. She had wanted to make a stand in order to fix the
With respect to the sign “Make the parents pay” she said
that she believed that the parents should pay, including the
fact that they
should have paid for the damage to the shop. This was because they should be
responsible for their children and it
should not be the victim who should pay.
When referred to the misspelling of the word “juvenials” in her
letter to the
Commissioner dated 21 June 1997, Mrs Kucera agreed that she had
spelt the word wrongly. But when directed to sign number 7 depicted
C2 referring to “juvenials” (in thin writing) she said that she had
not written that sign even if the expression
was misspelt. She had only written
the part in black. She had not written anything in texta though some unpleasant
things had been
written there.
Mrs Kucera insisted the outside boards had been painted over on the Tuesday,
and the four remaining signs by Wednesday evening. When
she had spoken to Mrs
Adams she felt that things had been negative enough and she had then wanted the
police, Geraldton Town Council
and everyone to help. She said that the meeting
on the Monday at ATSIC had been making good progress until an Aboriginal person
had come in and upset things. She accepted that with respect to the problems
concerning Aboriginal youth in the area there had been
some good things
happening. The Streetworkers bus had taken Aboriginal youth home at night and
there had also been great support
from the Yamatji patrol.
When Tony Higgins had run into the Diner, she had not understood the stone
throwing was aimed at him. She just saw the situation
as one where the youths
throwing the rocks were trashing her shop.
6.2 Mr Peter Johnson
Mr Johnson, the owner of “Uglies Pizza Bar”, Marine Terrace, gave
evidence that he and other traders had been concerned
with the area known as
“Terror Corner”. It had become a trouble area particularly in and
around 1994 to 1995. After
the Kuceras had taken over Koochies 24 Hour Diner
(as it then was), it had become a thriving business attracting a lot of people
from nightclubs and shift workers. Problems had started with young people,
particularly on Friday nights. The Streetworkers bus,
the Yamatji Patrol, the
police, and Juvenile Justice had made some difference but just how much largely
depended on police manning
levels. Once they started to drop off, trouble began
to increase. Mr Johnson had been involved with West End Traders Association
which had been formed in 1995-1996 in response to the trouble. Some break-ins
had occurred and windows had been smashed. The efforts
of the Association were
directed to reducing the amount of anti-social behaviour in the area. They had
approached the police and
at first the police had maintained regular controls in
the area but by August 1996 the police presence dropped off.
Mr Johnson recalled the night of 23 August 1996 as he saw it. It had been a
fairly busy night. Around about 6.30pm he had noticed
some “white
guys” swearing and yelling abuse at some Aboriginal children. A white guy
had grabbed an Aboriginal lass
and pushed her around. There seemed to be a
number of Aboriginal children congregating in the area. This had built up until
Later on he had noticed four white adults walking past his shop
and he heard one
of them saying that they were going to “sort these kids out”. He
noticed some time later that one of
them had a hold on an Aboriginal kid and was
giving him a hiding. Next thing he saw rocks coming. The white guys tried to
but the kids were coming from everywhere. They were advancing on the
whites. Mr Johnson had rung the police. He saw a couple of
the white guys
retreat across the road. By this time rocks were coming in large numbers and it
was unsafe to be out on the road.
He noticed some of the children on the road
were throwing stones at the Diner. He saw Mr Kucera come out. When he heard
breaking he rang the police a second time. Mr Kucera was still trying
to stop the rock throwing. He saw a stone hit Mr Kucera.
Mr Johnson had taken
off after the Aboriginal person who had thrown the stone at Mr Kucera and tried
to get him off the Streetworkers
bus. He had identified the youth to the police
after they had arrived. As soon as the police got there the youths had
leaving Koochies Diner a mess. Mrs Kucera was very upset and Mr
Kucera was very demoralised and distraught. Other traders came
down and started
to help out. They had gone home around 3 o’clock in the morning. Next
day Mr Johnson had gone for a drive
and had caught up with Mr and Mrs Kucera
later in the morning. He could not remember the signs going up the first day
the stone throwing but he did see them on the second.
Mr Johnson had felt that the police presence leading up to the incident had
been insufficient.
6.3 Mr David Benaim
Mr Benaim told the Commission that he had received a phone call on the night
of the incident and was told that Koochies Diner was
being bombarded with rocks
and that he should come down and save his shop. He had found Mrs Kucera crying
her eyes out and he had
stayed until about 4am in the morning.
After the signs had gone up he noticed a lot of people were signing things on
the notices. He thought the statement “destructive
Aborigines” was
true and was not racist. Later on he had helped to paint out a sign on which
the words “F.... blacks”
were written. He had painted it out
because he thought it was discriminatory.
6.4 Mr Richard Kucera
Mr Kucera told the Commission that he and his wife had built up the business
of Koochies Diner as the realisation of a long held dream.
Initially it had
been very successful for the first year or two. They had carried out
substantial renovations and improvements.
They had been trading 24 hours a day
but after a while things began to deteriorate. The problems of street violence
in the area
started to increase, particularly every weekend. He had joined the
West End Traders Association seeking to have something done.
Their efforts had
limited success. Once the police presence had been scaled down, windows started
being broken again.
On the night of the stone throwing he had gone through a most horrific
experience. Business had been flat out that night. He had
been cooking and
serving when a rock came through the window and he had run outside to see
somewhere around 50 to 70 young people
throwing rocks. Most of the diners in the
shop had retreated into the kitchen area. He had tried to get the youths
throwing stones
to stop. One of the rocks had hit him. He noticed the youth who
had struck him and had called out to Mr Johnson to get him. The
police arrived
and took the person off the bus. Mr Kucera thought that the rock throwing lasted
around 8 minutes. He had rang up
Mr Benaim and asked them to come around. The
premises at Koochies Diner had been destroyed and his dream was shattered.
He went home and slept from about 6 o’clock in the morning. He then
went back later to the shop and bought some boards. With
the help of some mates
he had boarded the premises up until Monday.
Although he had had nothing to do with the sign: “Closed(sic) due to
destructive Aborigines” he agreed with it. Mrs Kucera
had been very
disturbed and hurt. He saw the signs as telling the town that it had a problem.
There was a meeting at the Diner on
the Tuesday evening in an attempt to salvage
something from the ashes. He felt the incident had made the police sit up and
the Geraldton
Town Council to wake up.
Although the shop did re-open a few weeks later after they had fitted it out
again, his heart had gone out of the business. He could
not carry on and went
to Perth. He went back to the Diner to help his wife for a while and found that
the people were not coming
in. In fact the business was losing revenue. There
were no takers or interest in the business.
In cross-examination Mr Kucera said that the sign referring to Aboriginal
children was a statement of truth. At the time they had
received some
supportive comments but others had been offensive. He had had contact with Mr
Taylor when the latter had turned up
with two Aboriginal people and some police
to paint out the signs.
6.5 Mr Mervyn Brown
Mr Brown was employed as a chef at Koochies Diner for a period of about 5
years. He said that in the time leading up to the rock-throwing
incident there
had been a number of occasions of pilfering of food and disturbances by
indigenous customers. He had not been attacked
himself. He was rostered to
start at 6am on the Sunday morning following the stone throwing. When he had
turned up the Diner looked
as if a tornado had gone through it. Mr and Mrs
Kucera were there and they were distraught and upset. Later he saw a sign
to “destructive Aborigines”. He said that the sign was
inside the shop near the door. He noticed another smaller sign
placed outside on
the footpath with a similar message. Usually that was where the breakfast
specials were displayed. That morning
had been the last day that he had worked
at Koochies.
6.6 Other evidence
The Commission also received in evidence a videotape taken by GWN News
showing the inside of the shop after the damage, as well as
an Australian Bureau
of Statistics extract of the population distribution statistics for the
Geraldton area (1996 census) which showed
that approximately one quarter of that
population of around 20,000 people was recorded as Aboriginal.
SUBMISSIONS
OF THE PARTIES
7.1 Submissions for the complainant
Mr Vincent, for the complainant, accepted that the onus of establishing a
contravention of the Act was on the complainant, and further,
that the standard
of proof was the civil standard, namely the balance of probabilities. Having
regard to the consequences for the
respondent of an adverse finding, the
complainant also accepted that the Commission needed to be careful in having
regard to all
the circumstances before reaching a conclusion against the
respondent (
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336).
Mr Vincent submitted that even so, on the evidence the complainant had made
out his case against the respondent under
of the Act. The signs (at least
so much of them as could be attributed to the respondent’s actions) were
displayed “otherwise
than in private”
(s.18C(2)).
The signs had been
painted or displayed in places where they could be viewed by the public.
Further, the messages communicated were
“reasonably likely to
offend” a group comprising members of the Aboriginal community in
Geraldton. The test in that
regard was objective. However, the actual responses
related to the Commission by Aboriginal persons including the complainant and
other witnesses such as Mr Taylor and Ms Cowley could be taken into account when
making that assessment.
Mr Vincent further contended that whilst the respondent had asserted that the
content of the signs had only focused on the race of
those young persons who had
damaged the Diner, when read in the complete context of all the signs, they
suggested that Aboriginal
people as a racial group were responsible for crime in
Geraldton. The matter was to be viewed in the context of a town with a
significant
Aboriginal population and a background of racial tensions, so that
the signs by their very nature were likely to heighten racial
antipathies.
Mr Vincent also submitted that the act of publishing the signs was done
“because of the race of the person or group of people”
targeted. To support the claim that the signs were directed at Aboriginal
people, the complainant relied on the fact that
the respondent herself had in
evidence said “I was stating a fact ... Aborigines had trashed my shop
...” and otherwise
“Aborigines did it” and “I referred
to Aborigines because that’s how I refer to their race - as a
The complainant also contended that the sign including the word
“destructive Aborigines” (Exhibit C2(1)) was selective
indicated that only Aboriginal persons had damaged the shop, when it was the
case that white male adults had also been
instrumental in provoking the
disturbance which led to the rock throwing.
Addressing the reasons given by the respondent for writing the signs, Mr
Vincent also submitted that although the respondent had stated
displaying of the signs was “a cry for help” and was directed to
achieving some outcome that would address a
long standing problem of anti-social
behaviour in the vicinity, the motive or intention of the respondent was
irrelevant (
Australian Iron and Steel v Banovic
[1989] HCA 56
(1989) EOC 92-271
at 77,732; and
Waters v Public Transport Corporation
[1991] HCA 49
at 78,674).
Regarding the remedies available under s.25Z(1) of the Act, the complainant
a declaration
that the respondent’s conduct was unlawful;
the performance
of an act of redress; and
damages for
injuries to the feelings, and humiliation, of the complainant.
was submitted that an award for injured feelings should not be so low so as to
diminish respect for the public policy in suppressing
racial vilification that
underlay the Act (
Horn v Press Clough Joint Venture
7.2 Submissions for the respondent
Mr Redman, for the respondent, submitted that it was necessary firstly to
determine just what parts of the signs displayed for public
viewing were written
by the respondent. While it was accepted that the sign referring to
“destructive Aborigines” (Exhibit
C2(1)) had been written by the
respondent, only the parts in large black writing on other signs could be
attributed to her. In particular,
some of the most offensive additions in hand
writing, particularly those in texta, had been done by other people.
So far as what was written on the sign relating to the Diner being closed due
to “destructive Aborigines” Mr Redman submitted
that this was a true
and accurate statement of fact. It only referred to those members of the
Aboriginal community who were responsible
for the destruction. It could not be
read in a way that was likely to offend other or all Aboriginal persons in
Geraldton. The
complainant therefore should not have taken the sign to have
been referring to persons such as himself or his children. Similarly,
objectively, the parts of the other signs attributable to the respondent were
genuine statements of fact or opinion relating
to the situation of crime. That
situation was caused by a discrete segment of Aboriginal youths in Geraldton,
particularly those
congregating around “Terror Corner”. Thus the
claim that the parents should be responsible should be read in relation
parents taking responsibility for crimes committed by their children.
Mr Redman accepted that in determining whether the signs were likely to
humiliate and insult Aboriginal persons the matter was one
which must be viewed
objectively.
The respondent further submitted that if the Commission held that some parts
of the signs were likely to offend Aboriginal people
it was not the case that
those statements had been made
on the basis of the race
of those who were
offended. The message conveyed by the sign was directed at the group as the
ones who had caused the destruction,
not because of their being Aboriginal.
Again it was relevant to appreciate that the discriminating factor in the
content of the
signs was the selection of a particular group of youths who were
causing crime. They happened to be Aboriginal but the statements
were not aimed at or calculated to create offence to other persons such as Mr
Warner because of a particular attribute
of persons like him, namely, the fact
that persons such as Mr Warner were Aboriginal.
Further, if the Commission were to find that the conduct of the respondent
was capable of falling within
of the Act as otherwise unlawful conduct,
the Commission nevertheless should dismiss the complaint by reason of
(exemptions) available to the respondent under
In the first place, the statements made in the signs were made with a genuine
purpose in the public interest
(s.18D(b)).
They had been made with a view to
securing some future beneficial outcome to the community. The signs were
displayed out of a sense
of frustration on the part of the respondent because
nothing permanently effective had been done about the anti-social conduct of
youth, predominantly Aboriginal, in the vicinity of Koochies Diner. Further, it
was contended, the statements were published as a
“fair and accurate
report of a matter of public interest”
(s.18D(c)(i))
; alternatively they
were fair comment made “reasonably and in good faith” about a matter
of public interest and expressed
a genuine belief held by the respondent (
s.18D(c)(ii)).
In determining whether they constituted a fair and accurate report in the
public interest, it was again relevant to note that the
statements were directed
at a particular group of young Aboriginal persons who had engaged in the
destruction of Koochies Diner on
the night in question. It was in the public
interest that the matter should be further addressed and something done by way
and community response. The respondent had targeted the youths
responsible for the action without reference to any other elements
Aboriginal community in Geraldton.
In response to the contention of the complainant that the statements were not
fair and accurate because they were selective in so
far as they omitted any
reference to other persons sharing the responsibility, particularly the white
male adults who had provoked
the incident, Mr Redman submitted that the
respondent was looking at it from her point of view. The “trashing”
Diner was due to the rocks being thrown by the Aboriginal youths at the
time. The respondent had not seen what had led up to that
event. To that
extent, her statements were true and accurate. With regard to the actions of the
white adults who had been involved
in the disturbance, Mr Redman submitted that
the evidence of Mr Kucera and Mr Johnson suggested that rocks were being thrown
Diner independently of the fact that the white assailants, and Mr Higgins
in particular, had run into the store. The evidence should
be taken to be that
the Aboriginal youths concerned were destroying the Diner irrespective of the
conduct of the white males.
As to whether her actions were “reasonable” the respondent
accepted that this was something to be judged objectively in
circumstances of the case. In determining whether the respondent had acted in
“good faith” it was necessary to
appreciate what had been operating
in the mind of the respondent at the time she wrote and published the signs. In
that regard her
primary concern was to raise a “cry for help” with a
view to some positive outcome.
Mr Redman also submitted that the Commission should take into account the
actions of the respondent subsequent to publishing the signs.
Thus it was
relevant that the respondent had taken action, along with other persons
including members of the Geraldton Aboriginal
community, to paint over the
signs. Most of the offensive elements had been defaced by the Tuesday following
the incident and finally
removed on the Wednesday night, along with the
assistance of Mr Taylor.
8.1 Credibility
of the witnesses
In my opinion, the evidence given by the various witnesses was credible
though there were some variance between accounts of matters
such as the size of
the crowd of Aboriginal youths and the part that was played by the white adults
who were involved in the disturbance.
There is no doubt that the perception of
individual incidents was subjectively filtered in the accounts of the various
Particular persons saw things from a narrow perspective, and one
very much affected by heightened emotions. It is clear that, for
example, both
Mr Johnson and Mr Kucera, who were embroiled in the disturbance outside the
Diner, saw the matter as one where Mr Kucera
and the Diner were the essential
targets of the rock throwing. Accordingly, in my view, they tended to minimise
the role played
by white assailants in the matter. Mrs Kucera for her part was
deeply affected by the events. In fact she did not see the antecedent
that led up to “Animal” bursting into the Diner and the rain of
rocks that accompanied that event. Mrs Cowley
was also caught up in the
disturbance and her primary concern was to try to get young Aboriginal persons
onto the Streetworkers bus.
The objectivity of each of these witnesses was, to
a degree, affected by being caught up in the events. Nevertheless, I accept that
they sought to give their evidence truthfully as they saw the events.
One of the few witnesses who gave, in my opinion, a totally dispassionate
account was Mr Mervyn Brown. I found his evidence of assistance
in appreciating
the state of both the Diner after the fracas and the location of the signs the
following morning. But he of course
had not seen what transpired the previous
The findings that follow, therefore, have not sought to exhaust each factual
possibility, such as the size of the group that engaged
in the stone throwing.
Rather, they address the essential core of fact that is sufficient for me to
dispose of the matter, having
regard to the relevant provision of the Act.
8.2 Findings based on the evidence
The events on the night of 23 August 1996 and what transpired over the next
few days must be seen against their historic background.
I am satisfied that
for a period of at least 2 years preceding the incident on that night the
respondent had carried on business
at Koochies 24-Hour Diner (as it then was).
She and her husband had been successfully building up that business. They did
in the context of a growing problem arising from the fact that
unoccupied Aboriginal youths were congregating in the vicinity of
the Diner and
particularly at the location opposite it, which colloquially became known as
“Terror Corner”. The Kuceras
along with other members of the West
End Traders Association had been making various attempts for some time to have
the problem remedied
or contained. This had resulted in intermittent relief
when extra police patrols led to some improvement. Nevertheless, for various
reasons, the problems of anti-social behaviour around that location continued,
particularly on Friday and Saturday nights. Attempts
to involve the Geraldton
Town Council and Members of Parliament also appear to have been somewhat
ineffective.
I find that on the night of 23 August 1996 a group of Aboriginal youths,
initially around about 20 or perhaps more, congregated on
the corner opposite
the Diner in the early part of that evening. I am satisfied that from a
relatively early stage, several white
adult males started provoking trouble
among the congregated youths by actions such as seizing a young Aboriginal
woman. This culminated
later in the evening when, approximately about 10
minutes after 11pm, open hostility and fighting broke out after one of the white
adults started a fight with one or more Aboriginal youths. This quickly turned
into a serious disturbance in which a portion of
the Aboriginal youth present
started throwing stones and rocks. Accounts varied as to the length of the rock
throwing part of the
disturbance. Though it may have seemed longer to some, the
most likely account suggests it lasted about 7 or 8 minutes. Certainly
the stones were thrown at the white adults and three of them, including one Tony
Higgins (otherwise known as “Animal”)
ran into Koochies Diner. At
that stage those throwing stones outside directed the stones at the Diner. At
that juncture Mr Kucera
went outside and attempted to get those throwing stones
to stop. He himself was hit by one rock. He was also joined by Mr Johnson
pursued that particular rock thrower onto the Streetworkers bus.
Inside the Diner Mrs Kucera attempted to evict “Animal” and one
of his companions by pushing them outside the door of
the Diner. The rock
throwing continued until a police patrol car came onto the scene. Several
arrests were made, including a white
male and several Aboriginal juveniles, one
of whom was alleged to have thrown the rock at Mr Kucera.
As a result of the stone throwing the Diner was severely damaged. I find that
the damage was essentially caused by the youths who
threw the stones but also
resulted form the actions of a small group of anti-social white adults who had
set out to provoke a fight
with the youths.
Some criticism was directed by witnesses during the proceedings at what was
suggested to be tardiness on the part of the police response.
It is clear that
Mrs Kucera herself along with Clarissa and Mr Johnson and others made a series
of calls around about 11.15pm, some
of which, if not all, were recorded in the
police log. As the police were not represented in the proceedings I am not
prepared to
make any adverse findings regarding their response. In any event,
it is clear to me that the police resources were severely stretched
at the time
because of the fact that police patrols had been already dispatched to deal with
other serious disturbances, including
one at the Geraldton Racecourse.
It is undeniable that the result of the stone throwing was that the Diner was
very seriously damaged. This was not just to the plate
glass windows on the
exterior but also to the internal fittings. Although the Kuceras, and Mrs
Kucera in particular, made attempts
some weeks later to resurrect the business
and carry it on, it is quite clear that the financial results were also
devastating so
that about a year later Mrs Kucera was forced to relinquish the
After the disturbance was quelled Mr and Mrs Kucera made some efforts, along
with other persons, including Mr Banaim, who came to
broken glass and other debris. I accept the evidence of Mrs Kucera and those
also present including her husband
that she was extremely distressed, distraught
and emotionally shattered. I also find that her anger at what had happened was
directed solely at the situation that she and her husband found themselves
in and the effect of the damage on their business, but
also arose from
desperation and frustration associated with their previous attempts to seek
constructive measures to prevent the
anti-social conduct in their part of town.
Relevantly, I find that she was experiencing a mixture of emotions and feelings,
of which were directed at the futility of efforts to resolve the crime
problems that had affected the business of the Diner and now
the premises of the
Diner itself, so that she perceived herself and her husband to be unfair
victims. On the other hand her own
words to the Commission made it clear that
she was extremely angry at the Aboriginal youths who had damaged the premises.
that in part her motive in writing the signs (assuming it to be
relevant to the issue of possible exemptions) arose from a determination
action that would publicise what had occurred and that, in turn, hopefully might
lead to some more positive resolution of
the endemic problems of Aboriginal
youths in the west end part of town.
It was in that mixed frame of mind, then, that after initially clearing up
the premises during the early hours of the morning, that
the respondent returned
Kucera was too distressed
to do so. After her husband and some friends had
boarded up the broken windows on the afternoon of 24 August 1996, the respondent
gathered materials together and started painting in bold black letters the
various phrases and sentences that can be attributed to
her. These were firstly
on the boards that had been erected to cover the damaged windows. But I find
that she also painted a message
on a medium sized wooden sign which she then
placed outside the Diner on the footpath, though I am not able to determine what
expressed in that sign. The particular sign which caused most offence, in
my view, was that pictured in Exhibit C2(1). It stated:
“Not open due to
destructive Aborigines”. It was located inside the door of the Diner but
nevertheless visible to persons
like Mr Warner who came to view the premises.
Relevantly to
of the Act, the contents of the signs were visible to
members of the public.
As mentioned above Mr Redman, for the respondent, raised the issue of just
how much of the contents of the signs the respondent was
responsible for. I
accept his submission that she did not write the additions made with texta and
felt pens. These contained some
of the most scurrilous expressions undoubtedly
done by their authors in a way calculated to inflame racist feelings. But to
that she did not actually write them herself does not make them
irrelevant. It is clear to me that once such additions were being
should have realised what was happening and taken steps to prevent any further
additions. It is also the case that she
should have realised just how seriously
the facility she was providing, in the form of the boards and signs, was
inciting emotions
and feelings of a negative kind. These were directed to
Aboriginal persons generally. Tolerating, or at least doing nothing to
such additions, runs contrary to her own suggestion that she was merely making
statements directed to a very small portion
of the Aboriginal community in the
town. While she was responsible for only a core of the messages displayed, that
core was quickly
subsumed into a more virulent suite of messages, some of which
were extremely offensive, and any chance of the parts that Mrs Kucera
being read in isolation from the additions soon disappeared. It therefore
became impossible for someone in the complainant’s
situation to
distinguish between the various components when reading the signs. Globally they
expressed opinions manifestly hostile
to Aboriginal persons in the town.
There is also an issue of the relative visibility of internal signs and the
extent to which they would have been seen by passers-by.
Without attempting to
be definitive, as to which particular signs were visible from what perspective,
I am satisfied overall that
even if the context of some signs was not
immediately apparent to an outsider, all the relevant contents were nevertheless
of being seen, and were in fact seen, by external observers. In other
words there is a significant core of content which is attributable
respondent’s action in painting the signs both on the boards that had been
erected and on the sign placed outside the
premises. It cannot be claimed, in
my view, nor was it, as I understand the respondent’s case, that they were
only intended
for private viewing.
I am satisfied that at least the following signs were painted by the
respondent:
WHO DID THIS?”
(outside the shop)
YOUARE FED UP WITH CRIME IN GERALDTON SIGN HERE”
OPEN DuE TO DesTRUCTIVe ABORigiNeS”
THE PARENTS PAY”
I am not satisfied, however, that the
signs showing “ F... the parents take it out of their (sic) excess
abstudy” and
“NO SORRY IT WAS JUVENIAL ABORIGINIES” can be
attributed to the respondent.
Despite the misspellings involved in the latter sign and in the
respondent’s letter of 21 June 1997, the latter misspelling
been due to the fact that she was simply writing the word that way because she
was responding to a question from the Commissioner
that she did not write it.
Read cumulatively, the four signs I have designated were reasonably capable
of conveying a message along the following lines:
“There is a crime problem in Geraldton caused by Aborigines. Some of
them destroyed this shop. Their parents should pay. We
are fed up with
While I hold the view that it is unrealistic to be overly analytical and
break each phrase down into its elements, I see the following
considerations as
supporting the view I take about the expressions used in the signs. First there
is the unqualified reference to
“Crime in Geraldton”. This is linked
to “destructive Aborigines”. Secondly the use of the well worn,
emotive expression, “fed up”, is more likely to arouse
hostile feelings than promote rational discussion. This is exacerbated
invitation to “sign here”. As to which parents should pay, the
failure to indicate which youths had done the damage
left it open to inference
that any Aboriginal parent in Geraldton who had kids of the relevant age
(including parents like the complainant)
had been irresponsible and should
therefore pay. In all this the lack of detail prevents passers-by forming any
comprehensive understanding
of what was being said.
I find, further, that upon viewing them, Mr Warner was deeply insulted, upset
and humiliated when he read their content. This was
after he had been alerted to
their presence. This was not just immediate or short term. It affected the way
he viewed his role in
the town as an Aboriginal person and had an adverse effect
on his health. Undoubtedly, he was also affected because he was feeling
responsibility as a senior member of the Aboriginal community in Geraldton. It
is evident that other people in the Aboriginal community
felt likewise. This is
confirmed by calls directed to the respondent herself and the visits made to her
by Mr Taylor, who, as an
officer of ATSIC, was receiving complaints.
Although the respondent has sought to minimise the effect of the signs and in
particular to suggest that persons such as Mr Warner
had no cause for offence
because the signs were explicitly targeted at only the Aboriginal youths who had
engaged in rock throwing,
that claim does not stand up as realistic in the
circumstances. Experience suggests that witnesses on looking at events in
are often inclined to reconstruct their memories in the most
favourable light and I am satisfied that while the respondent was in
part aiming
her message at a small group of Aboriginal stone throwers, I think there is an
element of rationalisation in her belief
that that was the full and exclusive
import of her intended message.
Looking at the matter objectively, as must be done when considering the
requirements of
of the Act, the feelings unleashed as a result of the
displaying of the signs was not one in which fine analytic distinctions could
made such that, selectively, the signs were only to be read in a qualified way
as specifically directed to a small number of Aboriginal
persons in Geraldton.
The fact that representations soon were being made to the respondent by a number
of persons indicate that
a much wider message was being conveyed by the signs.
This should have been readily apparent to the respondent. This is reinforced
the fact that others like Mrs Adams were quick to contact the respondent with
the view to taking some positive measures to counter
the very adverse effect
that the signs were having among the Geraldton community. In particular I
accept the evidence of Mr Warner
and Mr Taylor that there was a real concern on
their part, which was expressed to the respondent, that the messages on the
were capable of exciting an explosive response in the town. It is
significant that at the meeting called on the Monday morning, attended
Warner and Mr Taylor and others, attempts were made to persuade the respondent
to remove the signs. Some progress appears
to have been made in that direction
but it all came to nothing when another Aboriginal person entered the meeting
and interrupted
it by berating the respondent.
All this satisfies me that for the purposes of
of the Act, the
displaying of the signs was reasonably likely in all the circumstances to
offend, insult and humiliate Aboriginal
persons in Geraldton like Mr Warner.
Again, in my view, it is significant that the respondent’s first
response when pressed by Mr Taylor to remove the signs was
to refuse to do so.
She was quite stubborn in that regard and though she later relented and on the
Tuesday switched to a much more
positive frame of mind, I find that she
knowingly permitted the signs to remain throughout the Monday and the first part
of Tuesday.
I accept that once she had changed her mind she instigated positive
steps towards a reconciliation by enlisting the assistance of
Mrs Adams and
others. In the result, with police and other members of the town community
present, and also with media coverage,
the first efforts were made on the
Tuesday evening to obliterate the offensive signs. Although Mr Taylor himself
did not participate
on that occasion, he joined with the respondent and others
in removing the last vestiges on the following evening.
Certainly it is the case, I am satisfied, that until those positive steps
were taken the respondent not only insisted initially that
the signs should not
be removed but in fact tolerated a situation where others started to write
highly offensive and derogatory comments
aimed at the Aboriginal community
generally, on the signs.
Tracing the course of what was passing through her mind over a period of
signs were ultimately
removed, I accept that in part her actions were directed, as she put it, to
raising a “cry for help”.
This was a product of a long and
frustrating period leading up to the incident in which, as she saw it, no one in
authority had been
taking the situation sufficiently seriously. (I say this
subject to the qualification that the relevant authorities have not had
opportunity to present any evidence to balance the perception of the Kuceras and
Mr Johnson.) Subjectively she was expressing
her extreme disappointment at what
she saw as failures on the part of authorities like the police and the Geraldton
Town Council
to heed the warnings that she, her husband, and other traders in
the area, had been voicing over a period of time.
But the matter cannot be judged solely in those subjective terms. In
particular, whatever the respondent’s initial motives
were, one has to
view the matter over the ensuing period of three days. As indicated above, once
she was being approached by people
like Mr Warner and Mr Taylor on the Monday,
it should have been evident to any reasonable person that, irrespective of her
intentions to publicise the need to take remedial action, the
continuance in displaying the signs was taking on a very different
Even in the first instance it is probable, in my view, that she was not acting
solely in an altruistic way but also was
doing so out of anger arising from her
pent-up feelings of blame and the unfairness of the situation. The blame was
certainly directed
at those who had specifically caused the damage. But
overall, as indicated above, one cannot just accept that, on a very selective
reading of particular signs, she was intending her message to be so confined.
This is particularly so once the signs started inciting
indignant and concerned
responses from people like Mr Warner in the days that immediately followed.
It is also relevant for the Commission to take into account that whilst she
did not herself make any additions to the signs, passively
she was permitting
them to be displayed in circumstances where she would have had time to reflect
on the damage they were doing in
the community. This would include a
realisation that their impact was not being understood as solely relating to a
narrow group
of the Aboriginal community about whom she was making certain
factual criticisms. It would have been evident very quickly to any
person that the signs were likely to create offence to a wider range of people
in the Aboriginal community of Geraldton
including those like Mr Warner who bore
no responsibility for what had happened to the Diner.
Similarly, I do not accept, for the purposes of
s.18C(1)(b)
of the Act, the
respondent’s submission that the signs were not directed at members of the
Aboriginal community because of,
or on the ground of their race, but rather was
simply directed to certain juvenile persons who were committing a specific
and who incidentally, happened to be Aboriginal. Once additions were
made to them, the signs were quite explicitly directed to young
persons and also to their parents (for example, “make the parents
pay”). It is not a plausible explanation
to say that messages of that
kind simply expressed a reasonable proposition that the parents of those
Aboriginal juveniles responsible
for the damage should have to pay for it. The
implications, particularly in the context of a town widely affected by divisions
the black and white community, must be taken to have been aimed at
Aboriginal members of the community on a wider scale. Having
regard to what the
respondent wrote herself on the signs including the reference to Aboriginal
persons (and her evidence in regard
to that aspect) the signs were reasonably
likely to provoke feelings of insult and humiliation against members of the
community by reason of the fact that they were Aboriginal.
I therefore find that she wrote the signs because the people likely to be
affected by them were of the Aboriginal race.
OF LEGAL ISSUES
I now turn to the legal submissions of the
parties. As indicated above I am satisfied that the signs were exhibited in
therefore are not exempt from the application of
because their exhibition was a private act.
It then falls to me to determine whether the act of the respondent in
exhibiting the signs to the public was “likely, in all
circumstances” to offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate another person
or a group of people. That is the first requirement
to establish unlawful
conduct under
s.18C(1)(a)
of the Act. In the light of my findings above I am
satisfied that this requirement has been established on the evidence. In that
regard the complainant has discharged the onus that he carries to prove the
point. Given the proportion of Aboriginal people in
the town, the group of
people likely to be affected by the publication of the signs, for the reasons I
have given above, comprised
a sizable portion of the Aboriginal community in
Geraldton. I do not accept that each sign can be viewed without reference to
collective impact. Nor do I accept that even within a particular sign such
as the critical one referring to destructive Aborigines,
the likely effect was
that persons reading that sign with an appreciation of the prevailing situation
in Geraldton regarding relations
between the Aboriginal community and the
non-Aboriginal community would have taken it to refer only to those Aboriginal
had thrown the stones. It was capable of a wider reference and would
have been likely to engender hostile feelings towards Aborigines
A reasonable person viewing the signs would have foreseen the possibility
that offence, insult and humiliation would have been caused
to members of the
Aboriginal community other than those directly responsible for the stone
throwing. It is clearly the case that
as a member of the community and
particularly one to whom the community looked for leadership, the complainant
was personally sickened
and disgusted by what he saw because of approaches made
to him by other members of the community. He also was caused distress by
of what he saw as a fairly bleak prospect for Aboriginal people in the town. He
was conscious of the divisive and inflammatory
effects that the signs could
engender and sought to take that up with the respondent.
The situation prevailing in Geraldton during the Monday following the
incident, while the signs were still having their effect, is
the very kind of
situation to which
of the Act is directed. Its policy is to prevent
situations arising where people of a particular racial group have cause to feel
deep grievance.
In that regard, it is relevant to note that the common law in respect to
matters such as defamation has long drawn distinctions between
statements of
limited dissemination and short duration, and statements made in a form likely
to have a wider and longer duration.
The signs in question fall in the latter
Whether it is true that, as I have in fact found, the respondent did reverse
her stance on Tuesday evening and Wednesday, in my view
great damage was done on
the first day and a half on which the signs were exhibited. It was in fact more
than two days before the
signs were fully expunged.
The complainant also has to establish that the act was done because of the
race of the other person or some or all of the people in
As I have indicated above, the references to Aboriginal characteristics in
the signs makes it clear to me that they were directed
at Aboriginal people as a
group or at least a discrete group within the wider context of Aboriginal people
in Geraldton. I reject
the rationalisation of the respondent that the
cumulative message that she sought to convey through the signs was directed only
persons because they were engaged in stone throwing or petty criminal
offending and that it was only coincidental that they happened
to be, as she saw
fit to mention, Aboriginal juveniles. I am therefore satisfied that the act of
publication of the signs was done
because of the race of people that comprised
the group likely to be offended by the signs.
The conditions that need to be established under
of the Act are in
my view satisfied. I have come to that conclusion after much careful
deliberation in accordance with the approach
set forth in the case of
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
I turn to consider whether, as submitted by Mr Redman, the actions of the
respondent, nevertheless, were done reasonably and in good
faith and, relevantly
to paragraph (b) of
of the Act, were made in the course of a statement or
discussion for a genuine purpose in the public interest.
Firstly, addressing the question of reasonableness, if the respondent had
published a clear account of what had transpired and what
she thought could have
been done by way of remedying the endemic problems of anti-social behaviour by
Aboriginal juveniles, one could
readily say that her actions were reasonable.
But the publication of short staccato expressions of the kind contained in the
contradicts that conclusion. Certainly it should have become evident to
her from the reaction that the signs engendered on the Monday
that if she was
pursuing an objective of having the whole issue of juvenile crime in Geraldton
discussed in a rational way, her undertaking
was going badly awry. It was
having completely the wrong effect in the community and particularly it was
affecting responsible Aboriginal
members of that community. Nevertheless she
persisted in exhibiting the signs. In those circumstances her actions could not
regarded as reasonable
I come to that conclusion notwithstanding that I am of the view that one of
the objectives of her actions was to raise her “cry
for help”. That
is, one objective, among others, was to cause people to address the very serious
situation that had arisen
over a period of time. But equally, she took the
action that she did and persisted with it for some time, in order to alleviate
her anger and distress. Whilst that may explain, if not excuse, her initial
painting of the signs, it does not provide a reasonable
justification for her
not taking the signs down as soon as it became evident that they were not
bringing about the kind of rational
discussion with which paragraph (b) of
is concerned.
Having decided her actions were not reasonable it is strictly not necessary
for me to address the issue, in the conjunctive for the
purposes of
whether the respondent acted in “good faith”. Nor need I consider
the aspects of the respondent’s submissions
concerning paragraphs (b) and
Nevertheless, having regard to Mr Redman’s careful
submissions, I propose to make some response to them.
Turning to sub-paragraph (c)(i) of
, I am not satisfied that the
publishing of the signs were a fair and accurate report of an event or matter of
public interest. I
accept that the matters indirectly alluded to in the signs
were matters of public interest. But what was conveyed thereby was far
brief to constitute anything in the nature of a “report”. As much
as anything the signs bore no specific reference
to the rock throwing and the
background of anti-social problems that had been part of the history of the
site. A fair comment would
have needed to be more detailed, for a start. The
reference to “destructive Aborigines” is hardly a fair and accurate
indicator to whoever might be reading the material as to what had in fact
transpired when the Diner was damaged in the stone throwing.
While the respondent has sought to portray the statement relating to
“destructive Aborigines” as a true and accurate statement,
rather misses the point, in my opinion. While in a strict sense the statement
Aborigines was true as far as
it went, by failing to provide more specific details the statement was capable
of being read in a wider
sense and therefore likely to create impressions which
were likely to be quite mistaken, in terms of the identity of the particular
persons who had been “destructive”. In saying that, I do not need
to go so far as to consider Mr Vincent’s submission
that the statement was
not fair and accurate because it omitted any reference to the contributions made
by white persons to the fracas
that led to the stone throwing. From the point
of view of the respondent herself, I accept that she did not have any personal
Higgins in particular run into the Diner it does seem odd to
me that she did not
make any association between that event and the throwing of the stones. It is
sufficient, however, for me to
hold that the signs collectively and individually
did not constitute a fair and accurate report of the incident.
I then turn to paragraph (c)(ii) of
To establish the exemption under
this head the statements of the respondent must represent “a fair comment
on any event or
matter of public interest if the comment is an expression of a
genuine belief held by the person making the comment”.
I am prepared to accept that comments such as “Not open due to
destructive Aborigines” was the expression of a genuine
belief held by the
respondent. But that does not address the cumulative effect that emerged from
people viewing the collection of
signs overall. They amounted to a much greater
claim that was conveyed by the signs. Likewise, the comment relating to
the parents pay” which appeared in association with the other
signs might also be regarded as an expression of the respondent’s
belief. However, having regard to all the circumstances and the cumulative
effect of the signs, I do not think that what
was conveyed by the content of the
signs can be characterised as a fair comment on a matter of public interest. To
have been that,
more rational discussion and less emotive terms would have been
needed and, as indicated above, more details about what had happened
incident itself and the history that led up to it. Short, staccato, general
statements of the kind that were made can hardly
be said to be fair comment,
given the circumstances.
I therefore reject the respondent’s contentions relating to
In the result I am satisfied that the conduct of the respondent was unlawful
within the terms of
of the Act. I have essentially confined that
conclusion to the material that she herself wrote. I have not addressed a wider
that would have held her responsible for what other persons had added to
found that the conduct of the respondent was in fact unlawful in accordance with
the terms of
of the Act I accept the submission of the complainant that
the Commission should make a declaration to that effect.
It is true that the circumstances were highly unusual and extremely
complicated both as to what happened on the night of the stone
throwing and the
actions of the respondent in the following days, as well as what had happened
over a long period of time that had
preceded the events of 23 August 1996. The
respondent, in my opinion, is not a mean spirited woman. What she did in
writing the
sings was not out of the kind of malice one normally associates with
a breach of the racial vilification provisions of the Act. It
instinctive emotional reaction of a person in great distress and frustration who
was caught up in a most unfortunate situation
not of her making. The end result
was that the business that she and her husband had striven to build up,
successfully, over a period
of time was effectively destroyed.
But while that might explain her actions it does not excuse them. Even
allowing for all those factors, as I read the policy of
of the Act,
actions of the kind engaged in by the respondent must be unequivocally declared
to be contrary to law. The Act is concerned
particularly with the effects of
such conduct, and not the motivations of the person who did it. Section 18C is
a provision designed
to prevent and stamp out the very kind of racial discord
that in fact followed from the publication of the signs. While Mrs Kucera
herself as the victim of circumstances that had been building up over a period
of time, and certainly made commendable efforts
from Tuesday onwards to
alleviate the pain that she had caused to various members of the Geraldton
Aboriginal community, her actions
for a considerable period of time up until she
removed the signs caused deep hurt to people like the complainant.
In my opinion Mr Warner acted with commendable responsibility in making his
complaint. Undoubtedly Mrs Kucera had a great deal of
hurt on her side but
relationships between Aborigines and other members of the community in Geraldton
were not helped by what she
did. In saying that I emphasise that it was the
form in which she sought to express her feelings and beliefs that was totally
inappropriate.
Though there was a kernel of truth in some of the things that
were portrayed in the signs, the way she went about the matter was
calculated to
aggravate racial tensions in the town, not cure them.
The issue then is whether the Commission should direct further remedies to be
undertaken. In that regard, having regard to the very
deep hurt which was
occasioned to the complainant, while I accept that the respondent did not intend
to wound him personally, it
is appropriate in the circumstances that she
acknowledge and apologise to him in written form for what hurt and humiliation
cause him. I leave the exact form of how that should be expressed to
the respondent. I have had occasion to view her throughout
the proceedings and
am of the opinion that she is a responsible person who genuinely was concerned
to achieve better relations between
Aborigines and other town people.
The publication of this decision itself bears testimony to the unfortunate
events that occurred on the night of 23 August 1996. I
am aware of the extreme
sensitivity that the incident has caused in the community at large and have
delayed my decision so that the
matter can be looked at rationally rather than
in the heat of what happened at the time and in the context of the hearing of
complaint. I appreciate that the proceedings revived for the participants
the very deep emotions felt on both sides.
Beyond that apology, however, I propose to make no further order. Mr Vincent
on behalf of the complainant submitted that an order
for compensation was
appropriate in the circumstances and that it should be considerable, having
regard to the very grave hurt experienced
by the complainant. Normally I would
accede to that request, particularly if the material published had been
maliciously or mischievously
put abroad, deliberately to stir up racial
passions. An award of compensation is appropriate both to assuage the hurt of
the individual
and to underline the gravity and unacceptable nature of the
(Hall v Sheiban Pty Ltd
[1989] FCA 72
(1989) EOC 92-250
at 77,395-6).
It is proper, however, in my view, to consider whether compensation should be
awarded in all the circumstances of this case, and not
just having regard to the
complainant’s feelings. The Commission, as I understand it, has a wide
discretion in the matter of
remedies. As foreshadowed when dealing with the
submissions of counsel, I had at the time of the hearing grave misgivings about
the utility of an award of compensation to the complainant. Having carefully
considered the matter since, though I accept that the
incident has had a serious
and probably enduring effect on the complainant, I do not consider in all the
circumstances that an award
of compensation would be appropriate.
In coming to that decision, I would emphasise that I do so because of the
very special circumstances that surround this case. The
omission of an award of
damages should not detract from the conclusion that I have otherwise reached
that the actions of the respondent
warrant the condemnation of the law, as laid
down in s.18C of the Act.
25Z of the Act sets out the kind of determination which the Commission is
empowered to make. I therefore make the following
declarations:
to s.25Z(1)(b)(i) of the Act, a declaration that the respondent engaged in
conduct rendered unlawful by s.18C(1) of the Act;
to s.25Z(1)(b)(ii) of the Act, a declaration that the respondent should
apologise to the complainant in writing for the hurt
and humiliation caused to
the complainant.
I certify that this and the preceding thirty-six (36) pages are
a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Commissioner Peter Johnston.
Legal Officer:
Date: 10 November 2000
RTF format (135 KB)
Signed PDF/A format