DECISION NO: 304/96
INDUSTRIAL LAW - TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT - employee borrowing money
from float for personal use
- whether SERIOUS MISCONDUCT in
circumstances.
North -v- Television Corporation Ltd
[1904] HCA 36
(1976) 11 ALR 5
Gooley -v- Westpac Banking Corporation
[1995] IRCA 658
(1995) 129 ALR 628
KATE ELIZABETH BELLHOUSE -v- ROADS AND TRAFFIC AUTHORITY
No. NI 4960 of 1995
COURT: WALKER JR
PLACE: SYDNEY
DATE: 10TH JULY
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT
OF AUSTRALIA
SYDNEY REGISTRY
No. NI 4960 of 1995
KATE ELIZABETH BELLHOUSE
ROADS AND TRAFFIC AUTHORITY
BEFORE: WALKER JR
PLACE: SYDNEY
DATE: 10th JULY 1996
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Kate Bellhouse
commenced employment with the Roads and Traffic
Authority in February 1993, as a part time Customer Service Operator
at the Moree
Branch. In June 1994, she was promoted to the
position of driving tester and is qualified to test applicants for
licences for cars,
motorcycles, 3A rigid trucks, small buses and
semi-articulated vehicles.
As a driving tester she worked in Moree on Mondays and
rest of the week attended other outlying centres at Boggabilla,
Boomi and Mungindi. When the applicant attended the itinerant
she carried with her a float of $150.00 in a tin for the purpose
of giving change to customers. At the end of each day she
balance the takings at the R.T.A office in the town, take the cash
to the post office and convert it into a money order and
to Moree with the money order and cash tin with the $150.00 float
and lock it all in the safe. The applicant's evidence was
would usually arrive back to Moree at about 4.30 pm to 4.45 pm
although she would often be later, and usually after the
left for the day.
$20.00 FOR PETROL.
On Wednesday, 13 September 1995, the applicant was required to
attend Boomi as her
part of her itinerant run. She left her
residence 15 kilometres out of Moree and drove into work in her
own vehicle. She then parked
her vehicle in Moree and drove the
R.T.A. vehicle onto Boomi. She said in evidence that,
"That Wednesday morning I was coming into
town I realised that I
wouldn't have enough fuel to get me back home in the afternoon. I
was worried about getting into town, didn't
think I'd have enough
fuel to get back in the afternoon and thought, "I've got to get
some money during the day before I have to
turn around and go
The reason the applicant did not have any of her own money was
because she had made a
loan to a friend the previous week. Boomi,
is a very small town and according to the applicant, does not have
a bank so she was unable
to access her account when she arrived
there. Although the applicant had been previously told she could
borrow money from Marie Conroy
or Clint Carter if she found herself
short, these people were attending a meeting in Tamworth and that,
she said, was the reason
she did not telephone them. When asked in
cross examination why she did not telephone her friend, Kate Munro
back at the Moree office,
(a person that had previously made up
the difference in the float when the applicant had borrowed money
on prior occasions), the
applicant agreed with counsel that she just
did not think to ring her. It was the applicant's evidence that
she had planned to see
her friend Nicole Reid at the Business
Enterprise Centre when she returned to Moree that afternoon and
borrow the petrol money from
The applicant arrived back in Moree on the afternoon of the 13
September 1995 at about 4.50 pm and deposited the Boomi briefcase
containing the takings and the $150.00 float in the R.T.A. safe.
She then visited her friend, Nicole, at the Business Enterprise
Centre to attempt to borrow money for petrol and was unsuccessful.
She then returned to the R.T.A. office opened up the safe and
$20.00 out of the float. She obtained petrol at the service station
across the road from the R.T.A office and drove home.
she arrived home the applicant received the money that her
friend had borrowed from her and then drove back into Moree to go
The applicant said she intended to replace the money she
had borrowed from the float when she came back into town but
changed her
mind because she would have to turn the alarms off and
on again and she thought it better to put it back in the morning.
Marie Conroy,
the office manager, arrived back at the Moree office
13 September 1995, at about 6.30 pm after attending a meeting in
She decided to carry out a spot check of the mail and
the floats and discovered that there was $20.00 missing from the
float. Ms Conroy then telephoned the area manager, Mr
Clint Carter and informed him of the situation. The next day, 14
1995, Ms Conroy called the applicant into her office when
she arrived at work and asked her why the float was deficient. The
admitted that she had borrowed the money to buy petrol to
get home the night before. Following this a number of events
unfolded over
the next three months and the applicant's employment
was subsequently terminated on the 11 December 1995, for
misappropriating Roads
and Traffic Authority funds.
A HISTORY OF BORROWING THE FLOAT MONEY.
Ms Kate Munro, a workmate and a friend of the applicant gave
evidence that in early 1995 she had found the float to be short
on two occasions. Her evidence was that,
"In early 1995, whilst also
performing itinerant Customer Service
Officer duties I found the float of money to be short. I can
remember two occasions in question
and the amounts were $25.00 and
an amount between $4.00 and $7.00. I questioned Kate Bellhouse about
these shortages. To the best
of my memory, she replied "I forgot
to take the money out of my account". "I needed the money to buy
lunch and magazines and I borrowed
the money and I forgot to
replace it". To the best of my memory, I said to Kate Bellhouse,
"You can't do that" and "It's a sackable
The applicant says she does not recall Ms Munro telling her that
it was a sackable offence to borrow the float money and
the claim that she had ever borrowed an amount of $25.00. In
examination in chief she was not forthcoming with evidence
how many times she had borrowed from the float before. However in
cross examination she admitted that she knew that she was
allowed to borrow from the float. When asked how often she had
borrowed she admitted, "five times", and later when asked if it
could have been more than five times the applicant said it was
three times.
EVIDENCE OF MARIE CONROY THE OFFICE MANAGER
Marie Conroy
the R.T.A. Office Manager at Moree produced her office
diary as a contemporaneous record of the events leading up to the
applicant's
termination. On the 21 March there is the following
Kate Munro approached me this afternoon and said she wanted to
with me about something really important. Kate M said that
last week when she was speaking with Peter Bartimote, DTC, she
concern about the operation at the itinerant centres. Her
main concern was that on the odd occasion that she had relieved at
centres the float had been out, sometimes as much as $25.00.
Kate M had questioned Kate B about it and Kate B had said that
had forgotten to get money out of her account and needed to
buy lunch and magazines and had borrowed the money and forgotten to
it. Kate M had told Kate B that she couldn't do that and
that it was a sackable offence. Kate M said that she didn't tell
earlier because she thought Kate B had stopped doing it but
realised recently that the practice was still continuing.
Kate M told
Peter what was happening. Peter said to Kate M that
it was a very serious offence and would have to let Clint Carter
(ABM) know about
it. Peter asked her if I had known about it and
Kate M said she hadn't told me. Peter suggested to her that she
tell me. I rang Clint,
later this afternoon, and told him that I
believed he knew something about the Itinerant Centres & could he
fill me in on what was
happening. He said to me that he would be
in Moree tomorrow afternoon to check the itinerant float when Kate
B returned from Boomi.
He asked that I be present when he spoke
to Kate B. If he found the float to be out he would have no
option but to dismiss Kate B.
If the float was okay he would be
issuing Kate B with a very severe reprimand.
On the 22 March 1995 when the applicant returned
to the Moree
office, Ms Conroy checked the applicant's float and found that it
balanced. Ms Conroy then told the applicant that Mr
Clint Carter
wanted to speak with her and a conversation took place.
The applicant's version of this event was that it was merely
casual conversation where Mr Carter had said,
"Kate, you're not allowed to borrow, don't do it again sort of
thing", and I said,
"Okay, Clint".
The applicant said that she could not recall being told that that
if she did it again her employment might be terminated.
Ms Conroy's
diary note as to the meeting on that day is as follows,
Clint arrived here this afternoon and asked me to detain Kate
when she arrived from Boomi. When Kate B arrived I told her that
Clint wanted to have a few words with her. I then conducted a
check of the float and found that all monies were correct.
Clint spoke to Kate B and told her how important it was that all
be correct at all times. He emphasised that if at any time
monies were missing albeit that one returns the money afterwards the
in charge of the money would be held responsible and would
be disciplined. He said that the person would then face criminal
and be dismissed.
Ms Conroy's diary note of the events of the 14 September 1995 is
as follows,
I arrived at the office at 7.30
am and checked the Boomi briefcase
to see if the missing $20.00 was there. It was not. I rechecked
the float. There was only $130.00
when there should have been
$150.00. I sat the float tin on my desk waiting for Kate to
arrive at the office. When Kate arrived she
made a phone call and
as soon as she was off the phone came into my office and said:
"I know the float is out, by $20.00. I took
it to buy fuel for
my car as my handycard wasn't working and they won't take cheques."
I said to Kate that Clint and I had told her
that she was not
to use public monies. I asked her, "Why?, You make about $30,000 a
year." She said, "I can't get myself organised".
"I'm going to put
the money back now." I said to Kate that I had checked the float
yesterday afternoon and had a sleepless night
over it. I then
raised my voice and said "How stupid can you be". I calmed down
and told her that I had no option but to report the
Clint. I rang Clint's office. He was on another line and I was
told that he would ring me back. During our conversation
to me that it was the first time she had used the float since
Clint and I told her of the correct procedures.
THE DISCIPLINARY
Following the discovery of the borrowed $20.00 from the float, Ms
Conroy prepared a written report concerning the matter
as requested
by Mr Clint Carter the Area Business Manager. Mr Carter then
prepared a report on the matter and faxed it to the Manager
the northern region of the R.T.A. In his report Mr Carter attached
a copy of Ms Conroy's report setting out the circumstances
surrounding the incident and also said that,
"Prior to this the Registry Manager had received information from
another staff member
that on one occasion the change reserve was
short when she received it from Ms Bellhouse."
And further on he commented that,
view of the staffing situation at Moree and the need to use
Ms Bellhouse at the itinerant sites, she is continuing to fulfil
role, pending further action you may instigate."
At the conclusion of his report Mr Carter made the following
recommendations,
"I recommend the following:-
1. The matter be handled internally without police involvement,
2. The matter be referred to group audit,
3. Disciplinary action be commenced."
During this period, a check of the Moree office was conducted to
establish if there was any
other accounting problems. Mr Cossins,
the Manager of Driver Vehicle Services, reported to Mr Kevin
Connelly of the Fraud Prevention
and Investigation Section, that
there was nothing untoward coming to light other than a need to
tighten some controls.
November 1995, Mr J.H. Ralston, the Area Business Manager
sent a letter to the applicant requesting her to attend a
disciplinary
interview at Belmont on the 17 November 1995. The
letter is as follows;
"You are required to attend a Disciplinary Interview at
and Traffic Authority's Central Coast / Newcastle Area Business
office, situated at the corner Pacific Highway and George
Belmont on Friday 17 November 1995 at 9.00 am".
A Disciplinary Interview is required to discuss allegations of
unacceptable
work practices - misappropriation of Authority's funds.
You can make arrangements for an independent observer to be present
you at the interview.
The interview will commence at 9.00 am and a record of the
interview will
be made. On completion of the interview,
a transcript will be typed
you will be given a copy.
You will be reimbursed for any reasonable travel and accommodation
If you require any additional information, please contact me or your
Business Manager."
The applicant attended the
Disciplinary Meeting on the 17 November
1995, and a transcript of that meeting was marked as Exhibit 9 in
these proceedings. During
that interview the applicant was asked by
Mr Ralston if she had ever borrowed R.T.A. money from cash floats
before and the applicant
"Once when I borrowed $2.00, and that was when Clint said:
"You are not allowed to do it, you are not allowed to borrow."
Following this interview Mr Ralston reported to Mr Cossins, the
Manager of the Northern Region. In his conclusion Mr Ralston said,
"The allegations concerning the unauthorised use of the Authority's
money for private use is confirmed, notwithstanding the mitigating
circumstances. I believe that Ms Bellhouse' perceived desperate
financial situation may have clouded her judgment on this occasion,
however I believe that there was no intention to defraud the
Authority".
RECOMMENDATION.
Ms Bellhouse has breached her obligation
and responsibilities when
handling the Authority's funds. However, I feel that she has
suffered a great deal of emotional stress
throughout the disciplinary
process. I recommend the following disciplinary action be taken:
Ms Bellhouse be issued with a first
warning in accordance with the
Authority's Human Resources Policy subject to dismissal action should
there be any re-occurrence of
unethical or other inappropriate
behaviour."
Mr Cossins, on receipt of this report, reported to the Director of
the Northern Region
on the 28 November 1995. Mr Cossins was of the
opinion that Mr Ralston's recommendation did not provide for an
appropriate penalty
and he recommended that the applicant be
terminated.
The Director, Mr Warren Shearer, on receipt of this report, sent a
the applicant indicating that on the evidence available he
considered the allegations proven and that he intended taking further
action. He then gave the applicant the opportunity to submit any
further information she considered should be taken into account
before he determined the disciplinary action to be taken and that
she should provide a response by 6 December 1995.
The applicant
replied by letter of the 4 December 1995, and asked
that if there was a possibility of dismissal, would consideration be
a demotion instead. By letter of 11 December 1995 the
applicant was advised by Mr Shearer that her employment was
terminated on the
grounds of misappropriation of the Authority's
Was the termination for a valid reason?
There can be no doubt that the termination
of the applicant's
employment was for a valid reason. The applicant admitted in her
evidence that she was aware that she could not
borrow the float
monies for her personal use. She admitted that she had read the
code of conduct document at the Moree Office although
she said she
only read the front page. There is no doubt in my mind that
taking into account the responsible position she was required
undertake that she would of been aware of the seriousness of using
these funds for her own use.
The evidence of her friend, Ms
Kate Munro, the office manager, Ms
Marie Conroy and the area business manager, Mr Clint Carter, all
corroborate the fact that she
was aware and had been told that to
do so was a sackable offence.
Did the applicant prove that the termination was nevertheless
unjust & unreasonable?
The applicant, Ms Bellhouse, although a little guarded in her
evidence impressed me as a witness. She
appeared as a honest person
and although she may have been confused as to the number of times
she had borrowed the float monies there
is no doubt in my mind
that she ever contemplated stealing the money. She has always
admitted that she did borrow the money so there
allegation of stealing in this matter and of course there never has
The applicant has argued that the special circumstance
applicant found herself in on the night of the 13 September 1995
should have been taken into account and that termination
employment therefore contravened Section 170 DC. It was further
argued that she was not afforded procedural fairness in that
until the letter from Mr Warren Shearer of the 29 November 1995,
she was never made aware that her employment was in jeopardy
then had very little time to mount a defence. Added to this was
the allegation that the actual process of determination having
three months was also unreasonable in the circumstances.
Although I feel great sympathy for the applicant in this case there
could never be any defence to the act of borrowing the float money
on the 13 September 1995. It simply was not a matter of necessity
that she take the money from the float to get petrol for her car.
She even admitted this in the transcript of interview with Mr
on the 17 November 1995 when she said,
"When I think back on it and look at all the other things I
could have done, there were other
options that I could have taken
but I didn't think and I did the wrong thing."
If the applicant was in such a difficult situation
she could have
simply driven the R.T.A. vehicle home that night, collected the
money from her friend, driven back to do her shopping
in Moree and
then returned the vehicle. There is also no doubt that she could
have always asked a friend for a lift home, or rang
her friend at
The applicant's position with the R.T.A. was a very responsible
position where the element
of trust was an essential part of the
contract of employment. She was required to attend unsupervised in
outlying country towns to
examine persons for various driving
licences and to collect the fees for the examinations.
In recent years there has been much criticism
of the R.T.A and
Driving Examiners who were subject to bribes and corruption and it
is therefore understandable that employees of
the R.T.A engaged in
this work exhibit behaviour that is above reproach. In the
circumstances the R.T.A. has determined that the
applicant be
dismissed and it was not a decision taken lightly by them. It is
a pity that the decision took such a long time to be
made but it
was done in accordance with their procedures and the applicant was
offered every chance to defend herself. The applicant's
using public money for her own use was conduct that must be, in
the circumstances of this case, regarded as serious misconduct.
Particularly as she had been warned before by several fellow
employees that to do so was an offence that could cause the
termination
of her employment and criminal charges being brought. I
am satisfied that her conduct was of a nature as that described by
and Evatt JJ in a passage in North -v- Television
Corporation Ltd
(1976) 11 ALR 599
, which was given approval by
Wilcox CJ in Gooley v. Westpac Banking Corporation
[1995] IRCA 658
(1995) 129 ALR
at 636-637. I must therefore find that the termination was not
harsh unjust or unreasonable in the circumstance and that the
application
must be dismissed.
I certify that this and the preceeding thirteen (13) pages are a
true copy of the reasons for judgment of Judicial
Registrar Walker.
Legal Assistant: Claire McAuley
Date: 10th July 1996
Appearances:
Solicitor for the applicant: Mr J. Fernon
Counsel for the applicant: Mr P. Punch
Solicitor for the respondent: Mr W. F. Barry
Counsel for the respondent: Mr C. Newnham
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT
OF AUSTRALIA
SYDNEY REGISTRY
No. NI 4960 of 1995
KATE BELLHOUSE
ROADS AND TRAFFIC
BEFORE: WALKER JR
PLACE: SYDNEY
DATE: 10th JULY 1999.
MINUTES OF ORDER
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The application
be dismissed.