Dyer & Kaeser [2021] FCCA 2171 (31 August 2021)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Dyer & Kaeser
[2021] FCCA 2171
File number:
DNC 117 of 2021
Judgment of:
JUDGE YOUNG
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– concerning two children
who are eleven and nine years old – whether the children should spend time
with the father
in Town B or City C – where the children live with the
mother in Town B – where the father proposes the children spend
him in City C – where the mother proposes the children spend time with the
father in Town B – where the mother
is concerned the father would fail to
return the children if the children spend time with him in City C – where
there is no
evidence the father has ever failed to comply with Court orders
– where the Court is satisfied the father’s proposal
is reasonable
– orders made accordingly.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Ms Bowen of Bowen Lawyers
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Ms Kobelt of Ward Keller
DNC 117 of 2021
JUDGE YOUNG
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS BY CONSENT THAT:
1. That the children X born in 2008, Y born in 2010 and Z born in 2012 live
with the mother.
2. That X spend time with the father in accordance with her wishes.
3. That X be permitted to communicate with the father by electronic means at
4. That when either parent is spending time with Y and Z (“the
boys”) during school holidays, that parent shall facilitate
(a) On Tuesday at 4:00pm;
(b) On Thursday at 4:00pm;
(c) On Sunday at 9:00am; and
(d) At any other times as requested by the boys.
5. That both parents are restrained from removing the children from the
Northern Territory of Australia without prior written consent
from the other
party or a court order.
6. The father shall spend time with Z and Y at times as agreed to between the
parties and in the absence of agreement as follows:
(a) First half of 2021/2022 Christmas NT Gazetted school holidays and each
alternate year thereafter with the time not to commence
prior to the last day of
the school term;
(b) Second half of 2022/2023 Christmas NT Gazetted school holidays and each
alternate year thereafter, with the time not to exceed
the first day of school
7. Should both parents be in the same location on special occasions, the
children shall spend the following times with their father;
(a) On Children’s birthdays from after school until 8 am the following day
on the school day or Friday, and on the non-school
day from 10 am to 2 pm;
(b) On Father’s Day from 9 am until commencement of school the following
(c) On Christmas day from 2 pm until 2 pm Boxing Day.
COMMUNICATION
8. That unless otherwise agreed to between the parties, or in the event of
emergencies concerning the children, communication between
the parties shall
occur primarily via emails and/or SMS text messages, and be limited to issues
pertaining to the children.
9. That the parties shall respond to the other’s communication within 6
hours of receiving the communication.
10. That each parent shall be at liberty to obtain all and any information
children are enrolled
11. That each parent shall be entitled to attend school or extracurricular
events that the parents are ordinarily invited to, and
both parents shall keep
each other informed of such events.
MEDICAL ISSUES
12. That each parent shall be at liberty to obtain all and any information
treating practitioners,
and be at liberty to attend any appointments the children are booked to attend,
with the parent booking the
appointment informing the other parent of the time
and location within a reasonable time to enable the other parent to attend.
13. That in the event that any of the children requires medical treatment,
the parent caring for the child is to immediately advise
the other parent via
phone, or SMS message, within 24 hours of the treatment being received.
14. That each parent shall keep each other informed of their current
residential addresses, telephone numbers, email and Skype addresses,
changes within 48 hours from the changes occurring.
15. That each parent shall be at liberty to receive information/records from
any carer, teachers, hospital, childcare institution,
and any social, sporting
or recreational organisations with respect to the children.
INJUNCTIONS
16. That injunction issue restraining each parent from the following;
(a) Denigrating the other parent or the parent’s partner or members of
that parent’s family in the presence of or within
the hearing of the
children or any of them and each parent remove the children from the hearing of
anyone else who may be denigrating
the other parent or that parent’s
partner or family;
(b) Exposing the children to family violence;
(c) Consuming alcohol to excess no less than 12 hours prior to and during the
time the children are in the respective parent’s
(d) Exposing the children to passive smoking.
AND IT IS ORDERED UNTIL FURTHER ORDER:
17. That the children spend time with the father in City C for the first half
of the Term 3 Northern Territory Gazetted School holidays
from 25 September 2021
until 2 October 2021;
18. That the children to spend 7 days with the father over the Easter school
holidays in 2022 in Brisbane with the period to be nominated
by the father no
less than 60 days in advance.
19. That there be no order as to payment of airfares.
20. That pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
interests of the children X born in 2008, Y born in 2010 and Z born in 2012 be
independently represented by a lawyer and it
is requested that Northern
Territory Legal Aid Commission make arrangements as soon as practicable to
secure that independent representation
of the children’s interests.
21. That forthwith upon appointment by the said Northern Territory Legal Aid
Commission or otherwise the Independent Children’s
Lawyer file a Notice of
Address for Service.
22. That upon filing a Notice of Address for Service, the Independent
Children’s Lawyer have leave to inspect and / or copy
any material in
accordance with
Rule 15A.13
Federal Circuit Court Rules 2001
subpoenaed by the parties and released by the Court up to that date.
23. That within seven (7) days of notification of such appointment each party
provide to the Independent Children’s Lawyer copies
of all relevant
documents relied upon by that party.
24. That the parties do all such things as are necessary to enrol and
complete the ‘Kids Are First’ parenting program
or the D Families
‘Post Separation Co-Operative Parenting Program’ and provide a proof
of completion certificate to the
other parent.
25. That the father do all things necessary to enrol and complete the
‘Tuning into Teens’ parenting Course and provide
completion certificate to the other parent
26. That pursuant to
section 62G(2)
Family Law Act 1975
parties and the child/ren of the relationship X born in 2008, Y born in 2010 and
Z born in 2012 attend upon a family consultant
nominated by the Regional
Coordinator Child Dispute Services of the Federal Circuit Court of Australia on
a date and at time/s to
be advised for the purposes of the preparation of a
family report, such report to be released by 28 February 2022.
27. That the family report to deal with the following matters:
(a) any views expressed by the said children and any factors (such as the said
children’s maturity or level of understanding)
that would affect the
weight that the Court should place on those wishes;
(b) the matters set out in
sections 60CC
(c) any other matters that the Family Consultant considers important to the
welfare or best interests of the said children.
28. That the solicitors for the parties forward copies of all documents filed
with the Court to the nominated report writer in accordance
with the directions
of the Case Coordinator Child Dispute Services.
29. That the parties are to confirm their attendance to the Case Co-ordinator
Child Dispute Services by email at Darwin.CDS@familycourt.gov.au
or alternately
call 1300 352 000 fourteen days prior to the date of the interview and in the
event such confirmation is not received
the interviews will be cancelled.
30. That upon the Report being provided to the Court, the Court will provide
a copy to each party (or if represented the party’s
lawyer) and to any
Independent Children’s Lawyer in the proceedings.
31. That unless a party objects, in writing, within 14 days of the date of
releasing the Report, copies of the Report may further
be provided to the
following, if the Court is requested to do so for a purpose related to the care,
welfare or development of the
child/ren to whom these proceedings
(a) a Children’s Court;
(b) a child protection authority;
(c) a State or Territory legal aid authority; and
(d) a convener of any legal dispute resolution conference.
the date on which a copy of the Report is be provided to any of those identified
above it may not have been admitted into evidence
and may be untested or, if
admitted, may form only one part of the evidence in the proceedings.
Family Law Act 1975
provides that it is an offence punishable by
imprisonment for up to one year to publish or disseminate to the public any
of family law proceedings which identifies the parties, witnesses or
other people concerned with the proceedings, unless specifically
authorised by
the event a party to these proceedings objects to the release of the Family
Report pursuant to Order 31 herein, they shall write
to the Chambers of Judge
Young seeking that the matter be listed on short notice for their objection to
32. That unless otherwise ordered, no person shall release
the Report, or provide access to the Report to any other person.
33. That upon filing a notice to inspect the parties’ legal
representatives be at liberty to inspect and copy all documents
pursuant to subpoena (SAVE & EXCEPT for those marked confidential).
34. That in the event any party
(or the Independent Children’s
in these proceedings wishes the family consultant to read any
material produced pursuant to subpoena and any
material then such
documents shall be put before the Court by way of affidavit to be filed and
served 7 days prior the interviews
with the Family Consultant as
(a) setting out short reasons for the inclusion of each set of documents,
including reference to any current pleadings, and
(b) annexing such material as is considered relevant, with
(c) the affidavit to be paginated, indexed and exhibits tagged.
35. That the matter is adjourned to the trial call-over list on 29 April 2022
at 10.30am for further directions.
Section 121
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in very limited circumstances, to
publish proceedings that identify persons, associated persons,
or witnesses
involved in family law proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment under the pseudonym
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR
JUDGE YOUNG:
1 This is an application concerning two children: Y who is 11 years old and Z
who is 9 years old. This matter was listed for interim
hearing in relation to
what I was told was a dispute about whether the two children should spend time
with their father in Town B
or in Brisbane.
2 There is also an older child, X, who is 13 years old, however, it is not
contemplated that she would spend any time with her father
other than in
accordance with her wishes. According to the mother, X disclosed to her a sexual
assault. X said that she did not want
to see her father anymore because in the
car he kept putting his hand up the top of her inside inner thigh. She
mentioned she always
tried to push his hand away and he got angry at her. X is
therefore not to be included, necessarily, in this dispute.
3 In relation to that disclosure, the mother’s affidavit filed
relatively recently says that X was interviewed at the police
station. The
Child Forensics Investigation Team in Darwin reviewed the allegations and the
evidence. The mother says that she was
informed on 23 August 2021 that the
police would not take the matter any further because they did not consider the
allegation amounted
to an allegation of indecent assault. That matter will,
therefore, not proceed any further. The agreed position is that there is
evidence, as far as the police are concerned, that that an indecent assault
occurred. That being the case, there is no evidence
to suggest that the children
are at any risk from the father.
4 The father’s present proposal is that in the coming school holidays
the time should be spent in City C for a week. He asserted
that there was no
accommodation available in Town B. However, that assertion was challenged and I
was told by Ms Kobelt, counsel
for the mother, that she received written
confirmation today that there is accommodation available over the period of a
week in Town
B, starting on 25 September 2021.
5 I am satisfied that there probably is accommodation available in Town B. I
am not satisfied that the argument advanced by the father
accommodation is correct. However, in my view, the issue which neither party
has satisfactorily addressed
is the recommendation in the Child Inclusive
Conference Memorandum that the father’s contact for the next school
holiday period
occur in Town B.
6 It is clear that Y wants to see more of his father and he has found his
parents’ separation very difficult. He wants to see
more of his father
and it makes him sad not to see his father. The Family Consultant stated:
Y said he would like to see his dad in Town B and said
I would like to talk to him more,
Z is recorded as saying “
I have never been out of Town B.
explained “
I came here [Town B] when I was three and I’m nine
now, that’s six years.
” Z went on to say that he was worried to
travel and he would like to see his dad “
at home and go fishing and
7 The mother told the Family Consultant that she
proposed that the children’s time occur in Town B or Darwin. I asked Ms
why the mother was concerned about that and she said that, in substance,
she was concerned that the father would not return the children
at the end of
them spending time with him. I infer from that comment and the material in the
mother’s affidavit that she is
anxious about whether the children will
return from their time with the father.
8 There is no evidence that the father has failed to comply with a court
order in the past. There is no evidence, that I can see,
that would lead to a
reasonable suspicion that the father would fail to comply with a relevant order.
It appears to me, at this stage,
that the mother’s concern reflects her
anxiety but nothing more. It may be, and I do not know, that the children are
the mother’s anxiety when they say they would like to see their
father in Town B. There is certainly nothing in the Memorandum
to give any real
background or context to what the children said about that.
9 I am not persuaded that it is inappropriate for the children to spend time
with their father in City C for a week on the assumption,
of course, that he
bears the cost of it. It occurs to me that if the children are to travel in
future, the relatively short flight
from Town B to City C, which is really not
much further than from Town B to Darwin, is not an unreasonable proposal of the
I see no reason why there should not be an order accordingly.
10 I do not propose to make any orders about who is to pay for the flights.
I was told that the mother has a very limited income.
I have no evidence
whatsoever about the father’s income, however, I was told he was in
receipt of unemployment benefits. How
these parties are expected to pay for
these two children to travel regularly between Town B and Brisbane is unclear to
me. In fact,
there is no evidence before me that would satisfy me that that was
a practical proposition at all. However, the father says that
he proposes to
borrow from family members to spend the time with the children.
11 I will make an order accordingly that in the next holiday period the
father may spend the agreed time (25 September 2021 to 2 October
2021) in City C
with the children.
12 As the matter is not likely to be reached for trial before the Christmas
school holidays, I should make orders about the Christmas
school holidays. I
propose to make orders that the children spend time with their father in
13 I do not propose to make any order about the cost because the parties
failed to come into the Court today armed with material to
satisfy me that that
was achievable. I certainly do not propose at this stage to make an order that
the mother share in the costs
of the flights to Brisbane.
14 I also going to make an order for an Independent Children’s Lawyer
to be appointed.
15 Both parties are to attend the E Families “
” program or the D Families Queensland “
Post-Separation
Cooperative Parenting
” program. I think it is probably possible to do
that online. I suggest that the recommendation from the Family Consultant
the father consider attending a parenting course, such as “
Tuning into
”, is a good idea. The proposed orders of the parties did not
dealt with this, however, that may be explained by the fact that
consultant, in view of the allegation made by X, recommended the Memorandum not
be released to the parties until the hearing
today. This makes it a difficult
for them to respond to the recommendations.
I certify that the preceding fifteen (15)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 5 October 2021
RTF format (376 KB)
Signed PDF/A format