Application by Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd [2021] ACompT 1 (9 March 2021)
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
Application by Port of Newcastle
Operations Pty Ltd
[2021] ACompT 1
Review from:
Application for authorisation AA1000473 lodged by New South Wales Minerals
Council on behalf of itself, certain coal producers that
export coal through the
Port of Newcastle, and mining companies requiring future access through the
Port, and the determination made
by the ACCC on 27 August 2020
File number:
ACT 2 of 2020
O'BRYAN J (Deputy President)
Date of Determination:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– submissions
and materials filed by interested third party – imposition of
confidentiality restrictions – relevance
of Harman undertaking –
whether personal undertaking by individual recipient required
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Cases cited:
Harman v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[1983] 1 AC
Hearne v Street
[2008] HCA 36
(2008) 235 CLR 125
Otter Gold Mines v McDonald
[1997] FCA 694
(1997) 76 FCR 467
Date of hearing:
Determined on the papers
Date of last submissions:
Number of paragraphs:
Solicitor for Port of Newcastle Operations Pty
Clayton Utz
Solicitor for NSW Minerals Council:
Clifford Chance
Solicitor for ACCC:
Australian Government Solicitor
Solicitor for Port Authority of New South Wales:
Herbert Smith Freehills
IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
ACT 2 OF 2020
APPLICATION FOR AUTHORISATION AA1000473 LODGED BY NEW SOUTH WALES
MINERALS COUNCIL ON BEHALF OF ITSELF, CERTAIN COAL PRODUCERS THAT
EXPORT COAL
THROUGH THE PORT OF NEWCASTLE, AND MINING COMPANIES REQUIRING FUTURE ACCESS
THROUGH THE PORT, AND THE DETERMINATION MADE
BY THE ACCC ON 27 AUGUST
PORT OF NEWCASTLE OPERATIONS PTY LTD
JUSTICE O’BRYAN (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
DATE OF DETERMINATION:
THE TRIBUNAL DIRECTS THAT:
of the documents listed in Annexure A to these directions and the information
contained in them (
Confidential Information
) be restricted
(a) the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
) and its external legal advisers and engaged experts (and their
direct staff);
(b) Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Limited (
) and its external
legal advisers and engaged experts (and their direct staff);
(c) the external legal advisers and experts (and their direct staff) engaged
by the New South Wales Minerals Council (
(d) the Chief Executive Officer of NSWMC (Stephen Galilee) and the Policy
Director of NSWMC (Andrew Abbey), subject to their providing
to the Tribunal a
signed Confidentiality Undertaking in the form of Annexure B and provided that
only the redacted form of the Confidential
Information provided to the Tribunal
on 4 March 2020 is to be disclosed to those two persons.
than the disclosure permitted by paragraph 1, the Confidential Information must
not be disclosed to any other person or otherwise
made public.
the leave of the Tribunal, the Confidential Information must not be used by any
person to whom it has been disclosed other
than for the purposes of this
proceeding.
written submission made to the Tribunal, or other document provided to the
Tribunal, that refers to or incorporates the Confidential
Information must be
marked to identify clearly the Confidential Information.
Confidential Information must not be referred to orally during the hearing of
this proceeding (whether in oral submissions made
to the Tribunal or
cross-examination) unless the Tribunal has directed that the hearing of the
submissions or cross-examination is
to take place in private pursuant to
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
further order of the Tribunal, the Confidential Information is not to appear in
any transcript of the proceeding before the
Tribunal other than in a
confidential copy of the transcript, which shall only be made available to the
persons referred to in paragraph
1 of these Orders.
in these directions imposes an obligation on the ACCC in respect of a document
or information which has been obtained by it
otherwise than in the course of
these Tribunal proceedings, or on PNO or NSWMC in respect of a document or
information which has
been obtained by it otherwise than in the course of these
Tribunal proceedings or the preceding application for authorisation before
parties have liberty to apply to vary these directions.
Port Services Agreement dated 17 December 2013 between Newcastle Port
Corporation and Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Limited.
Harbour Management System Access Agreement dated 17 December 2013 between
Newcastle Port Corporation and Port of Newcastle Operations
CONFIDENTIALITY
UNDERTAKING
I, [insert name, position and address],
HEREBY UNDERTAKE
to the Australian Competition Tribunal
in relation to the documents made available to me
pursuant to the directions of the Tribunal dated 9 March 2021
) in proceeding ACT 2 of 2020 (
Confidential Documents
as follows:
will not use the Confidential Documents except for the purpose of Tribunal
proceeding ACT 2 of 2020.
the leave of the Tribunal, I will not disclose or otherwise make public the
Confidential Documents or any part of them other
than as permitted by the
Directions.
will not make any copies or record of the Confidential Documents or any part of
them including by way of taking notes, photographs
or screenshots.
I become aware of any unauthorised use or disclosure of the Confidential
Documents, I will inform the Port Authority of New South
Wales' legal advisers
as soon as practicable.
the conclusion of Tribunal proceeding ACT 2 of 2020, I will return the
Confidential Documents to the Port Authority of New South
Wales' legal advisers
as soon as practicable.
terms of this undertaking may be varied by direction of the Tribunal.
provision of this undertaking does not constitute any acknowledgement that the
Confidential Documents contain information of a
nature that warrants their
inspection in this proceeding to be limited.
undertaking does not apply to any part of the Confidential Documents which is
made public at any time.
give this undertaking subject to the extent that I am required to disclose the
Confidential Documents or any part of them by law,
statutory body or
REASONS FOR DIRECTIONS
THE TRIBUNAL:
Introduction
of Newcastle Operations Pty Limited (
) has applied to the Tribunal
pursuant to
section 101
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
) for review of a determination of the Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission (
) dated 27 August 2020 (Commission file no.
AA1000473) (
Determination
). In the Determination, the ACCC granted
authorisation to enable the NSW Minerals Council (
) and certain coal
producers that export coal through the Port of Newcastle to collectively
negotiate with PNO in relation to the
terms and conditions of access, including
price, to the Port.
25 November 2020, the Tribunal made timetabling directions, including that
interested third parties file and serve any submissions
and supporting material
to which the Tribunal may have regard on or before 22 February 2021.
letter dated 22 February 2021, the solicitors for the Port Authority of New
South Wales (
Port Authority
) notified the Tribunal that the Port
Authority wished to make a submission as an interested third party and sought a
short extension
of time to file a submission by 25 February 2021. The Tribunal
received a submission from the Port Authority on that day. The submission
records that the Port Authority is a state-owned corporation established under
State Owned Corporations Act 1989
Ports and Maritime
Administration Act 1995
(NSW). It is responsible for and manages the
navigation, security and operational safety needs of commercial shipping in the
of Newcastle, as well as Sydney Harbour, Port Botany, Port Kembla and the
ports of Eden and Yamba. The Port Authority supports PNO’s
application for
review of the ACCC’s final determination made on 27 August 2020.
Port Authority’s submission attached the following two agreements between
the Port Authority (formerly the Newcastle Port
Corporation) and PNO:
(a) Port Services Agreement dated 17
December 2013 (
), being Confidential Attachment 1; and
(b) Harbour Management System Access Agreement dated 17 December 2013
), being Confidential Attachment
Submissions
letter dated 25 February 2021 that accompanied the Port Authority’s
submission, the solicitors for the Port Authority claimed
confidentiality in
respect of the PSA and the HMSAA. The letter stated:
(a) The terms of those agreements are and
are expressed to be confidential as between those parties, have not been made
public, and
are commercially sensitive to the parties.
(b) The Port Authority is obliged under a master confidentiality agreement with
PNO to keep the contents of the PSA and HMSAA confidential.
(c) The documents detail aspects of the confidential terms on which the NSW
Government privatised the Port of Newcastle, which neither
PNO nor the NSW
Government have otherwise disclosed.
(d) The terms of the PSA and HMSAA may also be commercially and competitively
sensitive as between PNO and third parties.
(e) The Port Authority does not object to the PSA and HMSAA being provided to
the ACCC (including its external legal representatives
and consultants), and the
documents are not confidential as against PNO.
(f) The Port Authority requests that the Tribunal make confidentiality orders to
the effect that the PSA and HMSAA are otherwise
to be disclosed only to the
external legal advisors and experts retained by
26 February 2021, the Tribunal requested the parties to confer and seek to agree
appropriate confidentiality directions to be proposed
to the Tribunal and,
failing agreement, to provide proposed directions and a short submission by 3
March 2021. The Tribunal indicated
that it would determine any dispute about
confidentiality directions on the papers unless any party sought a hearing.
3 March 2021, the NSWMC made a submission in accordance with the
Tribunal’s request. The NSWMC submitted that the confidentiality
restrictions sought by the Port Authority would cause prejudice to NSWMC because
it would not be entitled to view the agreement except
by external counsel.
Further, in receiving the documents the NSWMC would be subject to an implied
undertaking that the documents
will be used only for the purpose of the
litigation and this ordinarily provides sufficient protection to the party
producing the
confidential document. Alternatively, the NSWMC proposed that
directions be given that would permit two senior officers of the NSWMC
the agreements subject to a confidentiality undertaking.
4 March 2021, the Port Authority and PNO made a joint submission responding to
the submission of the NSWMC. In substance, they
accepted the confidentiality
regime proposed by the NSWMC save for relatively minor variations. However, they
proposed that the two
senior officers of the NSWMC be given access to a version
of the PSA and HMSAA with limited redactions to three specific matters:
monetary figure in the definition of the term “Navigation Services
Floor” in the PSA (which appears twice); the percentage
figure in Schedule
3 item 1.2 and item 2.1 of the HMSAA; and the monetary figure in Schedule 3 item
2.1 of the HMSAA. They submitted
that those figures are confidential and
commercially sensitive to the Port Authority, PNO and third parties, and that
of that information to the two NSWMC personnel is not necessary for
them to properly instruct their solicitors in this matter.
ACCC informed the Tribunal that it has no comment in relation to the orders
proposed by either the NSWMC or the Port Authority
and PNO. The ACCC noted the
public interest in ensuring that third parties continue to provide, and are not
deterred from providing,
information to the Tribunal to assist it in making its
decision. The ACCC submitted that this public interest will, in some
circumstances,
be served by restricting access to confidential information.
of the parties sought a hearing on the directions to be made.
Consideration
is no reason to doubt that the implied undertaking, often referred to as the
Harman undertaking after
Harman v Secretary of State for the Home
[1983] 1 AC 280
, applies in the Tribunal: c.f.
Mines v McDonald
[1997] FCA 694
(1997) 76 FCR 467.
A breach of the implied undertaking in a
curial context is punishable as a contempt of court:
Hearne v Street
[2008] HCA 36
(2008) 235 CLR 125
) at [96] (Hayne, Heydon & Crennan
JJ). In the Tribunal, a failure to comply with the implied undertaking would
constitute an
offence by virtue of the operation of s 162 of the CCA. The
implied undertaking arises where a person is compelled by the rules,
or orders of a court or tribunal to disclose documents or information to a party
to the proceeding. That includes an order
or direction for a party to file
evidence or produce documents:
at [96]. The existence of the
undertaking may be less clear where a third party is given permission to file
submissions and supporting
material in a tribunal proceeding, but is not
compelled to do so. In such circumstances, I accept the submission of the ACCC
there is a public interest in ensuring that third parties are not deterred
from voluntarily providing information to the Tribunal
to assist it in making
its decision which will, in some circumstances, be served by restricting access
to confidential information
so provided.
of the CCA empowers the Tribunal, where it is satisfied that it is
desirable to do so by reason of the confidential nature of any
evidence or
matter, to give directions prohibiting or restricting the publication of,
amongst other things, matters contained in
documents filed or lodged with the
Registrar, received in evidence by the Tribunal or placed in the records of the
Tribunal. A power
so exercise is procedural in nature and, by
exercised by a presidential member of the Tribunal.
am satisfied on the basis of the submissions made by the Port Authority that the
PSA and the HMSAA contain commercial information
that is not publically
available and that the parties to those agreements (the Port Authority and PNO)
regard as commercially sensitive.
The NSWMC has not sought to test that
conclusion and has indicated that it does not oppose the making of
confidentiality directions,
provided that two of its executives are able to have
access to the documents in order to provide instructions to its legal advisers.
the circumstances, I consider it is appropriate to make confidentiality
directions consistent with the form proposed by the NSWMC
and with adjustments
proposed by the Port Authority. I note two matters. First, the confidentiality
directions proposed by the NSWMC
require that the two executives of the NSWMC
who are to receive the documents are to give a personal confidentiality
undertaking
to the Tribunal. It seems to me that the Tribunal’s directions
as to confidentiality would have been binding on those executives
without the
need for a personal undertaking to the Tribunal. However, as the giving of the
undertaking formed part of the NSWMC’s
proposed directions, I will make
directions to that effect. Second, the confidentiality directions proposed by
the NSWMC contain
anticipatory directions relating to the possible reliance on
the documents by the Tribunal in the making of its determination in
proceeding. As I understand it, the directions contemplate that the Port
Authority will be given an opportunity to apply for
directions preventing the
disclosure of the documents as part of the Tribunal’s reasons for
decision. In my view, it is unnecessary
to make orders of that kind at this
time. Requests for suppression of parts of the Tribunal’s reasons for
decision on the grounds
of confidentiality will be addressed at the time that
the decision is
I certify that the preceding 14 (fourteen)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination herein of
the Honourable
Dated: 9 March 2021
RTF format (328 KB)
Signed PDF/A format