Mansoor v Coles Supermarkets T/A Coles Northland [2012] FWAFB 8081 (24 October 2012)
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Act 2009
—Appeal of decision
Minhaj Mansoor
Coles Supermarkets T/A Coles Northland
(C2012/4062)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT HAMILTON
COMMISSIONER LEE
COMMISSIONER GREGORY
MELBOURNE, 24 OCTOBER 2012
Appeal against Senior Deputy President Kaufman at Melbourne on 9 May 2012 in matter number C2012/3516.
The matter which is the subject of appeal
On 24 April 2012 Mr.Mansoor lodged an application for Fair Work Australia to deal with a dispute in accordance with a dispute settlement
procedure. The document said that the dispute was about the following:
‘I was transferred to another store by force (breach of Coles Supermarket Agreement 2011
Section 7.1.2)
when I was refused to go back to my base store.’
The dispute settlement procedure
provides for a number of steps, including conciliation, then arbitration, and an appeal to a Full Bench of Fair Work Australia.
On 8 May 2012 a conference was held before Kaufman SDP.
Coles Supermarkets Australia Pty Ltd (Coles) submits
that the matter was resolved at that conference by conciliation to the satisfaction of the parties. It submits that Kaufman SDP did
not, and was not requested to, deal with the dispute by way of arbitration. It submits that there was no decision made under the
dispute settlement procedure in the agreement, or under the Act. There is no record on file of any decision having being made by
Kaufman SDP as a result of the conference, whether pursuant to the dispute settlement procedure or another provision of the agreement,
or of the Act.
The appeal and procedural steps taken
On 1 June 2012 Mr.Mansoor lodged an appeal against what was claimed to be a decision made in that matter. There was no description
of the decision sought to be appealed in the appeal document. The grounds of appeal were:
‘[Coles Supermarkets Agreement 2011,
Equal Opportunity Act 2010
Fair Work Act 2009
Crimes Amendment (Bullying) Bill 2011
, Slave Trade Act 1824]’
On 13 June 2012 Fair Work Australia wrote to Mr.Mansoor advising him that his appeal did not appear to conform to the requirements
of rule 12(2) of the
Fair Work Australia Rules
2010. It advised him that the appeal document did not provide a description of the decision that he wished to appeal, did not provide
specific grounds relied upon in the appeal, provide matters that made the granting of the appeal in the public interest, and other
matters. Mr.Mansoor did not reply to this correspondence.
On 17 July 2012 Mr.Mansoor lodged an application for an extension of time for lodging appeal documents on grounds including that
he did not know where to appeal, and had appealed to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT). The application also sought an extension
of time in which to institute the appeal.
The matter was listed for hearing on 18 September 2012.
On 10 August 2012 Mr.Mansoor sought ‘an extended date for hearing as I am going to overseas due to illness and will be returning
‘This matter is set down for hearing on 18 September 2012.
You will be expected to attend the hearing and present your appeal.
If you do not attend your appeal will be heard in your absence and it is likely in those circumstances that the appeal will be dismissed.’
On 14 September 2012 Mr.Mansoor forwarded to Fair Work Australia a medical certificate stating that he was suffering from depression
and stress and was unfit to attend the hearing from 12 August 2012 to 23 September 2012.
On 18 September 2012 the appeal came on for hearing before a reconstituted Full Bench, headed by Hamilton DP. Coles appeared but
Mr.Mansoor did not. Coles agreed that the Full Bench should write to Mr.Mansoor indicating that the matter was one that was suitable
to be dealt with on the papers, and indicating that it would be dealt with in that way unless he objected. It agreed that the matter
should be determined on the papers, and had earlier so agreed in writing on 16 August 2012.
On 18 September Hamilton DP wrote to Mr.Mansoor in the following terms:
Re: C2012/4062: Appeal by Minhaj Mansoor against alleged decision of Senior Deputy President Kaufman in matter number C2012/3516
Your appeal in matter C2012/3516 was listed for hearing before a Full Bench of Fair Work Australia on 18 September 2012.
The purpose of the hearing on 18 September 2012 was to enable you to put your submissions in support of your appeal. You did not attend
the hearing on 18 September 2012 due to illness.
It appears to Fair Work Australia that your appeal can be adequately determined by giving you an opportunity to provide your submissions
in reply in writing to Fair Work Australia and without you making oral submissions in reply at a further hearing.
If you object to the above course, you must advise Fair Work Australia in writing of your objection by 4.00 pm on Tuesday, 25 September
In the absence of any objection from you, Fair Work Australia will take it that you consent to the above course and will issue directions
for you to file and serve written submissions in reply in your appeal.’
No reply was received from Mr.Mansoor.
On 26 September 2012 directions were issued for Mr.Mansoor to file submissions in support of his appeal by 3 October 2012, Coles
to reply by 10 October 2012, and Mr.Mansoor to file reply submissions by 12 October 2012. The directions stated that the appeal would
be determined on the basis of the written submissions filed and the other material on the Fair Work Australia files in Mr.Mansoor’s
notification of dispute matter C2012/3516 and appeal matter C2012/4062.
Submissions
In accordance with these directions, Mr.Mansoor submitted on 3 October 2012:
“I have been a faithful and valuable employee in this company for the past four years. My time at the company has been good
one so far, but now a problem has crept up, which threatens to disrupt my otherwise peaceful time at the company because of irresponsible
and racially motivated actions of my regional manager Alastair Stagg and HR
regional manager Katie Calderon toward my employment. My claim is obvious and legal as you can understand Coles supermarkets has breached
all basic rules in my case. Coles does not have right to transfer me to another store by force and refuses me to go back to my base
store. It is a bullying and similar to slavery. Forcing me to work in a store where I did not want to and store location is far than
15km is illegal and breaching Coles supermarkets agreement 2011. I like to ask Coles supermarkets what was the reason for my transfer
and under which section of Coles supermarkets agreement? I like to mention that this action interrupted my personal and working life
and led me to depression and anxiety. According to Coles supermarkets agreement 2011 transfer can only occurs to meet business genuine
needs. Coles supermarkets has acted unlawfully including breach of
Equal Opportunity Act 2010
Fair Work Act 2009
Crimes Amendment (Bullying) Bill 2011
and Slave Trade Act 1824.”
Coles submitted in reply on 10 October 2012
‘1. On 16 August 2012, Herbert Geer wrote to Fair Work Australia on behalf of the Respondent, Coles Supermarkets Australia Pty
setting out the background to this dispute and raising a number of jurisdictional issues. A copy of that correspondence is attached
as Exhibit 1 to these submissions.
2. Coles relies on the letter of 16 August 2012 to support its position that the appeal is fundamentally flawed on the basis that
there has been no decision capable of being subject to appeal within the meaning of the applicable dispute resolution procedure or
Fair Work Act
3. While Coles maintains that the Appellant’s submissions are not relevant, it continues to reject the allegations made by him
that it or its employees have acted inappropriately or in breach of the
Coles Supermarkets Australia Pty Ltd and Bi-Lo Ply Ltd Retail Agreement 2011
Equal Opportunity Act
4. It is submitted that permission to appeal should be refused and the appeal dismissed.
5. It is further submitted that FWA should order that the Appellant bear the costs of Coles under
section 611
Fair Work Act
(Cth) in relation to this appeal, on the basis that the appeal was instituted vexatiously, without reasonable cause, or that it should
have been reasonably apparent to the Appellant that the appeal had no reasonable prospect of success.’
On 12 October 2012 Mr.Mansoor further submitted that Coles Supermarket could not under the agreement transfer him as they had done.
He did not contradict the Coles Supermarket submission that no decision existed which could be appealed, and did not address the
Coles submission that costs should be awarded against him.
Section 604 of the Act provides:
604 Appeal of decisions
(1) A person who is aggrieved by a decision:
(a) made by FWA (other than a decision of a Full Bench or the Minimum Wage Panel); or
(b) made by the General Manager (including a delegate of the General Manager) under the
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
may appeal the decision, with the permission of FWA.
(2) Without limiting when FWA may grant permission, FWA must grant permission if FWA is satisfied that it is in the public interest
Note: Subsection (2) does not apply in relation to an application for an unfair dismissal (see section 400).
(3) A person may appeal the decision by applying to FWA.
Mr.Mansoor has been provided with at least four opportunities to advise the tribunal and Coles of the decision he purports to appeal.
The form which he used to lodge his appeal requested him to identify the decision he was appealing. Mr.Mansoor did not identify the
decision. Fair Work Australia wrote to Mr.Mansoor on 13 June 2012 advising him that he had not provided a description of the decision
that he wished to appeal, and that his appeal document did not appear to conform with the requirements of the rules. Mr.Mansoor did
not reply to the letter by describing the decision he wished to appeal. Coles Supermarkets provided a written submission which clearly
stated that no decision had been issued, and that therefore there could be no appeal against a decision. Mr.Mansoor did not respond
to that submission in his written submission of 3 October. Coles Supermarket repeated the point in its submission of 10 October.
Mr.Mansoor again did not address the issue in his final written submission of 12 October.
Mr.Mansoor has not identified any decision made by Kaufman SDP in the matter. Coles submitted without contradiction that the result
of the conference before Kaufman SDP was that a settlement was reached, and that Kaufman SDP was not requested to arbitrate the matter
and make a decision. There is no record of a decision on file. Kaufman SDP’s Chambers advised Mr.Mansoor that the matter was
settled in conciliation
. Mr.Mansoor did not contradict them.
We conclude that no decision was made by Kaufman SDP in relation to the application made by Mr.Mansoor in matter C2012/3516, whether
under the dispute settlement clause of the agreement or under another provision of the agreement, or under the Act. There is therefore
no decision which may be the subject of an appeal under the dispute settlement procedure or s.604 of the Act.
We must therefore dismiss the appeal. Nor is there a basis on which permission to appeal may be granted. We refuse permission to appeal.
It is not necessary for us to deal with the application for an extension of time in which to appeal.
An order dismissing the appeal is contained in
Coles Supermarket submitted that Fair Work Australia should order that Mr.Mansoor bear the costs of Coles under s.611(2) of the Act
in relation to this appeal, on the basis that the appeal was instituted vexatiously, without reasonable cause, or that it should
have been apparent to Mr.Mansoor that the appeal had no reasonable prospect of success.
Mr.Mansoor was directed to file submissions in reply on 12 October 2012. The submissions that he filed did not address this issue.
The issue had not previously been raised by Coles. In the circumstances we consider that it would be appropriate to provide Mr.Mansoor
with a further opportunity to respond to the employer costs submission. We direct him to file and serve on Coles any submissions
on this issue by Wednesday 31 October 2012. Coles have leave to file a submission in reply by Monday 5 November 2012.
We will make a decision on the costs issue on the basis of the submissions already filed, and any further submission put by the parties.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
Ms B Stagoll of counsel for
Coles Supermarkets trading as Coles Northland
Hearing details:
18 September
Final written submissions:
Appendix B to the Coles Supermarkets Australia and Bi-Lo Pty Limited Retail Agreement 2011
Written Submission, 16 August 2012
Email from Kaufman SDP’s chambers, 9 May 2012
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR529326>
No downloadable files available