Plaintiff S127-2025 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs [2025] HCASJ 31 (3 September 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
BEECH-JONES J
PLAINTIFF S127/2025 PLAINTIFF
MINISTER FOR
IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS DEFENDANT
[2025] HCASJ 31
Date of Judgment: 3 September
S127 of 2025
Court declines to hear the urgent application filed on 2 September 2025
pending the departure of the plane by which the plaintiff
is being removed from
Representation
The plaintiff is represented by Heretic
In the absence of the defendant
BEECH-JONES J.
At 9.51am on 2 September 2025, the plaintiff's legal representatives
uploaded to this Court's electronic filing system
an application for a
constitutional or other writ, which named the Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs as the defendant
("the Writ Application"). Also filed was
an "Urgent Application" seeking to restrain the defendant and its officers from
the plaintiff from Australia until the determination of the Writ
Application, and an unsworn affidavit identifying the plaintiff's
solicitor as
the deponent. The sworn version was uploaded at 9.59am ("the Affidavit"). The
Court was informed that at the time of
the upload of the Urgent Application the
defendant had not been notified that it would be made.
proceedings could not be remitted to another court because the principal relief
sought in the Writ Application was an order quashing
a decision of the delegate
of the defendant to refuse the plaintiff's application for a protection
Affidavit specified that the plaintiff was to be removed from Australia at
10.30am on 2 September 2025. At around the time of
uploading the documents
noted above, the plaintiff's legal representatives informed a Deputy Registrar
of this Court that the plaintiff
was due to be removed on a flight departing at
matter was approved for filing at 10.07am. At around 10.18am the Urgent
Application was referred to me as the practice list judge.
I read the materials.
I then advised the Deputy Registrar to inform the plaintiff's legal
representatives that, having read the materials,
I was not prepared to entertain
the Urgent Application while the plane was awaiting take off. My reasons for
doing so are as follows.
exhibits to the Affidavit indicate that the plaintiff is a citizen of another
country who arrived in Australia lawfully in 1997
at the age of 15. He appears
to have lived in Australia since then. According to the delegate, the plaintiff
travelled to his country
of origin on ten occasions between 2009 and 2019. The
plaintiff has family ties to Australia, including a daughter. Between 2022
2024 he served a term of imprisonment following his conviction for offences of
violence. His Resident Return subclass BB‑155
visa was cancelled following
those convictions.
point he was taken into immigration detention.
9 January 2025, the plaintiff made an application for a protection visa.
That application was refused by a delegate of the defendant
2025. On 4 July 2025, the plaintiff sought review of that decision by the
Administrative Review Tribunal ("the ART").
On 10 July 2025, the ART wrote
to the plaintiff and advised him that his application for review may not have
been valid as it was
not lodged within the relevant time limit and invited his
comment. The ART wrote to him again on 26 August 2025 and sought his
on a further issue that had arisen that was relevant to whether the
application was made within time. The materials do not indicate
what transpired
in relation to the application for review by the ART after that point.
Nonetheless, attached to the Affidavit was
a letter dated 26 August 2025
advising the plaintiff of his intended removal from Australia on
2 September 2025.
the Affidavit, the plaintiff's solicitor recounts the plaintiff's instructions
that the plaintiff only realised on the evening
of 1 September 2025 that he
was to be removed from Australia the following day after being placed in a
holding cell pending removal,
and states that the plaintiff only then provided
instructions to his solicitor. However, as stated, the evidence suggests that
removal date was notified to the plaintiff earlier and the potential for
removal must have been apparent to the plaintiff and the
lawyers who previously
acted for him for some time. The materials indicate that the plaintiff had other
lawyers acting for him at
least up until 13 June 2025.
basis for the principal relief sought by the plaintiff was an alleged
the application for
a protection visa. In particular it was contended that the delegate fell into
that so much of the plaintiff's application that
concerned his mental health conditions, and the alleged "stigma" that people
those mental health conditions experience in his country of origin, did
"not relate to any of the reasons in
s 5J(1)(a)"
Section 5J(1)(a)
refers to a fear of persecution
"for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social
group or political
opinion". The delegate nevertheless assessed whether the
plaintiff's claims, including his claims with respect to his mental health
conditions, meant that the plaintiff established so‑called complementary
protection;
that is, the
delegate assessed whether the delegate was satisfied that there were
"substantial grounds for believing that, as a necessary
and foreseeable
consequence of the non‑citizen being removed from Australia to a receiving
country, there is a real risk that
the non‑citizen will suffer significant
The delegate was not
so satisfied.
noted, I declined to conduct a hearing while the plaintiff was on a plane with
other passengers on the tarmac at the airport.
I did so conscious that the
effect of doing so was likely to render the proceedings futile. Even so such a
hearing was likely to
be prolonged with delay while the defendant was notified
and lawyers were properly instructed. The application could not realistically
have proceeded ex parte, especially as it was not known whether the
plaintiff or other passengers could be lawfully and safely removed
aircraft pending the outcome of the hearing. If apprised of the hearing, it is
likely that the airport authorities may have
felt some pressure to delay the
plane's departure. To conduct a hearing in these circumstances posed a potential
risk to the safety
of the travelling public and to the proper conduct of airport
operations, potentially affecting many persons and entities.
circumstances where the materials indicated that the plaintiff had previously
retained lawyers, had sufficient advance notice
of his removal from Australia to
approach this Court at an earlier time, had previously travelled to his country
of origin on numerous
occasions and the delegate had rejected the likelihood of
him suffering significant harm on his return for any of the reasons he
nominated, I declined to hear the Urgent Application while the departure of the
Migration Act
Migration Act
Migration Act
s 36A(1)(b).
Migration Act
s 36(2)(aa).
RTF format (180 KB)
Signed PDF/A format