Pavlenko & Chiba [2025] FedCFamC1F 552 (18 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Pavlenko & Chiba
[2025] FedCFamC1F
File number:
DNC 612 of 2023
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PARENTING –
Interim orders made on last day of final hearing – Where the mother
contends that the father has
sexually assaulted the child and is an unacceptable
risk – Where the father denies allegations of sexual assault – Where
the father contends that the mother has coached the child in disclosing
allegations – Where there are inconsistencies in what
the mother has
alleged to police, government agencies and the Court as to the disclosures of
the child – Where the Court is
satisfied the father had not sexually
assaulted the child – Where the Court is satisfied that the interim orders
best interests of the child – Orders made by consent for the
father to spend unsupervised time with the child on a graduating
Proceedings stood over part heard.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
Isles & Nelissen
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
(2022) 65 Fam LR 288
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
11 – 13 August 2025
Counsel for the Applicant:
Ms Lawrence
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Falcomer Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
AFL Withnalls Lawyers
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Mrs Bassano
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Northern Territory Legal Aid Commission
DNC 612 of 2023
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
MS PAVLENKO
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
consent and pending further order, orders are made in accordance with paragraphs
1 to 8 of a document titled “Interim Minute
of Orders Sought by
Consent” filed 13 August 2025 (marked as Exhibit 12) as set out
Mother shall deliver up the child to the Darwin Registry of the Federal Circuit
and Family Court of Australia by 3.30pm on the
day these Orders are pronounced
for the Orders to be explained to her.
child shall live with the Mother.
child shall spend time with the Father as follows:
period of four weeks:
. Each Tuesday,
from the conclusion of school or 2.00pm on a non-school day until 6.00pm;
Saturday, from 10.00am until 2.00pm.
Thereafter,
for a period of four weeks:
. Each Tuesday,
from the conclusion of school or 10.00am on a non-school day until
Saturday, from 10.00am until 6.00pm.
for a further period of four weeks
. Each Tuesday,
from the conclusion of school or 10.00am on a non-school day until 6.00pm;
10.00am each Saturday until 10.00am on Sunday.
Thereafter:
. Each Tuesday,
from the conclusion of school or 10.00am on a non-school day until 6.00pm; and
10.00am each Saturday until 6.00pm on Sunday.
Changeovers
will take place at the child's school on school days, and at the residence of
the parent where the child is about to spend
time on non-school days.
parents shall communicate in relation to the child via an agreed parenting app,
and failing agreement by Appclose.
parent hereby be restrained from:
these proceedings with the child or in the child's hearing, except to explain
these Orders; and
Denigrating
the other parent to or in the hearing of the child, and each party will remove
the child from the hearing of anyone else
who may be denigrating the other
parties will forthwith do all things and sign all documents necessary to engage
a child psychologist to treat the child, with
psychologist to be agreed between
the parties within 7 days of the date of these Orders and failing agreement as
nominated by the
Father, and with the parents to equally share the cost.
Independent Children's Lawyer is at liberty to provide a copy of the Family
Reports of Ms C dated 5 September 2024 and 9 April
2025 and copies of any
Reasons for Decision in these proceedings to any treating mental health
practitioner for the child, including
a counsellor.
list the matter for mention before myself at 12.00 noon (AEST) on Thursday,
27 November 2025 via Webex purely for the purposes of
determining the
future conduct of the matter.
grant liberty to all parties to restore on three days’ written notice to
my Associate.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Pavlenko & Chiba
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
SCHONELL J:
parties are engaged in proceedings pursuant to
Family Law Act
(Cth) (“the Act”) in relation to their one child, X, born
2018. The final hearing commenced on 11 August 2025 and concluded
August 2025 with the making of interim orders. The proceedings have been stood
over part heard with a listing date of 27 November
2025 to determine the future
progress of the matter. These reasons explain why the Court approved the interim
orders as being in
the child’s best interests.
the commencement of the hearing, it was the mother’s case that the child
had been sexually touched by her former partner
Mr D and by the father. The
mother contended that the father posed an unacceptable risk to the child and
sought orders for sole parental
responsibility, the child live with her, and the
child spend no time with the father. In the event that the Court does not make a
finding of sexual abuse by the father and that it considers that supervised time
is appropriate, she sought the child spend supervised
time with the father for
six months and then progress to unsupervised time subject to various conditions.
father denied all of the mother’s allegations and sought orders that the
child live with him and spend supervised periods
of time with the mother
ultimately progressing to alternate weekends. That said, the father in
cross-examination agreed that ideally,
he would like to see an equal time
arrangement.
Independent Children’s Lawyer (“the ICL”) indicated at the
commencement of the hearing that her preliminary
view was that orders should be
made for the child to live with the father.
mother was cross-examined extensively over the first two days of the hearing
with the father cross-examined in the afternoon of
the second day. Each of the
parties’ witnesses were also briefly cross-examined. A doctor who examined
the child was cross-examined
on the last day of the hearing, as was the report
writer. The report writer adhered to the opinions expressed in her report but
that an alternative position was that the Court might make interim orders
for the child to progress immediately to unsupervised time
in the event that the
Court was satisfied the father had not sexually assaulted the child. The
rationale behind interim orders was
to assess both the child’s and the
mother’s progress and in essence the level and extent of the
mother’s commitment
to such an arrangement.
evidence concluded just before the luncheon adjournment on the third day of the
hearing with submissions to commence that afternoon.
Following the luncheon
adjournment, all parties invited the Court to make orders by consent that
provided for an interim arrangement
with the father to commence immediately
spending unsupervised time with the child progressing in a fairly rapid
progression to overnight
is the only child of the parties’ relationship. The parties were in a
relationship between 2016 and 2019.
January 2023, the parties entered into an agreement, albeit not in the form of
orders, providing for an equal time shared-care
arrangement. Whilst the mother
contended in her affidavit that she was anxious about entering into such an
arrangement and asserted
the father made various threats, she took no steps to
change the arrangement until the events of 22 September 2023. The father denied
any such threats.
the breakdown of the parties’ relationship, the mother entered into a
relationship with Mr D. Mr D and the mother
were in a relationship for
approximately three years. The mother’s affidavit failed to provide a
fulsome explanation about
the nature of her relationship with Mr D or a fulsome
explanation of any concerns she had about him.
extent of the mother’s description in her affidavit of her relationship
with Mr D was the following:
[2023] I took [X] to [Country B] with my then partner [Mr D].
stayed at [Mr D’s] mother's home in [City E]. We returned to Australia in
[2023], and I became uncomfortable when [Mr D]
told me that he was from a
paedophile household and I was worried for [X's] safety.
34. Following this disclosure, I ended the relationship with [Mr D].
detail of any concerns she held about him was only exposed in cross-examination.
In cross-examination, the mother initially revealed
that she began to have some
concerns about Mr D and the nature of his interaction with X before they
travelled to Country B but says
that she did not say anything to Mr D. She
expressed it at its highest that she had suspicions.
mother and Mr D travelled to Country B for a holiday. While in Country B, she
observed things that made her uncomfortable including
how Mr D and his mother
interacted with the child. She said that upon their return to Australia she had
a conversation with him where
he said he was from “a paedophile
household”. She said in cross-examination she did not know what that
meant. She says
she then ended her relationship with him but that it took him
said about a month after he had moved out, she saw a counsellor from F Family
Services in September 2023. She says the counsellor
advised her to be direct
with X and to ask her whether or not she had been touched on her vagina. The
mother says that following
that meeting she came home and spoke to X.
records in her affidavit that X told her that evening the following:
dad does rude things to me when he drinks beers
beers and more rude things with private parts
touches his private parts with his hands on the couch in front of my
He does “these
31. [X] gestured to me hand masturbation in front of her body. And said to me:
He wears clothes when he does this and is not naked, but sometimes
he is naked when he is not on the couch
My dad puts his finger in my vagina before school and after
school, in the afternoon, at night and any time he feels like it
At my dad’s house, my dad puts his finger in my vagina in
the shower, the kitchen, the lounge room, his bedroom, my bedroom
backyard. I think my dad is a liar and he lies every day about
everything.
(As per the original)
that point in time, the mother suspended the father’s time with X.
mother said she contacted Territory Families, Housing & Communities
(“Territory Families”) and the Northern Territory
Police. The child
was interviewed by the Northern Territory Police in late 2023.
was medically examined in late 2023. Sexual assault of X was not
established.
mother commenced proceedings on 8 December 2023. The father did not find out
until then why his time with X had been suspended.
2023, the father has not seen X other than once with the report writer and one
attendance of supervised contact. Subsequent
attempts to have X attend on
supervised visits were unsuccessful.
father has never been interviewed by Northern Territory Police or Territory
Families. Each of Northern Territory Police and Territory
Families have
concluded their investigations.
Expert Reports have been prepared for the proceedings.
APPLICABLE LAW
with the provisions of
of the Act, I set out in short form my reasons.
proceedings are governed by
of the Act. In making a parenting order,
requires the Court to regard the best interests of the child as the
paramount consideration. In determining what is in the child’s
sets out the matters that are required to be
considered. No one matter takes priority over the other. The matters to be
60CC How a court determines what is in a child’s best interests
General considerations
(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(a), the court must consider the
following matters:
(a) what arrangements would promote the safety (including safety from being
subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, abuse,
neglect, or other harm) of:
(i) the child; and
(ii) each person who has care of the child (whether or not a person has parental
responsibility for the child);
(b) any views expressed by the child;
(c) the developmental, psychological, emotional and cultural needs of the
(d) the capacity of each person who has or is proposed to have parental
responsibility for the child to provide for the child’s
developmental,
psychological, emotional and cultural needs;
(e) the benefit to the child of being able to have a
relationship with the child’s parents, and other people who are
significant
to the child, where it is safe to do so;
(f) anything else that is relevant to the particular circumstances of the child.
considering the matters in
s 60CC(2)(a)
, the Court must, pursuant to
, consider any history of family violence, abuse or neglect
involving the child or a person caring for the child together with any
violence order that applies in relation to the child or a member of the
child’s family.
of the Act requires the Court, when making a parenting order, to ensure the
order does not expose a person to an unacceptable risk
of family violence and is
consistent with an existing family violence order.
s 60CC(2)(a)
, the Court must have regard to the arrangements which would
promote the safety of a child and the person who has the care of the
word safety should, in my view, be given its ordinary meaning; that is, the
orders should provide a degree of protection
from the matters identified in the
subsection to the extent necessary relative to the evidence and the risk of
is a case all about risk. The task of the Court in relation to questions of
unacceptable risk as identified in
Isles & Nelissen
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
(2022) 65 Fam LR
is to undertake a qualitative analysis of the evidence directed not just to
the existence of the risk of harm but also to the magnitude
of the possible
harm. An assessment of the probabilities is not the measure by which a future
risk of harm is determined. A possibility
may be sufficient basis upon which to
find an unacceptable risk.
usual circumspection and caution applicable in a case where the Court is called
upon to make interim orders does not apply in
this case where there has been a
rigorous testing of all the evidence through cross-examination.
have heard all of the evidence in the proceedings and read all of the documents
relied upon and tendered by the parties. All that
remained to conclude the
proceedings were the submissions of the parties. The parties ultimately did not
make submissions because
they reached an agreement that saw the father
immediately commence unsupervised time with the child.
am satisfied that the mother’s consent to those orders was an admission by
her that the father did not pose an unacceptable
risk. To contend otherwise
would be absurd.
I have not heard submissions from the mother’s counsel, I am satisfied on
the evidence the parties have adduced that
the father did not sexually assault
his daughter or touch her in a sexually inappropriate way. I reach that
conclusion for the reasons
set out below.
am not satisfied that the mother is reliable in her presentation of what the
child told her, when she was told, what she was told
or the events that led to
her separation from Mr D. The mother’s affidavit and her oral evidence is
inconsistent with the record
of what she told Territory Families in September
2023, a conversation about which she had not previously disclosed.
that respect, the mother’s account of the sequence of events in her
affidavit and in her oral evidence differs significantly
from what was recorded
by Territory Families in a document created some five days after the alleged
disclosure by X. Exhibit 11 records
at page 134 the following:
The [blank] of the child has called CIT very emotional and has disclosed that
[blank] has just discovered that 5-year-old daughter
[X] has been abused
sexually by two people. The [blank] states that has been in a [blank] with [Mr
D] for the past three years and
after [Mr D] had moved to [blank] house in [...]
where [blank] have been staying together with daughter. The [blank] says that
has been noticing unusual activities from [Mr D] since moving which
triggered to suspect sexual abuse. [Mr D] always wanted to see
the child naked,
and he would just go in when the child was in the toilet, bathroom, dressing or
undressing. The [blank] states that
[blank] “confronted him, and [Mr D]
assured that nothing was happening, and he had no intentions of harming the
The [blank] and the child have just been in [Country B] visiting [Mr D’s]
family and [blank] were staying at the parents’
house. The [blank] states
that [blank] noticed similar behaviour trends from [Mr D’s] mother who
also would look at the child
and would also be around the child when she was
naked. On returning back to Darwin the [blank] stated that [blank] confronted
D] again and highlighted concerns about [Mr D] and his mother’s
actions towards the child as they would constantly get into
the room when the
child was undressing or in the bathroom when showering. The confrontation was
ongoing until last week when [Mr
D] disclosed that he grew up in a family were
both his parents had been convicted for child sexual offences and he said he was
to break the cycle. The [blank] states that [blank] was angry at [Mr D]
and asked him why then he had to let and the child stay with
the parents in
[Country B] when he knew their history. He then said that he just like to see
the child naked but has never caused
any harm nor touched her. The [blank] then
asked [Mr D] to leave house and he did. On Friday [blank] then had time to talk
child and asked her (Did [Mr D] touch your vagina). The child stated that
[Mr D] has touched her vagina many times and even described
masturbate as she said, “[Mr D] waves his penis to the front and Dad waves
his to the side.”
The [blank] then says [blank] has asked the child if there is anyone else who
has touched her vagina and the child responded that
her dad also touches her.
The child said “I know when dad wants to touch me, he bends his finger.
[blank] asked her if dad
touches her on puts the finger inside, she said,
“she puts the finger inside”, The child is coming out with a lot
details and it’s just so disheartening.
The father and [blank] due to the controlling and abusive nature of the
relationship, and they have private parenting agreement with
the dad as there
are no court orders and they schedule the dates for visit fortnightly. Dad lives
alone and is expecting to see her
this week and [blank] states that [blank] does
not want her to go back ever again.
[blank] had called and told the school about [Mr D] on Friday and nothing had
been done as this was the last day of the school term.
There have been no
concerns from the school on the child's behaviour. [blank] also stated that
[blank] intends to report the matter
to the police
mother accepted that she was the person who provided the information to
Territory Families. It reveals contrary to the mother’s
oral evidence that
her suspicions of Mr D before travelling to Country B was significantly greater
than she alleged in her oral evidence
and that upon returning from Country B she
confronted Mr D, and he remained in her home until “last week”. That
put his departure from the home at about a week before the alleged
disclosure in September 2023 and not a month earlier.
mother’s evidence that she did not understand what he meant when he said
he came from a “paedophile household”
stands contrary to her
knowledge that his parents were convicted of child sexual offences.
mother’s affidavit evidence of what the child told her the father did is
different in detail to that recorded by Territory
Families. The assertion that
the child “is coming out with a lot more details” suggests that
there was more than one
conversation between 22 September 2023 and 27 September
2023, a fact not previously disclosed. What that detail was is not
child told her counsellor that after she reported to her mother what Mr D had
done to her, he then moved out (Exhibit 11, p. 26).
This conflicts with the
mother’s oral and written evidence.
child’s disclosures to the Northern Territory Police in late 2023 are
inconsistent with what she is alleged to have told
her mother about a week or
two earlier. The child is unable to tell the Northern Territory Police what her
vagina is or where it
is. She says that she wished her mother could say it.
Northern Territory Police concluded their investigations of X without
interviewing the father. They were of the view that the
child had been coached
by the mother (Exhibit 11, p. 140). The record of Territory Families records:
In consultation with police it has been assessed the mother is coaching the
child, [X] is unable to recall what has happened and
clearly does not know or
understand what a vagina does. At one point during the CFI [X] said “I
wish mum could say it”.
has been the subject of a number of notifications to Territory Families. Those
investigations have not substantiated the allegations.
Territory Families
recorded in late 2023 as follows:
There is insufficient evidence to suggest a [X] has been harmed as defined in
Care and Protection of Children Act 2007
. [X] has been unable
to particularise what has occurred, during the CFI she repeatedly said she did
not know what a vagina was, or
what it did. At one point she clearly said
“My dad is a liar. My dad was lying, that was the lie. But I did tell my
I don’t know what it was. Mum said dad is a liar, he was born to
be a liar”, also stating “l wish my mum could
say it, because it is
a tricky word to say. It's hard. Touching me. Can't remember what happened, he
did it when I was 5.”
Consult with CAT Police identified it was clear [X] had been coached.
There is insufficient evidence to suggest a [X] has been harmed as defined in
Care and Protection of Children Act 2007
. The care is
recommended for case closure with no further action.
investigations in early 2024 record as follows:
It is also noted the concerns were previously investigated with no abuse or
neglect found as stated in the rational above.
Concerns previously investigated in workflow [...] with Investigation being
finalised [in late] 2023.
mother’s counsel did not cross-examine upon or explore in any way the
allegations.
is no physical evidence that the child has ever been sexually assaulted. The
mother does not report any instance of concern
behaviour prior to 22 September 2023 in relation to assertions of sexual or
inappropriate touching nor did
the child ever make any complaint to the mother
prior to September 2023 of any sexual or inappropriate touching by the father.
from one observation by the mother post September 2023, there is no
evidence of the child acting in a sexually inappropriate way
with other adults
or children before or after.
accounts by X have changed over time including as they developed to include that
the father had placed his penis in her eye and
that she had been sexually
assaulted by the father and Mr D on numerous occasions and in numerous
the final expert report, the report writer proposed an alternative hypothesis to
that of the mother in the following terms:
is also an alternative hypothesis that the abuse did not occur, but because
initially [Ms Pavlenko] strongly suspected that
[Mr D] (her previous partner
referred to in the previous Family Report)) had sexually abused or groomed [X],
she was primed to believe
that the child had been sexually abused, and could
have misinterpreted otherwise innocent comments elicited from [X] about [Mr
touching her vagina, precipitating the development of a false narrative
of abuse by him.
am satisfied that this alternate hypothesis is more probable and consistent with
the evidence as a whole than any suggestion that
the father has acted
inappropriately. I am not satisfied that the mother can be relied upon given her
inconsistent evidence as to
when she was told and what she was told. The mother
is the sole source of the child’s initial disclosures.
mother bears the onus of proof of establishing that which she asserts. I am
satisfied that she has failed to discharge the onus
she carries.
am satisfied having considered all of the evidence that the parties have adduced
that the father has not touched his daughter in
a sexually inappropriate way and
that there is no basis to conclude that he poses any risk of harm to his
daughter, let alone an
unacceptable risk. The mother’s agreement to the
orders and her invitation to the Court to make the orders is an acceptance
her that the father does not pose any risk of harm to the child.
such of the s 60CC matters as are relevant I am satisfied that the arrangements
proposed in the interim orders promote
the safety of the child and the mother (s
60CC(2)(a)). There is ample evidence of the views of the child about the father
and spending
time with him (s 60CC(2)(b)). I place no weight on those views
where I am satisfied, they are created either in an environment as
hypothesised
by the report writer or the subject of coaching as viewed by the Northern
Territory Police. I am satisfied that it is
to the benefit of the child to
immediately resume her relationship with her father, that which should never
have been disrupted (s
60CC(2)(e)).
am entirely satisfied that the interim orders are in the child’s best
I certify that the preceding fifty (50)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 18 August 2025
RTF format (440 KB)
Signed PDF/A format