Tjurabalan Native Title Lands Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v FMG Resources Pty Ltd & Another [2025] NNTTA 16 (24 June 2025)
NATIONAL NATIVE TITLE TRIBUNAL
Tjurabalan Native Title Lands Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v FMG
Resources Pty Ltd & Another
[2025] NNTTA 16
(24 June 2025)
Application No:
WO2023/0291, WO2023/0685, WO2023/0686, WO2023/0706,
WO2023/0707
IN THE MATTER of the
Native Title Act 1993
IN THE MATTER of an inquiry into an expedited procedure objection
application
Tjurabalan Native Title Lands Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC (WCD2001/001)
(native title party)
FMG Resources Pty Ltd
(grantee party)
State of Western Australia
(Government party)
DECISION TO DISMISS OBJECTION APPLICATION
Mr Glen Kelly
Catchwords:
Native title – future acts – proposed grant of exploration
licences – expedited procedure objection application
– failure to
comply with directions –
– objection application
Legislation:
Cultural Heritage Act 2021
(WA) (repealed)
Heritage Act 1972
Heritage Legislation Amendment and Repeal Act 2023
Title Act 1993
Michael Daniel Teelow/Michael Page/Northern Territory
166 FLR 266 (Teelow
Representative of the native title party:
Mr Shaz Rind, Arra Group
Representative of the grantee:
Mr Colin Johnston, Fortescue Metals Group Limited
Mr Richard Anthonisz
& Ms Elisa O’Sullivan, Ashurst Australia
Representative of the Government party:
Ms Michelle Rogers & Mr David Crabtree, Department of Energy, Mines,
Industry Regulation & Safety
REASONS FOR DISMISSAL
of Western Australia gave notice under s 29 of the
(Cth) of its intention to grant five exploration
Resources Pty Ltd. The
notices included a
statement that the State considers the grant of the proposed licence to be an
act attracting the expedited procedure
Native Title Act
[2] A general
description of the licences is as follows:
notified on 9 December 2022, located approximately 225 km south easterly from
Halls Creek and covering an area of approximately
notified on 26 May 2023, located approximately 245 km south easterly from Halls
Creek and covering an area of approximately
notified 28 April 2023, located approximately 265 km in a southerly direction
from Halls Creek and covering an area of
approximately 157 km
notified on 23 June 2023, located approximately 267 km south easterly from Halls
Creek and covering an area of approximately
notified on 23 June 2023, located approximately 244 km in a southerly direction
from Halls Creek and covering an area of
approximately 642
[3] The licences
are either partly or entirely overlapped by the
native title
determination (WCD2001/001, WAD160/1997). This provides the Tjurabalan
registered native title body corporate, the
Tjurabalan Native Title Land
Corporation which holds the native title in trust for the Tjurabalan people,
with standing to object
to the application of the expedited procedure over these
[4] Objections
were made to the application of the expedited procedure for each of these
licences by Tjurabalan through
Cross Country
Native Title Services in the
case of E80/5788 and the Kimberley Land Council (
) for the remainder.
Each of these objection applications were lodged within the timeframe outlined
Native Title Act
and therefore, under
Tribunal is required to determine whether the grant of the proposed licence is
an act attracting the expedited procedure.
[5] Should the
expedited procedure be found not to apply, the matters are then subject to the
right to negotiate in accordance with
Native Title Act
[6] Initially,
Member Eaton was appointed under a delegation from the President of the Tribunal
to constitute the Tribunal for the
purposes of an inquiry in regard to E80/5788.
Due to their later notification and under a renewed delegation, I was appointed
constitute the Tribunal for E 80/5790 – E 80/5793. Subsequent to this,
E80/5788 was reallocated to myself to enable all five
matters to run
Procedural History
[7] On 6 April
2023 and consistent with Tribunal practice at the time, Member Eaton made
directions for the inquiry concerning E80/5788
with compliance dates commencing
after the close date for objections. During the course of the first preliminary
conference on 5
May 2023, parties indicated they were hopeful of resolving the
objection by agreement with Cross Country indicating a copy of the
heritage agreement had been provided to FMG, which FMG indicated it was
reviewing. Parties sought, and were granted, an
extension to enable this review
and further sets of document exchange to occur.
Member’s Case Management Conference on 23 June 2023, Member Eaton was
informed that FMG were continuing their review
of the agreement and parties
sought further time to allow this and further dialogue between the parties to
continue. Member Eaton
provided an extension on this same date.
[9] A further
extension was provided on 16 August 2023. In the main, this was due to
uncertainty created by the enactment and subsequent
repeal of the
Cultural Heritage Act 2023
). In light of this, parties
were keen to continue with dialogue however were uncertain of the terms that
would need to be reflected
in an agreement due to this legislative flux.
[10] Following
the acceptance of objections against the application of the expedited procedure
to the grant of E 80/5790 – E
80/5793 during August of 2023, the inquiry
in regard to E80/5788 was reallocated to myself to enable the matters to be
coordinated.
In light of the difficulties described by the parties in regard to
the ACHA repeal and the new need to co-ordinate case management
across these
matters, I took the decision to vacate directions on E80/5788, which occurred on
30 August 2023.
August 2023, KLC notified the Tribunal it no longer represented Tjurabalan in
any matters and that representation was now
with Cross Country. As a result of
the matters now all falling under the same representation, all matters were case
managed together
from this point forward, with a pause taken to await clarity on
State heritage legislation.
[12] A case
management conference was convened on 8 November 2023 to correspond with the
passage of the
Aboriginal Heritage Legislation Amendment and Repeal Act
(WA) on 15 November 2023. This repealed the ACHA and reinstated an
Aboriginal Heritage Act 1972
(WA). This also created certainty
for the parties in regard to the statutory framework, and given this, parties
were pressed on
their intention to reach agreement or otherwise.
Tjurabalan representative was unavailable for this conference, however
corresponded with the Tribunal that agreement drafts
had been exchanged, that
the document was with Tjurabalan who were preparing comments and that there was
optimism that agreement
resulting in the withdrawal of the objection would be
able to be reached. FMG echoed these same sentiments during the case management
conference.
[14] A further
case management conference was convened on 7 February 2024 however this status
had not changed. The draft agreement
remained with Tjurabalan who indicated
that instructions on proposed amendments were to be provided on the following
day. This again
remained the status by the case management conference convened
on 20 March 2024, with FMG noting in correspondence prior to this
that the Tjurabalan representative had been unable to receive complete
instructions but that the preference remained to
resolve the objections by
agreement. Tjurabalan concurred with this update at the 20 March case
management conference, however noted
it now had sufficient instructions to make
some progress and that a draft would be reverted to FMG in the following
[15] This status
was unchanged at the following case management conference on 1 May 2024 however,
with Cross Country advising that
a Tjurabalan Directors meeting in which it
expected to receive further instructions had been postponed. FMG notified the
it had been kept updated and did not have concerns about the
[16] Due to
party availability, the next case management conference was scheduled for 3 July
2024. Just prior to this date, Tjurabalan
sought an adjournment due to an
upcoming Directors meeting at which it was expected that instructions would be
provided to proceed
with agreement negotiations. Due to the lack of progress
however, I determined the case management conference would proceed as planned.
Tjurabalan representative was not present at this 3 July case management
conference, perhaps due to a misunderstanding following
the denied request. At
this conference, I set an action for Tjurabalan to advise, by 31 July 2024, of
the next scheduled board meeting
after July 12 (the date of the adjournment
request), the time frames in which instructions may be provided and an update of
between parties following provision of these instructions.
[18] This was
acknowledged and committed to by the Tjurabalan representative in correspondence
following receipt of this advice from
the Tribunal, however no such reporting
was received. On 5 August, the Tribunal sent a further request for information
from Tjurabalan,
to which it replied that it had in fact provided a responsive
draft to FMG and was awaiting a response.
[19] The matters
were listed for a further case management conference on 21 August 2024 at which
it was advised that a response had
been provided by FMG, that the Tjurabalan
representatives would seek instruction at a directors meeting the following week
in general, progress continued to be made on resolving the matter by
agreement. It was decided to allow the parties to continue
with this process
unaided as it appeared that despite delays, agreement was in fact close and
parties were committed to finalising.
As in previous conversations however, I
noted the age of the matters, indicating there was a growing sense of urgency to
any agreement process as a review of approach would need to occur
should time frames slip further.
matter was relisted for a case management conference on 16 October 2024. In the
intervening period, the Tribunal was notified
of a change in legal
representation from Cross Country to Mr Shaz Rind of Arra Group. At the
conference, Mr Rind indicated there
had been little hand over from the previous
representatives and that he was not in possession of the agreement draft,
FMG agreed to send a copy, it would be able to be placed before the
Tjurabalan board at a meeting scheduled for 31 October for instructions.
agreed to provide this and indicated it remained committed to resolving the
matter by agreement.
[21] The matter
was again relisted for 11 December 2024. The Tjurabalan representative was
absent from this case management conference.
FMG advised that it had provided
the agreement draft as requested and that aside from an invitation to meet with
the Tjurabalan
Board, to which FMG stated it had responded in the affirmative
and was awaiting discussion on a date, there had been no further communication
from Tjurabalan. As such, no further progress had been made in the preceding
[22] Both the
State and FMG expressed frustration at the state of events as it stood at this
case management conference, particularly
given agreement had appeared within
sight just a few months prior. As a result of this, given the significant age
of the matters,
given the long-standing repeated attempts to reach agreement and
given communication from Tjurabalan had now fallen away, FMG sought
be put to inquiry. The State was supportive of this view for the same reasons.
considering these factors, I agreed and set the matter for a Directions Hearing
on 22 January 2025. This was not without
regret, however the age of the matters
and the cessation of communication from Tjurabalan left little choice,
particularly in light
of previous urgings to finalise agreement processes.
13 December 2024, the Tjurabalan representative corresponded with the Tribunal
apologising for his non-attendance. In this
correspondence Mr Rind asserted the
invitation to FMG to attend a Tjurabalan Board meeting had not been responded
to, which contrasts
with statements made by the FMG representative during the
conference. The correspondence from Mr Rind also noted the date of the
Directions Hearing and a request was made to consider cultural business which
occurs at that time of year. This request
was noted as these factors are normal
considerations the Tribunal is sensitive to, with representatives invited to
make submissions
to ensure cultural matters are taken into account in the
setting of directions.
Tjurabalan representative was absent from the 22 January 2025 directions
hearing. At this hearing, FMG stated that it had
sought to continue to
negotiate the agreement that was substantially agreed with the previous
Tjurabalan representative and had responded
in the affirmative to meet with the
Tjurabalan directors, but had not been provided with any response from the new
representative.
Following discussion I decided to set directions, which were
provided to all parties on 29 January 2025. In these directions, the
compliance for Tjurabalan was set for 26 March 2025.
communication was received by the Tribunal from Tjurabalan following the
distribution of directions however, on 18 March 2021
Mr Rind made an urgent
request for a copy of the directions pertaining to WO2023/0291, citing a recent
receival of instructions and
a lack of hand over from the previous legal
representatives, although this change over had occurred in early October 2024.
directions were again provided on this same day and included all matters
considered in this determination, as they did when originally
distributed on 29
[27] Tjurabalan
made an extension request for all matters on 24 March 2024, requesting a revised
compliance date of 30 May 2024.
Several reasons were provided for this request.
Firstly the Tjurabalan representative stated he had not received proper notice
the 22 January 2024 directions hearing, that a law and culture break had been
occurring until early March making communications difficult,
that Tjurabalan had
a new Board and it sought to meet with proponents face to face, that the FMG
representative had not responded
to requests to meet with the Tjurabalan Board
and that a slight delay would not prejudice the other parties.
[28] The State
did not oppose this extension however FMG advised that it did not consent to the
request. In setting out its views,
FMG stated a view that there has been an
absence of meaningful engagement from Tjurabalan in negotiations since the
appointment of
Mr Rind, despite there being ample time for engagement to
[29] Having
considered the submissions of the parties I approved a six week extension for
Tjurabalan and set a new compliance date
of 7 May 2025. In communicating this
extension with the revised directions on 25 March 2025, it was noted that:
I continued to
encourage the parties to resolve the objections via agreement.
I understood
that a copy of the draft agreement was sent to Mr Rind from FMG at his request
following the Member’s Case Management
Conference on 16 October 2024 and
noted that this may be the basis of conversations to resolve the objections or
that it could be
re-sent if necessary.
understanding that FMG had reached out to Mr Rind to seek to organise a
conversation with the Tjurabalan Board however these
attempts at communication
were not able to achieve results due to a lack of response from Mr Rind.
Negotiations to
resolve objections may continue while directions are in place. Positive and
demonstrable progress in this regard
may lead to review of
directions.
[30] On 2 May
2025 a further extension request was submitted by Mr Rind on behalf of
Tjurabalan. In this request, Mr Rind notes that
he had sought recent
instructions, on 1 May 2025, from the Tjurablan Chairperson to progress the
matter based on the draft provided
by FMG in October 2024. Mr Rind also stated
that this draft had not been presented to the Tjurabalan Board, despite
assurances in
October 2024 that it would be, and that substantial discussion and
additional work was required. Mr Rind further outlined that there
was a meeting
of the Tjurabalan Board scheduled for the following week however it remained
unclear whether the draft would be put
before the Board on that occasion,
although that seemed the inference.
[31] Mr Rind had
not specified an extension time frame, which the Tribunal inquired on. This was
clarified to be for a further 6
weeks until 14 June 2025. Additionally, Mr Rind
corresponded on 5 May suggesting it may be useful to place these matters into a
s 150 case management conference. The views of the State and FMG on the
extension request and a s 150 referral were sought.
[32] The State
opposed the extension request but did support a s 150 conference, although the
latter would have no utility without
the former. In their reply, FMG expressed
that a further 6 week extension was not justified and did not consider a s 150
would assist. In arriving at this view, FMG provided that a copy of
the draft agreement was provided on 16 October 2024 which was
acknowledged by Mr
Rind at the time. FMG further note that it appeared from Mr Rind’s
extension request that instructions
were only received to negotiate the draft
agreement on 1 May 2025, some 6 months after receiving FMG’s
[33] Having
considered the submissions of the parties I declined the extension request. In
communicating this with the parties it
was noted that:
I had considered
all the correspondence from the parties and the history of the matters, noting
the earliest notification day for
WO2023/0291 was 9 December 2022, with the
remainder in the first half of 2023.
I had formed the
view that the native title party had been provided with sufficient opportunity
to present its case, having been provided
with 15 weeks or almost 4 months.
In relation to
WO2023/0291, Tjurabalan was provided with a number of extensions by Member Eaton
during the course of 2023 to assist
agreement making and once reallocated to
myself, directions were vacated for this same purpose as the parties appeared to
towards an agreed solution.
In late 2024
following the change of representative, Tjurabalan had become unresponsive and
agreement negotiation had not been progressed,
despite efforts of FMG and
regular case management conferences before myself at which the Tjurabalan
representative did not appear.
Directions were
reinstated for WO2023/0291 and put in place for all other matters in January
2025 and Tjurabalan had been provided
with an extension as requested, however
given Mr Rind’s correspondence, it appeared no effort to further progress
had been made.
[34] By 7 May
2025, no materials had been received from Tjurabalan. As no extension was
provided, parties were notified the matter
would proceed to
Consideration
Native Title Act
, the Tribunal may dismiss an objection
application at any stage of the inquiry in circumstances where the native title
party fails
within a reasonable time to proceed with the objection application
or to comply with a direction of the Tribunal. While the Tribunal
discretion to dismiss an objection application, doing so has significant
consequences for the native title party and is
not an action taken lightly.
nature of the expedited procedure and the principles relevant in considering
dismissal of an objection application for failure
to comply with directions are
set out in the Tribunal's decision in
Teelow v Page
at [13]. This
includes that the discretion of the Tribunal is dependent on a range of
circumstances, including that the right to
negotiate, the result if the
expedited procedure is found not to exist, is a valuable right that should not
be lightly dispensed.
Further considerations outlined in Treelow and Page at
[13] include:
the failure to comply was as a result of the actions of the native title party
or their representative or was due to some
other cause;
there has been a reasonable explanation provided for non-compliance, noting that
the giving of an explanation may not itself
prevent the exercise of the
Tribunals discretion;
the failure of the objector to comply has resulted in prejudice to other
history of the proceedings;
the inquiry itself raises novel or a series of issues that make it not
unreasonable to not comply with directions, and;
consequences of the dismissal.
[37] A strong
consideration in these matters has been the large area covered by the licences
within the Tjurabalan determination area,
although a number are only partly
overlapped by the determination. These can be expected to give rise to
exploration activity over
a broad area which may give rise to interaction with
Tjurabalan community activities at some level as well as possible interactions
with heritage places unless proper care is taken. This illustrates the further
consequences of a dismissal in these matters in addition
to not having access to
the alternative in the right to negotiate, should the expedited procedure be
found not to apply.
consequences weigh heavily in this dismissal. They could have been avoided
however, if Tjurabalan or its representative
had continued its progress towards
agreement, which appeared close to finalisation prior to the change of
representative in October
of 2024. Similar could be said if Tjurabalan provided
evidence to the Tribunal that resulted in a finding that the expedited procedure
did not apply. Neither of these actions were taken.
[39] It can be
seen from the procedural history that a long period of time was provided for
parties to reach agreement. This was
complicated by repeated changes to
Aboriginal heritage laws, however parties sought and were provided with a
further year to reach
agreement. While progress was slowed due to Board changes
at Tjurabalan in mid-2024, in the instance that genuine efforts are being
to resolve objections by agreement in a reasonable time frame, the Tribunal will
provide time and assistance if required, to
enable this.
satisfied that despite the time taken, genuine efforts were being made to reach
agreement until the change in representation
in October 2024. Further time was
provided for a settling in period and for documents to be re-distributed,
however following this,
it appears that communications from the Tjurabalan
representative effectively ceased.
[41] In the
first instance, a request was made for FMG to meet with the Board which was
responded to in the affirmative, however this
was not acted upon by Tjurabalan.
Issues were then raised by the Tjurabalan representative that FMG had not shared
the documentation
as requested and had not responded to the request to meet with
the Board. Both of these claims were refuted by FMG and run counter
previous history of negotiation in these matters.
[42] The lack of
communication from the Tjurabalan representative was part of the rationale for
convening the December 2024 case management
conference, to provide the
Tjurabalan representative with an opportunity to discuss and to potentially
generate some actions to finalise
an agreement. Mr Rind did not appear at this
case management conference however, so this conversation was unable to
[43] At this
point, given the extensive time and opportunity provided, I came to the view
that the lack of action from Tjurabalan
had become prejudicial to the other
parties and decided to schedule a Directions Hearing. This was scheduled some
months after the
Member’s Case Management Conference to provide further
time for the parties to reach accord if they were able, which would
obviated the necessity for the setting of directions. While FMG and the State
submitted the scheduling of a directions hearing
was now the reasonable course,
disappointment was expressed by both these parties given how close it appeared
the matters had been
to being resolved by agreement.
[44] Tjuarablan
sought an extension to its compliance date for the reasons outlined at
. Despite both FMG and the State
opposing this request given the age of the matters, I accepted the reasons
provided by Tjurabalan
and granted the extension to provide a further
opportunity for evidence to be provided into the inquiry.
extension request made on 2 May was altogether different as the reasons provided
for this extension quite remarkably misconstrued
the status of the matter. Mr
Rind was in effect, seeking an extension so the Tjurabalan Board could take what
would appear to be
its first consideration of the agreement draft since the
change of legal representation. While it seems extraordinary that the Board
not been presented with this draft despite indications to the contrary dating
[46] In making
the extension request, Mr Rind and Tjurabalan seemed blind to the fact that they
were now in the midst of an inquiry
process in which they were expected to
provide evidence for a determination to be made on the application of the
expedited procedure.
Given the remarks of Mr Rind, it appeared that despite
being provided with almost 4 months to do so, no effort had been undertaken
gather evidence and develop materials. Instead, a belated effort was made to
focus on the agreement draft, despite around 2 years
already being provided for
[47] Given the
history of these proceedings and, in particular, the almost complete inaction on
the part of Tjurabalan since the change
of representation to Mr Rind, I had
little confidence that any action would be taken. As can be seen in the
procedural history and
this consideration, once the change in representation
occurred, Tjurabalan had repeatedly and inexplicably failed to respond to
when an agreement seemed imminent, repeatedly failed to appear before
the Tribunal when provided the opportunity and subsequently,
failed to provide
materials into the inquiry despite being provided with a generous amount of time
which included an extension.
[48] While being
mindful of the consequences of dismissal these objections for Tjurabalan, a very
significant opportunity had been
provided for the matter to be resolved by
agreement in the first instance. Having exhausted this possibility, Tjurabalan
then failed
to act in relation to the inquiry process and made a request that,
in my view, was not reasonable in the circumstances. This is
particularly in
light of the long history of the matters and the almost complete lack of
engagement and activity on the part of the
native title party since the change
of representation in October 2024.
[49] Taking
these factors into consideration, I have regretfully formed the view that
Tjurabalan have been afforded sufficient opportunity
to progress the objection
applications but have failed to do so within a reasonable time. Having regard
to all of the facts and
circumstances of this matter, I am satisfied that the
objection applications should be dismissed.
Determination
expedited procedure objection applications in relation to E80/5788, E 80/5790, E
80/5791, E 80/5792, E 80/5793 are dismissed
pursuant to
Native Title Act
RTF format (289 KB)
Signed PDF/A format