Adobe Systems Software Ireland: Own motion investigation report [2015] AICmrCN 1 (9 June 2015)
Adobe Systems Software Ireland Ltd: Own motion investigation
report [2015]
AICmrCN 1 (9 June 2015)
Timothy Pilgrim, Australian Privacy Commissioner
Background 3
Relevant provisions of the Privacy Act
Use and disclosure (NPP 2) 4
Data security (NPP 4.1) 4
Security of passwords and password hints
NPP 4 conclusion — whether Adobe
took reasonable steps to protect the personal information it held 7
Rectification 7
Recommendations 8
Conclusion 9
Acronyms and abbreviations 9
On 13 December 2013, the Australian Privacy Commissioner (the Commissioner)
opened an own motion investigation into Adobe Systems
Software Ireland Ltd
(Adobe) following Adobe’s statement on its website that it had been the
target of a cyber-attack ‘involving
the illegal access of customer
information as well as source code for numerous Adobe products’ (the data
The investigation focused on whether Adobe took reasonable steps to protect
the personal information that it held from misuse and
loss and from unauthorised
access, modification or disclosure.
As part of his decision-making process, the Commissioner considered the facts
of the case, submissions from Adobe and relevant provisions
This data breach affected the personal information of millions of individuals
globally. In order to maximise the efficiency of his
investigation and avoid
regulatory duplication, the Commissioner liaised with the Data Protection
Commissioner of Ireland (DPCI)
the Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada
throughout the course of his
investigation, and referred to the analysis of the data breach conducted by the
DPCI and OPCC in making
his findings.
The Commissioner came to the view that Adobe had breached the
failing to take reasonable steps to protect all of the personal information it
held from misuse and loss and from unauthorised
access, modification or
disclosure. In particular, the Commissioner had concerns about how Adobe
protected user credential information
(email addresses and associated
passwords).
While Adobe generally took a sophisticated and layered approach to
information security and the protection of its IT systems, it failed
implement consistently strong security measures across its various internal
systems. In particular, a backup server stored a database
of unencrypted
credential information (email addresses and password hints) of over
1.7 million Australian users, directly linked
to the encrypted password for
each user. The type of encryption used, together with plaintext password hints,
allowed security experts
with access to the database, which became widely
available on the internet after the breach, to identify the 100 most common
and customer accounts associated with those passwords.
This data breach demonstrates the importance of designing an information
security system with multiple levels of protections, checks
and balances, and
for organisations to ensure that sufficiently robust security measures are
applied consistently across all systems.
On 3 October 2013, Adobe reported on its website that it had been the target
of a cyberattack. Between 30 August 2013 and 17 September
unauthorised third party illegally accessed certain customer order
information’. Adobe became aware of the
unauthorised access on 17
September 2013 when an attempt by the attacker to decrypt card numbers that were
a part of the customer
order information was discovered by Adobe.
Adobe’s subsequent investigation into the attack discovered that the
attacker had compromised a public-facing web server and
used this compromised
web server to access other servers on Adobe’s network. The attacker
transferred data out of Adobe’s
The attacker took a copy of a backup database containing the personal
information of customers, consisting of:
usernames (Adobe IDs)
passwords (a small number of unencrypted passwords, held in a separate database,
may also have been compromised)
password hints
addresses and
telephone numbers of some users
payment card numbers and payment card expiration dates.
advised the Commissioner that there were:
Australian users whose encrypted payment card numbers and other payment
information were involved in the data breach
Australian active and inactive users whose current password data was
Australian active and inactive users whose obsolete password data was
36 Australian
users who may have had plain text passwords exposed.
Relevant provisions of the
Until 11 March 2014, organisations covered by the
were required
to comply with ten National Privacy Principles (NPPs), contained in Schedule 3
. The NPPs were replaced by the Australian Privacy Principles
(APPs) on 12 March 2014. Adobe was subject to the NPPs at the time of
The NPPs applied to the handling of ‘personal information’ which
defined as:
information or an opinion (including information or an opinion forming part
of a database), whether true or not, and whether recorded
in a material form or
not, about an individual whose identity is apparent, or can reasonably be
ascertained, from the information
or opinion.
NPP 2 (use and disclosure) and NPP 4 (data security) were the
provisions relevant to this data breach. In particular:
NPP 2 stated
that an organisation must not use or disclose personal information about an
individual for a purpose other than the primary
purpose of collection, unless a
listed exception applies.
NPP 4.1 provided
that an organisation must take reasonable steps to protect the personal
information it holds from misuse and loss
and from unauthorised access,
modification or
disclosure.
Use and disclosure (NPP 2)
An organisation ‘discloses’ personal information when it makes it
accessible or visible to others outside the organisation
and releases the
subsequent handling of the personal information from its effective control. The
release may be an accidental release
or an unauthorised release by an employee.
An organisation is not taken to have disclosed personal information where a
third party
intentionally exploits the entity’s security measures and
gains unauthorised access to the information.
In respect of the data breach, the personal information of Adobe’s
customers was accessed as the result of a malicious third
party or parties
exploiting Adobe’s security systems to gain access to its customer’s
personal information. The Commissioner
did not consider this to be a
‘disclosure’ by Adobe within the meaning of NPP 2.
Therefore, the Commissioner did not consider Adobe to have breached NPP 2 in
this matter.
Data security (NPP 4.1)
In assessing whether Adobe took reasonable steps to comply with NPP 4.1, the
Commissioner considered the information provided by Adobe,
the OPCC and the DPCI
also considered what steps would
have been reasonable in the circumstances to
protect the personal information that Adobe held. This included considering
particular circumstances, such as:
the amount and
sensitivity of the personal information it held
the risk to the
individuals concerned
the ease with
which it could implement particular security measures.
Commissioner also had regard to the guidance set out in the OAIC’s
Guide to information security: ‘Reasonable steps’ to protect
personal information
Generally, an organisation will need to have a range of security safeguards
in place to protect all of the personal information that
it holds that address
the particular security risks that are present within that organisation.
Adobe’s submissions to the OAIC indicated that, at the time of the data
breach, Adobe had extensive and detailed security measures
in place to protect
its systems and the personal information that it held, including the
Information
technology security measures, including firewalls, two-factor authentication for
remote access, web traffic filtering,
and antivirus/antimalware systems.
training materials available to employees on Adobe’s intranet and annual
security training for IT personnel.
Monitoring tools
for malware detection, data loss prevention traffic monitoring and intrusion
detection/intrusion prevention.
Annual audit of
the database servers that maintain the customer data that was accessed by the
Penetration
testing and regular vulnerability scanning on Adobe’s IT-managed network
infrastructure.
Several incident
response plans that establish Adobe’s response procedures for security
incidents, depending on the resources
program that involved a variety of risk assessments, including an annual risk
assessment to identify risks at an enterprise-wide
level, and assessments to
evaluate risks relating to the handling of sensitive information or
‘information which otherwise
ought to be subject to higher standards of
protection, such as payment card
Security of
passwords and password hints
The system that the attackers gained access to during the attack was a backup
system that was designated to be decommissioned (the
system’). At the time of the data breach, two data fields within the
customer database held on this system were
encrypted: ‘password’ and
‘payment card number’.
Adobe introduced a new system in April 2010 as a more secure means of
authenticating users than the encrypted passwords stored in
the backup system
(the ‘new system’). According to an Adobe statement made to Ars
For more than a year, Adobe’s authentication system has
cryptographically hashed customer passwords using the SHA-256 algorithm,
including salting the passwords and iterating the hash more than 1,000 times.
This system was not the subject of the attack we publicly
disclosed on October
3, 2013. The authentication system involved in the attack was a backup system
and was designated to be decommissioned.
The system involved in the attack used
Triple DES encryption to protect all password information stored.
This supports Adobe’s claim that it regularly reassesses and updates
its systems and processes in response to changes in technology
and emerging
However, despite apparently recognising the deficiencies of the backup
system, Adobe continued to store user credential information
in that system
using a single encryption key and a ‘block cipher’ encryption
algorithm. As well as encrypted passwords,
the backup system stored user email
addresses and plain text password hints.
The choice of a block cipher encryption algorithm meant that common passwords
shared by different users had the same ciphertext representation.
For example,
each of the 1,911,938 users listed in the database who shared the most common
password had their password converted
into the following ciphertext which was
stored in the database: ‘EQ7fIpT7i/Q=’. Although this cipher text is
meaningless
without access to the encryption key, the fact that different users
with the same passwords have the same cipher text (because of
the encryption
method used) allows common passwords to be grouped together.
Adobe also stored customer ‘password hints’ in the backup system
in plain text rather than in an encrypted format. The
OPCC’s investigation
found that some of the plain text hints contained the password itself, or an
obvious hint. For example,
some of the users associated with the password
ciphertext set out above provided a password hint which included the actual
This allows an attacker to infer the password of every one of those
nearly 2 million users: ‘123456’.
The use of a block cipher encryption algorithm meant that if one user’s
password becomes compromised, the password of every
other user in the database
with the same password is also compromised. The user credential database taken
from the backup system
was published on the internet following the attack.
Security experts reported that they had been able to circumvent the encryption
on the most common passwords by analysing password hints and using other
techniques to guess at them.
of commonly used passwords, and related ciphertexts, have been posted
Therefore, the security of
passwords of individuals with at least those commonly used passwords has been
compromised as a result
of the data breach and the method of encryption used by
The publication of the encrypted passwords and plain text password hints on
the internet has consequences beyond the immediate relationship
between Adobe
and its customers. Where passwords are compromised, individuals are placed at
risk on other systems where they use
a common password. While Adobe is not
responsible for its customers failing to take its advice to change their
passwords, Adobe’s
password security measures in the backup system have
nonetheless placed some of its customers at an unnecessary risk of harm.
NPP 4 conclusion — whether Adobe took
reasonable steps to protect the personal information it held
The Commissioner noted the challenges in guarding against sophisticated
cyber-attacks such as this. Taking ‘reasonable steps’
personal information does not mean that an organisation must design impenetrable
systems. However, in order for an organisation
to comply with the requirement to
take ‘reasonable steps’, its security measures must adequately
address known risks.
Further, NPP 4 requires an organisation to take reasonable steps to protect
all of the personal information that it holds. The requirements
of NPP 4 will
not be satisfied if an organisation has adequate security measures in place to
protect personal information stored
in one area of its systems, but does not
implement these measures in relation to all of the personal information that it
The information Adobe provided about its security measures indicates that
Adobe has a sophisticated and layered approach to information
security and the
protection of its IT systems. However, encryption techniques vary in their
effectiveness, and in their suitability
for protecting particular types of
information. The passwords stored on the system compromised in the breach were
each encrypted,
apparently using the same key, rather than being individually
salted then hashed. Hashing and salting is a basic security step that
could reasonably have implemented to better protect the passwords in its backup
Adobe also stored customer
‘password hints’ in plain text rather than in an encrypted format,
further exposing its customers’
passwords to risk.
Given the resources available to Adobe to implement robust security measures
consistently across all its systems and the consequences
for individuals if the
data on the old servers was compromised, the Commissioner found that Adobe
breached NPP 4 by failing to take
reasonable steps to protect all of the
personal information it held from misuse and loss and from unauthorised access,
modification
or disclosure.
Rectification
Once Adobe became aware of the data breach, it took steps to contain the
breach, including:
Disconnecting the compromised database server from the network.
Initiating an investigation into the data breach.
Blacklisting IP addresses.
Changing passwords for all administrator accounts.
Resetting passwords (on 3-4 October 2013) for users whose Adobe ID and
current password data (i.e. a password that was valid against
production authentication system) were in the database taken.
Notifying affected individuals whose Adobe ID, password data and/or payment
card numbers were accessed, including expressing regret
inconvenience or concern this incident may cause’.
Notifying the banks processing customer payments for Adobe, so that they
could work with the payment card companies and card-issuing
banks to help
protect customers’ accounts.
Notifying law enforcement authorities.
Sending takedown requests to third party site operators that had published
the compromised personal information.
The Commissioner expressed concern about the risk of customer passwords being
compromised and misused during the period between Adobe
discovering that the
attacker had accessed encrypted passwords on 23 September 2014 and resetting the
passwords nine days later.
However the Commissioner noted that Adobe was taking
reasonable steps during this time to prepare for the password reset to address
Adobe also took steps to mitigate against the risk of future data breaches of
this nature, including in relation to network monitoring,
the storage of payment
card information and passwords, two-factor authentication, decommissioning the
affected server and abolishing
the use of password hints.
Recommendations
The Commissioner was satisfied that the measures that Adobe took in response
to the data breach will assist Adobe to significantly
strengthen its privacy
framework and meet its obligations under the
The Commissioner endorsed the recommendations of the DPCI in its final report
on its investigation into this data breach. In summary,
the recommendations
specify steps that Adobe can take to enhance its password protection, network
security and access security.
Adobe has already implemented many of these
measures. The Commissioner requested that Adobe ensure it implements all of
these recommendations
in order to further strengthen its information security
The Commissioner also recommended that Adobe regularly review its data
security processes to continue to aim for best privacy practice
that protects
the personal information of its extensive user base.
The Commissioner recommended that Adobe takes steps to ensure that it is able
to implement a faster and more wide-spread notification
procedure if it
experiences another data breach of this nature and scale.
Adobe advised that it intends to engage a suitably qualified independent
auditor to certify that it has implemented a number of security
measures to
strengthen its information security systems.
The Commissioner found that Adobe breached NPP 4 by failing to take
reasonable steps to protect the personal information it held from
loss and from unauthorised access, modification or disclosure.
The Commissioner was satisfied that Adobe responded quickly and effectively
when it discovered the attack on its systems, working
to secure its servers,
contain and respond to the data breach, and to implement steps to mitigate
against future data breaches of
this nature.
Based on Adobe’s remediation activities and its intention to engage an
auditor to confirm its remediation steps, the Commissioner
decided to close the
investigation.
and abbreviations
Commissioner — Australian Privacy Commissioner
Adobe — Adobe Systems Software Ireland Ltd
NPPs — National Privacy Principles (contained in Schedule 3 of the
(Cth), prior to 12 March 2014)
OAIC — Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
http://blogs.adobe.com/conversations/2013/10/important-customer-security-announcement.html
The DPCI and OAIC entered into
a Memorandum of Understanding on Mutual Assistance in the Enforcement of Laws
Protecting Personal
Information in the Private Sector on 25 April 2014. See OAIC
<www.oaic.gov.au/about-us/corporate-information/memorandums-of-understanding/mou-oaic-dpci>.
Cross-Border Privacy Enforcement Arrangement
Replaced in January 2015 with
Guide to securing personal information: ‘Reasonable
steps’ to protect personal information
, January 2015, OAIC website
<www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-resources/privacy-guides/guide-to-securing-personal-information>.
See Ars Technica,
epic blunder by Adobe could strengthen hand of password crackers
, 1 November
2013 (viewed 2 September 2014), Ars Technica website
<arstechnica.com/security/2013/11/how-an-epic-blunder-by-adobe-could-strengthen-hand-of-password-crackers>.
See Reuters UK,
breach notification taking longer than anticipated
, viewed 2 September 2014,
Reuters UK website
<uk.reuters.com/article/2013/11/25/us-adobe-cyberattack-idUKBRE9AO10R20131125>.
https://stricture-group.com/files/adobe-top100.txt
Generally speaking, 'salting'
is where an additional string of data, such as random numbers or text, is added
to the password to
make it less predictable and harder to attack, and 'hashing'
is where passwords are processed through cryptographic algorithms that
them into seemingly random characters. While passwords may be guessed through
computational 'brute-force' attacks, this becomes
very difficult when strong
hash algorithms and passwords are used. Hashed passwords are therefore more
secure to store than their
clear-text passwords.
RTF format (116 KB)
Signed PDF/A format