Clearview Towing Mirrors Pty Ltd v Shane Miles [2025] APO 34 (10 October 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT
Clearview Towing Mirrors Pty Ltd v Shane Miles
[2025] APO 34
Patent Application: 2022202540
Title: Elevating storage apparatus for storing or moving items
Patent Applicant: Shane Miles
Opponent: Clearview Towing Mirrors Pty Ltd
Delegate: Greg Powell
Decision Date: 10 October 2025
Hearing Date: 23 July 2025, by Video Conference
Catchwords:
– section 59 – opposition to the grant
of a patent – novelty – lack of novelty established –
step – lack of inventive step established – clear enough
and complete enough disclosure – invention is not fully
described –
support – claims are not supported – subsection 60(3) –
opposition successful – opportunity
to amend – costs –
application for variation of costs – where applicant requested an oral
hearing but did not attend
– variation of costs applied
Representation: The applicant did not appear at the hearing
Patent attorney for the applicant: Ahearn Fox
Counsel for the opponent: Sam Hallahan
Patent attorney for the opponent: Andrew Jones, Jones Maxwell Smith &
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Patent Application: 2022202540
Title: Elevating storage apparatus for storing or moving items
Patent Applicant: Shane Miles
Date of Decision: 10 October 2025
The opposition is successful.
are not novel and lack an inventive step. Claims 1–4 and 6–9 do not
comply with s40(2)(a) as there is
no clear enough and complete enough disclosure
of the invention across the scope of the claims. The invention of claims
and 6–9 does not comply with s40(3) as it lacks support.
Moreover, claim 6 lacks support because it defines an invention that
I allow the applicant two (2) months from the date of this
decision to propose appropriate amendments to overcome the issues
identified.
I award costs according to Schedule 8 against the applicant,
Shane Miles. I apply a variation to fee item 11 so as to include actual
of counsel to prepare for the oral hearing, and fee item 14 so as to reflect the
actual costs of counsel to appear at the oral
REASONS FOR DECISION
patent application 2022202540 (the
application
) in the name of Shane
) was filed on 19 April 2022 as a divisional of
Australian application 2020281026 (the
parent application
). I note that
the applicant for the parent application was “Shane
Miles”, while the applicant here is “Shane Miles”. S79B(1)
states that only “the applicant” of the
parent application may file
a divisional, and a question may arise whether the applicant is the same (for
example, maybe the applicant
here is “Shane Peter Miles”). No party
to this opposition raised this as a concern. As such, I will proceed as if the
applicant is entitled to file the application.
the parent application was originally filed as the last in a string of
divisional applications, following a decision by delegate
Umehara to the
opposition to the parent
application
), the parent application was amended to remove its divisional
status. Consequently, the application claims priority from Australian
provisional application 2020902327 with a priority date of 7 July
request for examination was made on 30 June 2022. The application was accepted
on 12 October 2023, and acceptance was advertised
on 9 November
Notice of Opposition was filed on 9 February 2024 by Clearview Towing Mirrors
Pty Ltd (the
). A Statement of Grounds and Particulars
) was filed on 9 May 2024 and Evidence in Support (
completed on 8 August 2024. No Evidence in Answer was filed by the applicant.
Therefore, there is no Evidence in Reply.
correspondence on dates for the hearing, the opponent notified the Commissioner
that they intended on appearing by written
submissions only. The applicant
appeared to require an oral hearing. Given the applicant’s apparent
preference, the Commissioner
proposed an oral hearing date and asked the
opponent to indicate their availability for an oral hearing. The opponent
replied, indicating
that, while they had intended on appearing via written
submissions only, this would change if the applicant indicated that they wanted
an oral hearing. The applicant responded stating that they preferred that the
opposition be determined by an oral hearing. A hearing
date was duly set and
due dates for each party’s written summary of submissions were
communicated.
opponent filed their written summary of submissions (the
) on 9 July
2025. Somewhat surprisingly, given their desire for an oral hearing, the
applicant informed the Commissioner on 18 July
2025, 5 days before the hearing,
that (i) they would not be filing any submissions, and (ii) neither the
applicant nor their representative(s)
would appear at the hearing.
Applicable Law
application was filed after 15 April 2013 and is governed by the
Patents Act
Patents Regulations 1991
Intellectual Property Laws Amendment (Raising the Bar) Act 2012
Thus, the standard of proof that applies in the present case is the balance of
probabilities.
opponent has the onus to satisfy me, on the balance of probabilities, that a
ground of opposition to the grant exists. If I am
satisfied, I may refuse the
application
or, where appropriate,
give the applicant a reasonable opportunity to amend the relevant specification
to remove any ground of
consists of a declaration of Andrew Richard Jones (
) dated 8 August
2024, accompanied by exhibits AJ–1 to AJ–5. Dr Jones was, at the
time of his declaration, a Principal
of Foundry Intellectual Property Pty Ltd.
His declaration makes statements about the opposition, claims and priority date
parent application. Exhibit AJ–5 is a declaration, including
exhibit JO–A, made by Jason Oliver (
) as part of the
opponent’s opposition to the parent application.
Grounds of Opposition
SGP set out the application was opposed on the basis of:
a) Lack of novelty;
b) Lack of an inventive step;
c) Lack of utility;
d) Lack of manner of manufacture;
e) Lack of clear enough and complete enough disclosure (S40(2)(a));
f) Lack of best method (S40(2)(aa));
g) Lack of a claim or claims defining the invention (S40(2)(b)); and
h) Non-compliance with the requirements for S40(3).
the hearing, the opponent narrowed its case to:
a) Lack of novelty; and
b) Lack of an inventive step.
The specification
invention relates to what are known as “fridge slides”. These
slides, typically used by 4WD enthusiasts, have a platform
generally supporting
a fridge allowing it to be moved from a stowed position in the vehicle to an
easy access position outside the
vehicle. For the purposes of this decision, I
will use “fridge” to refer to not only a fridge, but also any other
container or other element that could be mounted to the
specification notes that fridge slides can be of the type where a frame carrying
a platform is fixed to a surface in the storage
compartment of a 4WD vehicle so
as to allow a person to slide the platform, to which is mounted the fridge, out
of and into the storage
compartment. When the platform is slid out, the person
can access the inside of the fridge.
specification also notes another type of fridge slide that not only allows the
platform to slide in and out of the storage compartment
but can also lower it to
a second position once it is outside the compartment. Such an arrangement is
advantageous where the floor
of the storage compartment is at such a height
that, even when the platform is pulled out, the opening of the fridge is too
to allow easy access to the contents of the fridge. The specification also
states that this type of slide means that the frame can
be mounted above the
floor of the storage compartment (for example, on a set of storage drawers)
allowing access to the fridge without
having to remove other things in the
storage compartment.
specification states that an issue might exist for older 4WD and/or camping
enthusiasts who may not have the strength to work
the known fridge slides but
still need to be able to access their portable fridges and other equipment
easily. The specification
states that:
“... the present invention is aimed at providing fridge slides and
other storage apparatus which require less strength to use
and are therefore
more desirable for some persons than manually operated
apparatus.”
general, the invention is a fridge slide having a platform located between two,
spaced-apart, slide assemblies and attached to
the slide assemblies by linkages.
The linkages allow the platform to be raised and lowered once it has been moved
from a storage
position to an access position. Movement of the platform from
its raised position to its lowered position (and back) can be achieved
use of a powered drive means (such as a linear actuator) controlled by the
are a few embodiments disclosed in the specification. To provide some context
to the operation of the slide defined in the
claims, I will refer to figures
1–3 which show the initial movement of the slide from a stowed position to
a withdrawn position,
as this phase of movement is not shown in the figures of
the embodiment relevant to the present matter:
essence, the tray
supporting the fridge can slide from a stowed
to a withdrawn position
is supported by inner slide assemblies
connected to the
opposite sides of the tray
, with the inner slide assemblies
being connected to, supported by, and can slide back into, floating intermediate
slide supports
. The slide supports
are supported by, and
can slide back into, the outer slide support
fixed to the vehicle.
Once the tray
is withdrawn from the vehicle, it is then lowered to an
access position
. In these figures, the mechanism for lowering are
telescopic upright members
. This operation is performed in
reverse to return the tray to its stowed position.
embodiment relevant to the present matter does not use upright members to lower
(and raise) the tray. Instead, it uses scissor
linkage mechanisms on either
side of the tray. The powered drive means acts on this mechanism to raise and
lower the tray. Figure
27 shows the apparatus with the tray in its stowed
position and figure 29 shows the tray in its withdrawn and lowered
this embodiment, the tray
is connected to inner slide assemblies
via scissor mechanisms
on either side of the
of the scissor mechanism extends above the
inner slide assembly
and is connected to a lug
, welded to
the tray’s frame
, by a linear actuator
. Once the tray has been slid from its stowed position
to its withdrawn position (not shown in the figures of this embodiment),
the actuator
is operated to pull the leg extension towards the lug
(i.e. in the opposite direction indicated by the upper, left arrow in figure
29). This causes the leg
to rotate about its pivot pin
and, given the linkage of the scissor mechanism, also causes the other leg
of the mechanism to rotate, pushing the tray
Operating the linear actuator
in reverse cause the tray
lift. The gas strut
acts as an energy storage means to assist in the
lifting of the tray.
specification ends with 9 claims. Claims 1, 5 and 6 are the independent claims.
Claim 1 is directed to an “Elevating storage
apparatus”, claim 5 is
directed to “Apparatus for storing and moving one or more items”,
and claim 6 is directed
to “Apparatus for storing and/or moving one or
more items”. These claims are as follows:
“1. Elevating storage apparatus, including:
a pair of spaced apart slide assemblies adapted to be mounted to or on a
article support means supported by or between said spaced apart slide
assemblies for longitudinal movement between an elevated stowed
position in or
on the vehicle and a withdrawn (or extended) elevated access position beyond the
linkage means connecting the article support means to the slide assemblies so
as to enable the article support means to be raised
and lowered relative to the
slide assemblies between the elevated access position beyond the vehicle and a
lowered access position
also beyond the vehicle;
wherein said linkage means includes spaced scissor type linkage mechanisms
connecting respective opposite sides of the article support
means to respective
opposite ones of the slide assemblies; and
powered drive means operatively connected to said pair of slide assemblies
and said article support means and arranged to cause movement
of said article
support means relative to said pair of slide assemblies between said elevated
access position and said lowered access
position and vice versa; and
control means in communication with said drive means for controlling
operation of said drive means.”
“5. Apparatus for storing and moving one or more items, for example, a
portable fridge mounted in a vehicle, the apparatus including:
a first part including a base or frame adapted to be mounted to a
a second part including a platform or frame adapted to support the item to be
stored and moved;
said second part being operatively connected to said first part for
substantially linear movement of said platform or frame at one
level relative
thereto from a retracted position within the vehicle or on the vehicle to an
extended position at said one level substantially
beyond (or outside) the
vehicle and for movement from the extended position at the one level to a down
position at a lower level,
powered drive means operatively connected to said base or frame of said first
apart [sic] and said platform or frame of said second
part so as to cause
movement of said platform or frame of said second part from said one level to
said down level and/or vice versa;
wherein said second part is connected to said first part by a pair of spaced
apart scissors type linkage mechanisms and wherein said
powered drive means
includes a pair of powered linear drives or actuators and wherein one part of
the respective linear drives or
actuators is connected to said first part and
the other part is connected to a respective one of said scissor type linkage
mechanisms.”
“6. Apparatus for storing and/or moving one or more items, for example,
a portable fridge mounted in a vehicle, the apparatus
a first part including a base or frame adapted to be mounted to a vehicle
against movement relative thereto and a second part including
a platform adapted
to support the one or more items being stored and/or moved;
said second part being operatively connected to said first part by one or
more extendable tracks connected to said first part and
said second part so as
to allow substantially linear movement of said platform relative to said first
part from a retracted (or stowed)
position at one level within the vehicle or on
the vehicle to an extended position at said one level substantially beyond the
said platform being operatively connected to said one or more extendable
tracks by a scissor type linkage mechanism so as to allow
movement of said
platform from the one level at the extended position to a second position at a
lower level, and
one or more powered actuators operatively connected to said extendable track
and said one or more scissor type mechanisms and arranged
to cause movement of
said platform or frame from said one level to said second level and vice
claims 2–4 and 7–9 define additional features such as the
arrangement of the slide assemblies, points of connection
between the scissor
actuating lever connected to the linkage
assembly with a handle. The full claim
set is in the annex to this decision.
note that the claims in this application align, in a general sense, with claims
of the parent application as follows:
Present application claim
Parent application claim
the claims of the present application are broader in scope. For example, claim
1 of this application does not:
(i) require the scissor links to hold the article support substantially
horizontally as it moves from the elevated position to the
lowered position;
(ii) limit the powered drive means to being two spaced-apart linear actuators
mounted above the slide assemblies and connected to
the scissor linkages,
as required by claim 1 of the parent application.
another example, claims 5 and 6 of this application do not limit the claims to
the feature that actuation of the linear drives
causes movement of the article
support (although it may be said to be implied in claim 5), and do not limit
their mounting positions
to the extent that equivalent claims 7 and 9 of the
parent application do.
Person skilled in the art
KD Kanopy Australasia Pty Ltd v Insta Image Pty Ltd
, Kiefel J identified
the person skilled in the art (
“... a person acquainted with the surrounding circumstances of the
state of the art and manufacture at the relevant time ...
They are likely to
have a practical interest in the subject matter of the invention ... and may
often work in the art with which
the invention is connected.”
Root Quality Pty Ltd v Root Control Technologies Pty Ltd
, Finkelstein J
“He is the person to whom the patent is addressed and who must construe
it. He is the person whose knowledge will determine
whether a patent is novel.
He is the person who will judge whether a patent is obvious.”
AstraZeneca AB v Apotex Pty Ltd
, the High Court additionally noted
“The notional person is not an avatar for expert witnesses whose
testimony is accepted by the court. It is a pale shadow of
a real person
– a tool of analysis which guides the court in determining, by reference
to expert and other evidence, whether
an invention as claimed does not involve
an inventive step.”
was noted in the parent decision:
“The specification is directed to an apparatus for storing items in
vehicles which can be moved to an externally accessible
position. Accordingly,
the skilled person, or team, would be expected to have a practical interest in
this field, including the
development process and its use. While neither party
provided a characterisation of the relevant person skilled in the art, on the
face of the specification, there is little doubt that the notional person
skilled in the art would be a team including individuals
with expertise in, and
knowledge of, mechanical engineering. The team would have particular interest
in developing new accessories
to be fitted into existing
with this characterisation.
are two declarants in this matter: Dr Jones and Mr Oliver. As already noted, Dr
Jones is a patent attorney and only provides
comments on the opposition, claims
and priority date of the parent application. He asserts that, observing the
similarity of claims,
the priority date of the present application should be 7
July 2020. I note that this date is now the recorded priority date for
parent application.
was the case for the parent decision, only Jason Oliver is being put forward as
a suitable person to educate me as to the state
of the art. Mr Oliver is a
retail sales manager for vehicle accessories with prior experience in the
development of vehicle storage
systems, who owns a fabrication business
designing new products to mount compressors into four-wheel drive vehicles.
to suitability, the OS contained no submissions on Mr Oliver’s
suitability. As already noted, the applicant made no submissions
However, noting the substantial identicality between this application and the
parent application, the submissions made in
are apposite. Taking
those into consideration, I do not see any justification for excluding Mr
Oliver’s evidence. I agree
with the position stated by the delegate in
the parent decision:
“I accept that the identity of the expert witness and their
independence may be a relevant consideration when assessing the
weight that can
be given to their evidence. However, these are not the only considerations in
that assessment. Other considerations
may include the nature and relevance of
their experience and evidence, and whether the evidence is provided from the
point of view
of the person skilled in the art.
... I consider Mr Oliver has a background that enables him to provide
evidence in relation to what a person skilled in the art knew,
or would have
done, at the relevant date. For instance, Mr Oliver had worked on the
development of a competing product with the
support of engineers and fabricators
Construction
the rules of construction for an Australian patent specification are well
summarized in
Decor Corp v Dart
, the correct
application of these rules to the construction of claims was discussed by
Bennett J in
H Lundbeck A/S v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
“... the words in a claim should be read through the eyes of the
skilled addressee in the context in which they appear ... while
define the monopoly claimed in the words of the patentee's choosing, the
specification should be read as a whole ... it
is not permissible to read into a
claim an additional integer or limitation to vary or qualify the claim by
reference to the body
of the specification ... terms in the claim which are
unclear may be defined or clarified by reference to the body of the
specification.”
would also note what was said in
Eli Lilly and Company Limited v Apotex Pty
“It is well settled that the Court should, from the outset, approach
the task of patent construction with a generous measure
of common sense. The
Court must place itself in the position of a person skilled in the relevant art,
being the subject matter of
the patent. From this perspective, the patent is to
be read as a whole, in the context of the specification and in light of the
prevailing common general knowledge and state of the relevant art at the
priority date.”
Full Court in
Airco Fasteners Pty Ltd v Illinois Tool Works
recently reiterated the
principle that experts can give evidence on the meaning which those skilled in
the art would give to technical
or scientific terms and phrases and on any
unusual or special meanings that would be given by the skilled addressee to
words which
might otherwise bear their ordinary meaning, and the Court is to
place itself in the position of some person acquainted with the
surrounding
circumstances as to the state of the art and manufacture at the
However, it is for the
Court, not for any witness, however expert, to construe the
specification.
approach is taken in matters before the Commissioner.
relevant evidence in this matter comes from Mr Oliver, which was filed in the
opposition to the parent application. As such,
Mr Oliver provides comments on a
slightly different claim set. However, I do not believe that this is any great
obstacle. As stated
by the delegate in the parent decision:
“The value of expert evidence comes from their ability to provide their
views on technical or scientific terms and phrases,
and on any unusual or
special meanings that would be given by skilled addressees to words which might
otherwise bear their ordinary
terms used in the application are the same as those used in the parent
application. Moreover, the description and drawings of
the two applications are
identical. Interpretations should, therefore, be the same, baring anything
unforeseen.
is Mr Oliver’s evidence that he was asked to specifically comment on what
he understood by the phrase “powered drive
means operatively connected to
said pair of slide assemblies and said article support means” in claim 1.
Mr Oliver answered
that he was unsure about the meaning of this and said,
“it is not one that I would normally
response to submissions, the delegate construed the term “operatively
connected” in the parent decision. In this regard,
and while I recognise
that claim 1 does not define the powered drive means being operatively connected
to the scissor type linkage
mechanisms, it is my opinion that the construction
placed on the term “operatively connected” by the delegate in the
parent decision remains the same. I repeat, and adopt as my own, her reasoning,
“The adjectives ‘operative’ and ‘connected’ are
defined in the Macquarie Dictionary as ‘operating,
or exerting force or
influence’ and ‘joined together’, respectively. The ordinary
meaning of the feature is that
the components are joined in a manner that allows
for the desired operation of the apparatus. With reference to the present
the desired operation is the movement of the article support means
between the raised and lowered positions.
I do not understand the claim to be requiring that the powered drive means is
directly fixed to each of the slide assemblies, article
support means and
scissor type linkage mechanisms. If the powered drive means was directly fixed
to all three parts simultaneously,
I cannot envisage any arrangement where the
article support means would be able to move between the raised and lowered
Rather, I understand it to be defining the operational relationship
between the parts and the desired effect to be achieved.
Firstly, the powered drive means is
operatively connected
collective unit of slide assemblies and article support means. Separately, the
powered drive means is
operatively connected
to the scissor type linkage
mechanisms to also cause movement of the article support means, relative to the
slide assemblies, between
the raised and lowered positions. Consequently, the
claim is not defining any mode of connection between the powered drive means
the article support means by itself.
Secondly, the required outcome of the operative connections in both instances
is defined in claim 1 as being to cause movement of
the article support means,
relative to the slide assemblies, between the raised and lowered positions. In
contrast to the use of
other terms such as ‘connecting’,
‘mounted’ and ‘connected to’ otherwise appearing in the
the term ‘operatively connected’ defines a functional
relationship between the relevant parts. ...
I do not consider the various parts being ‘operatively connected’
to one another to require only a direct connection with
no more than nuts, bolts
and the like, as suggested by Mr Oliver. Instead, I consider the term
‘operatively connected’
to embrace both direct and indirect
connections that achieve the stated outcome. Depending on the desired
operation, a direct connection
(italics in
is a requirement of subsection 18(1) of the
that the invention, so
far as claimed in any claim, is novel. Subsection 7(1) provides that an
invention is taken to be novel unless
it is not novel in light of the prior art
base. Prior art information made publicly available in a document or through
of an act forms part of the prior art base for the purpose of novelty
if it was published before the priority date of a claim.
is well established that the general test for lack of novelty is the reverse
infringement test, as set out by Aickin J in
Meyers Taylor Pty Ltd v Vicarr
Industries Ltd
“The basic test for anticipation or want of novelty is the same as that
for infringement and generally one can properly ask
oneself whether the alleged
anticipation would, if the patent were valid, constitute an
infringement.”
test is satisfied if the alleged anticipation discloses all the essential
features of the invention as
The level of
disclosure required is set out in
General Tire & Rubber Co v Firestone
Tyre and Rubber Co Ltd
“If the prior inventor’s publication contains a clear description
of, or clear instructions to do or make, something that
would infringe the
patentee’s claim if carried out after the grant of the patentee’s
patent, the patentee’s claim
will have been shown to lack the necessary
novelty, that is to say, it will have been anticipated. ... if carrying out the
contained in the prior inventor’s publication will inevitably
result in something being made or done which, if the patentee’s
were valid, would constitute an infringement of the patentee’s claim, this
circumstance demonstrates that the patentee’s
claim has in fact been
anticipated.
If, on the other hand, the prior publication contains a direction which is
capable of being carried out in a manner which would infringe
patentee’s claim, but would be at least as likely to be carried out in a
way which would not do so, the patentee’s
claim will not have been
anticipated, although it may fail on the ground of obviousness. To anticipate
the patentee’s claim
the prior publication must contain clear and
unmistakable directions to do what the patentee claims to have invented. A
however clear, upon the road to the patentee’s invention will
not suffice. The prior inventor must be clearly shown to have
planted his flag
at the precise destination before the patentee.”
(citations omitted)
their submissions, the opponent stated that claims 1–6 were not novel in
(i) US 4958979 (D1)
(ii) DE 19606196 (D2)
(iii) US 2004/0131455 (D3)
(iv) US 2017/0282775 (D4)
(v) US 2018/0312381 (D5)
(vi) AU 2021203078 as a “whole of contents” citation (D6)
These documents were also raised in the opposition to the parent
application. However, the opponent did not press D1–D3 in
their novelty
case for the parent opposition.
US 2017/0282775 (D4), US 2018/0312381 (D5) and AU 2021203078
D5 and D6 were dealt with by the delegate in the parent
. In that decision, she
found that claims 1–4 and 6–9 of the parent application lacked
novelty in light of D4 and D5,
and claims 1, 2, 4, 5, 7 and 9 of the parent
application lacked novelty in light of D6. As I have noted at [24] above, the
of the parent application were narrower than the claims that are before
me. Prima facie, and as submitted by the opponent, it would
be reasonable to
expect that a document that anticipated a narrow claim would also anticipate a
broader version of that claim, which
entirely incorporates within its scope the
original (narrower) version. That is the case here. I have read D4–D6.
read, and agree with, the delegate’s reasoning in regard to
D4–D6. The applicant provided no submissions, effectively
conceding that
the delegate’s reasoning in the parent decision stands. It follows that
claims 1–6 of the present application
(being broader equivalents to claims
1–4, 7 and 9 of the parent application) lack novelty in light of D4 and
D5. It also follows
that claims 1, 2 and 4–6 (being broader equivalents
to claims 1, 2, 4, 7 and 9 of the parent application) lack novelty in light
opponent also submitted that claim 3 of the application lacked novelty in light
of D6, and they raised the same submission for
this opposition as they had for
the parent opposition. However, the delegate in the parent decision found
“D6 does not disclose driven arms of the lifting assemblies 30 being
operatively connected to the inner slides 42 providing
a fixed link pivot and a
sliding link pivot. Similarly, unlike the other prior art documents, D6 does
not disclose the linear actuator
being pivotally connected to the slide assembly
opponent provided no reason as to why this finding in the parent decision was
incorrect. The wording of claim 3 before me is
identical to the wording of
claim 3 of the parent decision and, like the delegate in the parent decision, I
do not see where D6 discloses
the scissor linkage mechanisms being connected to
their respective slide by a fixed link pivot and a sliding link pivot.
US 4958979 (D1)
is directed to a lift mechanism for a motor vehicle for use by individuals in
wheelchairs. Figure 1 shows the lift in an extended
and lowered
Figure 5 shows just the lift mechanism in the lowered position:
of D1 has a platform
which is attached to frame
via two scissor mechanisms
. D1 notes that the two guide channels
can be attached to the chassis
of the vehicle
and accommodate wheels mounted to the frame
such that the frame
can be slid between a storage position, which may be within, or under,
the vehicle, and an extended position as shown in figure 1.
There is a jack
connected to the slidable frame and a shaft
connected to ends
of the arms
scissor mechanisms
. When the jack
is operated, the shaft
rotationally displaces
. This rotation of the
causes the arms
to pivot, thereby raising
and lowering the platform
. D1 states that:
“[m]aneuvering of the arrangement can be effected in an appropriate
fashion, for example by means of controls which are contained
vehicle, although the possibility is also afforded for the remote control of the
arrangement, for example via portable
control devices which can be carried by
the person riding in the
wheelchair.”
Consideration
opponent submitted that claims 1–4 and 6 lacked novelty in light of
agree that the features of claims 1 and 6 are disclosed in D1. It discloses a
raisable, and lowerable, article support means (i.e.
a platform) connected to a
pair of slide assemblies via scissor linkage mechanisms. A powered drive means
is connected to both the
slide assembly and the scissor linkage in such a way
that when it is operated it causes the article support means to be raised or
lowered. It follows that the drive means is “operatively connected”
as that term has been construed. D1 also disclose
control means for controlling
the drive means.
also agree that D1 discloses the slide assembly arrangement of claim
, the fixed link pivot and a
sliding link pivot of claim 3
and the control means having the ability to position the article support means
as defined in claim 4
Furthermore, I agree with the opponent that claim 5 is novel in light of D1
because it does not disclose that the powered drive
means are a pair of linear
DE 19606196 (D2)
is directed to a lift mechanism for a motor vehicle. As D2 is a German language
document, a machine translation of this document
was supplied by the opponent
with its evidence. Figure 1 shows the mechanism in a lowered position in
relation to the vehicle:
2 shows just the lift mechanism in the lowered position:
lift of D2 is mounted to the floor
. A telescopic element
runs along each rail
be extended rearwardly from the vehicle
. A further pull-out element
which are slidably guided within their
respective telescopic element. The arms
are connected via
a frame section
. While figure 2 shows the pull-out element
detached from the telescopic elements
, in implementation locks are used
to ensure that the frame section
remains within the longitudinal
extent of the telescopic elements
. A loading platform
connected to the arms
via one arm
scissor links
. The other arm
scissor links
are connected to each other by a connecting
which is free to move along the underside of the loading platform
. To raise and lower the loading platform
via the scissor
, a cable winch
is provided on one arm
runs from the winch over pulleys
such that, when the winch is turned,
the platform
is raised or lowered. With the platform
raised position, the pull-out element
can be slid into, and out of,
the vehicle.
of the winch can be done by hand by winding a handle
. The translation
of D2 also states:
“The cable winch 25 [sic – 26] can be replaced by other force
devices for lifting and lowering the loading platform.
In particular, manual
operation can be replaced by an electrical
operation.”
Consideration
opponent submitted that claims 1–4 and 6 lacked novelty in light of
was the case for D1, I agree that D2 discloses the features of claims 1–4
and 6. While the specific cable mechanism for
raising and lowering the article
support means is quite different to what is described in the application, what
is shown in D2 is,
nevertheless, a drive means that is “operatively
connected” to the slide assemblies and article support means such that
operation of the drive means raises and lowers the support means. With regards
to the control means, I accept the opponent’s
point that, while there is
no explicit disclosure of a control means in D2, the lift system of D2, when
implemented with the suggested
electrical operation, could not be operated
without some form of a control means and its inclusion is implied. This was
also accepted
for the documents considered by the delegate in the parent
US 2004/0131455 (D3)
is directed to a lift mechanism incorporated into a roof rack. Figure 1 shows
the mechanism in its stowed position:
2 shows the mechanism in its lowered access position:
lift mechanism
has a frame
secured to the roof
the vehicle. The frame
has two guides
out of, which slide respective rails
. Spring-loaded pins
catch holes in each rail
to prevent the rails coming out of
the guides when they are slid outwards. The lift mechanism
to support articles, and the tray is connected to the rails
via pivotally connected drop-down links
scissor links
. In operation, as the rails
out of the guides
, which had been folded such that they lay essentially parallel to the
when the tray
was in the position shown in
figure 1, unfold, thereby dropping the tray
down to the position shown
in figure 2.
figure 4, D3 also discloses a lift assist mechanism:
is composed of cables
attached to the rails
extending back to a rotatable rod
attached to a
torsion spring
. Winding the rod
moves the rails
in and out of the guides
“It is also appreciated that a motor (not shown) may be operatively
connected to the lift assist mechanism 100 to assist in
moving the tray 60 from
the loading position to the storage position. Further, a reversible motor may
be utilized to move the tray
60 between the storage and loading
positions.”
Consideration
opponent submitted that claims 1–6 lacked novelty in light of D3. I
Specifically,
I do not consider that D3 discloses a powered drive means operatively connected
to both the slide assemblies
the article support means. In my
opinion, the drive means is operatively connected to only the slide assembly.
It in no way interacts
directly or indirectly, with the article support means.
It follows that the claims do not lack novelty in light of
Conclusion – novelty
find that claims 1–6 lack novelty in light of D1, D2 and D4–D6 as
(a) D1 and D2 disclose the features of claims 1–4 and 6;
(b) D4 and D5 disclose the features of claims 1–6; and
(c) D6 discloses the features of claims 1, 2 and 4–6.
Inventive step
7(2) states that an invention is taken to involve an inventive step unless it
would have been obvious to a person skilled
in the art in light of the common
general knowledge (whether in or out of the patent area) before the priority
date of the relevant
claim when considered alone or together with the
information mentioned in subsection 7(3).
7(3) defines the relevant information as:
The information for the purposes of subsection (2) is:
(a) any single piece of prior art information; or
(b) a combination of any two or more pieces of prior art information that the
skilled person mentioned in subsection (2) could,
before the priority date of
the relevant claim, be reasonably expected to have combined.
test for obviousness was stated by Aickin J in
Wellcome Foundation Ltd v VR
Laboratories (Aust) Pty Ltd
, and restated in
Aktiebolaget Hassle v
Alphapharm Pty Ltd
“The test is whether the hypothetical addressee faced with the same
problem would have taken as a matter of routine whatever
steps might have led
from the prior art to the invention, whether they be the steps of the inventor
J provided a succinct statement of principles relevant to assessing inventive
Hood v Bush Pharmacy Pty Ltd
“Section 7(2) of the Act uses the word ‘obvious’ in the
course of describing what must be established before an
invention can be held
not involve an inventive step. Something may be ‘obvious’ in light
of the common general knowledge,
or the common general knowledge coupled with
the relevant s 7(3) information, if it is ‘plain or open to the eye or
mind, something
which is perfectly evident to the person thinking on the
subject’ or something which ‘would at once occur to anyone
with the subject and desirous of accomplishing the end’.
An invention may also be obvious in light of the common general knowledge if
the person skilled in the art faced with the same problem
as the inventor would
have taken as a matter of routine whatever steps might have led from the prior
art to the invention, whether
they be the steps of the inventor or not or (using
the language of the ‘modified Cripps question’) if the person
in the art would be directly led as a matter of course to take such
steps in the expectation that doing so might well produce a useful
alternative to the prior art. However, a claimed invention is not obvious
merely because the person skilled in the art
would consider that it was
‘worthwhile to
Importantly,
where a claim is directed to a combination of known integers, obviousness is not
established merely by identifying each
of those features in the prior art or the
common general knowledge. This was explained by Aickin J in
& Manufacturing Co v Beiersdorf (Australia)
, stressing that the
question is whether the combination of those features is obvious. In a similar
vein, the High Court in
Lockwood Security Products Pty Ltd v Doric Products
Pty Ltd (No 2)
, said that
the question of whether it would be obvious to add one integer to a combination
of other integers:
“...will turn on what a person skilled in the relevant art, possessed
with that person’s knowledge, would have regarded,
at the time, as
technically possible in terms of mechanics, and also as practical. ... Even if
an idea of combining integers, which
individually may be considered mere design
choices, is simple, its simplicity does not necessarily make it
Problem to be addressed
noted at [15] above, issues existed around the prior art fridge slides because
older 4WD and/or camping enthusiasts do not have
the strength to work the lever
of the known fridge slides to raise and lower their portable fridges and other
equipment easily.
As such, the problem to be addressed is to
“fridge slides and other storage apparatus which require less strength
to use ... than manually operated
apparatus.”
Inventive step – claims 1–6
submissions
opponent relied on D1–D5 as prior art for the purposes of establishing
that claims 1-6 lacked inventive step. To the extent
that the opponent agreed
that D1 and D2 did not disclose the features of claim 5, the opponent maintained
that claim 5 lacked an
inventive step in light of D1 and D2. The opponent
submitted that I should find claims 1–6 do not involve an inventive step
for the same reasons that the delegate in the parent decision found that claims
1-4 and 6-9 did not involve an inventive
Consideration
believe it can be said that claims 1–6 lack an inventive step in light of
D1, D2, D4 and D5 for the same reasons as novelty.
They are clearly relevant to
the problem being addressed and disclose the features of the claims. As such,
collectively
, the claims lack an inventive step because the features of
claims 1–6 are found in these 4 citations as follows:
D1 and D2 disclose the features of claims 1–4 and 6; and
D4 and D5 disclose the features of claims 1–6.
respect to D3, I cannot find the claims lack an inventive step, because the
evidence does not establish that powered drive means
operatively connected to
both the slide assemblies and the article support means are common general
knowledge (
) in the art. Mr Oliver did not address this. Instead, he
was asked to provide comments on what fridge slides were on the market
Australia in early 2013. I do not see how this information equates to CGK in
the art at the relevant time. In any event, even
if I accept the
opponent’s submissions that Mr Oliver’s comments establish the
following CGK:
“(a) Fridge slides were common but the vast majority were capable only
of moving a portable fridge horizontally, from a stored
position inside the 4x4
vehicle to a more stable position outside of the vehicle;
(b) There was many ‘straight out’ fridge slides on the market,
having a range of qualities at a number of price points.
(c) Premium straight out fridge slides included telescopic runners having
sliding arms that moved on ball bearings, providing for
a smooth and practically
effortless sliding action
(d) The MSA Drop Slide, which would swing forward as it lowered because of
parallel arm linkages.
(e) The ‘Tilt Slide’ designed by Candy Campers, which tilted the
fridge towards a user as it had been slid out of the
it is clear that powered drive means have not been established as being
similar reasons, claim 5 does not lack an inventive step in light of D1 and D2.
The opponent submitted that:
“[p]lainly, using a ‘pair of powered linear drives’ instead
of a single linear drive on an otherwise known elevating
storage apparatus does
not constitute an inventive step. Again, the lack of an inventive step with
respect to this claim is plain
whether or not it is specifically addressed by
expert evidence.”
to one side the somewhat questionable statement that expert evidence is not
needed, the evidence does not establish that powered
linear drives or actuators
are CGK in the art. Moreover, I do not believe that the drives of D1 and D2 can
be considered
drives, so there is more than a simple doubling of
powered linear drives.
Inventive step – claims 7–9
submissions
opponent submitted that claims 7–9 lacked an inventive step. These claims
are essentially equivalent to claims 10–12
of the parent application.
Claims 10–12 of the parent application were found to not lack an inventive
step in light of D1-D5
in the parent decision. The opponent submitted
“claims 7, 8 and 9 lack an inventive step in light of D4 or D5. Claim
7 defines an otherwise known elevating storage apparatus
which further includes
an actuating lever (which claim 9 defines as having a handle) operatively
connected to said linkage assembly
and arranged to selectively raise and lower
said platform when said one or more powered actuators are not operable.
Providing a
lever with a handle for manually operating an elevating storage
apparatus in the event of its powered actuator not being operable
is clearly an
obvious modification, particularly as manual handles/levers are provided in both
the EasySlide® (Clearview’s
existing fridge slide) and the MSA Drop
Slide® (Miles’ existing fridge slide) referred to in paragraphs 17 and
Oliver Declaration. This is plain and, contrary to the decision of
the Delegate in [the parent decision] (see [150]-[151]), it is
plain whether or
not it is specifically addressed by expert
Consideration
opponent’s argument started with the presumptions that (i) levers are CGK
for fridge slides, since fridge slides with operating
levers had been on the
market for a long time, and (ii) that it was CGK in engineering design to
include backups. Therefore, the
argument was that the PSA, when designing a
powered fridge slide would include a manual actuator as a
as well as being unsupported by any evidence, this approach is contrary to the
problem to be addressed. As noted above,
the problem was to provide fridge
slides which required less strength to operate. Given that was the problem, it
seems counterintuitive
that the PSA would include something that required the
same, or more (given the presence of powered actuators), strength to operate
the prior art slides, when
operating strength was being
the evidence before me, I cannot find that claims 7–9 lack an inventive
I am wrong and it could be said that, despite the lack of evidence, a backup,
manual mechanism could be included, such a mechanism
would potentially have to
be designed such that the operating force was not as high as with the prior art
manual actuators. The
specification does not address this potential problem
with a potential design. This could lead to inquiries around whether the claims
meet the requirements of s40.
Conclusion – inventive step
1–6 lack an inventive step as follows:
(a) claims 1–4 and 6 lack an inventive step in light of either one of D1
and D2 as they disclose all the features of these
claims; and
(b) claims 1–6 lack an inventive step in light of either one of D4 and D5
as they disclose all the features of these claims.
On the evidence before me, I cannot find that claims 7–9 lack an
inventive step.
Subsection 60(3) – lack of clear enough and complete
enough disclosure (S40(2)(a)) and lack of support (S40(3))
opponent submitted that they did not press the lack of full description, lack of
support and lack of clarity grounds in the present
opposition given that those
grounds were unsuccessful in the opposition to the parent application. However,
as I have already stated
in my decision, the claims that are before me are
broader than those before the delegate in the parent decision. Given this,
writing this decision, I developed concerns that the claims did not comply
with s40(2)(a) and lacked support as per s40(3). On 15
August 2025 I
exercised my power under s60(3) of the
to take into account grounds
of opposition not relied upon by the opponent. I invited the applicant to file
submissions in chief,
the opponent to then file their submissions in answer, and
the applicant to then file their submissions in reply. I noted that,
applicant file no submissions in chief, no submissions would be required from
the opponent.
applicant failed to file submissions in chief.
Lack of clear enough and complete enough
requires that the complete specification must disclose the
invention in a manner which is clear enough and complete enough for the
invention to be performed by a PSA.
CSR Building Products Limited v United States Gypsum
a delegate of the
Commissioner determined that the steps involved in assessing whether the
disclosure requirement is satisfied were:
“(i) Construe the claims to determine the scope of the invention as
(ii) Construe the description to determine what it discloses to the person
skilled in the art; and
(iii) Decide whether the specification provides an enabling disclosure of all
the things that fall within the scope of the
Commissioner reformulated the third question stated in
as a two-step
consideration:
“(a) Is it plausible that the invention can be worked across the full
scope of the claim?
(b) Can the invention be performed across the full scope of the claim without
undue burden?”
approaches taken in
have found approval with the
Federal Court in
Cytec Industries Inc. v Nalco
my invitation I noted that the invention of claims 1 and 6 encompassed
power drive means/actuator which was connected to the pair of slide
assemblies and the article support means in
manner such that
operation of the powered drive means caused movement of the article support
means, relative to the slide assemblies,
between the raised and lowered
positions. I observed that the sole embodiment directed to the claimed
invention is shown in figures
27 to 29 of the present application and utilised
linear actuators operatively connected to the slide mechanisms and the support
I highlighted that the only type of drive means mentioned in the
specification were linear actuators – powered hydraulic or
cylinders, a worm drives, rack and pinion drives and telescopic ram
assemblies.
stated that, in preparing his evidence, Mr Oliver was given a document which was
referred to as “Patent Specification 2”,
which was the accepted
specification of the parent application, and was the same as the specification
for the present application.
Having read the document, Mr Oliver stated
“I was also asked whether I thought that Patent Specification 2
contains enough information to produce any configuration of
an elevating storage
apparatus including scissor type linkage mechanisms and a powered drive means
that would be able to lift/lower
a portable fridge.
I do not think that this
would be the case
. For the reasons described above, I expect that the
majority of configurations of the component parts listed in claim 1 would result
in apparatus that would not work.” (my emphasis)
noted that Mr Oliver goes on to state that:
“Figures 27 to 29 in Patent Specification 2 would give a good starting
point for the design of a working prototype of a powered
fridge slide with
scissor arms”,
and figures 27 to 29 of the parent application are
identical to figures 27 to 29 of the present application. However, I pointed
that these figures only show a linear drive, and the specification provided
no guidance as to how to connect powered drive means
and lowered positions when the actuator is operated.
I stated that, to my mind,
the present application might be said, at best, to provide enough information
for the PSA to arrive at
the linear actuator-powered fridge slide falling within
the claims. I could not see how that disclosure could be applied to other
of powered drive means that fell within the scope of claims 1 and 6.
set out that, in my opinion, the PSA would be in the same position that Mr
Oliver encountered when he was asked to read a document
referred to as
“Patent Specification 1”, which was the application from which the
parent application was originally divided
(and did not describe an elevating
storage apparatus having scissor type linkage mechanisms where a refrigerator is
lifted and lowered
using a powered drive means). Having read Patent
Specification 1, Mr Oliver was asked if he could produce a working protype of an
elevating storage apparatus having scissor type linkage mechanisms with a
powered drive means from the information in the specification.
“many factors, few of which are described in Specification 1, would
need to be investigated before it would be possible to make
such a working
prototype ... engineering geometry (e.g. how the intersecting scissor arms move
in use), mounting configurations (which
can affect the mechanical advantages
utilised in the apparatus) and the locations at, and manner in which, the
component parts are
joined together (e.g. with one end of each scissor arm being
able to slide) can greatly affect the functionality of the resultant
Specification 1 does not describe these factors in any detail.”
went on to say that something might be able to be produced but:
“doing so would take 12 months or more research and design, assuming
that competent design engineers were involved in the process
and that parts for
the prototypes could quickly be obtained ... Specification 1 does not contain
much in the way of guidance for
producing such an elevating storage
apparatus.”
stated that, to my mind, it would be an undue burden on the PSA to take the
disclosure of linear actuators operating a fridge slide
and try to apply that
teaching to make use of other types of non-linear powered drive means. The
necessary geometry, mountings,
attachments and connections would require
extensive work. Noting that only claim 5 limited the powered drive means to a
linear actuator,
I submitted that, in my opinion, claims 1–4 and 6–9
defined an invention which was not fully described and, consequently,
not comply with the requirements of S40(2)(a).
Consideration
already noted, the applicant did not provide any submissions in response to my
query and, consequently, there were no submissions
of whether the applicant’s position can be seen as a concession or not, it
would appear to me that the applicant
does not wish to argue against my opinion.
In such circumstances, I do not have persuasive refutations to my stance. As
such, absent
any inclusion in claims 1–4 and 6–9 of linear
actuators, I find that it would be an undue burden on the PSA to apply
teaching of linear actuators operating a fridge slide in an attempt to make
other variations within these claim’s scopes.
These “other”
fridge slides have not been enabled. As such, claims 1–4 and 6–9 do
not comply with s40(2)(a)
as there is no clear enough and complete enough
disclosure of the invention across the scope of the
Non-compliance with the requirements for support for the
claims (S 40(3))
as amended by the
Raising the Bar Act
requires that the claims must be
supported by matter disclosed in the specification. The requirement of support
can be summarised
as requiring that the scope of the claims “should
correspond to the technical contribution to the
Merck Sharp & Dohme Corporation v Wyeth LLC (No
Burley J confirmed that
the following summary provided by Aldous J in
Schering Biotech Corp’s
Application
, and often followed in the United Kingdom, encapsulates broadly
the approach in Australia:
“...to decide whether the claims are supported by the description it is
necessary to ascertain what is the invention which is
specified in the claims
and then compare that with the invention which has been described in the
specification. Thereafter the court’s
task is to decide whether the
invention in the claims is supported by the description. I do not believe that
the mere mention in
the specification of features appearing in the claim will
necessarily be a sufficient support. The word ‘support’ means
than that and requires the description to be the base which can fairly entitle
the patentee to a monopoly of the width
J provided further guidance on what “support” means in
Pty Ltd v Polaris IP Pty Ltd
Fuel Oils/Exxon
, (T409/91) [1994] OJ EPO 653 the EPO Boards
of Appeal said, in a passage at 3.3 that has been often cited, including by Lord
Generics UK
Generics (UK) Ltd v H Lundbeck A/S
[2009] UKHL 12
; [2009] All ER 955;
[2009] RPC 13]
, that: (emphasis
... [there is a] general legal principle that the extent of the patent
monopoly, as defined by the claims, should correspond to the
contribution to the art in order for it to be supported, or justified ... This
means that the definitions in the claims
should essentially correspond to the
scope of the invention as disclosed in the description. In other words, ... the
claims should
not extend to subject-matter which, after reading the description,
would still not be at the disposal of the person skilled in the
The language of ‘at the disposal of the person skilled in the
art’ should be understood to mean that the patent must enable
invention to be performed by such a person.
Jusand Nominees Pty Ltd v Rattlejack Innovations Pty
[2022] FCA 540]
, Rofe J observed that one way for the claim
impermissibly to exceed the technical contribution to the art is for the claim
ways of achieving the desired result which owe nothing to the patent or
any principle that it discloses: at
, which was referred to with approval in
, the delegate
the approach to
determining whether the requirements of support are satisfied as follows, which
remains relevant in view of subsequent
Federal Court
(i) construe the claims to determine the scope of the invention as
(ii) construe the description to determine the technical contribution to the
(iii) decide whether the claims are supported by the technical contribution
to the art.
will exceed the technical contribution to the art when they claim products that
the specification does not
, or cover ways of
achieving the desired result which owe nothing to the patent, or any principle
on what is meant by “the technical contribution to the art” is
apparent from
“The technical contribution to the art is a subtle concept that is not
to be confused with the inventive concept that is often
discussed in relation to
inventive step. The distinction was explained by Lord Walker in
‘The expressions are certainly connected, but I do not think it is
or generally) to
treat them as having precisely the same meaning. “Inventive
concept” is concerned with the identification
of the core (or kernel, or
essence) of the invention – the idea or principle, of more or less general
application (see
Kirin-Amgen
[2004] UKHL 46
[2005] RPC 9
paras 112-113) which entitles
the inventor’s achievement to be called inventive. The invention’s
technical contribution
to the art is concerned with the evaluation of its
inventive concept – how far forward has it carried the state of the art?
The inventive concept and the technical contribution may command equal respect
but that will not always be the case.’
In the same case Lord Neuberger of Abbotsbury described the technical
contribution at [95] as:
‘in the context of a simple product claim such as the present
(especially where the claim is to a single chemical product),
the technical
contribution is (at least in the absence of special factors) the product itself.
As I have suggested, the technical
contribution can often be equated with
non‑obvious novelty – what is new to the art and not obvious is
really another
way of identifying the technical
contribution.’”
my invitation I raised two points why the claims lacked
(i) they were not limited to the technical contribution of linear actuators;
(ii) claim 6 defined only a single scissor linkage mechanism.
Technical contribution – linear actuators
stated in my invitation that, for the reasons set out for lack of full
description, claims 1–4 and 6–9 lacked support.
Given that the
problem to be addressed was to provide fridge slides and other storage apparatus
which require less strength to use
than manually operated apparatus, I noted the
present application solved this with a powered drive means to operate the slide.
stated, however, that this general idea was not the technical contribution,
and that it could not be said that the claims extended
only to subject-matter at
the disposal of the PSA having read the specification (in line with
my opinion, the specification limited the powered drive means to
actuators. I could not see how it could be said that linear actuators in a
specific configuration represent a general principle
of application of actuators
. I noted that the mode of operation of a powered linear
actuator was quite different to a powered rotary actuator. Apart from the
too) broad principle that a powered actuator actuates when power is applied to
it, there were little to no other points of intersection
between these two types
of actuators. Therefore, I was of the opinion that the technical contribution
lies in the use of two
actuators operatively connected to both the
frame mounted to the vehicle and the support platform that holds an article,
the operation of the actuators raised and lowered the
claims 1–4 and 6–9 did not include this technical contribution, I
stated that they lacked support and did not comply
with S40(3).
Different invention – scissor mechanism – claim
my invitation I stated that claim 6 lacked support because it defined an
invention that was materially different from what was
described in the body of
the specification. As noted in
Calix Limited v Grenof Pty
“a claim that includes a feature not disclosed in the specification, or
omits a feature that is disclosed, may lack support
because the invention
claimed is materially different from the invention
disclosed.”
noted that claim 6 defined the support platform as:
“being operatively connected to said one or more extendable tracks by
scissor type linkage mechanism”.
there was no disclosure of the connection between the support platform and the
vehicle-mounting frame by a
scissor linkage mechanism. I stated
that it was difficult to see how such an arrangement would have enough strength
to support a
load on the platform. I noted that the invention defined in claim
6 was materially different to the invention described, which required
two such mechanisms. As such, claim 6 lacked support.
also noted in passing in my invitation that claim 6 was internally inconsistent,
as it defined only a single scissor linkage mechanism
between the frame and the
platform, yet referred to “said one
scissor type
mechanisms”.
Consideration
noted, the applicant provided no submissions. As such, there was no need for
submissions from the opponent.
I have already stated at [96] above, I am left in a position where I do not have
persuasive refutations to my stance. As such,
the claims 1–4 and
6–9 lack support.
opposition is successful. Claims 1–6 lack novelty and inventive step.
Claims 1–4 and 6–9 do not comply with
s40(2)(a) as they define an
invention for which there is no clear enough and complete enough disclosure of
the invention across the
scope of the claims. Furthermore, claims 1–4 and
6–9 lack support as they do not include the technical contribution
linear actuators operatively connected to both the frame mounted to the vehicle
and the support platform that holds an article,
such that the operation of the
actuators raised and lowered the platform. Finally, claim 6 lacks support
because it defines the
connection between the support platform and the
vehicle-mounting frame by a single scissor linkage mechanism, and this was not
consider these issues can be overcome by amendment. I will allow the applicant
two (2) months from the date of this decision to
propose appropriate amendments
to overcome the issues identified.
Further observation
for the sake of completeness, while I did not mention this in my invitation, the
dependency of claims 7–9 is problematic.
Claim 7 is appended to
“any one of the preceding claims” but defines a
“platform”, which does not appear
in claims 1–4. Although one
might argue that the reference to “platform” implies claim 7 (and
therefore claims
8 and 9) appends from claim 5 or 6, claims 7–9 also
define a “linkage assembly”, which is not in
claim. This creates a potential clarity issue, which I will not contemplate any
further and leave as an exercise for the
Submissions
the normal approach is that costs should follow the event, the opponent
submitted that the applicant’s conduct with respect
to the application
warranted an award of costs above what is specified in Schedule 8.
opponent stated that the applicant had:
(a) filed this (divisional) application with claims identical to the parent
application;
(b) refused to give the undertaking requested by the Commissioner, when they
sought to withdraw the parent, to not pursue in any
further applications
(including this application), the same, or substantially the same, invention
that had already been opposed in
the opposition to the parent
application
(c) not withdrawn this application following the parent decision, or, at the
very least, not sought to amend this application, even
though it had claims that
were evidently not novel or not inventive.
opponent submitted that this conduct meant that the opponent had been required
to oppose substantially the same claims twice.
Given the similarity of claims,
the opponent felt that they were bound to succeed this time for the same reasons
that it succeeded
in the parent decision. In the opponent’s opinion, the
present second opposition (and the costs associated with it) should
been necessary.
opponent noted that the parent decision had issued on 5 March 2024, and, thus,
the applicant had been well aware since then that,
if the narrower claims of the
parent application lacked novelty and inventiveness, the broader, unamended
claims of this application
would also lack novelty and inventiveness. The
opponent submitted that a properly advised applicant would have withdrawn this
application,
or conceded to the present opposition, shortly after receiving the
parent decision. However, they had not and had allowed this application
opponent also noted that the applicant had requested an oral hearing, indicating
to the opponent a desire to prosecute this application.
As such, the opponent
had proceeded on the basis that there would be an oral hearing and had paid the
hearing fee and briefed counsel
to draft written submissions, prepare for the
hearing and appear at the hearing. But the applicant’s desire had not
manifested.
The opponent noted that the applicant had informed the Commissioner
and the opponent after the deadline for filing their written
submissions that it
would not be filing any submissions and would not be appearing at the
to the opponent, the applicant knew, or ought to have known, that its position
was not viable when it requested an oral
hearing on 28 January 2025. The
applicant had not given any explanation for its actions, or lack of actions,
from that point onwards.
Consequently, the opponent had been forced to incur a
substantial amount of unnecessary costs due to the applicant’s
conduct/indifference.
opponent referred to the Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure (the
) which stated:
“While the Commissioner will not normally award costs other than on the
basis of Schedule 8, such an award will be appropriate
‘when the justice
of the case so requires or where there may be some special or unusual feature in
the case’ (
Re Wilcox; Ex parte Venture Industries Pty Ltd and
[1996] FCA 1942
141 ALR 727).
This could include circumstances where, because of
the complexity or importance of the case, the Schedule provides inadequate
recompense,
or where the conduct of one or other of the parties indicates that
variation of the scale is appropriate (see
GS Technology Pty Ltd v Davies
Shephard Pty Ltd
[2000] APO 49).
The basic question to consider is
‘whether the justice of the case requires variation of the schedule’
E.I. Du Pont De Nemours and Company v ICI Chemicals & Polymers
[2007] APO 12)
, and principles relevant to the variation of the
scale have been discussed in a number of Office decisions including, for
Sterling Drug Inc v Boots Company PLC
Pont De Nemours and Company v ICI Chemicals & Polymers Limited
Viskase Corporation v W.R. Grace & Co.-Conn
[1998] APO 47.
Conduct that the Courts have found to warrant the award of costs on an
indemnity basis includes misconduct that causes loss of time
to the Court and to
other parties; making allegations which ought never to have been made, or unduly
prolonging a case by groundless
contentions; commencing or continuing an action
for some ulterior motive, or with wilful disregard of the known facts or the
law in circumstances where the applicant, properly advised, should have
known there was no chance of success; and abusing the process
of the Court, in
the sense that the Court’s time, and the litigants’ money, has been
wasted on totally frivolous and
thoroughly unjustified proceedings (
Shepherd (No 2)
(1994) 35 NSWLR 277
at 279-280). See also
Colgate-Palmolive Co and another v Cussons Pty Ltd
28 IPR 561.
Conduct both in and leading up to proceedings may be taken into account when
considering an award of costs (
Evans and Another v Maclean Shire Council and
[2004] NSWLEC 89
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
(1998) 193 CLR 72
Costs awarded in relation to proceedings on the basis of a variation of the
scale may include items included in the Schedule on full
or partial indemnity
basis, or additional items that may otherwise be relevant to the proceedings.
In this regard the Federal Court
Scale of Costs may be a useful
opponent submitted that the applicant’s conduct clearly met a number of
the types of conduct referred to in this part of
the Manual as being a basis for
a special costs order. They submitted that the applicant was:
(a) unduly prolonging a case by groundless contentions;
(b) commencing or continuing an action for some ulterior motive, or with wilful
disregard of the known facts or the clear law in
circumstances where the
applicant, properly advised, should have known there was no chance of success;
(c) abusing the process of the Court or IP Australia in the sense that the
Court’s or IP Australia’s time and the opponent’s
been wasted on totally frivolous and unjustified proceedings.
opponent maintained that this had been the case since at least the parent
decision had issued on 5 March 2024.
not relying on the accusation that the applicant was continuing an action for an
ulterior motive (since the opponent’s
position was focussed on continuing
an action with wilful disregard of the facts or law), the opponent did point to
a significant
degree of acrimony between the opponent and the applicant
following the applicant’s unsuccessful infringement action against
opponent, but the opponent’s successful cross-claim for misleading and
opponent submitted that the approach adopted by the applicant to this opposition
had required the opponent to incur substantial
costs in drafting and filing a
statement of grounds and particulars, preparing and filing evidence, preparing
and filing written
submissions, paying a hearing fee and preparing for an oral
hearing, while the applicant incurred no costs themselves since they
file any evidence, did not file any submissions, and do not make an appearance
at the hearing.
Accordingly,
the opponent submitted that the applicant should be ordered to pay the actual
costs of the opponent incurred in relation
to the conduct of this opposition on
an indemnity basis. The opponent suggested that calculation of such costs could
accordance with the scale provided in the
Federal Court Rules 2011
Consideration
have some sympathy with the opponent. It is confusing to me why, in light of
the parent decision, the applicant did not, at the
very least, amend their
claims. Instead, the applicant deliberately pursued substantially the same
invention that was found to be
non-patentable in the parent decision. To my
mind any competent party would have recognised what the outcome of this
would be and, if genuinely seeking to obtain a patent, would have
taken steps to at least narrow the focus of the opposition. This
borders on, if
not is, wilful disregard of the known facts. The applicant’s behaviour is
such that it could be said that the
opponent was forced down a route that did
not necessarily have to be taken.
the applicant’s conduct in requesting an oral hearing and then failing to
appear raises concerns. The applicant knew
that the opponent was willing to
proceed on the basis of written submissions but also knew that the opponent
would attend if the
applicant requested an oral hearing. However, the applicant
did not indicate their intention to not participate in the hearing in
until effectively the last minute, when there was no doubt that the opponent had
already outlaid substantial sums of money.
The applicant’s actions have
rendered the oral hearing proceedings frivolous.
such, I believe that a variation in costs is appropriate. In this regard, while
I accept that the opponent drafted and filed a
statement of grounds and
particulars, and prepared and filed evidence, it must be observed that the SGP
filed for the parent opposition
and the SGP filed for this opposition are
essentially identical. Moreover, while I recognise that the declaration by
Andrew Jones
is EIS that was prepared for this opposition, it merely provides
background facts, gives the outcome of the parent decision and observes
priority date of this application as shown on the IP Australia website was
different to the priority date determined in
the parent decision. While
interesting, it is of no import to the grounds of opposition. The most
important role that Mr Jones’
declaration did was introduce the
declaration by Jason Oliver which formed the EIS for the parent opposition. As
such, the EIS filed
in this opposition is essentially the same as the EIS filed
for the parent opposition. Consequently, while it may be said that the
applicant’s behaviour forced the opponent down a path, and there is no
doubt that preparing the SGP and EIS required some time
and effort, most of the
work undertaken for that route already existed and can be encompassed within the
existing costs structure
in Schedule 8.
Notwithstanding
that, the applicant’s behaviour in insisting on a hearing and then not
participating in that hearing requires
redress. The opponent has been put to
unnecessary expense by requiring counsel to prepare for, and appear at, an oral
hearing that
did not, having regard to the applicant’s behaviour, need to
Consequently,
I will award costs according to Schedule 8 against the applicant, Shane Miles.
I will apply a variation to fee item
11 so as to include actual costs of counsel
to prepare for the oral hearing, and fee item 14 so as to reflect the actual
counsel to appear at the oral hearing. I would note that the oral
hearing itself lasted for approximately 27 minutes.
Greg Powell
Delegate of the Commissioner of Patents
1. Elevating storage apparatus,
a pair of spaced apart slide assemblies adapted to be mounted to
or on a vehicle;
article support means supported by or between said spaced
apart slide assemblies for longitudinal movement between an elevated stowed
position in or on the vehicle and a withdrawn (or extended) elevated access
position beyond the vehicle;
linkage means connecting the article support
means to the slide assemblies so as to enable the article support means to be
and lowered relative to the slide assemblies between the elevated access
position beyond the vehicle and a lowered access position
also beyond the
wherein said linkage means includes spaced scissor type linkage
mechanisms connecting respective opposite sides of the article support
respective opposite ones of the slide assemblies; and
powered drive means
operatively connected to said pair of slide assemblies and said article support
means and arranged to cause movement
of said article support means relative to
said pair of slide assemblies between said elevated access position and said
lowered access
position and vice versa; and
control means in communication
with said drive means for controlling operation of said drive
2. Elevating storage apparatus according to claim 1, wherein each
slide assembly is a compound slide assembly including an outer fixed
support, an intermediate slide support and an inner slide which can be withdrawn
(or extended) from its stowed elevated position
to a withdrawn (or extended)
elevated position at which both inner slides are supported beyond the outer
fixed slide supports.
3. Elevating storage apparatus according to claim 1
or claim 2, wherein the spaced scissor type linkage mechanisms are connected to
respective inner slides each of which provides a fixed link pivot and a sliding
link pivot.
4. Elevating storage apparatus as claimed in any one of the
preceding claims wherein the control means is adapted to actuate said
drive means for selectively positioning the article support means between the
elevated first access position and the second
lowered access
5. Apparatus for storing and moving one or more items, for
example, a portable fridge mounted in a vehicle, the apparatus including:
first part including a base or frame adapted to be mounted to a vehicle;
second part including a platform or frame adapted to support the item to be
stored and moved;
said second part being operatively connected to said first
part for substantially linear movement of said platform or frame at one
relative thereto from a retracted position within the vehicle or on the vehicle
to an extended position at said one level substantially
beyond (or outside) the
vehicle and for movement from the extended position at the one level to a down
position at a lower level,
powered drive means operatively connected to
said base or frame of said first apart and said platform or frame of said second
so as to cause movement of said platform or frame of said second part from
said one level to said down level and/or vice versa;
wherein said second part
is connected to said first part by a pair of spaced apart scissors type linkage
mechanisms and wherein said
powered drive means includes a pair of powered
linear drives or actuators and wherein one part of the respective linear drives
actuators is connected to said first part and the other part is connected to
a respective one of said scissor type linkage mechanisms.
6. Apparatus
for storing and/or moving one or more items, for example, a portable fridge
mounted in a vehicle, the apparatus including:
a first part including a base
or frame adapted to be mounted to a vehicle against movement relative thereto
and a second part including
a platform adapted to support the one or more items
being stored and/or moved;
said second part being operatively connected to
said first part by one or more extendable tracks connected to said first part
said second part so as to allow substantially linear movement of said
platform relative to said first part from a retracted (or stowed)
position at
one level within the vehicle or on the vehicle to an extended position at said
one level substantially beyond the vehicle;
said platform being
operatively connected to said one or more extendable tracks by a scissor type
linkage mechanism so as to allow
movement of said platform from the one level at
the extended position to a second position at a lower level, and
one or more
powered actuators operatively connected to said extendable track and said one or
more scissor type mechanisms and arranged
to cause movement of said platform or
frame from said one level to said second level and vice
7. Apparatus according to any one of the preceding claims further
including an actuating lever operatively connected to said linkage
assembly and
arranged to selectively raise and lower said platform when said one or more
powered actuators are not operable.
8. Apparatus according to claim 7
wherein said actuating lever is releasably connected to said linkage
9. Apparatus according to claim 7 or claim 8 further including
a handle connected to or integral with said actuating lever whereby
actuating lever is connected to said linkage assembly, said handle is at a
predetermined position remote from said platform
Clearview Towing Mirrors Pty
Ltd v Shane Robert Miles
, subsection
Ibid, subsection
Specification, page 2
line 29–page 3 line 2
[2007] FCA 481
[2015] HCA 30
Parent decision at
[9] and [15]
Parent decision
at [30]–[31]
[2013] FCA 214
[2023] FCAFC 7
Kimberley-Clark
Australia Pty Ltd v Arico Trading International Pty Ltd
[2001] HCA 8
Sartas No 1 Pty Ltd
v Koukourou & Partners Pty Ltd
[1994] FCA 1529
Parent decision at
Parent decision at
137 CLR 228
Nicaro Holdings Pty
Ltd v Martin Engineering Co
[1990] FCA 40
(1990) 91 ALR 513
[1972] RPC 457
at 485-486.
Parent decision at
[119]–[140]
D1 at column 4, lines
See items 16, 15
and 7 of D1 figures
items 35 and 40 of D1
Power source 13 is
actuated, implying a control means (see, for example, [126] of the parent
See also D2 at
column 6, lines 27–30 (this also indicates the number “25”
when it should be
decision at [126] for
[2002] HCA 59
212 CLR 411
[1980] HCA 9
Specification, page 2
line 29–page 3 line 2
OS at [44] (footnotes
(footnotes omitted)
[2015] APO 72
[2021] FCA 970
[2021] FCA 970
Fuel Oils/EXXON
(T 409/91) [1994] OJ EPO 653 at 659
[2020] FCA 1477
[1993] RPC 249
[2022] FCA 1493
at [546]-[547],
Jusand Nominees Pty Ltd v
Rattlejack Innovations Pty Ltd
[2022] FCA 540
[243]-[244]
[111]–[112]
EPO 653 (T409/91)
decision at [6]
MSA 4x4 Accessories
Pty Ltd v Clearview Towing Mirrors Pty Ltd
[2024] FCA 24
RTF format (9.25 MB)
Signed PDF/A format