URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1965/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BP Australia Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation [1965] UKPCHCA 2; (1965) 112 CLR 386 (27 July 1965)
PRIVY COUNCIL
B.P. AUSTRALIA LTD. v. FEDERAL COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
[1965] UKPCHCA 2
(1965) 112 CLR 386
Income Tax (Cth)
Privy Council
Lord Reid(1), Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest(1), Lord Pearce(1), Lord Upjohn(1)
and Lord Wilberforce(1).
Income Tax (Cth) - Assessable income - Allowable deductions - Taxpayer
selling petrol to retailers - Expenditure incurred in tying
retailers to
taxpayer - Capital or income expenditure - Whether allowable deduction -
Income Tax and Social Services Contribution
Assessment Act 1936-1952 (Cth), s.
1965, May 17, 20, 24-27; July 27. 27:7:1965
APPEAL from the High Court of Australia.
LORD PEARCE delivered the judgment of their Lordships as follows: -
This appeal is concerned with the question whether certain sums expended by
petrol during the year ending 30th June 1952 are revenue
expenses which may be
deducted in calculating its assessable income or are capital expenses in
respect of which no deduction can
be made. B.P. was assessed to income tax on
the basis that the expenses were not deductible. Taylor J. confirmed that
assessment.
He heard evidence and came to various conclusions of fact and
inference. The final result however depends not on fact so much as
weight and emphasis that one gives to indisputable facts and the overall
inference which one draws from the situation as a
whole. The Full Court of the
High Court affirmed his judgment by a majority (McTiernan, Windeyer and Owen
JJ., Dixon C.J. and Kitto
J. dissenting). Their Lordships are indebted to
counsel on both sides for their careful, fair and vigorous arguments. (at
2. The sales of petrol by B.P. to service stations represent a substantial
part of B.P.'s total sales. Before the war in Australia
(as in England)
various brands of petrol were sold in competition with each other at each
service station. The different producers
would own their particular tanks and
pumps at the service stations, letting them to the retailer at a nominal
figure, and each supplying
its particular brand to fill its particular tank.
This necessitated frequent small replenishments. A different system is now in
in both countries. Under the "solo site service station system" in
Australia (and "the exclusivity system" in England) service stations
only one brand so that deliveries by the individual producers are bigger and
less frequent with a consequent saving in expenses.
This also reduces the
number of staff necessary to work the service stations and obviates certain
undesirable practices that had
arisen under the former system. (at p387)
3. The change in Australia came about in this way. During the war all imports
of petrol were pooled and the spirit ceased to be
sold under the various
brands. Pool petrol was put into all the existing pumps in disregard of their
labels. In 1947 the pool system
ended, and in 1949 rationing came to an end.
There was a return to the pre-war system. In August 1951 however the Shell
Company suddenly
announced to the trade its intention of securing economy of
distribution by introducing the "solo site service station plan" whereby
would supply petrol to service stations on the basis that those stations would
deal exclusively with Shell. B.P. at that time
had pumps at the service
stations of some 4,000 retailers. Immediately after the Shell Company's
announcement 437 of these asked
B.P. to remove its pumps. By December 1951
this number had risen to 1,012. It was clear that steps must be taken by B.P.
wholesalers to deal with this alarming situation and make provision
for the future. B.P. was in a difficulty in adopting the solo
site plan on its
own since it did not market any brand of lubricating oil. There was also a
financial difficulty. B.P. therefore
co-operated with three other companies
for the purpose of persuading retailers at service stations to establish
"Independent Service
Stations" where only the respective brands of the
co-operating companies would be sold. The co-operating companies at first
to induce the retailers to deal solely with their companies by
undertaking to paint the retailers' service stations with distinctive
Their efforts were not wholly unsuccessful and at the end of December 1951
B.P. had gained 326 sites to set against the
1,012 it had lost. But it soon
became clear that rival companies were offering direct financial inducement to
retailers to join in
their solo site plan and that the co-operating companies
must follow suit. In February 1952 therefore they too decided to offer
assistance. A lump sum payment was to be offered to retailers who
would tie themselves to the co-operating companies for not less
years. The State Committee of the co-operating companies was authorized to pay
on the basis of 100 Pounds for every thousand
gallons per month (estimated)
with a maximum of 1,000 Pounds for a three years' tie. If the basis of payment
was "unacceptable" in
any case the sum might be increased to 150 Pounds for
every thousand gallons per month provided a tie for a period of not less than
five years could be arranged. The Head Office Committee could authorize
special arrangements and did so on many occasions. (at p388)
4. By the end of the financial year in question, namely by June 1952, B.P.
had been told to remove its pumps from 1,964 sites but
it had obtained trade
ties at 791 sites. The exhibits show that in the ensuing years it made
progress in surmounting its difficulties.
5. The intricacies of the expenses and the obligations of the co-operating
companies as between themselves are irrelevant for the
present purpose. During
the year in question B.P. spent a total sum of 270,569 Pounds either in
payment direct to the retailers under
written agreements, or by way of
adjustments with the other co-operating companies in respect of such payments
made by them. If this
total sum is allowable as a deduction against income,
this appeal succeeds. One may deal with the case for the sake of simplicity
if the agreements and payments were made by B.P. alone. The small sum of 671
Pounds expended in making structural alterations
for some retailers who
entered into agreements must stand or fall with the larger sum as it has done
in the other Courts. Substantial
sums spent in decorating service stations in
accordance with the written agreements were admitted as deductions and were
not in issue
before Taylor J. (at p389)
6. The written agreement was as follows: -
"This letter confirms the verbal agreement reached between
yourself and a representative of this company regarding
payment to you of an allowance to be used for the improvement
of your business and hereinafter referred to as 'The
Development Allowance'.
The Company undertakes to -
1. Contribute a Development Allowance of Pounds. . . to be used
by you to defray the cost of advertising and other
merchandising expenses, alterations and/or improvements.
2. Supply your requirements of the products marketed by
the company.
3. Assist you to develop your business by providing you
with a comprehensive Merchandising Plan as described in a
brochure already in your hands.
In consideration of the above you, on your part, agree to:
1. Increase the sale of C.O.R. Products to the best of your
2. Refrain from reaching any agreement, either verbal or
in writing, with any other wholesale distributor of petroleum
3. Resell from your premises only the brands of motor spirit
approved by this company from time to time.
Accordingly, until further notice we approve the resale of
C.O.R. or a combination of C.O.R. with any or all of the
brands Ampol and Golden Fleece, as may be available on your
4. Permit this company, or its contractors, to paint such
parts of your premises, which we consider as being ancillary
to the sale of our products, to our standard colours.
5. Make no alteration to those arrangements for a period
of 00 years.
6. Should your business be sold or otherwise transferred
during the period mentioned in the preceding clause, a
condition of such sale or transfer will be that this arrangement
will continue for the unexpired portion of the period.
Will you please signify your agreement to the above
arrangements by signing in the space provided at the foot of the
duplicate of this letter." (at p390)
7. Taylor J. after a careful examination of the facts and the authorities
came to the conclusion that the amounts paid were lump
sums for the purpose of
securing a trade tie over a period of years and that they were capital
outgoings for the purpose of obtaining
the resultant advantage. (at p390)
8. In reaching this conclusion he distinguished Bolam v. Regent Oil Co. Ltd.
(1956) 37 Tax Cas 56 where lump sums were paid in advance
as a rebate pursuant
to agreed trade ties for various relatively short term periods, some of which
however were as much as six years.
These periods, some of which however were
as much as six years. These sums were calculated by reference to the estimated
and were pro tanto repayable if the estimate was not reached. In the
present case Taylor J. relied strongly on the fact that the
payments had no
real relation to gallonage and could not be assimilated to a trade rebate or
discount. He found however that the
- ". . . 'gallonage' factor was, first of
all, a matter for consideration in determining what particular sum should,
prima facie,
be regarded as the maximum amount which in any particular case
might be laid out by the State Committees without reference to the
Head Office
Committee. No doubt, also, it was a material factor in ultimately determining
whether any particular proposal should
be entertained by the Head Office
Committee. But the 'gallonage' factor played no greater part than this and I
am satisfied on the
evidence that the lump sums paid to service station
operators by the appellant and its co-operating companies were not paid either
in form or substance as the equivalent of trade rebates or discounts." (1964)
110 CLR, at pp 397, 398 (at p390)
9. His Honour found that the service stations on strategic sites afforded
advantages of considerable value and that the amounts
which were paid were
determined by the intensity of the competition for securing a site and
obtaining re-selling outlets. He relied
on the fact that B.P. had by June 1952
spent 600,000 Pounds in buying sites for service stations and making loans to
retailers who
had secured ties (144,000 Pounds was spent in loans during the
relevant year) as giving some indication that the introduction of
trading required a substantial reorganization of marketing and distribution
methods in this section of the trade. In his
opinion B.P. obtained an asset
and an enduring benefit by securing substantial freedom from competition on
each selected site for
periods extending from three to ten years. (at p391)
10. On appeal McTiernan J. supported His Honour's judgment in toto. Windeyer
J. affirmed it expressing the view that B.P. obtained
for a substantial period
and with a prospect of renewal thereafter something that was to become a part
of the structure, organization,
or framework within which and by means of
which it carried on its business. (at p391)
11. Owen J. affirmed the judgment because there was in this case no material
distinction from the case of the Vacuum Oil Co. Ltd.
[1964] HCA 83
(1964) 110 CLR 419
which he gave a careful and reasoned judgment with regard to somewhat similar
payments. That
appeal was heard
immediately after
the present case both in the
High Court and before their Lordships. His Honour there came to the
although the making
of payments had the feature of a recurrent
expenditure the character or nature of the advantage
gained by the
balance in favour of the view that the outgoings were of a capital
nature. In his opinion the advantage
was the operator's
undertaking to
deal exclusively in the taxpayer's products and give it exclusive advertising
the station
site for a substantial
period of time. "The advantages
thus obtained", he said, "were of a continuing and not of a transient
The purpose or effect
of the expenditure seems to me to have been to add
valuable, even if intangible, assets of a lasting
to the appellant's
profit-earning organization" (1964) 110 CLR, at p 443 (at p391)
12. The competing view of the transactions in question was put broadly by the
learned Chief Justice and in greater detail by Kitto
J. (at p391)
13. Dixon C.J. said: "I do not think it was acquiring a capital asset or
doing any more than so conducting its business on revenue
account as to
increase it and make as certain as it could that its business was continuing
and also would continue, if possible,
to expand. For my part I cannot think
that all the course adopted changed the character of the transactions of the
company from those
of a continual attempt to establish its product in a
consumers' market and to meet all the obstacles which arose in a long and
troubled period to obtaining a reputation for its product." (1964) 110
CLR, at p 410 (at p391)
14. Kitto J. said: "But a promise by a service station operator not to deal
with oil companies other than the appellant or its allies
was only the
negative side of the substantial positive advantage which it was the purpose
and practical effect of the agreement to
produce, namely the advantage of a
practical certainly that the whole of the custom of the service station, for
motor spirit, would
be given to the appellant or its allies for the agreed
period; and what the appellant really paid its money for was that positive
advantage. The purpose was not to create a situation in which to set about
selling motor spirit; it was to secure the particular
sales which would be
necessary for the satisfaction of the service station's requirements of the
period. The payment of the money
was analagous to expenditure in sending a
commercial traveller on his rounds to secure orders; it was part and parcel of
the business
of effecting sales . . . The change in the organization of the
wholesale trade in motor spirit from the old system of multiple pump
stations to the new 'solo' system meant inevitably that every oil company, if
it wanted to sell motor spirit to service stations
in the future, had to
accept the necessity of spending money, not at the beginning once and for all,
but at the beginning and from
time to time, to ensure that it would receive
from as many service stations as possible the whole of their orders for
limited periods"
(1964) 110 CLR, at pp 412-415 (at p392)
15. Again: - " . . . the advantage was not the acquisition of a new market,
not a new framework within which to carry on trade for
the future, not an
extension of the appellant's selling organization to include a regiment of
resellers. It was not such an exclusion
of competition as adds to goodwill a
negative right and thus increases the value of goodwill. It consisted simply
of the practical
assurance of receiving bundles of orders for motor spirit,
the circumstances being such that for the foreseeable future it would
by getting similar bundles of orders that such a trade as the appellant's
could be carried on" (1964) 110 CLR, at p 415 (at
16. He concluded" . . . that it would be an odd piece of accounting that
would work out the appellant's profit from supplying motor
spirit to service
stations without bringing in, as an item of marketing cost, every sum spent to
make sure of securing orders in
the new way in which the trade was going about
the securing of orders, namely by inducing individual resellers to put
in the position of having to give the whole of their orders for a
period to a single oil company" (1964) 110 CLR, at p 416 (at p392)
17. There was considerable argument as to the findings of Taylor J.
concerning the relation of the sums paid to gallonage and how
far they were
affected by competition, but these do not conclude the matter one way or the
other. (at p393)
18. B.P.'s ultimate object was to sell petrol and to maintain or increase its
turnover. There can be no doubt that the only ultimate
reason for any lump sum
payment was to maintain or increase gallonage. If B.P. paid a higher lump sum
to A than B it was because
(i) A then was selling at a higher rate than B or
(ii) A was likely to sell at a higher rate in the future than B either since
was a better salesman or had a better strategic site or (iii) A was a
better bargainer and therefore obtained from B.P. the highest
price which it
was prepared to pay instead of the lower price which it had induced B to
accept or (iv) A had a particularly good
site which must not go by default
because that would allow rivals to encroach and so decrease B.P.'s overall
gallonage. All these
reasons are founded on gallonage whether immediate or
ultimate. The fourth reason which is founded on the Company's overall
as opposed to A's personal gallonage was no doubt infrequent; and it
does not alter the general relation of the sums paid to the
estimated efficacy
of the recipient retailer in selling B.P.'s petrol, and to the impact of his
efforts on the overall gallonage.
The fact that the amounts of the lump sums
were influenced or even decided by competition does not greatly affect the
matter. Every
price or rebate is influenced and largely decided by
competition. The trader offers the rebate that competition renders necessary
or desirable. So too with lump sums paid to retailers. The more they were
based on the particular retailer's gallonage the more closely
they were tied
to the immediate costs of selling to an individual customer. But even where
the overall gallonage rather than the
immediate gallonage influenced the sum
paid it could still be one of the revenue expenses of marketing. (at p393)
19. Considerable emphasis has been put on the fact that B.P.'s whole
existence was threatened by the new situation which had occurred.
But this is
not a decisive factor. Whenever a business finds that its trade rivals are
getting ahead of it, its existence is threatened.
The seriousness of the
situation has, however, this much relevance, that it provided ample
justification for capital expenditure
in the reorganization of its business
structure if that should be necessary or desirable. It demolishes any argument
that the occasion
was too trivial or too ordinary to enable counter-measures
in the means of marketing to assume the structural quality of capital
expenditure. But it still leaves unanswered the question whether the steps
which were taken to meet the crisis were in fact of a
capital or of a revenue
nature. (at p394)
20. A valuable guide to the traveller in these regions is to be found in the
well-known judgment of Dixon J. (as he then was) in
the case of Sun Newspapers
Ltd. and Associated Newspapers Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1938] HCA 73
where he discussed
the nature of certain sums spent in buying up
the competition of a rival and concluded that they were capital.
"There are, I
he said (1938) 61 CLR, at p 363 "three matters to be considered, (a)
the character of the advantage sought,
and in this its lasting
qualities may
play a part, (b) the manner in which it is to be used, relied upon or enjoyed,
and in this
and under the former head
recurrence may play its part, and (c)
the means adopted to obtain it; that is, by providing a periodical
outlay to cover
its use or enjoyment for periods commensurate with the payment
or by making a final provision or payment
so as to secure future use
enjoyment." And he also said "the expenditure is to be considered of a revenue
nature if its purpose
brings it within the very
wide class of things which in
the aggregate form the constant demand which must be answered out of the
returns of a trade or its
circulating capital and that actual recurrence of
the specific thing need not take place or be expected
as likely" (1938) 61
at p 362 (at p394)
21. To this one may add the general observation of Viscount Radcliffe in
Commissioner of Taxes v. Nchanga Consolidated Copper Mines
(1964) AC 948:
"Nevertheless, it has to be remembered that all these phrases, as, for
instance, 'enduring benefit' or 'capital
structure' are essentially
descriptive rather than definitive, and, as each new case arises for
adjudication and it is sought to
reason by analogy from its
facts to those of
one previously decided, a court's primary duty is to inquire how far a
description that
was both relevant and significant
in one set of circumstances
is either significant or relevant in those which are presently before
(1964) AC, at p 959 And "Again,
courts have stressed the importance of
observing a demarcation between the cost of creating,
acquiring or enlarging
the permanent
(which does not mean perpetual) structure of which the income is
to be the produce or fruit
and the cost of earning that income itself
performing the income-earning operations. Probably this is as illuminating a
distinction as the law by itself is likely
to achieve, but the reality
of the distinction, it must be admitted, does not become the
maintain as tax systems in different
countries allow more and more kinds of
capital expenditure to be charged against profits
by way of allowances for
depreciation, and
by so doing recognize that at any rate the exhaustion of
fixed capital is an operating
cost. Even so, the functions of business are
capable of great complexity and the line of demarcation is sometimes difficult
to draw and leads to distinctions of some subtley
between profit that
is made "out of" assets and profit that is made "upon" assets
assets." (1964) AC, at p 960 (at p395)
22. Many cases have been cited to their Lordships and careful arguments have
been based on the decisions either by analogy or on
the actual language used
in illuminating those decisions. (at p395)
23. Some of the cases on which the revenue rely deal with the buying off of
competition. Instances of these are the Sun Newspaper
[1938] HCA 73
(1938) 61 CLR 337
United Steel Companies Ltd. v. Cullington (1939) 23 Tax Cas 71, and Collins v.
Joseph Adamson
(1938) 1 KB
The Associated Portland Cement Case (1945) 27
Tax Cas 103 also comes in this category. And Van den Berghs' Case
has an element of this although it comes into another category. (at p395)
24. Where a trader buys out a rival in order to secure his goodwill or to
suppress it and so provide or maintain a clear field for
his own enterprise
over a substantial period, there is a definite prima facie pointer towards a
capital payment. But in the present
case B.P. was not achieving a monopoly nor
buying off competition nor obtaining any substantial area for its own domain.
one retailer was tied to B.P., the retailer next door could still buy
some other brand and the passing motorist could do likewise.
When a shop
agrees to deal only in the goods of a certain manufacturer, it may be said
loosely that the manufacturer has a monopoly
in that shop. But the word is
misleading when all the other shops in the row are available to competitors.
It may be that a particular
shop is in a site so superior to the others, that
securing its trade is a matter of great local importance. But looked at over a
broad front, as one should look at dealings which are so widely spread as
those in the present case and are common to the whole of
a vast and universal
trade, the particularly good site should be balanced against the particularly
bad site. It is the acquisition
of the sole trade of a retailer sited at an
average service station which should be regarded. The wholesaler would in
practice achieve
the same result by entering into a forward instalment
contract for the supply to a particular retailer of an amount of goods which
equalled his anticipated capacity to sell. As to the advantage to the
wholesaler of being able to paint the service station in his
own colours, or
advertise in any other way, it is a misuse of the word to describe it as an
advertising monopoly. In practice a retailer
welcomes (or demands) advertising
matter from his wholesaler, and the advertising advantage is no more than a
natural by-product
of the wholesaler having tied a dealer to take his goods.
25. For those reasons the cases where competition had been stifled for a
substantial period or a monopoly has been acquired have
little direct bearing.
26. Some of the cases on which B.P. relies deal with the removal of
unsatisfactory personnel. An instance of these is Mitchell v.
B. W. Noble Ltd.
(1) in which a lump sum paid to get rid of a bad director was held to be a
revenue payment. In that case Lord Hanworth
M.R. said that the payment was
made "not in order to secure an actual asset to the company but to enable the
company to continue
to carry on, as it had done in the past, unimperilled by
the presence of one who . . . might have caused difficulty" (2). Again in
Nevill & Co. Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (3) a lump sum paid to
get rid of an unnecessary director was held to
a revenue payment since "the
purpose was transient and, although not in itself recurrent, it was connected
with the ever recurring
question of personnel" (per Dixon J. (4)). A gratuity
of 1,500 Pounds paid to a reporter on his retirement (Smith v. Incorporated
Council of Law Reporting for England and Wales (5)) and 4,994 Pounds spent in
buying an annuity for an actuary who had retired (Hancock
Reversionary and Investment Co. (6)) were held to be revenue payments. But the
facts of these cases which deal with the
recurrent problems of personnel do
not provide an analogy to the present case. Nor on the other hand can any
useful comparison be
made with British Insulated and Helsby Cables v. Atherton
(7). There a company's contribution of over 30,000 Pounds to form the nucleus
of a fund and provide the amount then necessary to provide pensions for its
staff was held to be a capital payment on the ground
that "when an expenditure
is made, not only once and for all, but with a view to bringing into existence
an asset or an advantage
for the enduring benefit of a trade . . . there is
very good reason (in the absence of special circumstances leading to an
conclusion) for treating such an expenditure as properly attributable
not to revenue but to capital" (8). Those words are useful
as an expression of
general principle on prima facie indications, but the benefit in the
particular case was the foundation of a
fund that would endure for the whole
life of the company and provides no analogy to the present case. (at p397)
27. The solution to the problem is not to be found by any rigid test or
description. It has to be derived from many aspects of the
whole set of
circumstances some of which may point in one direction, some in the other. One
consideration may point so clearly that
it dominates other and vaguer
indications in the contrary direction. It is a commonsense appreciation of all
the guiding features
which must provide the ultimate answer. Although the
categories of capital and income expenditure are distinct and easily
ascertainable
in obvious cases that lie far from the boundary, the line of
distinction is often hard to draw in border line cases; and conflicting
considerations may produce a situation where the answer turns on questions of
emphasis and degree. That answer "depends on what the
expenditure is
calculated to effect from a practical and business point of view, rather than
upon the juristic classification of
the legal rights, if any, secured,
employed or exhausted in the process" (per Dixon J. in Hallstrom's Case
[1946] HCA 34
p 648) As each new case comes to be argued felicitous phrases
from earlier judgments are used in argument by one side
those phrases are not the deciding factor, nor are they of unlimited
application. They merely crystallize particular
which may incline the
scale in a particular case after a balance of all the considerations has been
taken. (at p397)
28. One may approach the problem by considering the first of the matters
mentioned by Dixon J. above, namely the character of the
advantage sought, and
in this both its lasting qualities and the fact of recurrence may play their
parts. Under this head one might
also take account of the nature of the need
or occasion which calls for the expenditure (Dixon J. in Hallstrom's Case
(1946) 72 CLR
29. The need or the occasion came from the fact that marketing in the petrol
trade in 1951 changed its nature suddenly but for sound
commercial reasons.
This change was in accord with modern tendencies in commerce. Instead of being
a short term trade it became a
long term trade. The producers' output no
longer flowed unimpeded, intermingled, and haphazard over the whole area of
consumption.
It was diverted into separate specialized and individual
channels. Henceforth the customer gave his whole loyalty or none at all.
producer in accordance with the new market fashion needed to have his own tied
retailers, fewer in number but individually better
customers, if he was to
compete with his rivals. The advantage which B.P. sought was to promote sales
and obtain orders for petrol
by up-to-date marketing methods, the only methods
which could now prevail. Since orders were now and would in future be only
from tied retailers, it must obtain ties with retailers. Its real
object however was not the tie but the orders which would flow
from the tie.
To obtain ties it had to satisfy the appetite of the retailers by paying out
sums for a period of years, whose amount
was dependent on the estimated value
of the retailer as a customer and the length of the period. The payment of
such sums became
part of the regular conduct of the business. It became one of
the current necessities of the trade. (at p398)
30. The test of whether these sums were payable out of fixed or circulating
capital, referred to for example in John Smith &
(1921) 2 AC 13
at p 19 tends in the present case in favour of regarding these payments as
revenue expenditure. Fixed
is prima facie that
on which you look to
get a return by your trading operations. Circulating capital is that which
your trading operations.
The sums in question were sums which
had to come back penny by penny with every order during the
in order to
reimburse and
justify the particular outlay. If one imagines a B.P. agent
justifying the price of petrol to a
or discussing whether price
reduction was possible, it is hard to imagine him omitting the lump sum so
paid (divided by
the estimated
gallonage) as an item in
the cost per gallon.
It is doubtful if he would even relegate it to overheads since it was
of the wholesaler's selling
costs. Nor can one imagine the retailer
demurring at such a calculation. Prima facie
therefore the lump
circulating capital
which is turned over and in the process of being turned
over yields a profit or
loss; they were part
of the constant demand which
be answered out of the returns of the trade. This however is merely one
and by no means
concludes the matter. (at
31. Mr. Menhennitt forcibly contends that these were payments of a "once and
for all" nature producing assets or advantages which
are an enduring benefit
and which should therefore go into capital account. (See per Lord Cave in
British Insulated and Helsby Cables
Ltd. v. Atherton (1926) AC, at pp 213,
214) Further he argues that the benefit was to the structure of B.P. within
which its profits
were earned and not to the process of earning them. These
are admittedly valid tests to apply and he contends that each points in
of a capital expenditure. (at p398)
32. The first point involves the question of recurrence. The Lord President
in the Vallambrosa Rubber Case (1910) 5 Tax Cas 529
said, as a rough
criterion, "capital expenditure is a thing that is going to be spent once and
for all, and income expenditure is
a thing that is going to recur every year"
(1910) 5 Tax Cas, at p 536 But as Rowlatt J. pointed out in Ounsworth v.
Vickers Ltd.
(1915) 3 KB 267
the words "every year" are not to be taken
literally but mean pursuant to a continuous demand (1915) 3 KB, at p 273
33. It is argued that here there is nothing to show that the retailers would
or could insist on fresh payments for a renewal at
the end of the periods. But
the reasonable inference is that they would and could do so. Unless the demand
for petrol exceeds the
supply (which on a balance of probabilities seems quite
unlikely) the retailers would at the end of the period be in a position as
good as or better than their original position. The fact that B.P. did not
regard the lump sum payments as a permanent solution but
considered that some
other method should be found does not prevent their being of a recurrent
nature. A temporary ad hoc solution
is none the less of a recurrent nature
because it is recognized that when the problem recurs it may have to be met in
or more permanent fashion. Nor does the fact that in some cases
B.P. dealt with the problem by an admittedly capital solution (e.g.
the service station itself and letting it to a customer) affect the question
whether the method here in issue was a capital
or income solution. Moreover
there were fresh sums being paid each year to fresh retailers, a fact which
cannot be wholly disregarded
in considering whether there is a recurrent
demand. (at p399)
34. Their Lordships agree with Owen J. in thinking that if regard was had to
"the whole picture" the expenditure was recurrent.
To find whether expenditure
is of a recurrent nature one must take a broad view of the general operation
under which the expenditure
was incurred. Here it was made to meet a
continuous demand in the trade. Prima facie matters connected with the ever
recurring question
of marketing and customers, though not themselves recurrent
in an identical form, share the same quality of recurrence possessed
matters "connected with the ever-recurring question of personnel". (at p399)
35. What additional indication is given by the actual length of the
agreements? That must be a question of degree. Had the agreements
for two or three year periods that fact would have pointed to recurrent
revenue expenditure. Had they been for twenty years,
that fact would have
pointed to a non-recurring payment of a capital nature. Length of time, though
theoretically not a deciding
factor, does in practice shed a light on the
nature of the advantage sought. The longer the duration of the agreements, the
the indication that a structural solution was being sought. In this
case the periods varied between three and fifteen years, but
the average
appears to be something just under five years and the predominant number of
agreements was for a five-year period. The
case was argued before their
Lordships as in the Courts below on the footing that five years was the length
of the tie and neither
side sought to make any differentiation because a few
of the ties were very much longer. That length of time appears to be neutral,
and in itself indicates neither capital expenditure nor revenue by its mere
length. It therefore does not add effectively to the
argument either way. The
question must be decided by other weights in the balance. (at p400)
36. In support of his argument that this was an enduring benefit Mr.
Menhennitt stresses the fact that B.P. secured a valuable chose
namely the contractual obligation of the retailer to order from B.P. and to
allow them to advertise at his station. Once
an asset outlives its year of
acquisition, its proper place, he contends, must be in the balance sheet as a
capital asset. He relies
inter alia on the observations of Lord Reid in Hinton
v. Maden & Ireland Ltd. (1959) 38 Tax Cas 391, where expenditure on knives
which were used in machinery and had on the average a life of three years (but
sometimes a life of only one year) was held to be
capital expenditure. But the
observations were directed to tangible tools and such assets do not form a
safe analogy when dealing
with choses in action. The plant and machinery and
tools of a factory and other tangible assets are prima facie durable objects
part of the structure within which the profit yielding process is carried
out. By convention and practice they are placed in the
balance sheet and their
diminution in value is acknowledged and accommodated by a system of capital
depreciation for revenue purposes.
No such clear practice or convention exists
with respect to choses in action and their Lordships cannot accept the
contention that
a chose in action must be a capital benefit if its value
outlives the year of accounting. (at p400)
37. Much reliance is placed on John Smith & Son v. Moore
(1921) 2 AC 13
showing that the contractual right to buy goods is
capital expense which
must be distinguished from the actual purchase which
is a revenue expense.
Therefore, it is said, in the
case one cannot (as did Kitto J.) equate
the tie to obtaining the mere
"practical assurance of receiving bundles of
must treat it as a separate asset of enduring capital benefit.
case dealt with special facts. The son had bought
the father's
business of a coal exporter for an overall sum on a valuation. An
item in the
valuation consisted of forward contracts
with collieries
for the delivery of
coal at a very low price. The father had
paid nothing for the contracts but
owing to the rise
in the price of
coal, the forward contracts were valued at
30,000 pounds. The
son made a large profit on the coal, and sought to
against them
30,000 pounds as expenditure in the profit and loss account for
the purposes of excess profits duty. The expenditure
was disallowed.
held that the change of ownership must be disregarded
since the duty was a tax
on a continuous business,
which was the
chief point there urged on behalf of
the Crown. His opinion therefore
has no relevance to the present case.
Haldane held
that as the son had acquired the contracts among other
assets of the
business as part of the capital of the business
they became
fixed capital. "It was not by selling these contracts . . . but by
them, that he was able to employ his
circulating
capital in buying under them"
(1921) 2 AC, at p 20 Lord Sumner held that
the case was covered by City of
London Contract
Corporation
v. Styles (1887) 2 Tax Cas 239 where the
purchaser of a business of
contractors which had some construction contracts
uncompleted,
sought to set against the profits of the contracts when completed
such part of the purchase price for the business as
was attributable
value. The Court had there held that that sum was paid
with the rest of the
aggregate price to acquire
the business, and
not as an outlay in a business
already acquired. Neither of their
Lordships indicated that, had there been no
of ownership
and purchase of the business assets, and had the son
himself paid
30,000 pounds to the collieries for the benefit of
the contracts,
the sum so paid would have been a capital expenditure. Lord Finlay
who dissented, did deal with "the distinction"
"goods" and "choses in
action", such as contracts for coal. "This
distinction", he said (1921) 2 AC,
at p 28, "seems to me
for this purpose untenable. The contracts gave the
means of getting
coal, and there is no difference for this purpose between
coal stored in your yard and having a contract which enables you
it from time to time as you want it. This, indeed,
was admitted
by the Lord
Advocate in argument when he was asked the question
specifically by Lord
Haldane." (at p401)
38. It is clear that this Board found difficulty with that case in Nchanga's
(1964) AC 948
, at p 964 Lord Radcliffe observed
that it decided nothing
that could govern Nchanga's Case
(1964) AC 948
and pointed out that Lord
Haldane's and Lord Sumner's opinions
had been determined by a combination of
two elements namely that no
sum of 30,000 pounds had ever been paid and that
in paying something
in respect of the benefit of the contracts the son had not
stock in trade or anything like stock. In the present case likewise
their Lordships do not derive help from John Smith & Son
(1921) 2 AC
One certainly cannot deduce that the result
have been the same if the
son had paid 30,000 pounds to the collieries for the
contracts. (at p402)
39. Nor do their Lordships obtain help from the case of Kauri Timber Co. Ltd.
(1913) AC 771
There the company in order to carry
on its business of cutting
and selling timber had bought twenty years previously (and in some
thereafter) land with timber
on it, or had bought timber with the right to cut
and remove it during a stated time which
in most instances was ninety-nine
It subsequently claimed to set off the value of the timber against
revenue but this claim
was rejected. The case was decided on the
the New Zealand Act and the references to the general principles of mining law
with regard to capital and income do not
40. Their Lordships do not find Stow Bardolph v. Poole (1954) 35 Tax Cas 459,
or H J Rorke Ltd. v. Commissioners of Inland Revenue
(1960) 39 Tax Cas 194,
distinction on which the Court decided
that the right to get gravel differed
from the getting of gravel and was a capital expenditure might not be
satisfying to some minds.
Both are within the difficult area of mining cases;
and principles governing extraction industries have little relation to the
case. (at p402)
41. It is of commercial importance that profits should not be inflated for
tax purposes by the artificial withdrawal from the profit
and loss account of
expenditure directly incurred in earning them unless it is of a truly capital
nature. There is force in the observation
of the Lord President in the
Vallambrosa Case: "The Crown will not really be prejudiced by this, because
when the tree comes to bear,
the whole produce will go to the credit side . .
. the only deduction will be the amount which has been spent on the tree in
year; they will not be allowed to deduct what has been deducted before"
(1910) 5 Tax Cas, at p 535 (at p402)
42. In the present case one is dealing with payments made to particular
customers to secure their particular custom. The only case
cited which deals
with that problem is Bolam's Case (1956) 37 Tax Cas 56 which in their
Lordships' view was rightly decided. But
that case (as Taylor J. found) does
not necessarily decide this case. For in that case the payments were simply
calculated as an
advance rebate which was repayable pro tanto if the actual
gallonage fell below the estimated gallonage. Usher's Case
(1915) AC 433
decided that where a landlord brewer pays or allows moneys to the tenant of a
tied house as a necessary incident of the profitable
working of a brewery
business, the landlord brewer may deduct those moneys in the balance of profit
and loss for the purpose of income
tax, in spite of the fact that they enure
also for the benefit of the tenant's separate trade in the tied house. But the
whether the outgoings were of a capital or revenue nature was not
raised and it was assumed that they were revenue payments. (at
43. One of the matters to be considered is how the sum in question should be
treated on the ordinary principles of commercial accounting
(see Whimster's
Case (1925) 12 Tax. Cas. 813.). The sums paid to the retailers in the present
case were put by B.P.'s accountants
in the profit and loss account. Had they
been put in the balance sheet together with the choses in action for which
they had been
paid, the latter would have been inappropriate capital assets.
They would necessarily have to be written down in the first and every
succeeding year by one third or one fifth, (or whatever was the figure
appropriate to the length of the tie) if the balance sheet
was to be honest.
And they would have to be written down out of money which had borne tax
although the depreciation had gone directly
to earn the taxable profits during
the period. On the other hand it may be fairly said that to put the whole sum
into one year's
expenses is also misleading. But at least it evens out fairly
over a period of years as do major repairs or renewals (e.g. the Rhodesia
Railways Case
(1933) AC 368)
or other intermittently recurring revenue
expenditures. (at p403)
44. The most apt way of dealing with these sums might seem to be to debit the
profit and loss account with the whole payments and
credit it with their
unexpired value, thus treating them as a revenue item; but this is not the
practice of accountants. If therefore
one must allocate these payments either
wholly to one year's revenue or to capital it would seem that either course
presents difficulties
but that an allocation to revenue is slightly
preferable. (at p403)
45. Finally were these sums expended on the structure within which the
profits were to be earned or were they part of the money
earning process? In
Hallstrom's Case
[1946] HCA 34
(1946) 72 CLR 634
where by a majority the Court held that the
cost of fighting
a patent was
a revenue expenditure, Dixon J. described the
between capital and income expenditure as lying "between the
acquisition
of the means of production and the use of them; between
establishing or extending a business organization and carrying
between the implements employed in work and the regular
performance
of the work . . . ; between an enterprise itself
and the sustained
those engaged in it" (1946) 72 CLR, at p
647 (at p404)
46. On this aspect of the matter two cases point the contrast. In Van den
Berghs Ltd. v. Clark
(1935) AC 431
450,000 Pounds was
received by one company
from another as damages on the rescission of a twenty year agreement with
thirteen years
unexpired by which
the companies agreed to share profits of
trading in margarine instead of competing with one another. The case
had certain
similarities to the cases of buying off competition, and to that
extent the argument in favour of a capital
payment was strengthened.
held that this sum was a capital receipt, since "the agreements formed the
fixed framework within
which their circulating
capital operated; they were not
incidental to the working of their profit-making machine but were essential
parts of the mechanism
itself. They provided the means of making profits, but
they themselves did not yield profits" (1935) AC, at
p 443 (at p404)
47. A contrary conclusion was reached in Anglo-Persian Oil Co. Ltd. v. Dale
(1932) 1 KB 124
The oil company employed an agent company
to manage its
business in Persia and the East, and to carry out the oil company's sales
there for ten years, renewable for a further
period of ten years. Eight years
later it decided that it would be cheaper to dispense
with its agent and to
employ the agent's staff
and organization direct. It paid the agent company
300,000 pounds cash in consideration
of the agency agreement being terminated.
It was held by Rowlatt J. that this was a revenue payment since there was no
purchase of
goodwill or start of a business, but simply
the putting to an end
of an expensive method of carrying on the business which remained
whether the distributive side was
in the hands of the oil company itself or
its agents. The Court of Appeal affirmed this
decision. Lawrence L.J.
concluded that "The
contract to employ an agent to manage the Company's
business in Persia, however, in no
sense forms part of the fixed capital of
company, but is a contract relating entirely to the working of the
Company's business,
the method of managing which may be changed
from time to
time. Neither the contract itself nor a payment to cancel it would, in my
opinion, find any place in the capital accounts
of the Company." (1932) 1 KB,
at p 144 (at p405)
48. That case goes some way in support of B.P.'s contentions. Although it
does not provide any compelling analogy, it is nearer
to the present case than
is Van den Berghs Ltd. v. Clark
(1935) AC 431
It justifies the argument that
expenditure incurred in making
a radical change in the marketing arrangements
of a company's organization
need not be a capital payment. It refutes any
that the bigness of the amounts and the widespread area involved and
the finality
and extent of the change point automatically to
a capital outlay.
Henriksen v. Grafton Hotel (1942) 24 Tax Cas 453 was a special case dealing
with the payment for a license. Without the license
the business could not be
carried on. There was also an element of monopoly. On those grounds it was
held to be a capital payment.
In Adam's Case (1928) 14 Tax Cas 34 the sums in
question were spent on a dumping ground which the company had to have in order
carry on its business. These cases do not provide any safe analogy with
sums paid to customers to secure their custom. (at p405)
50. Thus a consideration of the nature of the benefit sought and obtained by
B.P. would on the various tests suggested by the authorities
seem to point to
the expenditure being revenue rather than capital. (at p405)
51. The second of the consideration suggested by Sir Owen Dixon above, namely
the manner in which the benefit was to be used, relied
on and enjoyed by B.P.,
points in a similar direction. The benefit was to be used in the continuous
and recurrent struggle to get
orders and sell petrol. The agreements were not
strictly "bundles of orders" but they were the basis of them and made orders
inevitable.
The retailer was bound to sell none but B.P.'s petrol and to
increase the sale of its products to the best of his ability. This means
in practice he was bound to give orders for petrol which B.P. was bound to
supply. Although the price and time of delivery were
not specified these would
be implied by law as reasonable. No fresh consensus between the parties was
necessary. All that was needed
was that the retailer should specify from time
to time what quantity he required. Thus the agreements merged in and became
the ordinary process of selling. These facts point to the expenditure
being a revenue item. (at p405)
52. The third consideration suggested by Sir Owen Dixon, namely the method of
payment, does not point very clearly in either direction.
An advance payment
for a period is not unusual in many revenue matters (e.g. purchase of stock).
These payments were not current
payments made annually over the period of
benefit but on the other hand it was clear that they would have to be made
again at intervals
of a few years. In a durable company of this nature
recurrent five yearly payments certainly cannot be said to have a "once for
quality. Had the payments been for one or two years they would point
towards revenue; had they been for twenty years they would point
capital. But the actual period of time for which these particular payments
were made, as in the consideration of the nature
of the advantage (above),
gives no indication which could outweigh the indications given by other
considerations. (at p406)
53. The case is not easy to decide. But on a balance of all the relevant
considerations the scales appear to incline in favour of
the expenditure being
revenue and not capital outgoings. (at p406)
54. Mr. Menhennitt raised an alternative argument that this expenditure could
not come within the words of s. 51 (1) of the Act
since it was not incurred in
gaining the assessable income. B.P. made the payments, he argues, to put
itself into a position from
which to make income; it simply entered into
arrangements favourable to the making of income and the payments are too
indirect to
fall within s. 51 (1). He relies on the observations of Menzies J.
in Fairfax's Case
[1959] HCA 4
(1959) 101 CLR 30
, at p 48 (at
55. Their Lordships do not feel able to accept this narrow view of the matter
in the light of their conclusions on the broader issue.
The alternative
argument stands or falls with the main argument. For the reasons given they
hold that the expenditure was incurred
in gaining the assessable income. (at
56. Their Lordships will therefore humbly advise Her Majesty that the appeal
should be allowed, the orders of the Full Court and
of Taylor J. set aside
with costs and the amended assessment for income tax and social services
contribution for the year ending
30th June 1952 remitted to the respondent for
him to allow the appellant's objections thereto. The respondent must pay the
of the appeal. (at p406)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter