Sunnyhaven Limited re Sunnyhaven Limited Non-Award Covered Enterprise Agreement 2012 [2012] FWAFB 9399 (1 November 2012)
[2012] FWAFB 9399
Download Word Document
The attached document replaces the document previously issued with the above code on 1 November 2012.
The document has been edited to correct typographical errors.
Associate to Senior Deputy President Watson
[2012] FWAFB 9399
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Act 2009
- Appeal of decisions
- Application for approval of a single-enterprise agreement
Sunnyhaven Limited
(C2012/5059 and AG2012/9982)
SUNNYHAVEN LIMITED NON-AWARD COVERED ENTERPRISE AGREEMENT 2012
Social, community, home care and disability services
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT WATSON
DEPUTY PRESIDENT SMITH
COMMISSIONER JONES
SYDNEY, 1 NOVEMBER 2012
Appeal against decision
[2012] FWA 6664
of Commissioner McKenna at Sydney on 16 August 2012 in matter number AG2012/9982 - permission to appeal granted - appeal upheld -
decision quashed - application under
agreement approved with undertakings.
An application has been made for approval of an enterprise agreement known as the
Sunnyhaven Limited Non-Award Covered Enterprise Agreement 2012
(the Agreement). The application was made pursuant to
Fair Work Act 2009
(the Act). It has been made by Sunnyhaven Limited. The agreement is a single-enterprise agreement.
The application was initially heard by and dismissed by Commissioner McKenna on 16 August 2012,
in which she dismissed the application.
We quashed the decision of Commissioner McKenna in
[2012] FWAFB 9086
, deciding to hear and determine the application for ourselves.
At the conclusion of the appeal hearing on 25 September 2012, we announced that we would approve the agreement subject to the provision
by Sunnyhaven Limited of a written undertaking, pursuant to
of the Act, addressing a concern expressed by us that the dispute settlement procedure did not comply with
of the Act in that it did not apply to the National Employment Standards (NES) and did not provide for employee representation.
We also required the provision of evidence of the position of the employees covered by the agreement in light of
of the Act.
The agreement, covering and applying only to employees of the company in the position of Chief Executive Officer and/or Accountant
who are not covered by a modern award, is limited in its terms:
(a) Providing that it is read in conjunction with an employee’s individual contract of employment, with the agreement terms
prevailing to the extent of any inconsistency;
(b) Providing for a period of operation of four years;
(c) Providing for the cashing out of paid annual leave to the extent permitted by the National Employment Standards (NES) within
of the Act;
(d) Providing for the cashing out of paid personal/carer’s leave to the extent permitted by the NES within
of the Act;
(e) Purporting to provide for the cashing out of a “particular amount” of paid long service leave;
(f) The incorporation, by reference to the model flexibility terms - the flexibility term and the consultation terms as required by
of the Act;
(g) A dispute settlement procedure; and
(h) A no extra claims provision.
We have considered the terms of the agreement, the materials filed with the application for approval in compliance with the
Fair Work Australia Rules 2010
, the written submissions and supporting documents filed by Sunnyhaven Limited, both before Commissioner McKenna and on appeal and
the oral submissions put on behalf of Sunnyhaven Limited.
We are satisfied that each of the statutory requirements for approval of the agreement have been met, save for the terms of the dispute
settlement procedure in clause 9, which does not comply with the requirements of s.186(6) of the Act, in that it is not expressed
to settle disputes in relation to the NES (s.186(6)(a)(ii)) and does not allow for the representation of employees covered by the
agreement for the purposes of the procedure (s.186(6)(b)).
That deficiency is capable of rectification by an undertaking under s.190 of the Act. In that respect Sunnyhaven Limited provided
a written undertaking and evidence that the employees covered by the agreement supported the undertaking by letter of 10 October
2012. It reads as follows:
“Sunnyhaven Limited makes the following two undertakings in accordance with
Fair Work Act 2009
) with respect to the
Sunnyhaven Limited Non-Award Covered Enterprise Agreement 2012
the agreement
Disputes Procedure (Clause 9)
1. By reference to clause 9 of the agreement, the disputes procedure shall also apply to the settlement of disputes in relation to
the National Employment Standards, ie to the extent permitted by the FW Act.
2. By reference to clause 9 of the agreement, an employee utilising the disputes procedure shall be entitled to be represented by
a representative of the employee’s choice (including an industrial organisation of employees) throughout the disputes procedure.”
We are satisfied that the agreement should be approved, subject to that undertaking. In accordance with s.201(3) of the Act, we note
that the undertaking is taken to be a term of the agreement. The above undertaking will be attached to the agreement.
Given the substantive terms of the agreement deal with NES matters, we have given particular attention to the requirement in s.186(2)(c)
of the Act that requires satisfaction that the terms of the agreement do not contravene s.55 (which deals with the interaction between
the NES and enterprise agreements etc.).
Sections 55(1) and (2) of the Act provide as follows:
National Employment Standards must not be excluded
(1) A modern award or enterprise agreement must not exclude the National Employment Standards or any provision of the National Employment
Terms expressly permitted by Part 2-2 or regulations may be included
(2) A modern award or enterprise agreement may include any terms that the award or agreement is expressly permitted to include:
(a) by a provision of Part 2-2 (which deals with the National Employment Standards); or
(b) by regulations made for the purposes of section 127.”
We are satisfied that clauses 5 and 6 of the agreement, which provide for the cashing out in part of paid annual leave and paid personal/carer’s
leave, do so only to the extent expressly permitted by the NES in s.93 and s.101 of the Act, in respect of enterprise agreements,
and do not contravene s.55.
Clause 7 of the agreement provides for the cashing out, by agreement of a “particular amount” of the employee’s
accrued paid long service leave entitlement. The long service leave entitlements of the employees covered by the agreement arise
Long Service Leave Act 1955
(NSW) (LSL Act). Section 4(8) of the LSL Act provides that “payment shall not be made by an employer to a worker in lieu of
any long service leave or part thereof to which the worker is entitled” under the LSL Act, “nor shall any such payment
be accepted by the worker”, except in the circumstances of the termination of employment or death of the employee. Clause 7
of the agreement is plainly in conflict with the LSL Act.
A Full Bench of Fair Work Australia in
Armacell Australia Pty Ltd
) summarised some aspects of the manner in which long service leave is regulated in Australia and its relationship to the NES in s.113
of the Act. It noted:
Section 26 of the Act provides that “it applies to the exclusion of State and Territory industrial laws”;
Section 27 of the Act, however, provides that “a number of State and Territory laws are not excluded by s.26. In particular
s.27(1)(c) provides that State and Territory laws in relation to specified ‘non-excluded matters’ are not excluded”,
one of which is long service leave, except in relation to an employee who is entitled under Division 9 of Part 2-2 of the Act to
long service leave (s.27(2)(g));
Section 113, which is in Division 9 of Part 2–2 of the Act, provides “in part that a long service leave provision in
a federal award or State reference transitional award that was in operation immediately before 1 July 2009 or, for a Division 2B
State reference employee, immediately before 1 January 2010, is preserved for the benefit of an employee”.
In summary, the Full Bench concluded that: “Speaking generally, where an employee would have had an entitlement to long service
leave under a federal award if that award had continued to apply there is an entitlement under the
Fair Work Act
. All other cases are governed by the relevant State legislation”.
The long service leave entitlements of the employees covered by the agreement, not being award covered employees, are governed by
the LSL Act.
While s.29(1) of the Act provides that as a general rule enterprise agreements prevail over State laws to the extent of any inconsistency,
s.29(2) provides an exception in relation to a term of an enterprise agreement which is inconsistent with, relevantly, a law of a
State or Territory covered by s.27(1)(c), one of which is long service leave. In the event of inconsistency between a term of an
enterprise agreement dealing with long service leave and State long service leave legislation the latter, in this case the LSL Act,
prevails. The consequence, as noted in
, is that to the extent that “a term in an enterprise agreement purports to permit cashing out of long service leave in circumstances
where it would not be permitted under the relevant State legislation, the term is of no legal effect”.
Further, as also noted in
, given the operation of s.29(2), the issue arising in respect of the inconsistency between clause 7 of the agreement and the LSL
Act is not one on which an undertaking could be given under s.190 of the Act.
It is clear that the cashing out provision within clause 7 of the agreement is in conflict with the LSL Act and is of no legal effect.
The issue is not amenable to a s.190 undertaking.
However, this does not prevent approval of the agreement. In this respect, the
Full Bench concluded that:
“[I]nconsistency with State legislation is not a matter referred to in ss.186 or 187. Those provisions require Fair Work Australia
to approve an agreement if the specified conditions are met. In our view these sections must be given effect to regardless of the
presence in the agreement of a term which is inconsistent with State legislation.”
Finally, we note that two further undertakings offered to Commissioner McKenna are not necessary for approval of the agreement.
The first was an undertaking to pay an amount in excess of the base rate required by s.206(3) of the Act. This addressed a concern
of Commissioner McKenna about the better off overall test, which does not apply in relation to non-award employees, who are the only
employees covered by the agreement. Accordingly, no such undertaking is required. The base rate of pay under an enterprise agreement
in respect of an employee not covered by a modern award is provided by the Act in s.206(3). There is no basis within the Act for
substituting an alternative base rate of pay requirement through the agreement approval process.
The second is an undertaking in respect of model flexibility and consultation terms. Given clause 8 of the agreement, incorporates
the model terms under the
Fair Work Regulations 2009
, such an undertaking is unnecessary.
The Agreement is approved and, in accordance with s.54, will operate from 8 November 2012. The nominal expiry date of the Agreement
is 31 October 2016.
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
[2012] FWA 6664
[2010] FWAFB 9985
[2010] FWAFB 9985
, at paras 24-29.
ibid., at para 26.
ibid., at para 30.
ibid., at para 31.
ibid., at para33.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, AE897737 PR530989>
No downloadable files available