Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union v Skilled Engineering Ltd [2003] FCA 260 (27 March 2003)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries
Union v Skilled Engineering Ltd
[2003] FCA 260
INDUSTRIAL LAW
- certified agreement - principles of construction -
circumstances in which term should be implied - whether casual award rates
by new rates in certified agreement
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(Cth), ss 170LY, 170LZ,
Ali v Christian Salvesen Food Services Ltd
[1997] 1 All ER 721
distinguished
Aron Salomon (Pauper) v A Salomon and Company Limited
[1897] AC 22
referred to
Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union v
Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Australia
(1998) 82 FCR 175
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Limited v President, Councillors and
Ratepayers of the Shire of Hastings
(1977) 180 CLR 266 applied
Byrne v Australian Airlines Limited
[1995] HCA 24
(1995) 185 CLR 410
Chorlton v Lings
(1868) LR 4 CP 374
referred to
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Henry Walker Eltin
Contracting Pty Ltd
(2001) 108 IR 409
distinguished
Dinch v Dinch
[1987] 1 WLR 252
Geo A Bond & Co Ltd (In Liquidation) v
AR (NSW) 498
referred to
Glover v Glover
(1964) 6 FLR 262
referred to
Hawkins v Clayton
(1988) 164 CLR 539 cited
Hawkins v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
(1996) 66 IR 322
(1998) 82 FCR 175
Hospital Products Limited v United States Surgical Corporation
[1984] HCA 64
(1984) 156 CLR 41
Kainhofer v Director of Public Prosecutions (No.2)
(1996) 70 FCR 184
referred to
Prenn v Simmonds
[1971] 1 WLR 1381
Roxborough v Rothmans of Pall Mall Australia Ltd
[2001] HCA 68
(2001) 185 ALR 335
Seamen's Union of Australia v Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd
Short v FW Hercus Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 51
(1993) 40 FCR 511
, 520 referred to
St Edmundsbury and Ipswich Diocesan Board of Finance v Clark (No.
[1975] 1 WLR 468
Warramunda Village Inc v Pryde
[2001] FCA 61
(2001) 105 FCR 437
distinguished
AUTOMOTIVE, FOOD, METALS, ENGINEERING, PRINTING AND KINDRED INDUSTRIES UNION
v SKILLED ENGINEERING LIMITED
V 1139 of 2001
FINKELSTEIN J
THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
DISTRICT REGISTRY
AUTOMOTIVE,
FOOD, METALS, ENGINEERING, PRINTING AND KINDRED INDUSTRIES UNION
ENGINEERING LIMITED
FINKELSTEIN
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
1 In July 1998 the Metal, Engineering and Associated Industries Award came into
force. The award is binding on a number of employee
organisations, including
the applicant union, several employer organisations and their members, one of
whom is the respondent employer,
and on certain categories of employees. On 1
June 2001 the Skilled Engineering Limited, Pilkington Geelong Site
Maintenance Certified
Agreement 2002-2003 was certified by the Australian
Industrial Relations Commission. The parties bound by the certified agreement
are the employer, those of its employees who work at the Pilkington site in
Geelong and whose terms and conditions are regulated
by the 1998 award or
another award known as the National Electrical Electronic and Communications
Industry Award 1998, and the organisations
that represent those employees
namely the union and the Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Information,
Postal, Plumbing and
Allied Services Union of Australia. There is a
controversy between the union and the employer concerning the wages to be paid
casual employees. The controversy is whether those wages must be calculated
in accordance with the award (which is what the employer
contends) or whether
the award rates have been superseded by the new rates in the certified
agreement (which is the union's position).
The union has brought this
application pursuant to
Workplace Relations Act
(Cth) seeking (1) the imposition of penalties for breach of the
certified agreement and (2) an order that the underpayment of wages
2 The resolution of the controversy depends upon the meaning to be attributed
to the certified agreement. For these reasons the
parties requested, and I
agreed, to deal with the issue of construction separately from and before
hearing evidence to determine
the quantum of the alleged underpayment of wages
and before hearing submissions on what penalties (if any) should be imposed on
employer if it has breached the certified agreement. At the conclusion of
this part of the proceeding I will make orders declaring
the rights of the
parties, notwithstanding that this approach has sometimes been frowned upon:
Warramunda Village Inc v Pryde
[2001] FCA 61
(2001) 105 FCR 437
, 441 per Gray, Branson
and North JJ.
3 It is convenient to begin with an examination of the award. It is a
comprehensive document containing provisions dealing with,
amongst other
things, categories of employment, rates of pay, hours of work, rights and
obligations on termination, severance entitlements,
allowances, overtime and
leave entitlements.
4 The award provides for three categories of employee: full-time; part-time;
and casual. For the purposes of the award an employee
who is not engaged as a
part-time or casual employee is a full-time employee: cl 4.2.2. A
part-time employee is a person who is
"engaged to work on a part-time basis
involving a regular pattern of hours which shall average less than 38 hours per
4.2.4(a). A casual employee is one who is "employed by the
hour": cl 4.2.3.
5 A full-time employee's "ordinary hours of work" are 38 hours per week
averaged over the period of the work cycle that applies
in the employees
particular enterprise: cl 6.1. The rates of pay are set out in
the award. Subject to certain immaterial exceptions an employee is entitled to
the applicable rate for his classification. A
schedule sets out both the
weekly and the hourly rates of pay; in each case the hourly rate is
of the weekly rate. Special provisions are made for
apprentices, trainees and other categories of employees who are not on the
award rate. Overtime is payable "for all work done outside ordinary
hours": cl 6.4.1.
6 A part-time employee (that is, an employee who is engaged to work less than a
38 hour week) is entitled to receive pro-rata that
which is paid to a full-time
employee "on the basis that ordinary weekly hours for full-time employees are
38": cl 4.2.4(c). A
casual employee who works "ordinary time" is to be
paid "an hourly rate calculated on the basis of one thirty-eighth of the weekly
award wage ... for the work which [he] perform[s] plus a casual loading of
[25] per cent": cl 4.2.3. (The loading was increased
from 20 per cent by
an award variation which came into effect on 9 February 2001.)
7 Turning now to the certified agreement the first point to note is that it
provides for a number of over-award benefits. Important
for present purposes
is the wage increase for three classifications of employee: C8, C10 and C12.
The new rates are found in cl
13. They are expressed as weekly rates. No
hourly rate is mentioned. The evidence does not reveal whether any employee at
Geelong site is not within one of these classifications. There is also a
change to the ordinary hours of work. Clause 25.1 provides
"[t]hat the
ordinary hours ... will be an average of 35 hours per week, Monday
to Friday, ie 9 day fortnight".
8 The certified agreement also provides for benefits which are specifically
directed to casuals or to "all employees" which necessarily
includes casuals.
Clause 11 provides that "[e]ach employee being (casual or permanent) will
receive a [severance] payment of $49.00
per week or part thereof". Clause 16
provides that "all employees" will be covered by a "Sickness and Accident
Income protection
Plan" (sic). Clause 21 makes provision for a "travel
allowance of $17.95 per day" to be paid to "all employees". Improved
superannuation
benefits are found in cl 18. By that clause the employer
must pay for "all it's permanent and casual employees at [the] Pilkington
Geelong Site, a minimum of $60.00 into an agreed fund ... or the SCG,
whichever is the greater". Clause 18 states that one component
in determining
a casual's superannuation entitlements is his "full wage specified in this
[Certified] Agreement". Clause 22 outlines
the circumstances in which casual
employees are to be engaged. It provides:
"Casual Labour is engaged for high peak workload, shutdowns, and
to cover full time employees absences. Casuals will be only be engaged
for a maximum of 4 weeks. Where the Company needs an extension due to
unforeseen circumstances, a 2 week extension may be
agreed by delegates. This
should not be unreasonably withheld. Casual/permanent labour replacing a full
time employee will be paid
the same classification up to level G7 Electrical
(ETU) or C8 Mechanical (AMWU)."
Workplace Relations Act
provides that a certified agreement will
prevail over an award (State or Federal), orders of the Commission and State
generally ss 170LY and 170LZ. Conformably with these
provisions cl 6.1 of the certified agreement stipulates that: "[w]here
is any inconsistency between [the] agreement and the awards
mentioned ... [the] agreement shall take precedence to the extent of
inconsistency."
10 The certified agreement does not cover the range of subject matter that is
found in the award. Consequently many of the terms
in the award continue to
apply to the respondent's employees. In view of the fact that both the award
and the certified agreement
govern the entitlements of employees at the Geelong
site, cl 6.1 of the certified agreement provides that the agreement "shall
read wholly in conjunction with the [1998 award] as amended during the life
of the [Certified] Agreement."
11 The issue in this proceeding is whether the certified agreement changes the
rates of pay to which a casual employee is entitled.
This will only occur if
the certified agreement imposes an obligation on the employer to pay wages at a
rate which is higher than
the award rate. In the absence of an express
provision increasing the wages payable to casuals, the union's success depends
demonstrating that the obligation exists by implication as a matter of
construction or by the inclusion of a term.
12 This immediately raises the question whether it is permissible to imply a
provision into a certified agreement. The answer might
depend upon the nature
of such an agreement. On one view a certified agreement is no different from a
private contract (a binding
exchange of promises) between two or more persons,
save that the machinery for its enforcement is conferred by statute. On this
view the ordinary rules according to which a term can be implied into a
contract will apply to a certified agreement. Terms can
then be implied as a
rule of law, as representing the imputed intention of the parties or by
13 An alternate view is that a certified agreement is not a mere contract but
an instrument which seeks in a way to legislate for
the terms and conditions of
employment in much the same way as an award: compare
Geo A Bond & Co
Ltd (In Liquidation) v
[1929] AR (NSW) 498
, 503. This
view suggests that the principles applicable to the construction of statutes
(which it has been said are "not inapplicable
to an award":
[1993] FCA 51
(1993) 40 FCR 511
, 520) should be applied to the certified
agreement. This would also permit the implication of a term, but the
circumstances in which
the implication can be made are more limited than in the
case of a contract:
Chorlton v Lings
(1868) LR 4 CP 374
, 387 per Willes
J: (an enactment includes "what is necessarily or properly implied by the
language used");
Aron Salomon (Pauper) v A Salomon and Company Limited
[1897] AC 22
, 38 per Lord Watson ("what the Legislature intended to be done
or not to be done can only be legitimately ascertained from that which
chosen to enact, either in express words or by reasonable and necessary
implication").
14 A third possibility, which derives from the fact that we are dealing with an
agreement which has been certified by the Australian
Industrial Relations
Commission, is to apply by analogy the approach taken to the construction of
court orders. In this instance
it would still be permissible to imply a term
into the certified agreement for that is sometimes done with orders. For
Dinch v Dinch
[1987] 1 WLR 252
, 263 Lord Oliver said that
"[o]ne has, ... simply to look at the order and any admissible material
available for its construction,
and determine what the court intended - or, in
the case of [a] consent order, what the parties intended - to effect by the
Glover v Glover
(1964) 6 FLR 262
, 263 per Selby J:
("It cannot be assumed that the court intended its orders to be meaningless but
since, if constructed literally,
they are meaningless, they must be construed
liberally in an endeavour to ascertain the court's intention.");
Kainhofer v
Director of Public Prosecutions (No.2)
(1996) 70 FCR 184
, 186 per Lockhart,
Hill and Keiffel JJ: ("No order dismissing the cross-appeal was made, although
this is implicit in other orders
made at the time by their Honours, including
an order for the costs of the cross-appeal".).
15 The prevailing view seems to be that the rules applicable to the
construction of contracts should be applied to both awards and
agreements. The cases do not explain why this is so in the case of an award:
see by way of example
Seamen's Union of Australia v Adelaide Steamship
(1976) 46 FCR 444
Hawkins v Commonwealth Bank of
(1996) 66 IR 322
Australian Municipal, Administrative,
Clerical and Services Union v Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Australia
(1998) 82 FCR 175.
16 I have found two cases, an English decision (where the legislation is
analogous but not precisely the same) and one from the
Federal Court which have
considered whether a term might be implied into a certified agreement. The
English decision,
Ali v Christian Salvesen Food Services Ltd
1 All ER 721
concerned a collective agreement which introduced a system of
annual pay where employees were to receive a standard wage for working
of 1,824 hours in a twelve month period: effectively a 40 hour working week.
There were no provisions for the eventuality
that an employee might cease his
employment before the expiry of the twelve month period. The plaintiff was
made redundant after
working twenty-two weeks. He claimed that the hours he
worked had exceeded 40 hours per week and he applied for a determination
he be paid pro-rata for the excess based on an alleged implied term which he
constructed to cover his situation. His application
was refused.
Waite LJ, with whom Saville and Otton LJJ agreed, said (at 726):
"Should there be any topic left uncovered by an agreement of
that kind, the natural inference, in my judgment, is not that there has
omission so obvious as to require judicial correction, but rather that the
topic was omitted advisedly from the terms of
the agreement on the ground that
it was seen as too controversial or too complicated to justify any variation of
the main terms of
the agreement to take account of it."
As Waite LJ highlighted, it would be extremely difficult to devise a term to
cover the different circumstances in which an employment
contract would be
terminated prematurely. He instanced the employee who fell sick and was
dismissed for incapacity, the employee
who was dismissed for misconduct, and
the "zealous latecomer". He then went on:
"Once it is apparent that the situation for which it is sought
to imply a term is only one of the numerous eventualities on which
agreement is silent, it becomes difficult, if not possible to devise for any
particular eventuality, a term of which it can be
predicated with certainty
that the negotiating parties would inevitably have been of one mind about it if
a decision had been taken
to make specific provision for it in the
agreement."
17 The second decision is
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
v Henry Walker Eltin Contracting Pty Ltd
(2001) 108 IR 409.
The certified
agreement in that case made provision "for a 2 panel 5½ day roster working
2 x 12 - hour shifts". The employer
introduced a different roster to meet its
changed needs. The union contended that the certified agreement should be
construed as
to allow a change in salary to cover the case of a change in the
roster. In the alternative, it submitted that there was an implied
term of the
certified agreement which provided for the alteration of salary in accordance
with any change in the work done due to
an alteration in the roster. Neither
the construction argument nor the putative implied term nominated a salary that
was to be paid
in changed circumstances. Presumably the salary was one that
that was fair and reasonable. Branson J rejected both submissions,
substantially for the same reasons. Some of her reasons were dependent upon
the particular terms of the certified agreement. However
two were more
general. Branson J said (at 419):
"It would, in my view, be contrary to the intention of the
legislature as disclosed by these provisions of the Act [s 178 and
, for the amounts payable to an employee under a certified agreement
to be other than certain and capable of determination by reference
agreement itself.
And later (at 420):
"[T]he implication of [an alleged implied] term would not be
reasonable and equitable, it is not necessary to give business efficacy
Agreement, would not be an obvious reflection of the apparent intention of the
parties to the Agreement, is not capable of
clear expression and would
contradict the express terms of the Agreement (see Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd
v State Rail Authority
[1982] HCA 24
(1982) 149 CLR 337
per Mason J at
18 These cases suggest that the general approach is to apply the principles
of contract construction, but with a predisposition against
the implication of
a term. For example, it was accepted in
Ali v Christian Salvesen Food
that there was a gap in the agreement which produced unfairness.
However, this was not sufficient to convince the court that the gap
filled. As a collective agreement is usually a carefully negotiated compromise
between parties who have equal bargaining
power, the tendency is to assume that
the omission is intentional.
Roxborough v Rothmans of Pall Mall Australia Ltd
[2001] HCA 68
, 349 Gummow J said that the first task in implying terms is to
consider the evidence and to find the relevant express terms. Here
disagreement regarding the evidence to be considered. The employer contends
that the history of the certified agreement
can be considered. This is
uncontroversial. It also says that extrinsic facts can be taken into account
in construing the agreement.
So far so good. The employer then says that
those intrinsic facts should include the submissions filed by the union in
of its application for the award variation previously referred to as
well as the decision of the Full Bench of the Australian Industrial
Commission granting the increase. The employer seeks to rely on these
documents to submit that the union's current contentions
are inconsistent with
those put to the Commission.
20 Surrounding circumstances are admissible in all cases in order to place the
contract in its correct setting. In
St Edmundsbury and Ipswich
Diocesan Board of Finance v Clark (No. 2)
[1975] 1 WLR 468
John Pennyquick (with whom Russell and Orr LJJ concurred) said it was
"[T]hat the proper method of construction is first to construe the words of
the instrument in isolation and then look at the surrounding
circumstances in
order to see whether they cut down the prima facie meaning of the words. It
seems to us that this approach is contrary
to well-established principle. It
is no doubt true that in order to construe an instrument one looks first at the
instrument and
no doubt one may form a preliminary impression upon such an
inspection. But it is not until one has considered the instrument and
surrounding circumstances in conjunction that one concludes the process of
construction."
Prenn v Simmonds
[1971] 1 WLR 1381
, 1383-1384
Lord Wilberforce said:
"The time has long passed when agreements, even those under seal, were
isolated from the matrix of facts in which they were set and
interpreted purely
on internal linguistic considerations. ... We must ... inquire beyond
the language and see what the circumstances
were with reference to which the
words were used, and the object appearing from those circumstances, which the
person using them
had in view."
He continued (at 1385):
"[E]vidence should be restricted to evidence of the factual background
known to the parties at or before the date of the contract,
including evidence
of the `genesis' and objectively the "aim" of the transaction."
21 The object as always is to objectively determine the intention of the
parties from the words of the document. That intention
can manifest itself not
only from words used but from words considered in light of the circumstances
surrounding the transaction.
22 The circumstances to which the employer wishes to refer do not surround the
transaction. They cast no light on the genesis of
the certified agreement and
are so far removed from the agreement that they could not, on any view, speak
of the "genesis" or "aim"
of the transaction. While the evidence was received,
I pay it no attention.
23 It is common ground that full-time employees in classifications C8, C10 and
C12 are entitled to the weekly rate specified in
cl 13 of the certified
agreement for working the ordinary hours set out in cl 25.1. It is to be
noted, however, that this entitlement
does not arise because of cl 13 if
read in isolation: the clause make no reference to the payment of wages to
full-time employees.
The obligation exists when the certified agreement is
"read wholly in conjunction with the [1998 award]": (cl 6.1). When the
documents are read together it is abundantly clear that a full-time
employee's wages have been increased and his hours of work have
been reduced.
A contract lawyer would say this is implicit.
24 And what of the part-time employee? In order for him to be entitled to any
benefit under the certified agreement he must point
to the imposition of an
obligation upon the employer to provide that benefit. It will be remembered
that the award defines a part-time
employee as an employee engaged to work "a
regular pattern of hours which shall average less than 38 hours per week" and,
of cl 4.2.4(c) he is entitled to wages pro-rata to those payable
to a full-time employee who work a 38 hour week. There is no express
in the certified agreement which alters the pay entitlements of a part-time
employee. Nor is there any provision which
changes his hours of work. But
that is not to deny that there has been an implicit alteration to the wages
payable to a part-time
employee. Indeed it is apparent that there has been such
a change. I will explain why. Let it be assumed that a person is employed
work a 37 hour week. According to the award that person is a part-time
employee because he is engaged to work less than a 38
hour week. But according
to the certified agreement that same person is a full-time employee because he
is working more than 35
hours per week. This inconsistency must be resolved.
One approach is to ask this question: Is it to be supposed that this imaginary
employee is to receive the wages specified in the award? Plainly the answer
must be: No. The hypothetical worker is a full-time
employee and therefore
should receive a full-time wage. But where does one find the obligation to pay
that wage, presumably in our
example with 2 hours on overtime rates? The
certified agreement does not impose that obligation by an express provision.
It nevertheless
does so in its proper construction, but if it does not and
there is a gap, that gap must be filled by the implication of an appropriate
term into the certified agreement.
25 We can now deal with the casual employee. As a general proposition one can
say that, when appropriate, benefits provided to
full-time and part-time
employees are also provided to casuals. Turning to specific provisions,
cl 22 is important. It contemplates
that a casual employee will usually
be engaged to work the same hours as the full-time employee whose absence he is
"covering".
That is to say, a casual employee is likely to be engaged to work
at least 35 hours per week. He is to "be paid the same classification
level C8". This suggests that the rate of pay is to be based on the new rates.
So also does cl 18 which provides that wages
payable to casuals for the
purposes of calculating their superannuation contributions is to the "wages
specified in this [Certified]
Agreement." Then there is the fact that
part-time employees are to receive the new rates for reduced hours of work. It
say the least, be incongruous if the new rates are payable to both
full-time employees and part-time employees but not to casuals
who are likely
to work the equivalent of a full-time week. All in all, the indications are
that the parties intended that casuals
were to be paid an hourly rate of pay
for each hour worked calculated as 1/35
of the weekly rate
prescribed by cl 13 in addition to the casual loading of 25 per cent. If
this is not the proper construction
of the certified agreement then there is an
unintended gap which can be completed by an appropriate term. If it be
necessary to
imply a term, it is justified by the principles established in
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Limited v President, Councillors and
Ratepayers of the Shire of Hastings
(1977) 180 CLR 266, 283. Moreover, as
Deane J noted, the
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Limited
concerned with whether a term should be implied in a formal contract "which was
complete upon its face". Sometimes a more
flexible test is called for:
Hospital Products Limited v United States Surgical Corporation
[1984] HCA 64
(1984) 156 CLR 41
Hawkins v Clayton
(1988) 164 CLR 539, 571.
Byrne v Australian Airlines Limited
[1995] HCA 24
(1995) 185 CLR 410
422-423 (per Brennan CJ, Dawson and Toohey JJ). On the basis of these
cases, a term may be implied if it is necessary for the reasonable
or effective
operation of a contract in the circumstances of the case. In my opinion, that
test is satisfied in this case.
26 It will be necessary for the union to bring in short minutes of the orders
(including declarations) to give effect to these reasons
and to provide for the
future disposition of this case.
certify that the preceding twenty-six (26) numbered paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Judgment herein of the Honourable
Justice Finkelstein.
Dated: 27 March 2003
for the Applicant:
for the Applicant:
Blackburn Cashman
for the Respondent:
for the Respondent:
Aarons & Co
of Hearing:
& 19 September 2002
of Judgment:
RTF format (62.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format