McEwan v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy (No 2) [2025] FCA 1392 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
McEwan v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2025] FCA 1392
File number(s):
NSD 332 of 2025
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– application under r 39.05 of the
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) to set aside an order dismissing an
interlocutory application made in appeal proceedings which sought a temporary
suppression
order, non‑publication order or pseudonym order over reasons
for judgment – recusal application
Legislation:
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) r 39.05
Cases cited:
Aon Risk Services Australia Ltd v Australian
National University
[2009] HCA 27
(2009) 239 CLR 175
Bienstein v Bienstein
[2003] HCA 7
195 ALR 225
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR
Fokas v Mansfield (No 2)
[2020] FCA 30
Johnson v Johnson
[2000] HCA 48
(2000) 201 CLR 488
Laws v Australian Broadcasting Tribunal
[1990] HCA 31
McEwan v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2025] FCA 162
McEwan v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2025] FCA 978
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v Nicholls
(2011) 244 CLR 427
v Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
[2025] FCAFC 126
QYFM v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2023] HCA 15
(2023) 279 CLR 148
Re Keely; Ex parte Ansett Transport Industries (Operations) Pty
[1990] HCA 27
(1990) 64 ALJR 495
(1990) 94 ALR 1
UBS AG v Tyne
[2018] HCA 45
(2018) 265 CLR 77
General Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Commercial and Corporations
General and Personal Insolvency
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
20 October 2025; 6 November 2025
Counsel for the Appellant:
The Appellant appeared in person
Counsel for the Respondents:
Mr B I McMillan
Solicitor for the Respondents:
McInnes Wilson Lawyers
NSD 332 of 2025
JULIE MCEWAN
OFFICIAL TRUSTEE IN BANKRUPTCY
OFFICIAL RECEIVER
Second Respondent
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appellant’s amended interlocutory application dated 19 August 2025 be
appellant pay the respondents’ costs in respect of the amended
interlocutory application dated 19 August 2025.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
appellant, Ms McEwan, filed an interlocutory application seeking to set aside an
order made by this Court on 15 August 2025. The
order sought to be set aside had
been made in the following terms:
The appellant’s interlocutory application dated 30 June 2025 be dismissed.
her present interlocutory application dated 19 August 2025, Ms McEwan seeks to
have set aside an order that was made in respect
of an earlier interlocutory
application dated 30 June 2025 filed by Ms McEwan in appeal proceedings
appealing the judgment in
McEwan v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
which was made in the original jurisdiction of this Court (
). Relevantly, by her interlocutory application dated 30 June 2025,
Ms McEwan sought:
(1) A temporary non-publication order of the primary judgment dated 11 February
2025 pursuant to
s 37AG(1)(a)
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
) on grounds “prevent prejudice to the proper
administration of justice”; or alternatively
(2) The primary judgment of 11 February 2025 be anonymised including all
reference to the appellant’s family until the “court
appeal” (that is, the Full Court) has delivered judgment pursuant to s
37AG(1)(a) of the FCA Act on grounds “prevent
prejudice to the proper
administration of justice”. It was apparent from the appellant’s
submissions that, notwithstanding
the reference to s 37AG(1)(a), Ms McEwan was
relying on s 37AG(1)(c) of the FCA Act:
McEwan v Official Trustee in
[2025] FCA 978
her present application, Ms McEwan seeks to rely upon r 39.05 of the
Court Rules 2011
). That rule relevantly provides:
Varying or setting aside judgment or order after it has been entered
The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or order after it has been entered
(c) it is interlocutory; ...
Background to the orders sought to be set aside or
outlined above, by her interlocutory application dated 30 June 2025, Ms McEwan
sought a temporary non-publication order in respect
of all or part of the
reasons for the primary judgment, pending the hearing and determination of her
orders made on 15 August 2025, the Court dismissed the interlocutory application
dated 30 June 2025 for the following reasons:
(1) The making of a suppression order was not necessary to prevent prejudice to
the proper administration of justice. There was a
public interest in the public
availability of reason for the primary judgment.
(2) There was no evidence that the making of a suppression order was necessary
to protect the safety of Ms McEwan.
(3) The Court was not satisfied of the utility of any such orders given the
proceedings which led to the primary judgment had been
heard in open court, the
primary judgment had been published on multiple publicly available internet
platforms for months and details
in relation to Ms McEwan were publicly
available on the National Personal Insolvency Index.
the present interlocutory application, Ms McEwan seeks to set aside an order
made by this Court on 15 August 2025 and a temporary
suppression order,
non‑publication order or pseudonym order over the reasons for judgment
given on 15 August 2025.
Procedural background
granted leave to appear by Microsoft Teams, Ms McEwan informed the Court on
15 September 2025 that she wished to appear in
person. The present
interlocutory application was set down for hearing in person at 2.15 pm on 20
October 2025.
emails sent on 12 and 15 September 2025, my Chambers advised the parties that
the Court expected to be addressed on whether the
present interlocutory
application was an abuse of process. The email of 15 September 2025 was in the
following terms:
Justice Hespe expects that both parties will address the Court in written and
oral submissions on whether the interlocutory application
is an abuse of
process. The Court has not had the benefit of submissions from either party at
this stage.
reference to the interlocutory application is a reference to the present
interlocutory application pursuant to which the appellant
seeks relief under r
email sent on 17 September 2025 Ms McEwan confirmed her availability to attend
the in‑person hearing “at the time and
date specified”.
Although Ms McEwan requested a Microsoft Teams link be provided so members of
the public could “appear
virtually”, Chambers advised the parties
that although a Microsoft Teams link would not be provided to members of the
public, it was open to any member of the public to observe the hearing
17 October 2025, the parties each requested a Microsoft Teams link for
interstate stakeholders and members of the public to observe
the hearing. The
parties’ request for a Microsoft Teams link was denied as the parties or
their representatives (including
instructing solicitors) were appearing in
12.14 pm on the day of the hearing, the appellant emailed Chambers in the
following terms:
Please be advised that I am now appearing remotely as I am unable to attend in
person. Please provide a link for today’s hearing,
would be greatly
appreciated.
reason was given by Ms McEwan for her inability to attend in person.
a Microsoft Teams link was provided to Ms McEwan by email sent at 12.40 pm and
notwithstanding a number of email exchanges
with Ms McEwan and an adjournment to
allow Ms McEwan additional time to join the Microsoft Teams link, she was unable
to successfully
join the link.
short oral hearing continued in Ms McEwan’s absence. In oral submissions,
the respondents only sought to rely upon their written
submissions. The
respondents were directed by the Court to provide Ms McEwan with a copy of the
transcript of the hearing. Ms McEwan
was invited to make further written
submissions and inform the Court if she wished to have a further oral hearing,
to be conducted
by Microsoft Teams.
McEwan was provided with a copy of the transcript on 23 October 2025 and
confirmed that she wished to have a further oral hearing.
On 29 October 2025, Ms
McEwan sent an email to Chambers which included the following:
The respondents emailed me the transcripts [sic] as per her Honour’s
orders (attached). However, there appears to be parts
of the transcript that is
Honour Hespe J addressed Mr McMillan in relation to his submissions stating
words to the effect “
you accept you have misled Ms
he responded and said “yes”.
There were witnesses who appeared remotely at the hearing and heard this
interaction. One of the people attending the hearing phoned
me and placed the
phone on speaker so that I could hear the latter part of the hearing. This is
what I also heard. However, this
does not appear on the transcript provided by
the respondents.
Court has reviewed the transcript prepared by the Court’s transcript
provider and is satisfied that the transcript is an
accurate record of the
McEwan filed further written submissions on 31 October 2025.
Ms McEwan’s request for a further oral hearing, the matter was listed for
hearing by Microsoft Teams at 10.00 am on
6 November 2025. Ms McEwan did not
join at that time. The matter was called for hearing at 10.14 am. Ms McEwan had
not joined. The
matter was adjourned briefly so that an attempt could be made by
my associate to contact Ms McEwan by phone. That attempt was unsuccessful.
hearing resumed during which the Court advised that the matter would be
determined on the papers. The respondents did not make
any further submissions
at the hearing held on 6 November 2025.
RECUSAL APPLICATION
her written submissions filed in support of her interlocutory application, Ms
McEwan submitted that she rejected “the position
taken by her
Honour” in the email from Chambers requesting submissions as to whether
the appellant’s application is an
abuse of process and submitted that
“there appears to be a position taken by her Honour by pre-judging the
email sent at 2.13 pm on the day of the hearing, Ms McEwan confirmed that she
was seeking that I recuse myself on grounds of apprehended
bias which was said
to be supported by the following three points:
Pre-judging
the interlocutory application that it may constitute an abuse of process for
setting aside the orders of Justice Burley;
out the public from hearing the proceedings remotely until forced to provide a
link because the appellant is now appearing
Hespe has been referred to Parliament waiting on the outcome of an
investigation.
respect of point 3, Ms McEwan attached a copy of an email submission she had
sent to the Senate. In so far as that submission related
to me, Ms McEwan,
complained about the matters raised in points 1 and 2.
present interlocutory application, I, as a single judge, constitute the Court.
As such, it is for me to determine whether I am
satisfied that the Court has
v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 279 CLR 148
(Kiefel CJ and Gageler J), [89] (Gordon J),
[123]-[124] (Edelman J) and [307] (Jagot J).
judge is disqualified from determining a case if the judge is biased or a party
or a member of the public might reasonably apprehend
that the judge is biased:
see for example,
v Bienstein
195 ALR 225
(McHugh, Kirby and Callinan JJ). Bias exists if the
judge might not bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the resolution of
the issues:
Laws v Australian Broadcasting Tribunal
[1990] HCA 31
(1990) 170 CLR 70
at 87 (Mason CJ and Brennan J);
test for apprehended bias is set out in the High Court’s decision of
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
(Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ), and it is sometimes referred
to as the “double might” test. The criterion
for apprehended bias is
whether “a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably apprehend that the
judge might not bring an impartial
mind to the resolution of the question the
judge is required to decide”. The double “might” emphasises
criterion is concerned with “possibility (real and not remote),
not probability”:
at [37] (Kiefel CJ and Gageler J).
Application
of the criterion requires the identification of the factor which it is said
might lead a judge to resolve the question
other than on its legal and factual
merits; an articulation of the logical connection between that factor and the
apprehended deviation
from deciding that question on its merits; and an
assessment of the reasonableness of that apprehension from the perspective of a
fair-minded lay observer:
at [38] (Kiefel CJ and Gageler J).
first matter relied upon by Ms McEwan which is said might lead me to resolve the
question other than on its merits is the sending
of the email set out
email was sent in the context of proceedings commenced by a litigant in person
and in which that litigant sought the same relief
that had been refused by a
single judge exercising appellate jurisdiction. The power of the Court to set
aside such an order requires
extraordinary circumstances. The purpose of the
email was to give notice to an unrepresented appellant of an issue that was of
to the Court to give the appellant a reasonable opportunity to prepare
to address that concern in submissions. As the email noted,
the Court was
cognisant of the fact that it had yet to receive submissions from the parties.
High Court held in
Re Keely; Ex parte Ansett Transport Industries
(Operations) Pty Ltd
[1990] HCA 27
(1990) 64 ALJR 495
(1990) 94 ALR 1
that the expression by a judge of tentative views during the course of argument
as to matters on which the parties are permitted
to address full argument
manifests no partiality or bias. As the High Court observed in
[2000] HCA 48
(2000) 201 CLR 488
(Gleeson CJ,
Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ), judges are not expected to wait until the
end of a case before they start thinking
my Chambers expressed no conclusion but rather identified an issue on which the
Court wished
to be addressed at the hearing. The email was sent to give the
parties advanced notice of a matter in respect of which the Court
wished to be
addressed in a context in which the moving party was without legal
representation and might find it difficult to respond
to an issue if it were
raised for the first time at an oral hearing.
all of the circumstances, I am not satisfied that the email from my Chambers
advising the parties of the Court’s desire to
be addressed on an issue of
concern to the Court gives rise to an apprehension of bias. There is no
reasonable basis on which a reasonable
fair-minded lay observer might consider
that the Court might resolve the issue it raised other than on its legal and
factual merits.
It does not disclose a reasonable basis from which it might
reasonably be concluded that the issue might not be determined dispassionately
and neutrally weighing the legal and factual merits:
Michael Wilson &
Partners Ltd v Nicholls
[2011] HCA 48
(2011) 244 CLR 427 at 447
(Gummow ACJ, Hayne, Crennan and Bell JJ).
am not satisfied that the sending of that email demonstrates actual bias or
gives rise to an apprehension of bias on the Court’s
part. The email does
not evidence that a concluded view on the issue had been reached without hearing
from the parties.
second matter relied upon was my refusal to provide a Microsoft Teams link to
“the public”. The proceedings were heard
in open Court. Any member
of the public interested in the proceedings could attend Court. There is no
logical connection between
the refusal to publish a Microsoft Teams link for
members of the public and an apprehension that I would not decide Ms
interlocutory application on its merits.
third matter relied upon is the fact that Ms McEwan has raised the first and
second matters in a submission to the Senate. I am
not satisfied that the fact
that Ms McEwan has communicated those matters to members of the Senate would
lead to the result that
a fair‑minded lay observer might reasonably
apprehend that I might not bring an impartial mind to the resolution of the
interlocutory
application.
am not satisfied that there presently exists a basis for me to disqualify myself
and I will proceed to deal with the remaining subject
matter of the
interlocutory application.
GROUNDS RELIED UPON BY MS MCEWAN IN SUPPORT OF HER
INTERLOCUTORY APPLICATION
support of her current interlocutory application, Ms McEwan relies upon the
evidence filed in respect of her earlier interlocutory
application.
McEwan submits that the order made on 15 August 2025 should be set aside or
varied for the following reasons:
(1) A lay observer would apprehend that the single judge who made the order was
infected by bias.
(2) The Court in making the order failed to consider the relevant merits and
facts of the case.
(3) The Court in making the order relied on a false affidavit “where the
primary judge acknowledged the false and or hearsay
evidence that was entirely
irrelevant to the issues to be decided”.
(4) The Court in making the order failed to consider the grounds for the
temporary relief.
(5) In addition to an appeal, an application has been filed seeking to set aside
the primary judgment pursuant to r 39.05(b) and
therefore the reasons for the
primary judgment “should be withdrawn from publication until final
determination”.
her further written submissions Ms McEwan submits that:
(1) The appellant “intends to file a bankruptcy annulment application by
COB 31 October 2025 and therefore requests the court
to consider a further
ground for a non-publication until the determination of the annulment
proceedings have been determined”.
By email sent on 6 November 2025 at
1.08 am, Ms McEwan attached a copy of an application which used a pseudonym,
named six respondents
and sought amongst other things, a declaration that the
sequestration order be set aside and the bankruptcy be annulled. The application
had purportedly been lodged for filing but it was not apparent from the face of
attachment that it had been accepted for filing.
In her application by which she
seeks to annul her bankruptcy, Ms McEwan explains her use of a pseudonym on the
basis that a “relevant
judgment” of a different Court to be relied
on has been published under a pseudonym.
(2) Counsel for the respondents was “misconceived believing that the
appellant was to file an appeal against the interlocutory
application within the
appellate jurisdiction.” Counsel for the respondents “is a very
experienced barrister who has
made false and misleading submissions to the
appellant and the court stating her application is an abuse of process and
dismissed with costs because she did not file an appeal, knowing there
was no avenue to file an appeal.”
(3) The respondents’ “submissions are an abuse of process because
[Counsel for the respondents] has deliberately tried
to mislead the appellant
and the court for self‑serving interest to strong arm and beat the
appellant. The respondents could
have simply provided consent to dispense with
the hearing.”
Respondents’ submissions and appellant’s
submissions in reply
respondents submitted that:
(1) Ms McEwan has not sought leave to appeal from the judgment of 15 August 2025
or complied (even substantially) with the requirements
of r 35.12 of the Rules
(which requires an application for leave to be in writing and in a prescribed
form). Notwithstanding that
she is a self-represented litigant, Ms McEwan should
not be excused from the procedural requirements of the Rules.
(2) Ms McEwan has not established any proper basis for challenge to the
interlocutory judgment of 15 August 2025. Ms McEwan seeks
to re-litigate issues
that have already been determined adversely to her in this proceeding. The
application is vexatious and an
abuse of process.
her written submissions in reply, Ms McEwan reiterated that her application was
made pursuant to r 39.05 and not r 35.12 of the
Rules. She further contended
that “any formal requirements can be dispensed with pursuant to r 1.34 of
the Rules”.
CONSIDERATION OF INTERLOCUTORY APPLICATION
is well-established that the power under r 39.05 of the Rules cannot be invoked
as an opportunity to relitigate issues that were
the subject of judicial
determination following a hearing and a consideration of the arguments put. As
Wheelahan J observed in
Fokas v Mansfield (No 2)
[2020] FCA 30
Although the discretionary power conferred by r 39.05 does not contain any
express fetters, the power should be exercised in a way
that is consistent with
the overarching purpose in
Federal Court of
Australia Act
, and consistently with the judicial guidance that has been
given by the authorities in relation to its exercise:
[1986] HCA 17
161 CLR 513
at 519 (Mason and Deane
JJ), and 536 (Brennan J). The power under r 39.05 to set aside interlocutory
orders once entered should be
exercised in a judicial manner, and only in
exceptional circumstances:
Professional Administration Service Centres
Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[2012] FCAFC 180
(Edmonds, McKerracher and Nicholas JJ). Rule 39.05 is
not an alternative to appellate procedures in respect of interlocutory
Dudzinski v Centrelink
(Spender J). And the principle of finality of
litigation requires the Court to exercise great caution when considering whether
circumstances exist that warrant the variation of orders:
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[1997] FCA 1052
(1997) 78 FCR
at 549–553 (von Doussa, Moore and Sackville JJ).
power under r 39.05 cannot be invoked to undermine the principle of finality of
litigation. Nor can the power under r 39.05 be
invoked as a substitute for an
appeal or, as in the present case, be used to circumvent a limitation on the
appellate jurisdiction
of the Court.
the Full Court explained in
v Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner
[2025] FCAFC 126
(Mortimer CJ, Colvin
and Thawley JJ), an appeal is a creature of statute. The appellate jurisdiction
of this Court is conferred by
s 24 of the FCA Act
Relevantly, s 24(1) of
that Act provides:
Subject to this section and to any other Act, whether passed before or after the
commencement of this Act (including an Act by virtue
of which any judgments
referred to in this section are made final and conclusive or not subject to
appeal), the Court has jurisdiction
to hear and determine:
(a) appeals from judgments of the Court constituted by a single Judge exercising
the original jurisdiction of the Court; ...
Court does not have appellate jurisdiction to hear and determine appeals from
judgments of the Court made in exercising appellate
Any such appeal is to the High Court and requires a grant of special leave to
appeal: s 33(4) of the FCA
McEwan’s interlocutory application dated 30 June 2025 was an application
made in the appeal proceedings. The orders made
in respect of Ms McEwan’s
interlocutory application dated 30 June 2025 were made by a single judge of this
Court in exercise
of the power under s 25(2B)(ab) of the FCA Act. That
section provides:
A single Judge (sitting in Chambers or in open court) or a Full Court may:
(ab) make an interlocutory order pending, or after, the determination of an
appeal to the Court; ...
orders of 15 August 2025 were made by a single judge exercising appellate
to this Court. The power
under r 39.05 cannot be used to effect an appeal from those orders.
the extent that the respondents submitted that Ms McEwan should have sought
leave to appeal from the orders made on 15 August 2025
rather than make an
application to set aside those orders, that submission was mistaken. It was not
open to Ms McEwan to appeal the
orders of 15 August 2025 to this Court. This
issue was raised with the respondents during the oral hearing on 20 October 2025
recorded accurately in the transcript as follows:
HER HONOUR: Thank you. I do have one concern in relation to your submissions.
MR McMILLAN: Yes.
HER HONOUR: They seem to proceed on the basis that it is open to Ms McEwan to
file and seek leave to appeal Burley Js orders. I do
not think that that is the
case. I do not think this court has jurisdiction, because those orders seem to
me to have been made by
exercise of appellate jurisdiction of the court, and
there is no appeal, by leave or otherwise, to this court from an exercise of
appellate jurisdiction by this court.
MR McMILLAN: Yes. My submissions proceed on the basis, your Honour, that
Ms McEwan hadn’t sought any such leave in any event,
but I - - -
HER HONOUR: But it’s not open to her to seek leave, because where Ms
McEwan currently sits is she is labouring, as a result
of your submissions,
under the idea that this is just a procedural glitch, and that if she filed an
application for leave to appeal,
that could be dealt with – her
application could be dealt with that way. And what I’m suggesting is that
that avenue
is not open, because there is no ability to seek leave to appeal to
this court from an exercise of appellate jurisdiction by a judge
of this court.
MR McMILLAN: Yes, I accept that.
McEwan’s contention that she heard the Court tell Counsel for the
respondents that he had misled Ms McEwan reflects a misconstruction
by Ms McEwan
of the above exchange. As the above makes apparent, the difficulties with Ms
McEwan’s current interlocutory application
were not formalistic and could
not be cured by treating her interlocutory application as an application for
leave to appeal. There
was no suggestion from the Bench that the respondents had
deliberately misled Ms McEwan or the Court.
Scope of current interlocutory application
of Ms McEwan’s submissions were directed at the correctness of the primary
judgment and some of Ms McEwan’s submissions
were directed to Ms
McEwan’s application that the primary judgment be set aside pursuant to r
39.05(b) of the Rules. Neither
Ms McEwan’s appeal from the primary
judgment nor her application to have the primary judgment set aside pursuant to
are the subject of the current interlocutory application. The current
interlocutory application is concerned only with the orders
made by the Court on
15 August 2025.
No basis for exercise of r 39.05 power
McEwan seeks to rely on the arguments and evidence she relied upon at the
hearing of her interlocutory application dated 30 June
2025 to the effect that
she has suffered and continues to suffer “prejudice” by the
publication of the primary judgment.
Rule 39.05 cannot be used to relitigate
issues that have been determined. An attempt to relitigate issues that have
already been
determined is an abuse of process:
Aon Risk Services Australia
Ltd v Australian National University
[2009] HCA 27
(2009) 239 CLR 175
(French CJ);
UBS AG v Tyne
[2018] HCA 45
(2018) 265 CLR
(Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ).
best as this Court has been able to discern, the additional arguments on which
Ms McEwan now relies in support of her current interlocutory
application are
(a) the single judge who heard and determined her interlocutory application
dated 30 June 2025 was biased because he delivered an
that failed to consider the relevant merits and facts of the case;
(b) the published reasons of the Court for the orders it made on 15 August 2025
were not fair or accurate;
(c) Ms McEwan had filed an appeal from the primary judgment and has made a
separate application to have that judgment set aside under
r 39.05; and
(d) Ms McEwan has sought to file a separate application to annul her bankruptcy
under a pseudonym.
McEwan did not make an application to the single judge that he recuse himself
for apprehended bias at any time during the hearing
of her interlocutory
application dated 30 June 2025. She was afforded the opportunity to be heard and
to present her case in support
of her interlocutory application. The fact that
the judge, having heard her submissions, dismissed her interlocutory application
by delivery of an
judgment does not demonstrate that the judge
was biased or that a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably apprehend that
might not bring an independent mind to deciding the issues.
reasons of the Court for the orders made on 15 August 2025 demonstrate that the
appellate judge considered the factual and legal
merits of the interlocutory
application. To the extent that Ms McEwan seeks to question the veracity of
evidence given before the
primary judge, that evidence was not relied upon in
making the interlocutory order of 15 August 2025 which is the subject of the
present application.
making a suppression or non-publication order the Court must take into account
the fact that a primary objective of the administration
of justice is to
safeguard the public interest in open justice: s 37AE of the FCA Act. The fact
that Ms McEwan had filed an appeal
from the primary judgment was not a basis for
the making of a suppression order over the primary judgment. Nor was the fact
Ms McEwan has filed a separate application to have the primary judgment set
aside under r 39.05(b). Nor is the fact that Ms McEwan
intends or has
attempted to file an application for the annulment of her bankruptcy under a
pseudonym. The primary judgment did not
concern the judgment that has been
published by another Court under a pseudonym. Whether a pseudonym ought to be
applied to the annulment
application is not the question before this Court. None
of those matters support a conclusion that the requirements of s 37AG(1)(a)
(c) of the FCA Act are satisfied in relation to the primary judgment. None of
those matters support a conclusion that the making
of a suppression order is
necessary to protect the safety of Ms McEwan or necessary to prevent prejudice
to the proper administration
of justice.
McEwan’s allegation that the published reasons of the Court for the orders
it made on 15 August 2025 were not fair or accurate
is no more than a
submission that she disagrees with the Court’s findings and conclusions.
Ms McEwan’s disagreement with
the Court’s assessment of the facts
and submissions does not demonstrate a failure by the Court to consider the
legal merits
and facts as found.
Court is not satisfied that it is in the interests of justice for the orders
made on 15 August 2025 to be set aside or varied.
Ms McEwan has not demonstrated
that there are exceptional circumstances that warrant the setting aside or
variation of those orders.
By her current interlocutory application, Ms McEwan
seeks to relitigate the same issues that were determined by the orders made on
15 August 2025. Ms McEwan has not demonstrated that there is any new
circumstance that has arisen which warrant the setting aside
of those orders.
interlocutory application dated 19 August 2025 is dismissed with
I certify that the preceding fifty-six (56)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 13 November 2025
RTF format (395 KB)
Signed PDF/A format