Kearns v Chief of Army [2022] ADFDAT 3 (12 August 2022)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Kearns v Chief of Army
[2022] ADFDAT 3
Appeal from:
Defence Force Magistrate
File number:
DFDAT 1 of 202
Judgment of:
LOGAN J (President), BRERETON jA (deputy
president) AND SLATTERY J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
DEFENCE AND WAR
– appeal from a
Defence Force Magistrate (DFM) – where the appellant was found guilty of
assaulting a subordinate –
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
– and of conduct prejudicial to the discipline of the
Defence Force under
Defence Force Discipline
Appeals Act 1955
Appeals Act
) – whether time
should be extended under
Appeals Act,
s 21 for lodging the appeal –
the appellant, a Lieutenant Colonel had attended a function at the Australian
Defence Force Academy
Cadets Mess the appellant was convicted of conduct under
, s 60 by placing his hand at the function upon the thigh of a female
Officer Cadet whilst intoxicated and convicted of assaulting
the same female
Officer Cadet , a subordinate, under
, s 34 by twirling her hair and
massaging her shoulder – whether the DFM impermissibly took into account
the absence of evidence
of a motive to lie contrary to
Palmer v The
, constituting a material irregularity and resulting in a miscarriage
of justice warranting the conviction being quashed under
Appeals Act
23(1)(c) – whether the convictions were unreasonable, or cannot be
supported having regard to the evidence or in all the
circumstances of the case
are unsafe or unsatisfactory warranting the conviction being quashed under
Appeals Act,
s 23(1)(a) and (d) – appeal dismissed –
observations about the authority of superior service tribunals under the
Legislation:
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Defence Regulation 2016
Cases cited:
Fulton v Chief of
Howieson v Chief of Army
[2021] ADFAT 1
Lane v Morrison
[2009] HCA 29
(2009) 239 CLR 230
Mills v Martin
(1821) 19 Johns 7
[1998] HCA 2
(1998) 193 CLR 1
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
(2020) 94 ALJR 394
Private R Army v Chief of Army
[2022] ADFDAT 1
(1987) 11 NSWLR 12
R v Rodriguez
(1997) 93 A Crim R 535
Randall v Chief of Army
[2018] ADFDAT 3
Tomlinson v R
[2022] NSWCCA 16
Yewsang v Chief of Army
[2013] ADFDAT 1
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr RA Pearce
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Salerno Law
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr S Whybrow
Mr M Fielden
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Office of the Director of Military Prosecutions
Table of Corrections:
In paragraph 7, the references to “Solerno” have been replaced
with “Salerno”.
In paragraph 57, the reference to “
replaced with “
In paragraph 119 the following amendments have been made:
has been replaced with “initiated”.
ultimately to his administrative discharge” has been replaced with
“proposing to terminate his appointment”.
appointment had been terminated on another basis and” has been inserted
after the words “heard by the Tribunal”.
In paragraph 121 the following amendments have been made:
“initiate action to” have been inserted in the first line after
“decision to”.
“could have” have been inserted in the first line after “his
“decision” in the third sentence has been replaced with
“action initiated against him”.
“two” has been deleted before
“convictions”.
DFDAT 1 of 2022
SEAN PATRICK KEARNS
CHIEF OF ARMY
LOGAN J (PRESIDENT), BRERETON JA (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
AND SLATTERY J (MEMBER)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
be extended to the appellant to bring this appeal out of time.
appellant have leave to amend the grounds of appeal so as to include a further
ground in the following terms:
“(c) The learned Defence Force Magistrate fell into error by impermissibly
taking into account the absence of evidence of a
motive to lie, constituting a
material irregularity, and resulting in a miscarriage of justice.”
to appeal be granted.
appeal be dismissed.
REASONS FOR DECISION
THE TRIBUNAL:
Introduction
6 May 2021 the appellant, Lieutenant Colonel (LTCOL) Sean Patrick Kearns was
convicted by a Defence Force Magistrate (DFM) of two
service offences under the
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
). He was convicted
on a charge that as a defence member at the Australian
Defence Force Academy (ADFA) he engaged in conduct likely to prejudice the
discipline of the Defence Force by touching a female Officer Cadet (OCDT) on the
thigh while in the ADFA Cadets Mess (ACM). He was
also convicted under
of assaulting a subordinate in rank, namely the same OCDT on
the same occasion, by twirling her hair and/or massaging her shoulder.
further hearing on 7 May 2021 punishments were imposed in respect of both
convictions, requiring him to forfeit seniority
in the rank of LTCOL with his
new seniority in rank to date from that day.
appellant seeks an extension of time to appeal and leave to appeal to this
Tribunal, under
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act
Appeals Act
), s 20 and s 21, contending that both convictions should be
quashed on two grounds. First, he contends under
Appeals Act,
s 23(1)(c) that there was a material irregularity in the course of the
proceedings and a substantial miscarriage of justice has occurred,
namely that
the DFM impermissibly took into account in support of the complainant’s
account that she had an absence of a motive
to lie, contrary to statements in
(1998) 193 CLR 1
[1998] HCA 2
the appellant contends under
Appeals Act,
s 23(1)(a) and (d) that both
convictions are unreasonable or cannot be supported having regard to the
evidence and in all the circumstances
of the case are unsafe or unsatisfactory.
On this ground he contends that the DFM engaged in a process of circular
reasoning: the
DFM rejected the appellant’s evidence, because of the
appellant’s state of gross intoxication; but the DFM should have
the same considerations when assessing the prosecution’s admittedly
intoxicated witnesses, in concluding that the appellant
was grossly intoxicated,
based on their evidence that the appellant was more intoxicated than they
Extension of time to Appeal
appeal is brought out of time.
Appeals Act,
s 21(1) requires appeals to
the Tribunal to be lodged with the Registrar “within the appropriate
period, or within such further
period as the Tribunal, either before or after
the expiration of the appropriate period, allows”. The “appropriate
for the purposes of
Appeals Act
, s 21(1) is the period of
30 days commencing immediately after the earlier of, the notification of the
results a review of the proceedings
s 152, or the last day of
a period of 30 days after the conviction:
Appeals Act,
s 21(2)(a) and
the hearing of the application to extend time to appeal and the appeal on 3 June
2022 the Tribunal extended the time to bring this
appeal. The appellant
conducted himself reasonably warranting the grant of extension in the following
circumstances. Following the
appellant’s conviction on Thursday, 6 May
2021 the Commander Forces Command (COMD FORCOMD) undertook the automatic review
conviction required under
s 152. The outcome of this automatic
review was notified to the appellant on 10 June 2021. The earlier of the two
periods provided
Appeals Act,
s 21(2)(a) and (b) here was the
period 30 days after conviction which expired on Monday, 7 June 2021 (30 days
counts to Saturday,
5 June 2021 a day when the Tribunal’s Registry is
Appeals Act,
s 21 appeal period expired before the appellant received
the outcome of his automatic review on 10 June. The appellant considered
position and further available avenues of review available to him and decided to
submit a petition against his convictions to
COMD FORCOMD on 2 July 2021.
Pending the outcome of his petition on 8 August 2021 he returned to duties
providing direct support
to non-combatant evacuations from Kabul, Afghanistan.
On 9 August 2021 he was issued with a notice to show cause as to why his service
should not be terminated on the grounds that his retention was not in the
interests of the Defence Force under
Defence Regulation
s 24(1)(c).
He began preparing a response. On 13 August 2021 he
received advice as to the outcome of his petition from COMD Division 2
both convictions and punishments and on 19 August 2021 he was
supplied with the
s 154 report in relation to his petition. On 9
September 2021 he submitted his response to the termination notice.
9 September 2021 and 14 September 2021, he requested legal assistance from
Defence Counsel Services in respect of his possible
rights of appeal and
independently sought consultations with an Army reserve legal officer. The
Tribunal is satisfied that he made
reasonable attempts in a timely way to engage
legal advice through these two means. When he was ultimately unsuccessful, he
his present solicitors, Salerno Law, on 4 December 2021. Consultations
with Salerno Law and his present counsel, Mr R. Pearce, followed
resulting in
the appellant giving instructions for the filing of the present appeal on 4
December 2021.
was reasonable for the appellant to wait for the outcome of the automatic review
and then his petition before deciding what further
course to take in respect of
his convictions. The Tribunal does not regard any of the steps that appellant
took in pursuing his rights
of petition under
s 154 or seeking to
secure legal advice before lodging his appeal as unnecessary or involving
excessive delay. It was important in
his own interests and for the better
administration of justice for him to secure legal advice before commencing an
appeal. In the
circumstances an extension of time to institute his appeal was
warranted and was granted during the hearing.
s 21(2) appears to be structured on the assumption that a
s 152 automatic review will be available to a convicted defence member within 30
days of conviction. In practice that does not occur.
Appeals Act,
21 warrants amendment to provide a longer time for appeal, running from the
notification of the outcome of
s 152 mandatory automatic review, or
if applicable the outcome of any
s 154 petition. Earlier this year,
in expressing a like view in
Private R Army v Chief of Army
[2022] ADFDAT
), at [11], the Tribunal suggested that, “a more
suitable ‘appropriate period’ might be achieved by omitting
is the earlier’ from s 21(2) of the Appeals Act and
replacing it with ‘whichever is the later’”.
The Charges and the Trial
3 May 2021, the appellant pleaded not guilty to three principal charges and two
alternative charges involving two OCDTs before
the DFM, Brigadier M Cowen QC at
the Court Martial Facility in the Australian Capital Territory (ACT). All
charges arose out of events
alleged to have occurred on the evening of 26
September 2020. Two of the charges qualified as “sexual offences”
the ACT evidence legislation which applied to the trial, the
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
). In conformity
s 74 during the trial the DFM ordered that the names of the
complainants not be published.
Tribunal takes the same course in these reasons. Even though the appellant was
found not guilty of the two charges involving
sexual offences the charge sheet
still contained charges involving sexual offences and the Tribunal made
nonpublication orders consistent
s 74. The first charge and
its alternative charge related to an event alleged to have occurred in relation
to a female complainant,
who will be referred to in these reasons as OCDT X. The
second charge and its alternative, and the third charge related to the other
female complainant, who will be referred to in these reasons as SCDT Y.
following were the charges preferred against the appellant:
First Charge – s 61(3), DFDA and s 60(1),
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) – Act of indecency without
Being a defence member at the Australian Defence Force Academy, Canberra, in the
Australian Capital Territory, on or about 26 September
2020, did commit an act
of indecency upon [OCDT X] by touching her buttock without her consent, and
being reckless as to whether
she consented.
In the Alternative to the First Charge –
Prejudicial conduct
Being a defence member at the Australian Defence Force Academy, Canberra, in the
Australian Capital Territory, on or about 26 September
2020, did engage in
conduct likely to prejudice the discipline of the Defence Force by touching
[OCDT X] on her buttock while in
the ADFA Cadets Mess.
Second charge –
, DFDA – Prejudicial conduct
Being a defence member at the Australian Defence Force Academy, Canberra, in the
Australian Capital Territory, on or about 26 September
2020, did commit an act
of indecency upon [SCDT Y] by touching her thigh without her consent, and being
reckless as to whether she
In the Alternative to the Second Charge –
Prejudicial conduct
Being a defence member at the Australian Defence Force Academy, Canberra, in the
Australian Capital Territory, on or about 26 September
2020, did engage in
conduct likely to prejudice the discipline of the Defence Force by touching
[SCDT Y] on her thigh while in the
ADFA Cadets Mess.
Third Charge –
, DFDA – Assaulting a subordinate
Being a defence member at the Australian Defence Force Academy, Canberra, in the
Australian Capital Territory, on or about 26 September
2020 assaulted [SCDT Y] a
member of the ADF who was subordinate to him in rank by twirling her hair and/or
massaging her shoulder.
6 May 2021, the fourth day of the trial, the DFM found the appellant not guilty
of Charge 1 and its alternative in relation to
OCDT X. But in relation to SCDT Y
he found the appellant not guilty of Charge 2 but guilty of its alternative, and
guilty of Charge
the convictions, in imposing the punishments of forfeiture of seniority on the
appellant, the DFM described the offences
found proven as, “too serious to
be met by a severe reprimand or a reprimand, even in conjunction with a
fine” but he
balanced this with a judgment about the appellant’s
prospects for rehabilitation in future service, saying that the appellant
“still [has] a lot to offer the Army as a lieutenant colonel.” Under
Appeals Act
, no appeal lies to this Tribunal against the punishments
imposed; the punishments are a matter for review by command under
Overview of Uncontested Matters
the afternoon and the evening of 26 September 2020, the ADFA Rugby Club held an
after-match function at a venue known the “Sportsman
Bar”, which is
located on the top level of the ACM. Several of the Rugby Club’s teams had
participated in semi-finals
matches that day. Two teams had won and would be
progressing to the grand final in their respective division.
that time the appellant was the Chief of Staff of the Royal Military College of
Australia. He was also the Head Coach of the ADFA
Rugby Club and a sponsor under
the ADFA Family Sponsorship Program (a program which pairs Canberra-based ADF
Officers with ADFA cadets).
function commenced at approximately 1700 and many of the defence members present
commenced drinking alcohol at around this time.
The cadets in the Rugby Club who
gave evidence were all either OCDTs continuing to undertake studies at ADFA or
were at the time
of giving evidence staff cadets (SCDT) at the Royal Military
College – Duntroon. SCDT Y was of that rank when she gave evidence
been an OCDT on 26 September 2020. Witnesses are referred to in these reasons in
the rank they held when giving evidence.
attendees commenced drinking before they arrived at the function, and some,
including the appellant, only began to drink after
joining the function. The
appellant arrived at the function between 1900 and 1930 hours. As Head Coach of
the Rugby Club, he participated
in presenting match awards and continued
socialising and drinking alcohol at the Sportsman Bar with other members of the
club, including
the complainants.
function continued until the Sportsman Bar closed sometime between 2130 and 2200
hours. All those still attending the ADFA Rugby
Club function then moved down
one level within the ACM to its first level, where the Beersheba Bar and an
associated lounge seating
area are located. The same night the ADFA AFL Club was
hosting a function in the Beersheba Bar lounge area. The appellant continued
socialising with the members of the Rugby Club in that area, although there was
some intermingling with members of the AFL Club.
is not in contest that the appellant left the ACM at approximately 2330 and was
The events that led to the two
charges in respect of OCDT X occurred first, followed by the events that led to
the three charges in
respect of SCDT Y. All relevant events occurred between
2130 and 2330 and several cadets associated with the Rugby Club were witnesses
events in relation to Charge 1 relating to OCDT X, commenced when the appellant,
SCDT Barclay Roach and OCDT X were standing close
to the bell of the President
of the Mess Committee (the PMC Bell), which is affixed to the wall adjacent to
the Beersheba Bar. Around
this time, OCDT X kissed SCDT Roach. OCDT X’s
evidence in support of Charge 1 is based on an alleged interaction between the
appellant and herself shortly after OCDT X had initiated this kiss. Whilst she
was walking to the ladies’ restroom, SCDT Y
said she observed the
interaction between the appellant and OCDT X. Another witness observed aspects
the night progressed further, the appellant and other Rugby Club members moved
to a seating area in the general vicinity of the
Beersheba Bar and adjacent to a
concourse and stairs, leading down to the ground floor of the ACM. The seating
area contained several
clusters of four two-seater leather couches, each
arranged around a wooden coffee table. The four couches within each cluster were
placed at 90° to one another forming a square facing into the coffee table,
allowing small groups to sit close to one another,
to socialise and to place
drinks on the coffee table in the centre of each cluster.
appellant moved from the PMC Bell area and occupied a couch in a cluster of
couches on one side of the Beersheba Bar lounge area,
immediately adjacent to
the concourse and stairs leading down to the ground floor. The back of his
lounge abutted the balustrade
above the stairway to the ground floor. From where
he sat the appellant had a view throughout the lounge area. Several of the
whose evidence featured in the appeal sat or stood nearby.
Jack Carroll sat on the couch directly opposite the appellant in the same lounge
cluster. At that time SCDT Nicholas Elks occupied
the couch to the left of and
at right angles to the couch occupied by the appellant. There was another couch
at right angles and
to the right of the appellant, behind which a small group of
cadets was standing. By this time SCDT Roach had also moved away from
vicinity of the PMC Bell and was standing as a member of this group. At some
point SCDT Y joined the group near the cluster of
lounges where the appellant
was sitting and then she sat on the same couch as the appellant sitting on his
left. He agrees that she
was sitting on his left although SCDT Roach has the
appellant sitting on SCDT Y’s left.
appellant states, and it is not in contest, that that before SCDT Y sat next to
him, he was engaged in conversation with LT Carroll,
centred on the theme of
rugby and service life. After a while the appellant broke his conversation with
LT Carroll to have a conversation
with SCDT Y. The conversation was also centred
on rugby. The appellant congratulated SCDT Y on her performance as an
officeholder
of the Rugby Club. The conduct comprising Charge 2 and Charge 3 is
said to have occurred after the appellant and SCDT Y had been
sitting on this
couch talking for a period.
after the Charge 2 and Charge 3 events, the Beersheba Bar was closed, and
everyone departed the ACM. SCDT Roach took SCDT
Y to her lines at ADFA. The
appellant returned to his residence at Duntroon.
following morning, SCDT Y and OCDT X exchanged text messages regarding the
previous night. Later that evening, SCDT Y indicated
to OCDT X that she intended
to speak with CAPT Hardy, the Rugby Club’s supervising officer, regarding
the events from the previous
night. SCDT Y called CAPT Hardy on 28 Sep 20 and
she complained to CAPT Hardy about what had occurred at the ACM. CAPT Hardy then
held separate records of conversation with OCDT X and SCDT Y. The military
police became involved and spoke with each of the complainants
statements. OCDT X then indicated she wanted to make a formal complaint. A
further statement was taken, and a record of
interview was conducted with the
accused concerning OCDT X only.
evidence of the witnesses’ and the appellant’s state of intoxication
was varied and controversial. The quality of
that evidence is discussed later
during analysis of the grounds of appeal.
appellant initially sought to rely in submissions upon the evidence of FLTLT
James Champness who, as the unit Adjutant, had examined
and searched closed
circuit television footage of the Sportsman’s Bar area on the evening of
26 September 2020. The video footage
itself was not put into evidence but it was
ultimately not in contest that the footage related only to the area of the
Sportsman’s
Bar, which the appellant and the other witnesses had left
before the conduct complained of occurred. Counsel for the appellant indicated
that he placed no reliance upon the evidence of this witness, nor was any
challenge made to the way that the DFM dealt with his evidence.
Overview of The Prosecution Case, the Contest at Trial and
the DFM’s Findings
appellant was acquitted of Charge 1 – act of indecency concerning OCDT X
and its alternative prejudicial conduct charge.
But the contest in relation to
Charge 1 is relevant to the DFM’s evaluation of the evidence in relation
to Charges 2 and 3
concerning SCDT Y.
prosecution alleged in relation to Charge 1 that after OCDT X spontaneously
kissed SCDT Roach in the group by the PMC Bell that
the appellant, who had been
standing near to OCDT X, placed his arm around OCDT X and intentionally
indecently touched her buttock
whilst he was grossly intoxicated by alcohol.
OCDT X said he touched her in this way. In this she had some support from SCDT
who remembered receiving the kiss and being “quite shocked”
and then seeing the appellant’s arm reach around behind
OCDT X after the
kiss. SCDT Y said that as she was walking to the bathroom, she noticed the
appellant’s hand on OCDT X’s
backside and later that evening that
prompted her to ask OCDT X whether she was “okay”. SCDT Y observed
that the appellant
was continuing to drink, and she described him as
“quite heavily intoxicated at that point”. Other witnesses gave
appellant denied at trial that he had touched OCDT X’s buttock, but he
agreed in evidence that he had touched her back before
her kiss of SCDT Roach,
as a gesture of apology for something he had said to her that might have caused
her offence. In a service
police interview he did not mention any kiss between
OCDT X and SCDT Roach nor any touching of OCDT X. At trial he gave evidence
that when he observed the public display of affection involved in a kiss between
OCDT X and SCDT Roach and her wrapping her arms
around SCDT Roach, it
“made me feel awkward and subsequently leave the area” of the PMC
acquitting the appellant of Charge 1 and its alternative, the DFM noted the
amount of alcohol which OCDT X had consumed (up to
15 standard drinks) and
concluded that she was grossly impaired as a result. He further noted that OCDT
X’s contemporaneous
text messages showed she had impaired memory of the
event, and doubted the reliability of her evidence. He said he was comfortably
able to rely upon the evidence of SCDT Y as an “honest reliable and
credible” witness who is “an accurate historian
of events”,
and was comfortably satisfied that at least “momentarily, the
appellant’s hand contacted with the buttock
of SCDT X”. But he
concluded that the touching of her buttock could have an innocent explanation, a
clumsy drunken manoeuvre
being a possibility, and that any sexual element was
“equivocal”, so he was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
the conduct was indecent, intentional, or likely to prejudice the discipline of
the Defence Force. But although not being satisfied
that this charge was proved
beyond reasonable doubt, the DFM rejected the appellant’s account that he
was uncomfortable after
OCDT X spontaneously kissed and embraced SCDT Roach.
Charges 2 and 3
conduct alleged in these two charges involved the appellant placing his hand on
the skin of the thigh of SCDT Y (Charge 2 and
its alternative) and twirling her
hair and massaging her shoulder (Charge 3) whilst he was seated on her right on
the couch. The
two charges do not reflect the chronological order of events, the
twirling of the hair allegedly occurring before the touching of
relying upon the evidence of SCDT Y, the prosecution’s case was that
during their conversation, from his position
on her right the appellant began
twirling SCDT Y’s hair, around the area of her right ear with his left
hand. SCDT Y said that
after approximately two minutes she jerked her head away
from his hand. At that point, according to SCDT Y, the appellant moved his
hand to SCDT Y’s left shoulder and began lightly massaging her shoulder.
This lasted for about ten or so seconds before
SCDT Y again jerked away, this
time moving her body away from the appellant.
this point SCDT Y says that the appellant moved his hand to SCDT Y’s right
thigh and began touching her bare skin above the
knee and just below the hemline
of her skirt, rubbing his hand back and forth on this part of her thigh for
SCDT Y says she again jerked her body away from the
appellant, and the touching ceased. SCDT Y says SCDT Roach then sat next to the
appellant, positioning himself in the centre of the couch and pushed next to
the course of the appeal, the Tribunal was taken to the evidence supporting SCDT
Y’s account, and some evidence said to be
inconsistent with or
unsupportive of it, and this will be dealt with below.
appellant said that after SCDT Y sat down next to him, he engaged in
conversation with her and congratulated her on the grand
final and the work that
she had done as an officeholder of the Rugby Club.
He recalled tapping her on the arm and upper
shoulder as a gesture of camaraderie whilst complimenting her for what she and
the players
had achieved in a demanding year. He did not recall coming into
accepted they were sitting “relatively close” on the two-seater
couch. The appellant denied that OCDT Y moved
away from him during their
interaction and said that “she retained facial and eye contact with me.
And – not the entire
time, of course, but there was what you would expect
– the nodding of the head as we were communicating and talking about
pieces.” He otherwise denied the conduct alleged to constitute
Charges 2 and 3.
cross examination, the appellant denied touching her on the leg as she alleged.
But he also explained
that he could not recall
putting his hand on her leg but that “he may have” done so. He said
that “a hand on the
leg is a [gesture] that “isn’t uncommon
for me, with a closed hand – wrong – with the back of the hand. I
can’t recall whether I used that gesture with OCDT Y or not.”
DFM accepted SCDT Y’s account of what happened between her and the
appellant on the couch and rejected the appellant’s
account. He accepted
SCDT Y’s account beyond reasonable doubt and said that he had “no
doubt about any aspect of her
evidence”. He rejected the appellant’s
account on the basis of his findings that the accused was grossly intoxicated,
finding based both on the evidence of prosecution witnesses and the
appellant’s own account of events. He was unimpressed
appellant’s directness in answering questions. And the DFM was troubled by
some of the appellant’s descriptions
of conduct that he would regard as
socially acceptable, including the appellant’s concession that he would
“not uncommonly”
interact socially with females by touching them on
the leg. He ultimately thought that the appellant did “not have a great
deal of memory and has to that extent, reconstructed it with the benefit of
hindsight”.
DFM was comfortably satisfied that the touching on the thigh was without
consent, because the appellant “was so intoxicated
he did not even think
satisfied that the touching of the
thigh was indecent, as there was no evidence
that he had moved his hand under her skirt or to the inside of her thigh, nor
other evidence to similar effect. Nonetheless the circumstances
permitted him to conclude that such conduct between a LTCOL and an
OCDT, as SCDT
Y was at that time, would be likely to prejudice the discipline of the Defence
Force. This was because the touching
occurred in a place where the cadets expect
such conduct not to occur, and because the conduct would cause serious distrust
officers. So, the DFM convicted the appellant of the
alternative
to Charge 2 under
DFM convicted the appellant of Charge 3. He again accepted the evidence of SCDT
Y and rejected the evidence of the appellant.
The DFM found that the appellant
massaged SCDT Y’s shoulder and twirled her hair, and that it must have
been apparent to him
that she did not consent and that it was thereby an
unlawful application of force establishing the assault alleged.
pleaded, the appeal grounds are as follows:
(a) The learned Defence Force Magistrate erred in rejecting the
Appellant’s sworn testimony;
(b) In all the circumstances of the case, the convictions are unsafe and
unsatisfactory; and
(c) The learned Defence Force Magistrate fell into error by impermissibly taking
into account the absence of evidence of a motive
to lie, constituting a material
irregularity, and resulting in a miscarriage of justice.
of appeal (a) and (b) were argued together and are considered together in these
reasons. The applicant was given leave to
amend his application to include
ground of appeal (c) during the hearing. Ground (c) was argued first in the
appeal and is dealt
with first in these reasons.
is no challenge in the appeal except in one respect as to the way the DFM
directed himself on issues of law. The DFM directed
himself as to the burden of
proof, as to the requirement for the prosecution to disprove mistaken belief as
to consent, as to the
meaning of indecency, as to taking into account
self-induced intoxication as relevant to whether the element of recklessness as
consent was proved, whether the accused’s state of intoxication was
relevant to whether he held a mistaken belief as to consent
as distinct from the
reasonableness of the belief and as to the meaning of prejudicial conduct. And
the DFM correctly directed himself
that it was not a question of him making a
choice between the evidence of the accused and the prosecution witnesses, but it
the prosecution to prove the elements of the offence beyond reasonable
doubt. Consistently with
(1987) 11 NSWLR 12
he scrutinised the
complainants’ evidence with great care.
Ground (c) – A Contravention of the Principles of Palmer
v The Queen?
appellant argued orally on this appeal that part of the DFM’s reasoning
contravened statements of the High Court in
The appellant’s
contentions on this issue could not readily be accommodated within grounds of
appeal (a) and (b), which being
Appeals Act,
s 23(1)(a) and (d)
did not require the appellant to establish a miscarriage of justice. The
respondent was ready to engage with the
appellant’s argument in relation
. The Tribunal invited Mr R. Pearce, Counsel for the appellant
to formulate an additional ground of appeal orally which he extemporised,
which was then confirmed in writing. It was to the effect that:
(c) The learned Defence Force Magistrate fell into error by impermissibly taking
into account the absence of evidence of a motive
to lie, constituting a material
irregularity, and resulting in a miscarriage of justice.
appellant’s argument on this ground arises out of several passages in the
DFM’s reasoning where he made observations
Y. The DFM’s observations relied upon by the appellant are the following:
I pause to note that in relation to her state of sobriety her evidence is
uncontested. That does not mean to say that I should accept
it, but when she
says that she was chatty, she, essentially, was not so adversely affected by the
consumption of alcohol. I accept
her evidence on that point. I also accept her
evidence on that point, finding her an honest and reliable witness
axe to grind, with no moment of malice
or exaggeration, that her assessment,
even approaching cautiously the fact that she had been consuming alcohol, in her
position as
president of the Rugby club, was that the defendant, contrary to his
current recollection was grossly intoxicated on the evening
in question.
[emphasis added]
DFM returned to similar themes when discussing OCDT Y’s credibility later
in his reasoning as follows:
I comfortably come to the conclusion that I am able to accept the word of SCDT
Y. I have no doubt about any aspect of her evidence.
no moment of
malice. No intentional falsity.
No exaggeration. Proper concessions –
for example, making the observations from 10 to 15 m, as was read out to her
original statement said 10 m. She was a reluctant complainant,
in that there was no moment of over enthusiasm to get somebody into
trouble. But
that does not go to her discredit. All that means is I had no moment of malice
or unreliability – of lack of credibility,
in relation to her evidence.
[emphasis added]
appellant argues that these passages, particularly the parts emphasised in
italics involve the DFM reasoning that the SCDT Y had
no motive to lie. Mr
Pearce contends that that is the only fair description one can apply to those
words. He further submits that
the absence of a motive to lie was not raised by
either party; it did not arise either in the prosecution case in cross
examination
or in addresses. Mr Pearce submits that a proper application of
makes clear that there is no onus upon an accused to prove that
the complainant in an allegation of a sexual offence has a motive
that the failure or inability to identify motive to lie is entirely neutral in
relation to the credibility of the complainant,
whose account gains no
legitimate credibility from the absence of evidence of a motive to lie.
Pearce argues that if the DFM’s observations were limited to the phrase
“no moment of malice” a different construction
of his reasons might
perhaps be open, but the position is made even clearer when the DFM reasons
“she had no axe to grind”.
Mr Pearce further submits that whether an
accused has in fact no knowledge of any fact from which it could be inferred
that the complainant
has a motive to lie is an entirely irrelevant consideration
and that the DFM should have directed himself in accordance with
to ignore considerations of whether or not OCDT Y had a motive to lie.
principles in
may be shortly stated. In the trial of the accused
for sexual assault and various acts of indecency the
prosecution cross-examined the accused to show that he could not prove any
for imputing a motive to lie to the complainant. The High Court concluded
that the complainant’s account gained no legitimate
credibility from
evidence that the accused could not suggest a motive for her to lie and that in
the circumstances of the case the
asking of the question had such a prejudicial
effect that there may have been a miscarriage of justice. The High Court
the principle in the following way:
[7] It is one thing to permit cross-examination of a complainant in order to
elicit, if possible, a motive to lie. It is another
thing to permit
cross-examination of an accused to show that an accused cannot prove any ground
for imputing a motive to lie to the
complainant. A complainant knows whether he
or she has a motive to lie and, as a motive to lie is a fact that may be proved
the complainant's credit, the complainant may be asked about it. And
evidence may be given by other witnesses of events from which
such a motive may
be inferred. But the fact that an accused has no knowledge of any fact from
which a motive of the kind imputed
to a complainant in cross-examination might
be inferred is generally irrelevant. In general, an accused's lack of knowledge
means that his evidence cannot assist in determining whether the
complainant has a motive to lie, but if the facts from which an
inference of
motive might be drawn are facts that the accused would know if they existed, his
lack of knowledge could be elicited
to disprove those facts.
[8] If it were permissible generally to cross-examine an accused to show that he
has no knowledge of any fact from which to infer
that the complainant has a
motive to lie, the cross-examination would focus the jury’s attention on
irrelevancies, especially
when the case is “oath against oath”. In
such a case, to ask an accused the question: “Why would the complainant
lie?” is to invite the jury to accept the complainant's evidence unless
some positive answer to that question is given by the
accused. As Gleeson CJ,
speaking for the Court of Criminal Appeal of New South Wales, said in F:
“the ‘central
theme’ of the case, according to the trial judge, could be found in the
question, ‘Why would
the complainant lie’? That is a question, often
left unspoken, which usually hovers over cases of this nature. ... Whilst that
question, sometimes spoken, sometimes unspoken, is often of great practical
importance, it is never 'the central theme' of a criminal
trial. At a criminal
trial the critical question is whether the Crown has proved the guilt of the
accused person beyond reasonable
doubt. Just as the law does not require the
Crown to prove a motive for the criminal conduct of the accused, the law does
not require
the accused to prove a motive for the making of false accusations by
a complainant."
absence of proof of a motive to lie is entirely neutral as the High Court
explained in
when rejecting certain observations of Callaway JA in
R v Rodriguez
(1997) 93 A Crim R 535
With respect, a complainant's account gains no legitimate credibility from the
absence of evidence of motive. If credibility which
the jury would otherwise
attribute to the complainant's account is strengthened by an accused's inability
to furnish evidence of
a motive for a complainant to lie, the standard of proof
is to that extent diminished. That is the converse of the proposition stated
Cresswell J in the case cited by Wills where his Lordship acknowledged that
proof of a motive to lie weakened a complainant's
credibility. The correct view
is that absence of proof of motive is entirely neutral.
[Footnote references omitted]
appellant’s argument on this ground is not persuasive for several reasons.
First, upon a proper reading of the passages
of the DFM’s reasons that the
appellant relies upon in context, they are only observations about the demeanour
of the witness
in the witness box. They are not findings that the complainant
did not have a motive to lie. This is evident from looking at all
the words used
by the DFM in both cited passages. His use of the phrase “moment of
malice” in each passage is not a reference
to motive to lie at all. It is
a finding that OCDT Y did not share the tendency of some witnesses to exaggerate
the detail of facts
in her account of events, deliberately to embellish
testimony to give it more effect, or otherwise to manifest through their
antagonism towards an opposing party.
was even more evident from the second passage where the DFM links “no
moment of malice” with “no intentional
falsity” and again with
“no exaggeration” in the same context, observing that she made
proper concessions - just
as a well-balanced witness would in relation to
fallible memory. Then in the same vein he goes on to describe her as “a
complainant” and as having no “moment of over
enthusiasm”. The DFM uses the word “moment” in these
in one of its secondary meanings its sense of a cause or motive for action; a
decisive or determining influence; a determining
argument or consideration:
Oxford English Dictionary
. All these observations are consistent with a
demeanour-based finding that the witness was reliable because she was measured,
not indulge in exaggeration, and was not inclined to do so.
Pearce’s emphasis on the words “no axe to grind” does not
elevate the argument any further. Like all oft-used
metaphors “no axe to
grind” should be interpreted carefully. Having “no axe to
grind” is applicable to wide
variety of situations in public and personal
life which have nothing to do with having a motive to lie. A person can have an
to grind”, who is enthusiastic in pursuing a particular issue
or idea. All that the observation “having no axe to grind”
context here is that OCDT Y’s credibility was not impaired by obvious over
enthusiasm for a cause, something which
the DFM also said expressly when he used
the words “no moment of over enthusiasm”, a vanilla observation
credibility.
these passages do not look at all like the reasons that might be expected had
the DFM been relying upon a failure to demonstrate
that OCDT Y had a motive to
lie. Had that been the exercise that the DFM had taken upon himself, more
detailed examination of her
actual motives might be expected to appear in what
is clearly a set of detailed and careful reasons. But nothing like that is
Counsel for the appellant correctly observed in argument that no
contention that the appellant had no motive to lie was advanced
in submissions
or cross examination by the prosecution contrary to
. This Tribunal
would not readily infer from the language that the DFM used that he had
spontaneously launched into consideration
of the issue without some foundation
in the contest before him.
the passages of the DFM’s reasons do not demonstrate the DFM engaging in
reasoning that the absence of proof of the complainant
having a motive to lie
added legitimate credibility to the complainant’s account. He did not pose
the question to himself,
“why would the complainant lie” or anything
like it. In any event,
does not hold that the absence of a motive
for a complainant to lie is an irrelevant consideration for a tribunal of fact;
holds is that it is impermissible to cross-examine an accused to elicit
an inability to suggest any such motive.
(c) is not made out. It is not necessary to consider the question of a
miscarriage of justice, as no material irregularity
is established.
Grounds (a) and (b) – An Unreasonable or an Unsafe and
Unsatisfactory Verdict?
Appeals Act,
s 23(1)(a) and (d), the appellant argued grounds of
appeal (a) and (b) together, ground (a) being presented as an aspect of ground
(b). The two grounds are:
(a) The learned Defence Force Magistrate erred in rejecting the
Appellant’s sworn testimony;
(b) In all the circumstances of the case, the convictions are unsafe and
unsatisfactory.
grounds not being confined to a question of law, leave to appeal is required:
Appeals Act,
s 20(1). In
Angre v Chief of Navy (No 3)
[2017] ADFDAT 2
the Tribunal (Tracey, Logan and Brereton JJ) considered the
test for leave to appeal in the context of the Tribunal and said:
purpose of a requirement for leave to appeal is generally to serve as a filter
on unmeritorious or trifling appeals, so as to
restrict the appeal procedure to
appropriate matters and thereby promote the efficiency of the Tribunal’s
appeal procedures:
Coulter v The Queen
(1988) 164 CLR 350
at 359. Most
principles concerning leave to appeal have been developed in the context of
interlocutory appeals in civil matters,
and considerable caution is required in
their application in the present context of appeals from final convictions in
quasi-criminal
matters, where, as Deane and Gaudron JJ observed in
In a case such as the present
where the application for leave to appeal was from a criminal conviction or
information to a first court
of appeal exercising general supervisory appellate
of efficiently disposing of prospective appeals which would obviously fail
since it is difficult to envisage circumstances where
a competent application
for leave to appeal to such a court could properly be refused in a case where
the conviction should be set
aside if leave were to be granted and the appeal
were to proceed to a full hearing.
other words, leave would not be refused in a criminal appeal if it appeared to
the tribunal that there had been a miscarriage of
justice warranting the
quashing of a conviction. An equivalent approach should apply in this
appeal has been fully argued. It is a rare case in which it can be said,
prospectively, that an appeal on the “unsafe
and unsatisfactory”
ground, which requires the Tribunal itself to review the evidence to ascertain
whether the DFM ought to
have had a reasonable doubt, must obviously fail. In
any event, this is not such as case. Leave to appeal should be granted.
parties argued these grounds of appeal on the basis that no distinction was to
be drawn between
Appeals Act,
s 23(1)(a) and
s 23(1)(d). These two
provisions are expressed in the same language as analogous acts in the civilian
criminal justice system which
have long received close judicial scrutiny. Both
parties accepted in their submissions that the applicable legal principles are
stated in this Tribunal’s decision in
[34] to [38] where this Tribunal stated:
this ground alleges two bases separately specified in s 23 of the Appeals Act
upon which an appeal might be allowed, each
party was agreed that, at least in
the circumstances of any application in the present case, no relevant
distinction was to be drawn
between the grounds specified in s 23(1)(a) and s
23(1)(d) of the Appeals Act. The Tribunal has in the past and by reference to
in the High Court concerning analogous provisions in the civilian
criminal justice system, remarked on the overlap between these
paragraphs of s
Fulton v Chief of Army
[2005] ADFDAT
), at [55], and
Randall v Chief
[2018] ADFDAT 3
), at [26]. A
comprehensive collation and discussion of authorities pertinent to an
unreasonable verdict ground was recently offered
by Brereton JA (N Adams J and
Cavanagh J agreeing) in
Tomlinson v R
[2022] NSWCCA 16
et seq. It is not necessary to repeat what is there stated. The pertinent
principles, as derived by the Tribunal in
Yewsang v Chief of
[2013] ADFDAT 1
), at [56] – [59],
from such analogous authority are:
(a) The Tribunal must address the question whether, upon the whole of the
evidence, it was open to the DFM to be satisfied beyond
a reasonable doubt that
the applicant was guilty?
(b) To address that question, the Tribunal must make an independent assessment
of the sufficiency and quality of the evidence.
(c) The conviction must be set aside if the Tribunal decides that the
, not might, have had a reasonable doubt about the
appellant’s guilt, even if there is sufficient evidence in law to support
(d) A doubt experienced by the Tribunal will be a doubt which a DFM ought also
to have experienced, except where the DFM’s
advantage of seeing and
hearing the evidence is capable of resolving a doubt experienced by the
decided, the High Court has emphasised, by the following explanation
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
(2020) 268 CLR
), at 144 – 145, [37] –
[38], that a court exercising appellate criminal jurisdiction undertakes a
different function
from the primary tribunal of fact (a jury in that case) in an
assessment of the evidence and must not usurp the function of that
tribunal of
[T]he assessment of the
credibility of a witness by the jury on the basis of what it has seen and heard
of a witness in the context
of the trial is within the province of the jury as
representative of the community. Just as the performance by a court of criminal
appeal of its functions does not involve the substitution of trial by an appeal
court for trial by a jury, so, generally speaking,
the appeal court should not
seek to duplicate the function of the jury in its assessment of the credibility
of the witnesses where
that assessment is dependent upon the evaluation of the
witnesses in the witness-box. The jury performs its function on the basis
its decisions are made unanimously, and after the benefit of sharing the jurors'
subjective assessments of the witnesses. Judges
of courts of criminal appeal do
not perform the same function in the same way as the jury, or with the same
advantages that the jury
brings to the discharge of its function.
... The assessment of the weight to be accorded to a witness' evidence by
reference to the manner in which it was given by the witness
has always been,
and remains, the province of the jury.
like position prevails in relation to the respective functions of this Tribunal
and the tribunal of fact functions of a service
tribunal exercising jurisdiction
under the DFDA, be that a court martial panel or, as in the present case, a DFM.
Further and as
with a civilian judge or magistrate trying a case alone and
unlike a civilian jury or a court martial panel, a DFM is obliged to
or her reasons for convicting the person charged.
passage from the joint judgment in
, at 145, [39], is also in
our view applicable,
mutatis mutandis
, to the function of the
Tribunal on an appeal where, as here, reliance is placed on 23(1)(a) of the
Appeals Act to challenge a conviction
by a service tribunal:
The function of the court of criminal appeal in determining a ground that
contends that the verdict of the jury is unreasonable or
cannot be supported
having regard to the evidence, in a case such as the present,
upon the assumption that the evidence of the complainant was assessed
by the jury to be credible and reliable
. The court examines the record to
see whether, notwithstanding that assessment – either by reason of
inconsistencies, discrepancies,
or other inadequacy; or in light of other
evidence – the court is satisfied that the jury, acting rationally, ought
nonetheless
to have entertained a reasonable doubt as to proof of guilt.
with a judge or magistrate trying alone a charge in the civilian criminal
justice system, the acceptance by a DFM of the credibility
and reliability of a
complainant is not just a matter of assumption but must be, and was in this
case, exposed in the reasons given
by that DFM. At times, some of the
submissions made on behalf of Private R in relation to Ground 1 seemed to us to
solicit, contrary
to the emphasised observation by the High Court
, our making our own assessment of whether the evidence of
the complainant was credible and
[Footnote reference omitted – emphasis added]
considering these grounds, therefore, the Tribunal’s first task is to
consider the evidence for itself, and then, if it has
a reasonable doubt as to
the appellant’s guilt, to consider whether any such doubt can be resolved
by reason of the DFM’s
position of advantage in hearing and seeing the
witnesses. However, in adopting that approach, the Tribunal is informed by the
appellant’s
submissions as to why it is said that the DFM erred in
expressing himself to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the
appellant’s
guilt. In circumstances where the appellant gave evidence in
his defence, the DFM could be so satisfied only if he disbelieved the
and setting his evidence aside was satisfied that the prosecution had proved its
case beyond reasonable doubt. The appellant’s
argument in support of
Grounds (a) and (b) was concisely set out in the written submissions of counsel
for the appellant:
learned Defence Force magistrate (DFM) was confronted with two irreconcilable
cases: on the one hand it was asserted the Appellant
had wilfully assaulted two
female officer cadets in circumstances that, if accepted, warranted
denunciation. The Appellant’s
contrary position (as he explained in his
interview with Service Police, and during his sworn testimony) encompassed bare
or an explanation of innocent or inadvertent touching.
establish a pathway to conviction, the learned DFM had to reject the
Appellant’s explanations. To the extent the Appellant’s
explanation
remained plausible, the prosecution had not established proof to the requisite
short, it is contended that the learned DFM was wrong to reject the
Appellant’s evidence, which he did on the basis “[t]here
reliable evidence to my mind that he was grossly intoxicated”.
rejecting the Appellant’s evidence on the basis he was grossly
intoxicated, the learned DFM both failed to adequately consider
evidence on the
Prosecution case that the Appellant was not so intoxicated, and acted
unreasonably in accepting the evidence of some
prosecution witnesses over others
- this being a case where those same witnesses accepted as reliable were
themselves affected adversely
by consumption of alcohol.
the learned DFM was correct in relying on the Appellant’s purported state
of intoxication to reject his evidence, he ought
to have applied the same
consideration when assessing the various prosecution witnesses (on whom the DFM
relied to conclude that
the Appellant was grossly intoxicated). The Appellant
contends that no proper or reasonable basis existed for the DFM to have rejected
the Appellant’s account, and that accordingly, he erred in so doing. It
follows that the resulting convictions in respect of
the alternative charge to
Charge 2 (Prejudicial conduct) and Charge 3 (Assaulting a subordinate) are
unsafe or unsatisfactory.
learned DFM engaged in a process of circular reasoning by which, having accepted
evidence from intoxicated witnesses that the
Appellant was likely more
intoxicated than they, that the conduct alleged of the Appellant by those
witnesses was consistent with
the conduct of an intoxicated person, and
therefore more likely to have occurred as they alleged.
appeal therefore involves a criticism of the learned DFM’s purported
rejection of the Appellant's evidence, the consequence
of which was to render
the resulting convictions unsafe or unsatisfactory.
appellant’s argument puts the following main propositions. The first
proposition is that in rejecting the appellant’s
evidence the DFM failed
adequately to consider evidence in the prosecution case that the Appellant was
not grossly intoxicated and
that the DFM acted unreasonably in accepting the
evidence of some prosecution witnesses adversely affected by alcohol over
second proposition is that if the DFM was correct in relying upon the
appellant’s purported state of intoxication to reject
his evidence, the
DFM should have applied the same consideration when assessing the prosecution
witnesses, who were themselves affected
adversely by the consumption of alcohol.
And had the DFM done so there was no proper basis for him rejecting the
appellant’s
third proposition was that the DFM engaged in “a process of circular
reasoning” by accepting the evidence of intoxicated
witnesses that the
appellant was more intoxicated than they were and that because the appellant was
intoxicated his conduct was more
likely to have occurred.
propositions all convey the same core ideas but in different words: the evidence
of admittedly intoxicated witnesses provided
an unreasonable or unsafe
foundation for finding that the appellant was grossly intoxicated and rejecting
his evidence, and then
being satisfied on that evidence beyond reasonable doubt
that the appellant was guilty. Put in terms consistent with the task of
Tribunal defined in
, at [34], the appellant was asking the
Tribunal to assess the sufficiency and quality of the evidence, particularly
that of intoxicated
prosecution witnesses, to see if the DFM must have had a
reasonable doubt about the appellant’s guilt.
Rejecting the Appellant’s Evidence.
to the first aspect of the appellant’s argument, the DFM’s rejection
of the appellant’s evidence, the rejection
was in fact based on much more
than the judgments of other witnesses about the appellant’s state of
intoxication.
a process of careful reasoning the DFM grounded inferences about the
unreliability of the appellant’s evidence and his high
intoxication from aspects of the evidence that were open as a proper basis for
such inferences, and which did not depend
upon direct evidence of intoxicated
witnesses opining about his level of intoxication. Once this is appreciated, the
appellant’s
argument about the DFM’s falling into the trap of
circular reasoning, or accepting the evidence of intoxicated witnesses about
appellant’s level of intoxication, falls away. The DFM’s analysis
ranged over both the circumstances of Charge 1
and Charges 2 and 3.
the DFM accepted some of the appellant’s own evidence and drew inferences
directly from that evidence and what he said
in his police interview, about the
appellant’s level of intoxication. The appellant said in evidence at the
trial that he placed
his arm around OCDT X before the kissing incident, although
the appellant did not mention this at all at the police interview. Accepting
appellant’s evidence at trial that he remembered placing his arm around
the back of OCDT X, the DFM found on the strength
of other evidence that it was
after the kiss. The DFM drew a reasonably available inference from this
This, for a lieutenant colonel and an officer in a cadets’ mess, is an
indication of gross intoxication. That he thought it
appropriate to institute
physical contact, at that stage, with somebody who’d just planted a kiss
on somebody else, is an indication
of such an impairment of judgment, it
supports my view that he was grossly intoxicated.
DFM suspected that the appellant’s failure to mention this touching of
OCDT X in the police interview was either because
he chose not to mention it,
because it would have put him in close contact with the complainant, or he did
not remember it because
he was intoxicated. But the evidence of other witnesses
of the appellants arm being around OCDT X forced him to give evidence of
at the trial.
the appellant himself accepted under cross-examination that he had consumed
somewhere in the range of 6 to 8 beers in 2
to 3 hours, a not insignificant
quantity of alcohol. He also accepted that the time of his interactions with
OCDT X that “to
some extent [his] judgment had been impaired” by
alcohol. The DFM’s findings were consistent with these admissions.
the DFM found aspects of the appellant’s evidence inherently improbable or
internally inconsistent. For example, the
DFM noted that the appellant did not
mention OCDT X’s kiss of SCDT Roach at all in his record of interview but
then gave evidence
on the subject. The DFM did not accept as “having the ring of
the appellant’s explanation for not mentioning the kiss to the service
police: that explanation being that he
was not sure of the identity of OCDT X as
the person involved in the kiss. The appellant said:
I was not certain at the point of interview that it was who we were talking
rumour – that
I know haunts a lot of women – I chose not to, because I was not sure.
the DFM was entitled to dismiss the appellant’s excuse for omitting the
kiss as implausible. This was a judgment well open
to the DFM on the evidence.
Looked at objectively at the time of interview the identity of the person making
the kiss really did
not matter, so much as the act itself, which the appellant
did not mention to the service police.
DFM highlighted other related inconsistencies in his assessment of the
appellant’s evidence. The DFM mentioned the aspect
appellant’s evidence that gave an account of the appellant’s claimed
reasonable belief that SCDT Y consented to
his touching of her shoulder. The
appellant said that that “she [SCDT Y] retained facial and eye contact
with me” and
that she was “nodding [her] head as we were
communicating” and “her verbal and non-verbal responses
she was “okay” with being touched on the shoulder.
The DFM could not accept on the one hand the appellant’s evidence
felt so uncomfortable with seeing OCDT X kissing SCDT Roach that he had to move
away “straight away” from an
area in which he felt safe but that he
nevertheless felt comfortable, on his own admission, about putting his arm
around the back
of an intoxicated OCDT X to comfort her and later touching the
shoulder and even the thigh of SCDT Y, as he spoke to her. The DFM
was justified
in finding the tension between these two attitudes as
“incredible”.
could the DFM accept that the appellant had a good recollection of his claimed
eye contact with and encouragement from SCDT Y,
yet had such poor recollection
of perhaps putting the back of his hand (as he said) momentarily or accidentally
on the skin of SCDT
Y’s thigh, or (as she said) rubbing his hand up and
down. The DFM said:
For a man who says he remembers the verbal and non-verbal cues, I find, as a
fact that he did touch her thigh, and it is remarkable,
in the circumstances,
when he says he has no memory of such touching. To remember one thing that is
fairly innocuous – looking
her in her eyes after patting her on the back
and touching her shoulder, remembering specifically that he formed the view she
consenting to that act, but then are not remembering skin on skin touching,
to my mind, raise significant eyebrows about the accuracy
of his recollection.
were all elements in the appellant’s evidence that contributed to the
DFM’s rejection of it.
the DFM also took into account in rejecting the appellant’s evidence that
the way he gave it did not instil confidence.
Mindful that the appellant was a
LTCOL being cross-examined in the witness box in a less than commanding position
and that allowance
should be made for that, the DFM nevertheless observed,
“but a lot of times in his answers he did not answer the question but
sought to give a speech”. And there are other examples of the appellant
giving inconsistent answers on important issues: at
different times he denied
and could not recall placing his hand upon SCDT Y’s thigh.
the DFM grounded his reasoning about the appellant’s state of gross
intoxication from uncontroversial facts, based upon
the DFM’s general
service knowledge, which resonated with the evidence of other witnesses. The DFM
inferred that the appellant’s
judgment was impaired from the time, the
nature of the conduct, the location, and the disparity of rank in the
circumstances. The
DFM inferred that for an officer of LTCOL rank holding a
senior posting within ADFA to be engaging after 2130 in the various admitted
acts of touching of cadets in the ACM was itself evidence of impaired judgment.
The DFM justifiably said of the Charge 2 conduct,
rejecting a finding of
indecency but inferring inappropriateness, that:
... it is incredible, that it speaks of gross intoxication, that it is extremely
questionable conduct, drunk or sober, that is fairly
shocking behaviour of a
LTCOL at any time, to think it would be appropriate to lay his bare hands and
rub the naked leg, or the unclothed
part of the thigh of a female cadet.
acceptance of only one part of the evidence of SCDT Y which is corroborated by
SCDT Elks and SCDT Roach, not directly involving
any judgment about the
appellant’s state of intoxication, gives objective support to the
DFM’s reasoning. All three say
that the appellant reached around her
shoulder and appeared to “twirl” SCDT Y’s hair. Such behaviour
is so inherently
incongruous between persons of such rank disparity in a social
situation that it bespeaks severely impaired judgment. Even the appellant
himself conceded that this inference was well open when he agreed as a general
proposition that conduct including hair twirling by
a person of his rank in that
situation would “not be appropriate”.
conclusion, the DFM regarded the explanation for the appellant’s conduct
on the evening as his gross intoxication. The DFM
Having concluded, from the other evidence that I do find reliable, I find that
his asserted recollections of the level of his intoxication
are not accurate and
reliable. I find he was severely intoxicated and has downplayed his memory of
its effect. Because he does not
have a great deal of memory, and has, to that
extent, reconstructed it with the benefit of hindsight.
was quite open to the DFM as the tribunal of fact to reject the
appellant’s evidence on these grounds, which did not depend
exclusively or
even substantially upon the evidence of intoxicated prosecution witnesses. In
other words, the DFM was entitled to
disbelieve the appellant. This part of the
appellant’s argument fails.
Prosecution Witnesses.
The appellant next argues that the DFM must have had
doubts about SCDT Y’s testimony and that of other prosecution witnesses
supporting her account, because of their intoxication. The appellant’s
argument canvasses the evidence of several witnesses,
OCDT Samuel Hicks,
Midshipman (MIDN) Joshua Bloor, LT Carroll, SCDT Nicholas Elks, SCDT Roach, and
examining the appellant’s submissions, the DFM’s other observations
in addition to those covered
earlier in these reasons are set out. He said:
There is other support for that conclusion which I will come to from other
witnesses and other support for that conclusion by the
overall circumstances of
the case that the defendant found himself in the arms at one stage of a female
cadet half his age, in her
first year, putting his arm around her is other
support for conduct which, in my view, is questionable at any time, unless you
consoling somebody genuinely. But in circumstances, while everybody is
intoxicated is demonstrable, to my mind, of impaired judgement,
impaired judgement arose from all of the circumstances and the consumption of
alcohol. It is also supported by the observations
of SCDT Roach. It is not
contradicted by MIDN Bloor, and I will come to his evidence in a moment.
So, I can comfortably conclude that LTCOL Kearns was significantly intoxicated
at the relevant parts of the proceedings that the
passage of time has made it in
his mind that he was less intoxicated than he actually was.
He was cross-examined. He admitted that drinking in a cadets’ mess, whilst
not specifically against any regulation, is a fraught
situation which one needs
to exercise care and judgement with. He said that is true. He said drinking
until closing time as cadets
get more and more intoxicated is even more
problematic. He made that concession. There was toing and froing between the
and the prosecutor about the amount of alcohol that he had. Like other
witnesses, I accept his memory was imprecise. The upshot of
the totality
appears, to my mind, to be somewhere around the 10 standard drinks in the course
of the evening, so over a bottle of
wine. He said that, whilst it would have
been irresponsible, that he could have driven. He did admit that when he was
cross-examined
that to some extent his judgement in decision-making to some
extent that we cannot determine would have been affected.
In relation to the evidence and testimony of LTCOL Kearns, looked at in
conjunction with his interview with the service police, I
do not accept his
explanation that he was not so intoxicated. There is other more reliable
evidence to my mind that he was grossly
intoxicated.
appellant’s submissions approach the argument by examining the evidence of
prosecution witnesses that supports an inference
that he was less intoxicated
than the DFM found. The appellant then criticises the reasoning of the DFM in
respect of these witnesses.
The appellant’s arguments to this effect are
set out and analysed here.
appellant first pointed to aspects of the evidence of OCDT Hicks that supported
the appellant's account that he had arrived at
the venue much later than the
others on the night, which the appellant submitted constrained the opportunity
for him to become grossly
intoxicated but which was inconsistent with the
evidence of the witnesses whose evidence was accepted by the DFM. But the
submits that the DFM in his findings only referred to certain other
evidence of OCDT Hicks that the appellant placed his arms around
shoulder, and she put her arm around his waist, describing that as, “the
extent of his evidence”. The
appellant was critical of this, submitting
that the DFM had therefore ignored OCDT Hicks' evidence supporting the appellant
his arrival at the venue later than others.
the evidence of OCDT Hicks is relatively peripheral to the main issues. Whatever
time the appellant arrived, even on his own evidence
the appellant had consumed
6 to 8 beers in 2 to 3 hours and admitted being affected by alcohol. Evidence
from OCDT Hicks about the
time the appellant’s arrival was unlikely to
weigh heavily against the evidence that he was intoxicated. It is unsurprising
that the evidence of OCDT Hicks did not feature greatly in the DFM’s final
the appellant submitted that the uncontradicted evidence of MIDN Bloor, who
claimed to have had only between one and three standard
drinks, was that the
appellant was “standing upright and was not swaying around, falling,
wasn't carrying on, vomiting or slurring
words, or any other affect that would
make me believe that he was intoxicated at that time.”
appellant submitted that even though the appellant’s intoxication was the
basis for the DFM's findings, and that MIDN Bloor
was clearly more sober than
many of the other witnesses, the DFM was somewhat dismissive of MIDN
Bloor’s evidence, saying of
his account, “I make this observation.
That does not exclude the likelihood with the preponderance of other evidence
Kearns was grossly affected by alcohol”. And then concluding
The appellant
submits that MIDN Bloor was anything but “neutral”, and supportive
of the defence case.
submission is not persuasive. First, MIDN Bloor described an uncommonly
demanding standard of what might indicate gross intoxication,
a standard that
the DFM was entitled to downplay. But also, the DFM was quite entitled to
conclude MIDN Bloor was “neutral”,
because of MIDN Bloor’s
limited interaction with the appellant. When asked whether the appellant was
affected by alcohol, MIDN
Bloor said:
I would be unable to say, sir, if LTCOL Kearns was intoxicated or not. I did not
engage in a discussion with him: I only observed
him standing next to a few
other people.
light of this concession, the DFM’s assessment of MIDN Bloor as
“neutral” was entirely appropriate in the circumstances.
appellant submitted that the only evidence apart from that of SCDT Y that
supported part of the conduct constituting Charge 3,
namely the twirling of the
respondent’s hair, was that of SCDT Elks. But the appellant submitted that
SCDT Elks was intoxicated.
SCDT Elks’ evidence was that he had consumed
“around 10 drinks that evening”, which he described as
Dry tins, and then Bundaberg Rum tins”. SCDT Elks' evidence
included this exchange (in evidence-in-chief):
Q: At the time this occurred, how would you describe your state of sobriety? ---
Probably fairly intoxicated, sir, but not to the
level where I was incoherent, I
don't think so, sir.
Q: And were you able to make any assessment of any of the other people in the
area? --­ Yes, sir. I'd say that OCDT Ruben Linden,
OCDT X and LTCOL Kearns
were probably more so intoxicated than the rest of the members there.
appellant submits that despite SCDT Elks' acknowledgement that he was
“fairly intoxicated”, the DFM concluded:
The upshot of all of his evidence is I can comfortably take from it that this
was not a one or two second flick of the hair in an
attempt to pat her shoulder
in a complimentary fashion. Even if it was I'm struggling to see how that would
cause her hair to be
moved, and visibly so, as seen by other people.
So the upshot of his evidence as I conclude as a fact is he saw unintentional
playing of the hair of SCDT Y which was not for a couple
of seconds but might be
less than 30 seconds. But whatever it was it was not a momentary flick
consistent with an action touching
in a congratulatory way a shoulder.
Elks was not central to the DFM’s reasoning. The DFM accepted SCDT
Y’s evidence about the hair twirling conduct as
he was entitled to do, and
he saw the evidence of SCDT Elks as “supportive” not
“conclusive” as he explained:
The fact that other people saw the touching of the hair is supportive of her
account but not conclusive of it. But having already
said that I accept
everything she said might not have gone on exactly for two minutes, but it was
not momentary.
defence at trial raised issues about why no one else apart from SCDT Elks had
seen the hair twirling, but as the DFM explained,
it could have been brief and
“other people [had] limited views of that part of the event”.
Moreover, the proposition
that SCDT Elks was the only one to see it was
incorrect; SCDT Roach gave evidence to similar effect.
Elks’ admitted intoxication does not mean that his evidence is without
evidentiary value, especially where it is consistent
with that of SCDT Roach
and, in particular, that of SCDT Y, for which it provides significant
corroboration.
the appellant was critical of the DFM’s treatment of the evidence of LT
Carroll. The evidence of SCDT Y had been that at
material times LT Carroll had
been seated on a couch in front of her, and that after the appellant touched
her, LT Carroll asked
her “if I was okay.” But the appellant
submitted that neither of those assertions were supported by LT Carroll, whose
evidence was dealt with by the learned DFM in the following limited
LT Jack Carroll. He said he had had a few drinks before he arrived. He was aware
of his surroundings.
appellant submitted that the inconsistencies between LT Carroll’s evidence
and that of SCDT Y were not addressed adequately
or at all by the learned
appellant’s submission does not do justice to LT Carroll’s evidence,
which was not a basis to doubt the quality or
reliability of anything that SCDT
Y said in her evidence. LT Carroll did not contradict SCDT Y. He simply said
of conversations between them, “I believe I might
have had a conversation with her at the time within Beersheba, however, I
remember specifically what we spoke about”, and “I do not remember
any specific conversations or interactions
with her”. This was not a
denial that he had said what was attributed to him by SCDT Y, such as to create
an inconsistency
between the two witnesses. LT Carroll also could not remember
– but did not deny - sitting on couches in the Beersheba Bar,
“I do not recall sitting – sitting on those lounges at all, to be
honest sir”. LT Carroll’s evidence
on this matter also did not
create any inconsistency between LT Carroll and SCDT Y.
SCDT Roach and SCDT Y
appellant next focused upon SCDT Y and SCDT Roach, the principal prosecution
witnesses on the charges on which the appellant was
convicted. The appellant put
his submissions in respect of both witnesses together, and it is convenient to
analyse them together
in these reasons.
appellant submits that the DFM based his ultimate findings on an acceptance of
SCDT Y and SCDT Roach as reliable witnesses. That
is only partly true. As the
earlier analysis shows, the DFM based some of his findings on inferences drawn
from the appellant’s
own evidence, or evidence that was uncontested.
appellant points out that SCDT Y acknowledged that she had consumed “about
eight drinks over the course of the night”,
an amount which the appellant
submitted was not inconsequential. So much may be accepted. Those eight drinks
were four cans of Canadian
Club Dry pre-mixed cans, two Bundaberg Rum pre-mixed
cans, a Rekorderlig Cider, and another drink, which she later identified as
Toohey’s Extra Dry, a full-strength alcoholic drink. The appellant submits
that the number of 'standard drinks' represented
by this quantity of alcohol was
not calculated but that it was likely to impair her recollection of the
appellant further submits that SCDT Y must have been impaired because she could
not recall “drinking games” that had
taken place that night
according to the evidence of other witnesses. But this submission relies upon an
incomplete account of her
evidence. It is quite clear that when the cross
examiner clarified what he meant by “drinking games”, as
races conducted in the Sportsman’s bar”, she
remembered them immediately and gave responsive answers about them. She
she had participated in boat races herself but could not recall whether she had
done so that night.
appellant criticises the DFM for not mentioning SCDT Y’s claimed defective
recollection on this subject. But upon proper
analysis of the transcript of the
cross examination on the subject there was nothing for the DFM to say. It is
clear from the transcript
she was responsively drawing upon actual recollection
of the detail of this aspect of the evening. She had witnessed many “boat
races” over the years, and while her inability to recall whether she had
done so on this occasion shows that her recollection
of the evening is
imperfect, it does not follow that her recollection of the matters that she does
remember is inaccurate.
DFM said the following as to SCDT Y’s state of sobriety:
I pause there to note that in relation to her state of sobriety her evidence is
uncontested. That does not mean to say that I should
accept it, but when she
says she was chatty she, essentially, was not so adversely affected by the
consumption of alcohol. I accept
her evidence on that point.
I also accept her evidence on that point, finding her an honest and reliable
witness with no axe to grind, with no moment of malice
or exaggeration, that her
assessment, even approaching cautiously the fact that she had been consuming
alcohol, in her position as
[an officeholder] of the rugby club, was that the
defendant, contrary to his current recollection, was grossly intoxicated on the
evening in question.
Tribunal cannot conclude that the DFM must have had a reasonable doubt about the
appellant’s guilt because he should somehow
have discounted SCDT Y’s
account of her own sobriety because of what she had drunk. The DFM was entitled
to accept her uncontested
evidence that although she was “chatty”,
she was “not so adversely affected by the consumption of alcohol”
to render her evidence unreliable. And objectively there is much to support the
DFM’s acceptance that her evidence was reliable.
Her evidence in chief and
her cross examination are characterised by answers that draw upon immediate
recollection, are responsive
and add detail to the picture of the scene that she
is describing.
the account of the events of Charges 2 and 3 that she gave to CAPT Hardy on
Monday 28 September was substantially consistent
with the account she gave in
her oral testimony and supports her credibility. This is what she said to CAPT
Later, I returned to the bar and sat down on the couches, LTCOL Kearns was
already sitting on the couches in a three-seater couch
near the bar and near the
steps that lead down to the ACM dining area, when I sat down, pretty much
straight away he started to play
with my hair, then moved to my shoulder and
leg, where he was touching the outside of my thigh, each time he touched me I
pull away from him. He did not say anything to me when he was touching
me. When the bar was closing, I cannot remember the time,
I moved away from
LTCOL Kearns. LTCOL Kearns did not say anything to me upon moving away or in the
time since this event occurred.
appellant also submits that SCDT Roach, by his own admission, had consumed at
least as much alcohol as OCDT Y. The appellant was
critical of how the DFM dealt
with SCDT Roach’s testimony, which was as follows:
... I then heard from SCDT Roach; he said he had had approximately eight or nine
drinks, varying in strength. In evidence-in-chief
he said, at page 131:
‘From what I can remember, [the Appellant] had had more to drink than I
had, and was more intoxicated than I was.’
... To the extent that whilst I do not have to accept that, it was not
challenged on that impressionistic view. And I approach with
caution anybody on
this evening who had been drinking a substantial amount of alcohol, such that
they were intoxicated, and their
impressionistic views of somebody else who has
been drinking a substantial amount of alcohol.
But even so, in support of [SCDT Y] or capable of supporting her views of the
defendant's level of intoxication, Roach said:
‘I was definitely feeling the effects of alcohol after the amount that
I had been drinking, and had a good day of sport. But
I could somewhat remember
what was happening and was aware of my surroundings’
So, he said, line 25:
‘OCDT X was slightly tipsy; I would probably say on the same level of
myself, relative as to how much she can drink. And from
what I could gather,
LTCOL Kearns was more intoxicated than myself and OCDT X.’
appellant puts several submissions based upon this evidence. He submitted that
on his own evidence, SCDT Roach placed himself
“on the same level”
of intoxication as OCDT X, whom the learned DFM had "cause to doubt" because she
was "severely intoxicated."
this submission is not persuasive.
The DFM had made
repeated observations about the need for care in assessing the evidence of
intoxicated witnesses and closely considered
the effect of intoxication on those
witnesses. He said:
I approach with caution anybody on this evening who had been drinking a
substantial amount of alcohol such that they were intoxicated,
impressionistic views of somebody else who had been drinking a substantial
amount of alcohol.
he was able to act on SCDT Roach’s statements that he “could
somewhat remember” and “was aware of my surroundings”
could accept SCDT Roach’s comparative assessment of his own and the
appellant’s comparative intoxication without
necessarily accepting SCDT
Roach’s comparative assessment of his own and OCDT X’s comparative
intoxication.
was well open to him because he had other direct evidence about how severely
impaired OCDT X’s memory was from her contemporaneous
text messages the
following morning in which she asked SCDT Y the questions “can you rejog
my memory, did we just go straight
“did something happen, I know Elksy walked me back to my div”. These
show significant lack of memory of the evening. The appellant’s
analysis does not cause the Tribunal to conclude the DFM must
have had a doubt
appellant also submitted that it is unclear on the evidence whether the alcohol
consumed by SCDT Roach included any from the drinking
game in which he is likely
to have participated. SCDT Roach had been awarded three points for his
participation in the rugby that
day and the Rugby Club tradition was that
someone awarded three points should participate in a drinking “boat
this submission is also not persuasive. The DFM was entitled to accept SCDT
Roach’s assessment of the number of drinks that
he had consumed and his
own sobriety, without having to work out whether any of the drinks had been
consumed during boat races.
Tribunal does not find the appellant’s criticism of the DFM’s
reasoning persuasive. The appellant’s contention
was that no proper basis
existed for the rejection of the appellant's testimony by accepting the
testimony of other witnesses, who
by their own admissions were intoxicated.
However, the DFM gave multiple reasons, not dependent on the relative sobriety
of the witnesses
– for disbelieving the appellant. Necessarily, those
reasons include the combined effect of the evidence that was inconsistent
his. Ultimately, the critical factual questions were (in relation to the second
charge) whether the appellant touched SCDT
Y on her thigh, and (in relation to
the third charge) he twirled her hair and/or massaged her shoulder. As the DFM
repeatedly observed,
caution is required in assessing the evidence of
intoxicated witnesses. However, it is within ordinary human experience that
intoxication may impair acuity of perception or recollection, it does not
obliterate it, and many events – including in particular
those that are
out of the ordinary – may be remembered. In particular, where multiple
witnesses who, though to a greater or
lesser extent intoxicated at the time,
recall the same event, it is not incumbent to entertain a reasonable doubt as to
the accuracy
of the substance of their recollection.
evidence of SCDT Y was consistent with her contemporaneous complaint to CAPT
Hardy. There was also a substantial body of evidence
that there was an
immediate contemporaneous reaction by bystanders which bespoke something seen at
the time to be inappropriate having
occurred, and an associated concern for the
welfare of SCDT Y. As to the touching of the thigh, the appellant’s
evidence was
that while he could not recall putting his hand on her leg, he may
have done so, it being a “not uncommon” gesture on
his part. As to
the hair-twirling, the evidence of SCDT Y in that respect was corroborated by
the evidence of SCDT Roach and SCDT
Elks, while the appellant’s evidence
was that he recalled tapping her on the arm and upper shoulder, but did not
recall coming
into contact with her hair, and denied “twirling” it.
That being the status of the evidence, there was and is no reason
to doubt that
both the touching of the thigh, and the twirling of the hair, occurred, were
intentional, and were to the appellant’s
knowledge not consensual.
it does not appear to us that the evidence required that the DFM entertain a
reasonable doubt as to the appellant’s guilt,
it is unnecessary to
consider whether the DFM’s position of advantage in seeing and hearing the
witnesses explains why he did
(a) and (b) of the appeal fail.
Some Additional Observations
a notice dated 9 August 2021, a little over two months after his conviction and
punishment by DFM, administrative action was initiated
against the appellant
proposing to terminate his appointment on the basis that the retention of his
service was not in the interests
of the Defence Force. By the time these
proceedings were heard by the Tribunal, his appointment had been terminated on
another basis
and he was no longer a member of the ADF.
7 May 2021 the DFM made a considered decision under
Pt IV that the
appellant had continuing value to the ADF and should be retained in service but
with a loss of seniority within his
existing rank of LTCOL. The transcript of
the punishment hearing shows the DFM reached this decision based not only on the
circumstances
of the convictions and a victim’s impact statement but on
extensive examination of the appellant’s service record, officer
performance appraisals, character, and a psychological analysis of the
appellant’s circumstances.
subsequent administrative decision to initiate action to terminate his service
could have produced quite a different outcome for
the appellant. This Tribunal
is not reviewing that decision and its factual basis and the reasons for it are
not before this Tribunal.
But the appellant has contended in documents before
this Tribunal that the termination action initiated against him was based upon
the same or substantially the same facts as those that led to his convictions.
This Tribunal is not charged with deciding whether
that contention is correct or
the contention raises a wider question about administrative decisions after
action against a member and the authority of the decisions of
superior service tribunals under the
. The apparatus of the
Appeals Act
provides for public external review of the conviction, but
not the punishment, of defence members by superior service tribunals under
. The public functions of review by this Tribunal under the
Appeals Act
are one of several statutory safeguards that maintain
confidence in the independent administration of justice under the
leading to both conviction and punishment. Another statutory safeguard is the
requirement under
s 140 for superior service tribunals to hold
trials in public.
Tribunal’s functions in scrutinising the proper administration of justice
leading to conviction by superior service tribunals,
give it an interest in
matters which may undermine the authority and independence of those tribunals,
even matters occurring after
conviction. Maintaining public confidence in the
convictions of superior service tribunals is not limited to looking at events
conviction.
administrative decision made close in time to a punishment imposed by a service
tribunal under the
, but which produces on substantially overlapping
facts an outcome which may objectively be described as more severe, may need to
be reconciled with the operation of
provisions of the
prohibit commanders from increasing punishments
imposed under the
s 68 a commanding officer of a
convicted person “may moderate the consequences of” a punishment
by service tribunal, but has no power to increase the
punishment. And upon review of action under
, Pt IV under
, s 162 a conviction may only be quashed under s 162(1) if it is
“excessive” or “wrong in law” and once quashed
substitute punishment imposed under s 162(5), “shall not...be more
severe” than the punishment imposed by the service
tribunal. No power
exists in the reviewing authority to quash a conviction on the grounds of
insufficiency of punishment.
administrative decision maker considering termination of a defence member after
action on facts substantially overlapping with the
action does not act as a reviewing authority under the
. But such a
decision-maker may have to examine real questions of continuing fidelity to the
commands of
s 68 and s 162 and what punishment is being imposed in
practice and whether the administrative decision is consistent with the
maintenance
of good conscience by command.
s 68 and s 162 reflect well-established principles that military command is
bound to observe good conscience in punishing a defence
member. The High Court
Lane v Morrison
[2009] HCA 29
(2009) 239 CLR 230
, at [85] (
), identified
that the central point of the court-martial within military command structures
such as the ADF is to inform the conscience
of the commanding officer. In
, at [85], the High Court cited the following reasoning of Platt J in
the Supreme Court of New York in
Mills v Martin
(1821) 19 Johns 7, at 30,
as accurately capturing this aspect of the role of the court-martial within the
command system:
The proceedings of the court-martial were not definitive, but merely in the
nature of an inquest, to inform the conscience of the
commanding officer. He,
alone, could not condemn or punish, without the judgment of the court-martial;
and, it is equally clear,
that the court could not punish without his order of
confirmation.
court-martial informs the conscience of command and command acts on good
conscience by confirming or moderating, but not increasing,
the punishment fixed
by the court-martial. Recognising that a punishment imposed by a service
tribunal in relation to a defence member
sets the upper limit of post-conviction
action binding on the conscience of command for that member provides safeguards
for the ADF
and for the member.
command, it promotes military cohesion and defence members’ acceptance of
discipline decisions by separating command from
any perception of personal bias
or ill-will in the exercise of discipline. For the member punished,
command’s fidelity to good
conscience in confirming or moderating
punishments confers security and stability and promotes loyalty to the service
in that member
and in all members who see command observing the precepts of good
conscience in punishments.
as this Tribunal emphasised in
Howieson v Chief of Army
[2021] ADFAT 1,
), an administrative decision to terminate a
member’s service where a court-martial has imposed a sentence which gives
an opportunity for rehabilitation “could be regarded as
undermining the court-martial process”. We add the reasoning
here to that
to that expressed in
on this subject.
the obligations of good conscience upon command in imposing
punishments recognised in
and embedded in
162 are ignored post-conviction, leading to the administrative termination of
the service of defence members, stigma,
loss of morale and confidence in the
administration of justice in the ADF may be most acute for those directly
affected by the termination
but similar effects are likely to be felt more
widely. But more broadly, as
emphasises, the authority of
in specialist superior service tribunals seeking to do justice by
balancing rehabilitation against other sentencing factors may also
undermined.
question may need to be addressed in the future when what it means to
“impose” a punishment under the
falls to be decided; and
whether that means more than just to pronounce the punishment but to carry it
to appeal should be granted, but the appeal must be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
thirty-three (133) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
Decision of
the Honourable Justices Logan, Brereton and
Dated: 12 August 2022
RTF format (637 KB)
Signed PDF/A format