Association of Consulting Architects - Australia [2024] FWCD 1049 (3 October 2024)
[2024] FWCD 1049
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
—Alteration of other rules of organisation
Association of
Consulting Architects - Australia
(R2024/113)
CHRIS ENRIGHT
MELBOURNE, 3 OCTOBER 2024
Alteration of other rules of organisation.
On 6 and 7 August 2024 the Association of Consulting Architects
– Australia (ACA-A) lodged with the Fair Work Commission (the
Commission)
a notice and declaration setting out particulars of alterations to its rules.
Further information in support of the alterations
was lodged on 27 August 2024.
The ACA-A seeks certification of the alterations under
section 159
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
Based on the information contained in the notice and declaration, and
additional information provided on 27 August 2024, I am satisfied
alterations have been made under the rules of the organisation.
The particulars set out alterations to Rules 3, 8A, 8B,
. The alterations also seek to insert a new Rule 8C
regarding Affiliate Students.
The alterations concern a range of uncontroversial issues including
the following:
• they give a general right to financial members to appoint a proxy in
relation to general
• they reduce the quorum for general meetings from 20 to 15 financial
• they confirm that only financial members have the right to vote at
general meetings;
• they insert new provisions regarding Affiliate
• they clarify the process for the conduct of ‘recall’
elections for Branch Committees when the number of nominees
in an election is
lower than the number of vacant offices on the relevant
• they clarify the manner for calling Annual General Meetings and
Extraordinary General Meetings, where those meetings are
held in whole or in
part by technological
• they update existing references in the rules to the ‘Registered
Organisations Commission’ with references to
the ‘Fair Work
Commission’;
• they delete a number of definitions which related to superseded
provisions of the Act regarding the ‘remuneration’
of officers and
related matters;
• they confirm that unfinancial members do not have the rights of
financial members;
• they clarify the manner in which persons can apply to be Affiliate
Members or Retired Associates of the
In my opinion, the alterations comply with and are not contrary to
the Act, the
Fair Work Act 2009
, modern awards and enterprise agreements,
are not otherwise contrary to law and were made under the rules of the
organisation. I
certify accordingly under
subsection 159(1)
of the Act.
DELEGATE OF THE GENERAL MANAGER
See Rules 10(2)
25(6)(a) and 46(3).
See Rule 8C. I
note that Affiliate Students are not members of the ACA-A and are not afforded
the rights of members under the proposed
alterations.
See Rule 36.
See Rules 23(2)
and 24(3)(c) respectively.
See Rules 28 and
See Rule 3.
See Rule 14.
See Rules 8A
and 8B. I note that neither Affiliate Members nor Retired Associates are members
of the ACA-A and neither are afforded
the rights of members under the rules.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (500 KB)
Signed PDF/A format