Steve O'Reilly and Department of the Treasury (Freedom of information) [2025] AICmr 163 (12 September 2025)
Steve O'Reilly and Department of the Treasury (Freedom of information)
[2025] AICmr 163
(12 September 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of
Rocelle Ago General
Manager, Freedom of Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian
Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Steve O'Reilly
Department of the Treasury
Decision date
Freedom of Information —
Respondent to process request following removal of practical refusal reason claim
s 55K of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(the FOI Act), I set aside
the decision of the Department of the Treasury (the Department) of 23 December
2021. In considering the
Department’s indication that it no longer
maintains that processing the applicant’s revised request would amount to
substantial and unreasonable diversion of the Department’s resources
from its other operations, I substitute my decision that
a practical refusal
reason does not exist.
of this decision the
Department must process the applicant’s request and notify the applicant
of its decision in accordance
with s 26 of the FOI Act. The Department must also
advise whether it has fully implemented my decision.
decision sets aside the Department’s practical refusal decision on the
basis that the Department no longer maintains a
practical refusal reason
Reasons for decision
Scope of IC review
applicant made 2 freedom of information requests that were transferred to the
Department.
The requests can
broadly be summarised as seeking access to:
internal and
external correspondence relating to a claim under the Scheme for Compensation
for Detriment caused by Defective Administration
(the CDDA claim), and
communications, correspondence, and
relating to the powers of
the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (the ASIC) in relation to
the CDDA Scheme.
the similarities in the two requests, the Department decided to treat both
requests as a single request under s 24(2) of the
FOI Act. The Department
initiated a request consultation process (s 24AB) with the applicant on the
basis that processing the applicant’s
combined request would substantially
and unreasonably divert the resources of the Department from its other
operations.
applicant revised their request by:
removing the
entirety of their second request
removing the
references to correspondence between the Department and the Department of
Finance from the first part of their first
removing the
reference to speeches made in the House of Representatives by the Treasurer or
Assistant Treasurer from the first part
of their first request, and
narrowing the
date range of the second part of their first request by approximately eight
23 December 2021, the Department refused the applicant’s revised request
under s 24AA(1)(a)(i) on the basis that processing
the request would amount
to a substantial and unreasonable diversion of resources from the
Department’s other operations.
applicant sought IC review on 21 January 2022 on the basis that no practical
refusal reason existed. The applicant also made assertions
of bias during the
handling of their request and submissions on issues relating to ASIC’s
powers in determining the CDDA claim.
However, these are not IC reviewable
issues and do not fall within the ambit of my powers as a delegate for the
purposes of s 55K
of the FOI Act.
the IC review,
the Department
indicated that it no longer maintains that processing the applicant’s
revised request would amount to a substantial
and unreasonable diversion of the
Department’s resources from its other operations (s 24AA(1)(a)(i)), and
that it is able to
process the revised request.
on the information before me, I am satisfied that the practical refusal reason
no longer exists. The Department must now process
the applicant’s request
and notify the applicant of its decision within 30 days of receipt of this
Rocelle Ago
General Manager, Freedom of
Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian Information
Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Whether a practical refusal reason exists (ss 24 and
Section 24 of the FOI Act
enables an agency or Minister to refuse access to a document where the agency
has undertaken a request consultation
process in accordance with s 24AB of the
FOI Act, and after that process the agency or Minister is satisfied that the
practical refusal
reason still exists.
Subparagraph 24AA(1)(a) of the FOI Act lists the following practical refusal
(1) For the purposes of section 24, a practical refusal reason exists in
relation to a request for a document if either (or both)
of the following
(a) the work involved in processing the request:
(i) in the case of an agency--would substantially and unreasonably divert
the resources of the agency from its other operations;
(ii) in the case of a Minister--would substantially and unreasonably
interfere with the performance of the Minister's functions;
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
Accessing your information
If you would like access to the information that we hold about you, please
FOIDR@oaic.gov.au
information is available on the
information
page on our website.
On the question of the
processing deadlines that now apply, see
Fletcher and Prime Minister of
Under s 16 of the FOI Act.
Made by the Treasurer or the
Assistant Treasurer.
The two requests specified
different timeframes, but the subject matter of the second request would have
been subsumed within the
In response to a direction
under s 55(2)(e)(ii) of the FOI Act.
RTF format (22.1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format