In the matter of an application by Jan Marek Kant for leave to issue or file [2025] HCASJ 40 (10 November 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION BY
JAN MAREK KANT FOR LEAVE TO
ISSUE OR FILE
[2025] HCASJ 40
Date of Judgment: 10 November
M82 of 2025
ex parte application filed on 1 October 2025 for leave to issue or file an
application for a constitutional or other writ is refused.
Representation
The applicant is unrepresented
This is the fourth ex parte application for leave to issue or file an
application for a constitutional or other writ against
various defendants,
including the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, the Principal
Registrar of this Court, and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, filed by
the applicant.
The present application is the second filed by the applicant seeking leave
to issue or file an application for a constitutional or
other writ against
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
("the defendant"). The substance of each application against
defendant concerns communications sent by the applicant to the defendant and the
defendant's response to those communications.
September 2025, Steward J directed that, pursuant to r 6.07.2 of
High Court Rules 2004
(Cth), the application for a
constitutional or other writ against the defendant was not to be issued or filed
without the leave of
a Justice first had and obtained by the applicant.
This application for leave to issue or file that application for a
constitutional
or other writ is supported by an affidavit affirmed by the
applicant on 30 September 2025. I have read the applicant's affidavit
in support of the application as well as the proposed application for a
constitutional or other writ against the defendant.
that the applicant seeks in the proposed application for a constitutional
or other writ is, relevantly, "a writ or an
injunction requiring
the [d]efendant do all things necessary":
(1) "to have the [applicant's] complaint UR/CAT/24/AUS/13 resolved in accordance
with Article 22 of
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment
(2) "to bring to resolution all complaints already made by the [applicant] to
the Human Rights Committee in accordance with the Optional
Protocol to
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(3) in the alternative to (2), "to have the [applicant's] complaint
UR/CCPR/24/AUS/22 resolved in accordance with the Optional Protocol
International Covenant on Civil and Political
application for a proposed constitutional or other writ states that on six
occasions the applicant produced to the Office of
the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights ("the OHCHR") an individual communication for
submission to a specified committee.
The applicant states that the defendant
variously "failed to bring [the communications] to resolution in compliance with
treaty provisions", "made known his refusal or failure to deal with
the issues raised in the [applicant's] communications" or has
acknowledged the communications.
applicant's complaint is, in substance, that the defendant has "refused or
failed, and intends to continue to refuse or fail,
to properly discharge his
duties under [the]
[(Cth)] and treaties to which
Australia is a State Party" and that Ch III of the
Constitution
empowers this Court to command the performance of any duty imposed on any
person by any treaty to which Australia is a party.
correspondence exhibited to the applicant's affidavit, the registry of this
Court expressed concerns to the applicant that he
previously sought to file a
related application that sought "almost identical relief and [was] drafted in
substantially similar terms"
and that leave to file that prior application was
refused on the basis that it was "manifestly untenable" and would be an "abuse
of process".
The applicant stated that he seeks, in his current application, different
relief because his current claim is based on the defendant's
refusal or failure
to deal with his complaints, as opposed to the defendant's delay in dealing with
his complaints.
the application for a constitutional or other writ against the defendant,
nor the applicant's supporting affidavit, discloses
any rational legal argument
that could support the relief sought. The claims set out in the proposed
application against the defendant
are manifestly hopeless and, therefore,
an abuse of process.
The applicant's contentions proceed on fundamental misunderstandings.
treaty – an international agreement concluded between two or more states
and, relevantly, an international organisation –
is governed by
international law and gives rise to international legal rights and
obligations.
The signing and
ratification of a treaty by the Executive Government of the Commonwealth does
not make the terms of the treaty the
To give a treaty
legal force in Australia, the Commonwealth Parliament must pass an Act that
implements the terms of the treaty,
in whole or in part, so that the terms,
as enacted, are the law of
Australia is a
party to core international human rights
and is also a party
to a number of other optional
and related
mechanisms.
Commonwealth Parliament has not implemented all of the international human
rights treaties to which Australia is a party as part
of its domestic law.
So, for example, under the
Australian Human Rights Commission Act
(Cth), "human rights" are defined by reference to various international
human rights treaties and
declarations.
Australian Human Rights Commission Act
does not give those treaties
or declarations any substantive effect as the law of Australia. For those
reasons, claims based directly
on breaches of provisions of human rights
treaties are misplaced.
Moreover, neither the defendant, nor the OHCHR, is subject to the
any event, as Gleeson J said in relation to a previous application for leave to
issue or file an application for a constitutional
or other writ by the applicant
in relation to two of the applicant's communications to the
Art 22 of the Convention nor the Optional Protocol impose a duty on the
defendant to resolve the relevant complaints without
delay. The applicant
has not identified any other basis for finding a duty owed by the defendant to
resolve the complaints without
delay. Accordingly, on the face of the
application, the applicant is seeking to invoke this Court's jurisdiction on a
is 'manifestly untenable'."
that a document the subject of an application for leave to issue or file under
r 6.07.3 of the
High Court Rules
is to be considered "on its
it is implicit
that the application falls to be determined without an oral
The ex parte application filed on 1 October 2025 for leave to issue or
file an application for a constitutional or other writ is
The applicant filed ex parte
applications for leave to issue or file a constitutional or other writ in
Matter Nos M65 of 2023, M8
of 2025, and M16 of 2025. The applicant
filed applications for leave to appeal in Matter Nos M71 of 2023 and M30 of
2025. See also
In the matter of an application by Jan Marek Kant for leave to
issue or file
[2025] HCASJ 5
In the matter of an application by Jan
Marek Kant for leave to issue or file
[2025] HCASJ 16.
In the matter of an
application by Jan Marek Kant for leave to issue or file
[2025] HCASJ 16
In the matter of an
application by Leonard William Clampett for leave to issue or file
Citta Hobart Pty Ltd v Cawthorn
[2022] HCA 16
(2022) 276 CLR 216
, [37], 246-247 [72]-[73].
Victoria v The Commonwealth
(Industrial Relations Act Case)
(1996) 187 CLR 416 at 478.
Industrial Relations Act
(1996) 187 CLR 416 at 480-481.
Constitution
s 51(xxix).
Industrial Relations Act Case
(1996) 187 CLR 416 at
See, eg, International Covenant on
and Political Rights (1966); International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (1966); Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (1984).
See, eg, Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966); Optional Protocol
to the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment (2002).
For example, Australia is a party
to complaints mechanisms under the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment (1984).
Australian Human Rights
Commission Act
definition of "human rights".
[2000] FCA 125
(2000) 60 ALD 366.
and (2), read with
definition of "agency" and
definition of "organisation".
In the matter of an
application by Jan Marek Kant for leave to issue or file
[2025] HCASJ 16
[2020] HCA 13
(2020) 94 ALJR 448
[2020] HCA 13
376 ALR 567
High Court Rules
[2020] HCA 13
(2020) 94 ALJR
[2020] HCA 13
376 ALR 567
RTF format (214 KB)
Signed PDF/A format