Yugunga-Nya Native Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Philip Arthur Box and Another [2025] NNTTA 30 (13 November 2025)
NATIONAL NATIVE TITLE TRIBUNAL
Yugunga-Nya Native Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Philip Arthur
Box and Another
[2025] NNTTA 30 (13 November 2025)
Application No:
WO2024/0480; WO2024/0481
IN THE MATTER of the
Native Title Act 1993
IN THE MATTER of an inquiry into expedited procedure objection
applications
Yugunga-Nya Native Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC (WCD2021/008)
(native title party)
Philip Arthur Box
(grantee party)
State of Western Australia
(Government party)
DETERMINATION THAT THE ACT IS AN ACT ATTRACTING THE EXPEDITED
DETERMINATION THAT THE ACT IS NOT AN ACT ATTRACTING THE EXPEDITED
Ms Nerida Cooley
Catchwords:
Native title – future acts – proposed grant of prospecting
licences – expedited procedure objection applications
– whether acts
are likely to interfere with the carrying on of community and social activities
– acts are not likely
to interfere with the carrying on of community and
social activities – whether acts are likely to interfere with areas or
of particular significance – CullCulli 2 as an area or site of
particular significance – act (P 20/2508) is likely to
interfere with
areas or sites of particular significance – whether acts are likely to
involve major disturbance to lands and
waters – acts are not likely to
involve major disturbance – act (P 20/2507) is an act attracting the
expedited procedure
– act (P 20/2508) is not an act attracting the
expedited procedure
Legislation:
Heritage Act 1972
(WA) ss 17, 18
Title Act 1993
(Cth) ss 151, 237
Cheinmora v Striker Resources NL and Others; Dann v State of Western
Australia and Others
(1996) 142 ALR 21
Dann v Western Australia and Another
(1997) 74 FCR 391
Little and Others v Oriole Resources Pty Ltd
; (2005) 146 FCR 576 (‘
Little v Oriole
Smith v Western Australia and Another
(2001) 108 FCR 442
Smith v Western
Yarnangu Ngaanyatjarraku Parna (Aboriginal Corporation) RNTBC v Border
Exploration Pty Ltd and Another
Border Exploration
Yindjibarndi Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v FMG Pilbara Pty Ltd and
Yindjibarndi v FMG
Representative of the native title party:
Anja Gambie-Becker, Yugunga-Nya Native Title Aboriginal Corporation
Representative of the grantee party:
Representatives of the Government party:
Julie Shields and Harper Quinlan, State Solicitor’s Office; Andrea
Wyles, Department of Mines, Petroleum and Exploration
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Philip Box has applied for the grant of two prospecting
20/2507 and P 20/2508, located north-easterly of Cue in Western
of Western Australia considers that the grant of each licence is an
act attracting the expedited procedure under the
Native Title
(Cth). If the expedited procedure applies, each licence
may be granted without first requiring negotiation in good faith between Mr
the State and any native title parties for the licence area.
[3] The relevant
native title party is
Yugunga-Nya
Native Title Aboriginal Corporation
RNTBC, which holds non-exclusive native title rights in trust for the common law
holders (Yugunga-Nya
People) in relation to the whole of each licence area.
[4] Yugunga-Nya
objects to the application of the expedited procedure on the basis that the
grant of each licence is likely to directly
interfere with the carrying on of
community and social activities, interfere with areas or sites of particular
significance to Yugunga-Nya
People and involve major disturbance. Of special
importance to Yugunga-Nya is a registered Aboriginal site called CullCulli 2
in P 20/2508, which is described as so sacred even Yugunga-Nya People do
not go there.
[5] Both the
State and Mr Box contend that interference or disturbance as alleged by
Yugunga-Nya is not likely due to the activities
proposed by Mr Box, as well as
aspects of the State’s regulatory regime, including the conditions and
endorsements to which
each grant will be subject.
[6] To determine
whether the expedited procedure applies, I must undertake a predictive
assessment by considering the likely consequences
from the grant of each licence
in the sense of a real, not remote, chance: see overview of approach in
Yindjibarndi v FMG
satisfied this matter can be adequately determined without a hearing:
Native Title Act
. On the basis of the evidence provided, I
have determined that the grant of P 20/2507 is an act attracting the expedited
but that the grant of P 20/2508 is not an act attracting the
expedited procedure due to likely interference with CullCulli 2. My
What are the issues?
are three key issues relevant to whether the expedited procedure applies.
first is whether the grant of either licence is likely to interfere directly
with the carrying on of the Yugunga-Nya People’s
community or social
activities:
Native Title Act
. This involves a consideration of
both the extent of the community and social activities undertaken and whether
the grant of the
relevant licence is likely to cause direct interference with
those activities. Trivial impacts are outside the scope of interference
contemplated by the section:
Smith v Western Australia
[10] The second
issue is whether the grant of either licence is likely to interfere with areas
or sites of particular significance
to Yugunga-Nya People:
. For that to be the case, I must be satisfied of the
identification and location of such areas or sites and that the relevant grant
is likely to result in interference in accordance with Yugunga-Nya traditions:
Yindjibarndi v FMG
[11] The third
issue is whether the grant of either licence is likely to involve major
disturbance to any land or waters within the
Native Title Act
. Major disturbance is to be given its ordinary meaning
as understood by the whole Australian community, including Aboriginal people:
Little v Oriole Resources
at [52]–[54]. I can also have regard to
the context of the relevant grant, including the history of mining and the
characteristics
of the land and waters to determine whether major disturbance is
at page 395 the word “major” is
described as an adjective of degree in respect of which the Tribunal must make a
[12] I will deal
with each of these issues in turn.
Is the grant of either licence likely to directly interfere
with the Yugunga-Nya People’s community or social activities?
licences are located near to each other. Yugunga-Nya has provided a map which
shows both licences, an area of previous disturbance
to the west labelled
Reedy’s Gold Mine, breakaway areas to the east and a number of waterways
or creeklines. The CullCulli
2 registered site is shown as overlapping a large
portion of P 20/2508.
[14] Yugunga-Nya
says that frequent community and social activities are carried out in the area
of both licences, including hunting
for traditional foods, visiting the land
with family members and intergenerational teaching of traditional knowledge.
[15] Yugunga-Nya
elder Mr Billy Shay and common law holder Mr Robert Kelly have provided
statements in support of Yugunga-Nya’s
objections. Specifically,
Yugunga-Nya points to evidence given by Mr Kelly but Mr Kelly does not
detail any activities undertaken
other than saying he has family who go to the
area of the licences for food because there are no kangaroos near Meekatharra.
makes a number of references to flora and fauna in the general area. Mr
Shay similarly says that he and a lot of other Yugunga-Nya
People go to the area
near Reedy’s Gold Mine and undertake activities such as hunting
“around all over the Country in
that area”.
[16] As the
State contends, the evidence is vague in relation to the nature and extent of
activities undertaken. Rather, much of Yugunga-Nya’s
arguments and the
evidence of Mr Shay and Mr Kelly are directed to general concerns about the
risks of harm arising from disturbance
including contamination, safety concerns,
restricted access and impacts on the availability of flora and fauna. Reference
to experience in other areas such as Reedy’s Gold Mine. Mr Kelly
says the “Country needs to be left alone”. While
I do understand and
appreciate these sentiments and concerns, they are not supported by evidence,
but more to the point, they do
not go to the issues for the application of
because there is no specific evidence regarding community or social
activities undertaken in either licence area.
[17] Interference
must be direct and substantial. On the evidence provided, there is
no basis to support such a conclusion in relation to either licence.
Is the grant of either licence likely to interfere with areas
or sites of particular significance to Yugunga-Nya People, in accordance
their traditions?
What areas or sites does Yugunga-Nya identify?
[18] Yugunga-Nya
identifies four areas or types of areas as being of particular significance. Of
these, the CullCulli 2 registered
site relates only to P 20/2508. The remaining
areas relevant to both licences, are the breakaway areas shown on the map, rock
and caves mentioned in the evidence and creeklines or waterways within
the licences.
CullCulli 2
[19] CullCulli
2 is the only named area or site located within either licence. The boundary of
the site, which is described on the
State’s search of the Aboriginal
Cultural Heritage Inquiry System as reliable, shows the site as a circle
occupying a substantial
portion of the southern half of P 20/2508 and extending
beyond the licence to the east.
registered site is described as “Artefacts / Scatter; Rock Shelter”.
Both Mr Shay and Mr Kelly refer to rock
shelters in the area. Mr Kelly also
says that the area is significant because of the connection to old people who
camped at the site.
He says it is so sacred Yugunga-Nya People do not go into
the site themselves.
[21] While the
State concedes that CullCulli 2 may be an area or site of particular
significance to Yugunga-Nya People, its contentions
primarily focus on the
likelihood of interference, as do those of Mr Box. I will deal with the question
of interference later in
these reasons, but I am satisfied that CullCulli 2 is
an area or site of particular significance to Yugunga-Nya People given its
nature and the additional evidence of Mr Shay and Mr Kelly. It is clearly
identified and located partly within the area of P 20/2508.
Breakaway areas, caves and rock shelters
[22] Yugunga-Nya
says that the breakaway areas shown on the map easterly of P 20/2508 are areas
or sites of particular significance.
It also says there are rock shelters and
caves within and around the proposed licence areas. It expresses concern about
the consequences
of destruction or damage to these areas.
[23] Mr Shay
refers to rock shelters in the breakaway areas and says “we ... do not
want anyone near those rock shelters”.
Kelly’s statement includes a section entitled “Hill range and caves
(Northeast of [licences])”. He says
there are a few caves “out where
Mr. Box’s [licences] are” and that “[t]here are etchings and
other cultural
material there”. However, it is not clear if this is a
reference to the breakaway areas or the area more generally.
[25] Mr Kelly
says people need to stay “well clear” of the entire area around the
range of the hills that are further
northeast of the licences. He expresses
concern about damage caused previously, although no particulars are given, and
would love to preserve the rest of what is [the
licences]”.
[26] Despite
Yugunga-Nya’s contentions, none of this evidence relates directly to the
licence areas. The only evidence regarding
rock shelters in the licence area is
in relation to CullCulli 2, which I have already addressed. All of the breakaway
areas shown
on the map are located outside the licences, although one is close
to P 20/2508. The location of the hills mentioned is unclear other
they are clearly described as further northeast of the licences.
[27] Therefore,
while the evidence about the breakaway areas points to the existence of rock
shelters in some or all of those areas,
the locations are insufficiently
identified for me to make any findings about specific areas or sites of
particular significance.
The evidence about the hills northeast of the licences
is even less detailed.
[28] In any
event, as I have noted, other than CullCulli 2, the evidence regarding the
breakaway areas, caves and rock shelters concerns
areas outside of the licence
areas and there is no evidence to suggest that interference with any of these
areas is likely.
Waterways or creeklines
[29] Yugunga-Nya
contends that creeklines have special cultural significance to Yugunga-Nya
People and raises concerns about the impacts
of prospecting on the waterways,
including consequences for animal life.
[30] This issue
is mentioned in exceedingly general terms by Mr Shay who references the
creeklines and says there is to be no wastewater
going into them. Mr Kelly says
the creeklines are special and sacred to Yugunga-Nya People but there is no
evidence beyond that bare
assertion. Again, most of the concerns expressed by Mr
Kelly relate to environmental impact.
[31] Accordingly,
on the basis of the evidence provided, I am not satisfied that any creeklines
which pass through either licence
are areas or sites of particular significance
Is the grant of P 20/2508 likely to interfere with CullCulli
the areas or sites identified by Yugunga-Nya, I have found CullCulli 2, located
partly within P 20/2508, to be an area or
site of particular significance for
As I have not made any findings regarding areas or sites of particular
significance in relation to P 20/2507, it is not necessary
consider the question of interference with respect to that licence.
[33] Mr Box says
that he is a retiree who enjoys prospecting by metal detector. He argues that
Yugunga-Nya’s concerns about
the impact of machinery are moot as the use
of machinery is prohibited. However, the rights of the holder of a prospecting
(WA) contemplate
the use of machinery and the special conditions which the State proposes to
apply to the licence would enable the
use of machinery with prior approval of
the relevant departmental Environmental Officer.
[34] Mr Box also
says that he is well aware of the CullCulli 2 site, has no intention of
operating in the area of this site and sought
to exclude it from his original
application, as is evident from the copy of the application provided by the
State. He says that it
was the State’s decision to include the site in the
licence area. That may be so but, nonetheless, the licence includes part
registered site which, from the mapping, covers a sizeable portion of the
licence area.
[35] The State
says that there is insufficient evidence to support a conclusion of likely
interference. It relies on Mr Box’s
stated intention not to operate in the
area of the site and on the operation of s 17 of the
Aboriginal Heritage
(WA) which makes it an offence to excavate, destroy,
damage, conceal or alter a registered site without a permit under s 18. It says
that Yugunga-Nya would have to be consulted as part of the process.
[36] In its
reply, Yugunga-Nya says that neither the State nor Mr Box have given adequate
explanation or assurance regarding likely
interference with this site. It points
to Mr Shay’s evidence that Yugunga-Nya does not want anyone near
CullCulli 2 or the
rock shelters. Similarly, Mr Kelly’s evidence is that
the area is so sacred even Yugunga-Nya people do not go there.
appreciate Mr Box’s stated intention to avoid the CullCulli 2 site but, as
he has acknowledged, the site has not been
excluded from the licence application
and his unenforceable intentions, no matter how honourable, are of little weight
in that context.
This is a point the Tribunal has made many times (see
Exploration
at [37]). If Mr Box wishes to commit to such an arrangement that
is more appropriately a matter for agreement with Yugunga-Nya.
[38] While the
evidence regarding interference is limited, both Mr Shay and Mr Kelly are
consistent in the need to stay away from
CullCulli 2. That is not something
either the State or Mr Box has addressed, other than by reference to Mr
Box’s unenforceable
intentions. In particular, the State’s analysis
regarding the application of the
Aboriginal Heritage Act
does not address
the differences in application between s 17 of that Act and
Native Title Act
. Again, that is an issue the Tribunal has drawn out in
other matters: see
Border Exploration
at [48]–[49].
[39] In this
case, given the sizeable extent to which the site extends into the licence,
possibly up to a third of the licence based
on the mapping, and the apprehended
interference including entry into the registered site, I am satisfied that
interference within
the meaning of
with CullCulli 2 is
Is the grant of either licence likely to involve major
disturbance?
[40] The rights
available to Mr Box under each licence are set out in s 48 of the
. Mr Box’s proposed activities are also discussed above.
Additionally, each licence will be subject to a number of conditions
endorsements provided by the State, as well as regulatory controls, such as
those under the
Aboriginal Heritage Act
[41] Yugunga-Nya’s
key argument regarding major disturbance is that caves, rock shelters and
etchings in breakaway areas are
of critical importance and should not be
disturbed. To do so would amount to major disturbance. It says that is the case
whole community and notes Mr Shay’s evidence that rock shelters
are sacred to a lot of people.
inclined to agree with Yugunga-Nya regarding the Australian community’s
views of the destruction of rock shelters,
caves and etchings. The destruction
of such areas would not be taken lightly. The difficulty again here is that the
breakaway areas
are outside the tenements, which is a point made by the State.
In reply, Yugunga-Nya contends that disturbance to the surrounding
cause disturbance to the sites themselves. However, there is simply no evidence
to support that view in the context of
the location of the breakaway areas in
therefore not satisfied that the grant of either licence is likely to involve
major disturbance.
Determination
determine that the grant of P 20/2507 is an act attracting the expedited
[45] I determine
that the grant of P 20/2508 is not an act attracting the expedited
Ms Nerida Cooley
RTF format (247 KB)
Signed PDF/A format