Randall v Chief of Army [2018] ADFDAT 3 (10 July 2018)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Randall v Chief of Army
[2018] ADFDAT
Appeal from:
Restricted Court Martial
File number:
DFDAT 4 of 2017
TRACEY (PRESIDENT), LOGAN (DEPUTY PRESIDENT) AND HILEY (MEMBER)
Date of decision:
Catchwords:
DEFENCE AND WAR
application for extension of time to appeal – application for leave to
appeal against convictions by Restricted Court Martial
– unauthorised
access to restricted data –
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 478.1 – related alternative
prejudicial conduct charges –
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
– obligation of prosecution to prove absence of access
authority beyond reasonable doubt – conclusion of panel as to
absence of authority on the evidence unsafe and unable to be supported –
convictions quashed
– proceeding for service
offence before service tribunal – proof of absence of authority for
conduct charge – general
service knowledge –
Defence Force
Discipline Act 1982
– cannot be used to contradict
authority conferred by service instructions and explained in duty statements
Legislation:
Criminal Code
(Cth) ss 6.1, 6.1(1)(a), 6.1(b), 6.1(2), 6.1(3),
13.1-13.5, 13.2(1), 13.2(2), 476.1, 476.2, 476.2(2), 478.1, 478.1(1), Ch 2
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Army Act 1881 (UK), 44 & 45 Vict, c 58
Army Discipline and Regulation Act 1879 (UK), 42 & 43 Vict, c 33
Naval Discipline Act 1957 (UK), 5 & 6 Eliz 2, c 53, s 58(2)
Rules of Procedure 1947 (UK)
Rules of Procedure 1907 (UK) r 74
Cases cited:
Attorney General’s Reference No 4 of
2002; Sheldrake v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2004] UKHL 43
[2005] 1 AC 264
Environmental Protection Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 74
(1993) 178 CLR 477
Fulton v Chief of Army
[2005] ADFDAT 1
Komljenovic v Chief of Navy
(2017) 319 FLR 215
[2017] ADFDAT
Lee v The Queen
(2014) 253 CLR 455
[2014] HCA 20
Li v Chief of Army
(2013) 250 CLR 328
[2013] HCA 49
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
[2002] HCA 53
Momcilovic v The Queen
(2011) 245 CLR 1
[2011] HCA 34
Nigerian Air Force v Obiosa
(2003) 4 NWLR (pt 810) 233;
R v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
[2016] HCA 35
Re Manion’s Appeal
(1962) 9 FLR 91
Sorby v Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281
Woolmington v Director of Public Prosecutions
[1935] AC 462
Date of hearing:
26 and 27 April 2018
Date of last submissions:
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Salerno Law
Counsel for the Respondent:
R Cawte with H Dempsey
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Office of the Director of Military Prosecutions
DFDAT 4 of 2017
PETER ALLEN RANDALL
CHIEF OF ARMY
TRACEY (PRESIDENT), LOGAN (DEPUTY PRESIDENT) AND
HILEY (MEMBER) JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
period within which the appeal and application for leave to appeal herein must
be lodged be extended to the date on which it was
to appeal, to the extent necessary, be granted.
appeal be allowed.
convictions of the appellant be quashed.
REASONS FOR
THE TRIBUNAL:
“The golden thread”
Woolmington v Director of Public Prosecutions
[1935] AC 462 at
the then Lord Chancellor, Viscount Sankey, with whom the other
members of the House of Lords who sat on that appeal agreed, famously
Throughout the web of the English Criminal Law one
golden thread is always to be seen that it is the duty of the prosecution to
the prisoner’s guilt subject to ... the defence of insanity and
subject also to any statutory exception. If, at the end of
and on the whole of
the case, there is a reasonable doubt, created by the evidence given by either
the prosecution or the prisoner
... the prosecution has not made out the case
and the prisoner is entitled to an acquittal. No matter what the charge or
trial, the principle that the prosecution must prove the guilt of the
prisoner is part of the common law of England and no attempt
to whittle it down
can be entertained.
Unsurprisingly,
given the British heritage of our legal system, this “golden thread”
is also woven into the web of Australian
common law:
Environmental
Protection Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 74
(1993) 178 CLR 477
(Mason CJ and Toohey J). In Australia, the proposition that it is for the
prosecution to prove the guilt of the accused has
been described as “a
cardinal principle of our system of justice”:
Sorby v Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281
at 294 (Gibbs CJ); see also
Momcilovic v The
(2011) 245 CLR 1
[2011] HCA 34
(French CJ). This
feature of our criminal justice system has been said to reflect
“a balance struck between the power of the
State to prosecute and the
position of an individual who stands accused”:
Lee v The Queen
[2014] HCA 20
(2014) 253 CLR 455
at 466-467;
[2014] HCA 20
(French CJ, Crennan,
Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ). In
, at 51-52 [54], French CJ
also stated that “[t]he presumption of innocence has not generally been
regarded in Australia as
logically distinct from the requirement that the
prosecution must prove the guilt of an accused person beyond reasonable
In 2005, in
Attorney General’s Reference No 4 of 2002;
Sheldrake v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2004] UKHL 43
[2005] 1 AC 264
Bingham stated that the underlying rationale for the presumption of innocence
was that to place the burden of proof on a defendant
was “repugnant to
ordinary notions of fairness”.
after its establishment, the Defence Force Discipline Appeal Tribunal
(“the Tribunal”), then known as the Courts-Martial
Tribunal, held that this “golden thread” was a governing principle
in respect of Australia’s then service
discipline law system:
Manion’s Appeal
(1962) 9 FLR 91
at 103-104 (Deputy President McInerney
QC, Members Wright and O’Sullivan). That remained the position upon
the enactment and
commencement of the
Defence Force Discipline Act
(Cth) (“the DFDA”) because, as enacted,
principles of the common law with respect to criminal liability applicable to
service offences. Since then, Parliament
has found attraction in a codification
of those principles and in the application of that codification to service
offences. But
this has not led to the unravelling of the “golden
thread”. It remains woven, both directly and indirectly, into the
Australia’s current service discipline law.
direct thread is created by the present
of the DFDA, which provides that
Chapter 2 of the Commonwealth
Criminal Code
(“the Criminal
Code”), being the Schedule to the
Criminal Code Act 1995
applies to all service offences. Division 13 (set out below) is amongst the
general principles of criminal responsibility
found in Chapter 2 of the Criminal
Code. In relation to offences against the Criminal Code, Division 13 gives
statutory expression
both to the common law principle that the burden of proving
beyond reasonable doubt “every element of an offence relevant to
of the person charged” falls on the prosecution and to the recognition in
Woolmington
that Parliament may provide for exceptions to this principle.
Save in respect of the class of service offences created by s 61(3)
DFDA, as to which see the next paragraph in these reasons, s 10 of the DFDA thus
makes the principle that the prosecution
must, subject to any express exception,
prove guilt beyond reasonable doubt directly applicable to the trial of every
person charged
with a service offence.
indirect thread is created by s 61(6) of the DFDA with respect to conduct which,
if it took place in the Jervis Bay Territory,
would be a “Territory
offence”, as defined (s 3, DFDA), and which is made a service
offence by s 61(3) of the DFDA.
The otherwise direct effect of s 10 of the DFDA
is modified by s 61(6) of that Act, which provides:
(6) To avoid doubt, section 10 of this Act does not have
the effect that Chapter 2 of the
Criminal Code
applies to the law in
force in Jervis Bay, for the purpose of determining whether an offence against
this section has been committed.
The note to s 61(6) of the DFDA accurately describes the effect of that
subsection:
Note: Section 10 of this Act applies Chapter 2 of the
Criminal Code to the content of this section, but not to the content of the
in force in Jervis Bay. To determine, for the purposes of this section, whether
Chapter 2 of the Code applies to Jervis Bay
law, it is necessary to consult
Jervis Bay law.
offences set out in the Criminal Code are, in terms of the definition of
“Territory offence” in s 3 of the DFDA, offences
against a law of
the Commonwealth in force in the Jervis Bay Territory. They form part of the
law in force in that Territory. So,
too, accordingly, do the provisions of
Chapter 2 of the Criminal Code, applicable to such offences, form part of that
law. In this
indirect fashion, Division 13 of the Criminal Code applies to
contraventions of the Criminal Code which, by s 61(3) of the DFDA,
service offences.
present application for an extension of time and related leave to appeal raises,
in an acute way, whether, on the whole of the
evidence and in light of the
application of Division 13 of the Criminal Code to the proof or, as the case may
be, defence of the
service offences charged, it was reasonably open to the
members of the panel of a restricted court martial convened under the DFDA
conclude that the guilt of the appellant was proved beyond reasonable doubt.
For the reasons which follow, our conclusion is
that such a conclusion was
unreasonable and cannot be supported and that the convictions are unsafe or
unsatisfactory. Principally,
that is because, on the whole of the evidence, the
prosecution did not make out its case of unauthorised access (or modification)
to the required standard such that the appellant is entitled to
Court martial proceedings and outcome
appellant is Warrant Officer Class Two (“WO2”) Peter Allen Randall,
a member of the Royal Australian Corps of Signals
(“RA Sigs”) within
the Australian Army. He was brought to trial before a restricted court martial
and charged with 28
offences against s 61(3) of the DFDA, constituted by
unauthorised access to (or modification of) restricted data, contrary to
of the Criminal Code. In respect of each of these primary
charges, an alternative charge of prejudicial conduct, contrary to s 60(1)
the DFDA, was additionally preferred against him. Originally, 46 charges were
preferred but 18 of these were abandoned by the
prosecution before the final
hearing commenced.
offences upon which the prosecutor proceeded were alleged to have occurred
variously in 2013 and 2014, during the course of WO2
Randall’s deployment
in the United Arab Emirates as a member of the Force Communications Unit
(“FCU”), serving
under the Australian National Headquarters –
Middle East Area of Operations (“MEAO”), known as Headquarters Joint
Task Force 633 (“JTF 633”). At the time, WO2 Randall was acting in
the next most senior Army rank, Warrant Officer Class
One (“WO1”),
in an information systems appointment within the FCU. He held a number of roles
at this time. He was the
Information System Engineer and the Information System
Manager. He had the status of a System Administrator and a System Manager.
was also the Information Security Systems Officer.
were disparate outcomes at trial in respect of the charges. On 21 June 2016,
the court martial convicted him of some of the
charges and acquitted him of
others, either by express direction of the Judge Advocate or on the
panel’s own assessment of
the evidence. The panel did not need to
consider prejudicial conduct charges brought as alternatives to primary charges
478.1 of the Criminal Code where it found the primary charges proven.
charges of which WO2 Randall was convicted and the related sentences
consequentially imposed by the panel were as follows.
4 provided:
Unauthorised access to restricted data
Being a defence member in Al Minhad Air Base, United Arab Emirates, on 28 May
2014, did intentionally cause unauthorised access to
restricted data held in a
Commonwealth computer, knowing that the access was unauthorised, by accessing
the email account of LEUT
Arthur Jagiello on the ADF Deployed Defence
Secret Network.
Particulars
28 May 2014 at about 0539h, WO1 Randall accessed the Lotus Notes email account
of LEUT Arthur Jagiello on the ADF Deployed Defence
Secret Network (DDSN),
arthur.jagiello
(“the email account”).
email account was held on a Commonwealth computer system, and had been
restricted in its accessibility by way of an access control
system associated
with a function of the computer, namely a username and password for access to
the computer network, as well as
system-based restrictions that limited who
could open email accounts to the relevant user, system administrators and
specifically
authorised personnel.
Randall used his administrator privileges to access the email account without
authorisation.
The sentence imposed for Charge 4 was: “To be
reprimanded.”
5 provided:
Unauthorised access to restricted data
Being a defence member in Al Minhad Air Base, United Arab Emirates, on 30 May
2014, did intentionally cause unauthorised access to
restricted data held in a
Commonwealth computer, knowing that the access was unauthorised, by accessing
the email account of LEUT
Arthur Jagiello on the ADF Deployed Defence
Secret Network.
Particulars
30 May 2014 at about 0719h, WO1 Randall accessed the Lotus Notes email account
of LEUT Arthur Jagiello on the ADF Deployed Defence
Secret Network
(“DDSN”), titled
arthur.jagiello
(“the email
email account was held on a Commonwealth computer system, and had been
restricted in its accessibility by way of an access control
system associated
with a function of the computer, namely a username and password for access to
the computer network, as well as
system-based restrictions that limited who
could open email accounts to the relevant user, system administrators and
specifically
authorised personnel.
Randall used his administrator privileges to access the email account without
authorisation.
The sentence imposed for Charge 5 was: “To be severely
reprimanded.”
6 provided:
Unauthorised access to restricted data
Being a defence member in Al Minhad Air Base, United Arab Emirates, on 28 May
2014, did intentionally cause unauthorised access to
restricted data held in a
Commonwealth computer, knowing that the access was unauthorised, by accessing
the email account of LEUT
Arthur Jagiello on the ADF Deployed Defence
Restricted Network.
Particulars
28 May 2014 at about 1010h, WO1 Randall accessed the Lotus Notes email account
of LEUT Arthur Jagiello on the ADF Deployed Defence
Restricted Network
(“DORN”), titled
arthur.jagiello
(“the email
email account was held on a Commonwealth computer system, and had been
restricted in its accessibility by way of an access control
system associated
with a function of the computer, namely a username and password for access to
the computer network, as well as
system-based restrictions that limited who
could open email accounts to the relevant user, system administrators and
specifically
authorised personnel.
Randall used his administrator privileges to access the email account without
authorisation.
The sentence imposed for Charge 6 was: “To be
reprimanded.”
alternative to Charge 8 alleged prejudicial conduct contrary to s 60(1) of the
Prejudicial conduct
Being a defence member in Al Minhad Air Base, United Arab Emirates, on 05 May
2014, did an act likely to prejudice the discipline
of the Defence Force by
accessing without authorisation the email account of CAPT Ami Hansen on the ADF
Deployed Defence Secret Network.
The sentence for the alternative to Charge 8 was as follows: “Conviction
without punishment recorded on condition that Warrant
Officer Randall undertake
to be of good behaviour for 12 months.”
12 provided:
Unauthorised access to restricted data
Being a defence member in Al Minhad Air Base, United Arab Emirates, on 08 June
2014, did intentionally cause unauthorised access
to restricted data held in a
Commonwealth computer, knowing that the access was unauthorised, by accessing
the email account of CAPT
Melissa Healy on the ADF Deployed Defence Secret
Particulars
08 June 2014 at about 1253h, WO1 Randall accessed the Lotus Notes email account
of CAPT Melissa Healy, on the ADF Deployed Defence
Secret Network (DDSN), titled
melissa.healy
(“the email account”).
email account was held on a Commonwealth computer system, and had been
restricted in its accessibility by way of an access control
system associated
with a function of the computer, namely a username and password for access to
the computer network, as well as
system-based restrictions that limited who
could open email accounts to the relevant user, system administrators and
specifically
authorised personnel.
Randall used his administrator privileges to access the email account without
authorisation.
The sentence imposed for Charge 12 was: “To be
reprimanded.”
13 provided:
Unauthorised access to restricted data
Being a defence member in Al Minhad Air Base, United Arab Emirates, on 08 June
2014, did intentionally cause unauthorised access
to restricted data held in a
Commonwealth computer, knowing that the access was unauthorised, by accessing
the email account of CAPT
Melissa Healy on the ADF Deployed Defence Restricted
Particulars
08 June 2014 at about 1257h, WO1 Randall accessed the Lotus Notes email account
of Army CAPT Melissa Healy on the ADF Deployed
Defence Restricted Network
(DORN), titled
melissa.healy
(“the email account”).
email account was held on a Commonwealth computer system, and had been
restricted in its accessibility by way of an access control
system associated
with a function of the computer, namely a username and password for access to
the computer network, as well as
system-based restrictions that limited who
could open email accounts to the relevant user, system administrators and
specifically
authorised personnel.
Randall used his administrator privileges to access the email account without
authorisation.
The sentence imposed for Charge 13 was: “To be
reprimanded.”
14 provided:
Unauthorised access to restricted data
Being a defence member in Al Minhad Air Base, United Arab Emirates, on
19 February 2014 at about 0420h, did intentionally cause unauthorised
access to restricted data held in a Commonwealth computer, knowing that the
access was unauthorised, by accessing the email account
of CAPT Peter Kimberley
on the ADF Deployed Defence Restricted Network.
Particulars
19 February 2014 at about 0420h, WO1 Randall accessed the ADF Deployed Defence
Restricted Network (DORN) Lotus Notes email account
CAPT Peter Kimberley, titled
peter.kimberley
(“the email
email account was held on a Commonwealth computer system, and had been
restricted in its accessibility by way of an access control
system associated
with a function of the computer, namely a username and password for access to
the computer network, as well as
system-based restrictions that limited who
could open email accounts to the relevant user, system administrators and
specifically
authorised personnel.
Randall used his administrator privileges to access the email account without
authorisation.
The sentence imposed for Charge 14 was: “To be
reprimanded.”
15 provided:
Unauthorised access to restricted data
Being a defence member in Al Minhad Air Base, United Arab Emirates, on
19 February 2014 at about 0420h, did intentionally cause unauthorised
modification of restricted data held in a Commonwealth computer, knowing that
the modification was unauthorised, by modifying data
in the email account of
CAPT Peter Kimberley, held on the ADF Deployed Defence Restricted
Particulars
19 February 2014 at about 0420h, WO1 Randall accessed the ADF Deployed Defence
Restricted Network (DORN) Lotus Notes email account
CAPT Peter Kimberley, titled
peter.kimberley
(“the email
“Employment opportunities at BAE Systems”,
from the email account
and placed it in his own email account, and in doing so., erasing the email from
CAPT Kimberley’s email
removal of the email by WO1 Randall modified the email data is such a way that
it prevented CAPT Kimberley from accessing the
email or the data contained
email account was held on a Commonwealth computer system, and had been
restricted in its accessibility by way of an access control
system associated
with a function of the computer, namely a username and password for access to
the computer network, as well as
system-based restrictions that limited who
could open email accounts to the relevant user, system administrators and
specifically
authorised personnel.
Randall used his administrator privileges to access the email account without
authorisation.
The sentence imposed for Charge 15 was: “To be severely
reprimanded.”
16 provided:
Unauthorised access to restricted data
Being a defence member in Al Minhad Air Base, United Arab Emirates, on
19 February 2014 at about 1724h, did intentionally cause unauthorised
access to restricted data held in a Commonwealth computer, knowing that the
access was unauthorised, by accessing the email account
of CAPT Peter Kimberley
on the ADF Deployed Defence Restricted Network.
Particulars
19 February 2014 at about 1724h, WO1 Randall accessed the ADF Deployed Defence
Restricted Network (“DORN”) Lotus Notes
email account of
CAPT Peter Kimberley, titled
peter.kimberley
(“the email
email account was held on a Commonwealth computer system, and had been
restricted in its accessibility by way of an access control
system associated
with a function of the computer, namely a username and password for access to
the computer network, as well as
system-based restrictions that limited who
could open email accounts to the relevant user, system administrators and
specifically
authorised personnel.
Randall used his administrator privileges to access the email account without
authorisation.
The sentence imposed for Charge 16 was: “To be severely
reprimanded.”
alternative to Charge 19 provided:
Prejudicial conduct
Being a defence member in Al Minhad Air Base, United Arab Emirates, on
29 December 2013, did an act likely to prejudice the discipline
Defence Force by accessing without authorisation the email account of WO1
Phillip Saunders on the ADF Deployed Defence Secret
The sentence imposed for the alternative to Charge 19 was: “To be
reprimanded.”
22 provided:
Unauthorised access to restricted data
Being a defence member in Al Minhad Air Base, United Arab Emirates, on 15 May
2014, did intentionally cause unauthorised access to
restricted data held in a
Commonwealth computer, knowing that the access was unauthorised, by accessing
the email account of WO1
Phillip Saunders on the ADF Deployed Defence Secret
Particulars
15 May 2014 at about 0425h, WO1 Randall accessed the Lotus Notes email account
of WO1 Phillip Saunders, titled
phillip.saunders
on the ADF Deployed
Defence Secret Network (DDSN) (“the email account”).
email account was held on a Commonwealth computer system, and had been
restricted in its accessibility by way of an access control
system associated
with a function of the computer, namely a username and password for access to
the computer network, as well as
system-based restrictions that limited who
could open email accounts to the relevant user, system administrators and
specifically
authorised personnel.
Randall used his administrator privileges to access the email account without
authorisation.
The sentence imposed for Charge 22 was: “To be severely
reprimanded.”
Extension of time and leave to appeal
Randall’s notice of appeal was filed outside the period fixed by
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
(Cth) (“the
DFDAA”). He has sought an extension of time pursuant to
of the DFDAA.
The reasons for the delay are fully explained in an uncontroversial affidavit
made by his solicitor, Captain Emma Salerno,
an Army Reserve Legal Officer.
They relate both to the understandable and not unreasonable disposition of
WO2 Randall first to exhaust
DFDA review procedures, his deployment for
extended periods following the communication to him of the outcome of the last
reviews, the need by counsel (Colonel R A Pearce, who appeared as
defending officer at the court martial) and solicitor to analyse
many thousands
of pages of transcript and numerous exhibits from the court martial proceeding
and provide related advice, and the
availability of counsel and solicitor to
seek instructions, having regard to their travel and Service commitments.
surprisingly, in light of this explanation, the respondent Chief of Army chose
to resist the granting of an extension. Be
this as it may, taking into account
both the explanation given as well as WO2 Randall’s prospects in respect
of the grounds
of appeal which he chose to press, we regard the granting to him
of an extension of time as necessary in the interests of justice.
Further, and
if only out of an abundance of caution, we shall grant him leave to appeal in so
far as the same may be necessary.
Grounds of appeal
grounds of appeal pressed by WO2 Randall are the third and fourth of those
pleaded in his notice of appeal namely:
(c) The findings of guilt are unreasonable and/or cannot
be supported having regard to the evidence; and
(d) In all the circumstances of the case, the findings of guilt are unsafe
and/or unsatisfactory and should be quashed.
grounds reflect two bases upon which, by
of the DFDAA
respectively, the Tribunal may allow an appeal and quash a conviction. As to
these two provisions, we take their meaning
and effect to be as stated by the
Tribunal in
Fulton v Chief of Army
[2005] ADFDAT 1
with reference
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
MFA v The Queen
[2002] HCA 53.
The Tribunal (at [55]) there observed:
Little, if any distinction, can be drawn between par (a)
and (d). Both reflect the law as expounded by the High Court in
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
(2002) 213 CLR 606.
The two joint
judgments in the latter case affirmed the principle expounded in the former, at
Where, notwithstanding that as a matter of
law there is evidence to sustain a verdict, a court of criminal appeal is asked
to conclude
that the verdict is unsafe or unsatisfactory, the question which the
court must ask itself is whether it thinks that upon the whole
of the evidence
it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
was guilty (See
Whitehorn v The Queen
(1983) 152 CLR at 686;
Chamberlain v The Queen (No 2)
(1984) 153 CLR at 532;
Knight v The
[1992] HCA 56
(1992) 175 CLR 495
In the application of this principle, we must consider both the sufficiency and
the quality of the evidence.
(at [56]) referring to
MFA v The Queen
, the Tribunal
McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ said at 623-624 that in this
context the expressions “unsafe or unsatisfactory”,
“unreasonable”
and “cannot be supported having regard to the
evidence” have the same meaning. With respect to the jury’s
of seeing and hearing the evidence, their Honours said that in a case
where the appellate court experiences a doubt about the conclusion
of a guilty
verdict and there appears a significant possibility that an innocent person is
being convicted, the verdict must be quashed
unless the fact that the jury has
seen and heard the evidence can explain the different
conclusions.
qualification in the passage quoted from
in relation to the fact
that the jury has seen and heard the evidence is salutary. It is applicable, by
analogy, in appeals against
conviction under the DFDAA, in relation to the
verdicts of courts martial and Defence Force Magistrates.
qualification was a key feature of the Chief of Army’s submissions.
However, as will be seen, in this case much turned
not on an advantage of this
kind enjoyed by the panel but on documentary evidence, found in service manuals,
instructions and duty
statements, with respect to the duties of the holder of
the position to which WO2 Randall was then posted. Further, as to oral
the panel had before it the uncontradicted evidence of another, well
qualified and experienced, RA Sigs Warrant Officer, WO1 Mark
Neville Wright,
called by the prosecution, who gave evidence as to the tasks and
responsibilities of an Information System Manager
and an Information System
Engineer, the practical application on deployment of those duties, and
WO2 Randall’s expertise.
As it happened, WO2 Randall gave oral
evidence consistent with this body of documentary and oral prosecution
R v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
[2016] HCA 35
Court observed of a trial in respect of an alleged offence against civilian
criminal law that it was “accusatorial
but also adversarial”. The
same is true in respect of the trial of an alleged service offence before a
court martial or a
Defence Force Magistrate. It necessarily follows that, as in
the civilian criminal jurisdiction, so, too, in the service discipline
present proceeding, even in respect of instances where
there was evidence of an
“apology” by him, the conduct of WO2 Randall’s case never
involved a concession that he
lacked authority.
The offence provisions
far as is presently material, s 478.1 of the Criminal Code, as in force at the
time of the commission of the alleged offences in
2013 and 2014,
478.1 Unauthorised access to, or modification of,
restricted data
(1) A person is guilty of an offence if:
(a) the person causes any unauthorised
access to, or modification of, restricted data; and
(b) the person intends to cause the access or modification; and
(c) the person knows that the access or modification is unauthorised.
Penalty: 2 years imprisonment.
(3) In this section:
restricted data
(a) held in a computer; and
(b) to which access is restricted by an access control system associated with a
function of the computer.
s 476.1 of the Criminal Code, the term “unauthorised access, modification
or impairment” is given the meaning set out
in s 476.2. It is there
provided, materially:
476.2 Meaning of
unauthorised access, modification
or impairment
(1) In this Part:
(a) access to data held in a computer;
(b) modification of data held in a computer; ...
by a person is unauthorised if the person is not entitled to cause that access,
modification ... .
(2) Any such access, modification ... caused by the
person is not unauthorised merely because he or she has an ulterior purpose for
causing it.
(3) For the purposes of an offence under this Part, a person causes any such
unauthorised access, modification ... if the person’s
substantially contributes to it.
to the service offence of prejudicial conduct, s 60 of the DFDA materially
provided at the time of the commission of the alleged
offences in 2013 and
60 Prejudicial conduct
(1) A defence member is guilty of an offence if the member does an act that is
likely to prejudice the discipline of ... the Defence
Maximum punishment: Imprisonment for 3
(2) An offence against subsection (1) ... is an offence of strict
strict liability
see section 6.1 of the
Criminal Code
(3) It is a defence to a charge under subsection (1) if
the member proves that he or she had a reasonable excuse for the relevant
Note: The defendant bears a legal burden in
relation to the matter in subsection (3). See section 13.4 of the
Randall relied upon the defence in s 60(3) of the DFDA which required him
to prove that he had a reasonable excuse for engaging
in the impugned conduct.
The “reasonable excuse” invoked was that WO2 Randall believed
that he had authority at each
of the relevant times.
Criminal Code — Burden and standard of proof
is now necessary to set out the material parts of Division 13 of the Criminal
13.1 Legal burden of proof—prosecution
(1) The prosecution bears a legal burden of proving every element of an offence
relevant to the guilt of the person charged.
Note: See section 3.2 on what elements are
relevant to a person’s guilt.
(2) The prosecution also bears a legal burden of
disproving any matter in relation to which the defendant has discharged an
burden of proof imposed on the defendant.
(3) In this Code:
legal burden
, in relation to a matter, means the burden of proving
the existence of the matter.
13.2 Standard of proof—prosecution
(1) A legal burden of proof on the prosecution must be discharged beyond
reasonable doubt.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if the law creating the offence specifies a
different standard of proof.
13.3 Evidential burden of proof—defence
(1) Subject to section 13.4, a burden of proof that a law imposes on a defendant
is an evidential burden only.
(2) A defendant who wishes to deny criminal responsibility by relying on a
provision of Part 2.3 (other than section 7.3) bears an
evidential burden in
relation to that matter.
(3) A defendant who wishes to rely on any exception, exemption, excuse,
qualification or justification provided by the law creating
an offence bears an
evidential burden in relation to that matter. The exception, exemption, excuse,
qualification or justification
need not accompany the description of the
(4) The defendant no longer bears the evidential burden in relation to a matter
if evidence sufficient to discharge the burden is
adduced by the prosecution or
by the court.
(5) The question whether an evidential burden has been discharged is one of
(6) In this Code:
evidential burden
, in relation
to a matter, means the burden of adducing or pointing to evidence that suggests
a reasonable possibility that the matter
exists or does not
13.4 Legal burden of proof—defence
A burden of proof that a law imposes on the defendant is a legal burden if and
only if the law expressly:
(a) specifies that the burden of proof in relation to the matter in question is
a legal burden; or
(b) requires the defendant to prove the matter; or
(c) creates a presumption that the matter exists unless the contrary is
13.5 Standard of proof—defence
A legal burden of proof on the defendant must be discharged on the balance of
probabilities.
can be seen, the combined effect of s 13.1 and s 13.2(1) of the Criminal Code is
to codify what in
Woolmington
was described as “the golden
thread”, namely that it is for the prosecution to prove the guilt of the
person charged
beyond reasonable doubt. Subsection 13.2(2) of the Criminal
Code recognises that this general position may be subject to express
The offence of prejudicial conduct contrary to s 60 of the DFDA offers, in
s 60(3), an example of an express exception.
The note to that subsection
correctly recites that its effect is to place the legal burden, as described in
s 13.4 of the Criminal
Code, on the person charged. So it does in respect of
the defence found in s 60(3) of the DFDA.
reasons set out below, even in relation to the prejudicial conduct charges,
absence of access authority was an element the proof
of which fell on the
prosecution. It was only in respect of the defence of a reasonable excuse under
s 60(3), for example, a belief
that the access was authorised, that any legal
burden fell on WO2 Randall in relation to the prejudicial conduct charges
Criminal Code — Effect of other provisions of Chapter
taxonomy apparent in Chapter 2 of the Criminal Code which characterises the
elements of offences created by that code into physical
and fault elements has a
superficial, attractive simplicity which, in practice, has admitted of
difficulties of characterisation.
In the service discipline context, this is
illustrated by the disparate views as to the offence elements concerned, evident
stages in the proceedings which culminated in the High Court in
v Chief of Army
(2013) 250 CLR 328
[2013] HCA 49
We gratefully
adopt the summary of the general effect of the other provisions of Chapter 2 of
the Criminal Code offered by the High
at 337-338 [19]-[22]
(French CJ, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and Gageler JJ):
DFDA applies Ch 2 of the
Criminal Code
(Cth) to all of the service
offences it creates [s 10 of the DFDA]. The relevant effect of Ch 2 of the
Criminal Code
so applying can be summarised as follows.
establish guilt of a service offence, the prosecution must prove each physical
element of the offence as well as a fault element
for each physical element [s
3.2 of the Criminal Code]. A particular physical element may be: conduct (which
may itself be an act,
an omission to perform an act or a state of affairs); or a
result of conduct; or a circumstance in which conduct, or a result of
occurs [s 4.1 of the Criminal Code]. A fault element for a particular physical
element may be: intention; or knowledge;
or recklessness; or negligence [5.1 of
the Criminal Code].
fault element for a physical element that consists only of conduct is intention
[s 5.6(1) of the Criminal Code]. A person has
intention with respect to conduct
if the person means to engage in that conduct [s 5.2(1) of the Criminal Code].
fault element for a physical element that consists of a circumstance or a result
is recklessness [s 5.6(2) of the Criminal Code],
although proof of intention
will also satisfy that fault element [s 5.4(4) of the Criminal Code]. A person
has intention with respect
to a circumstance if the person believes that the
circumstance exists or will exist [s 5.2(2) of the Criminal Code], and has
with respect to a result if the person means to bring that result
events [s 5.2(3)
of the Criminal Code]. A person is reckless with respect to a circumstance or a
result if the person is aware of
a substantial risk that the circumstance exists
or will exist, or that the result will occur, and, having regard to the
circumstances
known to the person, it is unjustifiable to take that risk
[ss 5.4(1), (2) of the Criminal Code].
(Footnote references
incorporated.)
to the charges of unauthorised access to restricted data contrary to s 478.1(1)
of the Criminal Code and in terms of the physical
element/fault element taxonomy
summarised in the passage quoted from
, each offence charged consisted
of a physical element (causing unauthorised access to restricted data) and
two fault elements (an
intention to cause that access and knowledge that the
access was unauthorised). The legal burden of proving each of these elements
beyond reasonable doubt fell on the prosecution. It was not incumbent on
WO2 Randall to prove that his access was authorised. Rather,
in the proof
of the physical element of this offence, it was incumbent on the prosecution to
prove not only that he caused access
to (or modified) restricted data but that
that access (or modification) was unauthorised.
s 60(1) of the DFDA creates an offence of strict liability, the effect of s
6.1(1)(a) of the Criminal Code is that there are
no fault elements for any of
the physical elements of that offence. However, the existence of strict
liability does not make defences
unavailable: ss 6.1(2), 6.1(3) of the
Criminal Code.
physical element of the prejudicial conduct charge was, necessarily, identical
to the physical element of the charge alleging
an offence against s 478.1 of the
Criminal Code namely, causing unauthorised access to (or modification of)
restricted data. Causing
access (or modification) could
hardly be said to be prejudicial conduct. On this analysis, it was, in respect
of the prejudicial
conduct charge, likewise incumbent on the prosecution to
prove an absence of authority beyond reasonable doubt. Because the prejudicial
conduct charge was one of strict liability, the prosecution did not additionally
have the legal burden of proving any fault element
for the physical element of
the offence, for example, that WO2 Randall knew that the access was
unauthorised.
context, a defence to the prejudicial conduct charge would necessarily be that
WO2 Randall reasonably thought
that the conduct concerned was
authorised; that he had at least tacit approval. That would amount to a
reasonable excuse in terms
of s 60(3) of the DFDA. In respect of the
prejudicial conduct charges, the judge advocate summed up (see, for example,
transcript,
p 2370) on the basis that this would amount to a “statutory
defence”. WO2 Randall’s evidence certainly raised
a reasonable
excuse for access defence in relation to the prejudicial conduct
The central issue
was submitted on WO2 Randall’s behalf that the central issue on the appeal
was whether, on the whole of the evidence, the
prosecution had proved beyond
reasonable doubt that he lacked authority to access the email accounts as
particularised. As a general
proposition and in relation to the unauthorised
access (or modification) charges, this is borne out by an analysis of the
led at trial and the verdicts returned by the panel. For the reasons
given above, it is also, in our view, the central issue in
respect of the
prejudicial conduct charge convictions.
aside the conviction in respect of the prejudicial conduct alternative to
Charge 8, which looks to be a special case, the
charges upon which the
panel has convicted WO2 Randall are those where access was either conceded
by WO2 Randall or readily to be
inferred from his concessions. The
panel’s acquittals are readily explicable on the basis of an absence of
concession as to
access and the existence of a doubt, based on a concern held by
the panel about the reliability of the expert evidence that CAPT
Peter Martin
Kimberly gave on the subject of access. Concessions by CAPT Kimberley in the
course of evidence which he gave on a
, his possible partiality
and the unreliability of some of the raw data in relation to network access had,
in combination, earlier
been responsible for the prosecution’s decision
not to proceed with certain charges. If the panel were persuaded beyond
doubt that the access was unauthorised, it was no great step, in
light of the evidence as to WO2 Randall’s knowledge and experience,
to be likewise persuaded, for the purposes of s 478.1, that the access was
intentional and known not to have been authorised.
in relation to the charges of unauthorised access (or modification) contrary to
s 478.1 of the Criminal Code, whether want of
authority was proved beyond
reasonable doubt by the prosecution was indeed critical. As to the alternative
prejudicial conduct charges,
and assuming the legal burden fell on the
prosecution, it was the same body of evidence as to authority which was
to formal orders and instructions, the judge advocate put this to the panel
(transcript, p 2352):
It is common ground that the relevant provisions of the
Defence Security Manual do apply, together with DI(G) CIS 6-1-001, Appropriate
and Inappropriate Use of Information and Communications Technology Resources,
exhibit 68. The [DSM] and the DI(G) have the force
of general orders. It is also
common ground that JTF 633 Standing Instruction OPS 06-11, DLAN User Policy,
exhibit 65, and JTF 633
Standing Instruction OPS 06-09, Network Access Policy,
exhibit 66, also applied. The lawfulness of such orders and instructions,
proper construction and the way in which such directions might stand with one
another, are matters of law where you are bound
To assist the understanding of the reader, we set out below an explanation,
derived from the evidence, of the service acronyms used
in this passage and
which have not earlier been identified:
means “Defence Instructions (General)”, as made jointly by the Chief
of the Defence Force and the
Secretary to the Defence Department under the
Defence Act 1903
means “Defence Security Manual”; and
means “Deployable Local Area Network”.
the subject of authorisation, the judge advocate further directed the panel
(transcript, p 2355):
On the basis of the orders and instructions applying
here, the prosecution must prove:
(a) that WO2 Randall had no legitimate need to know in connection with the
access in question; and
(b) that the access or modification was not sanctioned by a policy, duty
statement or directive.
This, in turn, requires proof that any access or modification was not for
security compliance and maintenance purposes and did not
otherwise fall within
the scope of WO2 Randall’s duty statement. You will recall that the latter
specifically provided responsibility
for provision of advice for classified
information systems and deployable local area
judge advocate added, accurately on the evidence, that “WO2 Randall has
consistently maintained that he considered that
any access made by him was
authorised by his position and duties”.
, Chapter 2.60, of the Defence Security Manual (“the DSM”),
appeared at Exhibit 85. Paragraph 60.41 provided, under the
“Access to Information and Security-Protected Assets”, the
Access to information and security protected assets is
based on a need to know and a need to restrict to authorised people only. Access
is unauthorised if it is not based on a legitimate need to know or sanctioned by
a policy duty statement or directive.
This was the source of the “need to know” principle referred to in
the court martial proceedings. There was no issue
at the trial that each of the
networks mentioned in the charges, the Deployed Defence Secret Network
(“DDSN”) and the
Deployed Defence Restricted Network
(“DDRN”), the computers which served those networks, and the
information on those
computers, were “Information and Security Protected
Assets” within the terms of the DSM and a “Commonwealth computer
system” as pleaded in the charges. Nor was it in issue and the
evidence was that the computers on these networks housed “restricted
data” for the purposes of s 478.1 of the Criminal Code. What was in
issue and for the prosecution to prove was that WO2 Randall
legitimate “need to know”
that access (or modification)
was not sanctioned by a “policy, duty statement or directive”; in
others words, that the
access (or modification) charged was
unauthorised.
party sought to make anything of the Defence Instructions (General) (“the
DI(G)”) (Exhibit 68) mentioned in the
judge advocate’s summing up.
It appears to be directed to the subject of the terms on which personnel are
permitted personal
(as opposed to duty) access to Defence Department computer
networks and what is appropriate and inappropriate personal access. It
specify the limits of access to such networks associated with the position
within the FCU to which WO2 Randall was posted.
It is not necessary further to
consider the DI(G).
under the DSM and DI(G), as apparent from the explicit reference to them in each
document, are the JTF 633 Standing Instruction
OPS06-11, DLAN User Policy
(Exhibit 65), and the JTF 633 Standing Instruction OPS 06-09, Network
Access Policy (Exhibit 66). These
do give particularity to the role of the
appointment held by WO2 Randall and related access rights and limits.
65 received particular prominence in the course of submissions on the appeal.
It was also a restricted exhibit in the court
martial proceeding.
For these reasons, it is necessary to set out and consider this
instruction’s contents and application,
as well as the authority it
conferred, in some detail but to do so in a way which respects the existing
restriction.
instruction expressly (at paragraph 4) applied to both networks, the DDSN and
the DDRN. It identified (at paragraph 6) a hierarchy
or level of user within the
MEAO. There were three levels:
A general user of JTF633 ICT systems who has basic access granted
after an approved Network Access Request (“NAR”) has
Administrator (SA)
. A System User who has been granted administrator
privileges by virtue of their employment within TG 633.14. The roles and
responsibilities
of the SA are detailed in annex A.
Manager (SM)
. The SM is the senior SA within TG 633.14 and would normally
be the Information System Engineer (ISE) or the Information Systems
(ISM). The SM is responsible for obtaining and maintaining security
accreditation of the Commander Joint Operations Command
(CJOPS) force assigned
networks. The roles and responsibilities for the SM are detailed in annex
“ICT” is yet another service acronym. On the evidence, it means
Australian “Information Communication and Technology”.
parlance, a Defence Department computer connected to either or each of the two
networks mentioned would be an “ICT
to his “Army Other Ranks Performance Appraisal Report” of 25 April
2014 (Exhibit 73), WO2 Randall’s employment
category within the FCU
was “Information Systems”. The evidence was that, within this
employment category and while
posted to the FCU, WO2 Randall, acting as a
WO1, simultaneously undertook the roles of Information System Engineer
and Information System Manager (“ISM”). He was
also the Information System Security Officer. In terms of the hierarchy
users described in Exhibit 65, he was both a “System Administrator”
and a “System Manager”. In undertaking
these roles, he was what
CAPT Kimberly described in evidence as a “Domino administrator”.
CAPT Kimberley described (ibid)
the access rights of a “Domino
administrator” in this way:
[A] Domino administrator has the ability to open any
mailbox they choose on the server they are connected to. And, in some cases in
theatre, as was explained yesterday, they could also access mailbox between
locations as well.
JTF 633 Standing Instruction, which was Exhibit 65, specified (at paragraph 8)
the following over-arching objective for the computers,
networks and other
information systems operated by JTF 633:
JTF 633 provides computer devices, networks and other
electronic information systems to assist in meeting its mission objectives.
meet these objectives JTF 633 must manage these resources responsibly to
maintain the confidentiality, integrity and availability
of its information.
This policy requires the users of information assets to comply with departmental
policies and protect Defence
and Government against potentially damaging
reputational and legal issues.
Read in context, where, in this instruction, the words, “manage”
or “management” are used, they necessarily
refer to the management
of the JTF 633 resources mentioned in this paragraph to the end of maintaining
“the confidentiality,
integrity and availability of its
information”.
his capacity as a “System Administrator”, WO2 Randall was bound by
and had the roles and responsibilities specified
in Annex A to the instruction
which is Exhibit 65. Materially, this annex emphasised in its introduction the
need for strict adherence
to specified administration processes in order to
ensure the deployable ICT systems in the MEAO performed at an optimal level to
support the operational scheme of manoeuvre. It also offered the guidance that
a System Administrator should have completed “Deployable
Operating Environment (DSEO) training”.
there was no evidence as to the formal content of “Deployable Standard
Operating Environment (DSEO) training”,
there was evidence, as will be
seen, of what, in practice, were the necessary administrative processes for
someone in WO2 Randall’s
position in order to “support the
operational scheme of manoeuvre”. It was common ground between the
parties that, although
WO2 Randall had not undertaken that course, in so
far as the course was intended to ensure that System Administrators had the
background knowledge to undertake that role, there was no deficit in
WO2 Randall’s knowledge.
A recognised that System Administrators required a privileged level of network
access but did not detail the nature and extent
of this permitted access.
Rather, it specified the types of accounts which System Administrators were to
maintain. Consistent with
the sentiments in its introduction, Annex A
reiterated in its closing summary that deployable ICT systems in the MEAO were a
operational capability that required careful management and
administration.
that WO2 Randall was also a “System Manager” for the purposes of
standing instruction which constituted Exhibit
65, Annex B to that
instruction was also applicable to his role. Materially, this annex:
(a) emphasised the critical nature of the
provision of secure and reliable ICT services to the command and control of
deployed ADF
(b) highlighted the importance of management and maintenance of equipment to
ensure that it was up-to-date; and
(c) made reference to privacy rights when personnel accessed Defence ICT systems
but emphasised that users did not have a right to
total anonymity.
position which emerges from this instruction is that the administration and
management of deployed ICT systems and related assets
to the end of supporting
operations was the core responsibility of a System Manager such as WO2 Randall.
It was this end which governed
the nature and extent of permitted access. For
that purpose, a person so posted was given sweeping access privileges to network
accounts. That was corroborated by CAPT Kimberley’s evidence as to the
rights enjoyed by a “Domino administrator”.
These included an
ability to access personal email accounts on the networks for the purpose of
discharging that responsibility.
The existence of those rights explains why
Annex B to Exhibit 65 stated (at paragraph 21) that, while users’ rights
are “maintained”, “users do not have a right to
total anonymity”.
Chief of Army submitted that a limitation in those access privileges was to be
found in paragraph 27 of Exhibit 65. That is true
only in respect of personal,
as opposed to duty-related, access when that paragraph is read in context.
Paragraph 27 provides:
An effective test of “inappropriate” use is
not a personal test. Rather, ask yourself would you be comfortable discussing
the type of use with your supervisor, Commanding Officer, CJTF633, or the Chief
of the Defence Force. If you have any concerns,
then the usage is very probably
inappropriate and must not be conducted. Detailed guidance on appropriate use
can be found in ref
24 to 27 of this instruction are directed to the terms on which members are
granted access to the JTF 633 provided internet
services for personal use. Read
in context, paragraph 27 makes it plain that the list of prohibited,
personal use purposes specified
in paragraph 26 is not exhaustive. It imposes
an overarching touchstone in respect of personal use by a member. It may be
that paragraph 27 of this instruction identifies types of usage which
would be inappropriate unless otherwise authorised (because
that usage fell
within the duties of a particular appointment) but it has nothing at all to say
privileges of a member when
undertaking the duties of a System Manager.
the rights of access (and modification) which WO2 Randall enjoyed, by
virtue of the position which he held, the evidence led
by the prosecution from
the holders of the various personal accounts as to their not having given him
permission to access those
accounts was never, even if accepted in full by the
panel, sufficient to prove absence of authority beyond reasonable doubt.
66, the JTF 633 Standing Instruction OPS 06-09, Network Access Policy, applied
to all personnel deployed to the MEAO. It
provided direction on access to the
DDSN and DDRN by such personnel (at paragraph 4). The “MEAO Network
Access Request Form”,
which appeared at Annex A of the standing
instruction, required an applicant, under the heading “Part C –
Applicant Declaration”,
to acknowledge, in relation to both networks, that
he or she was “aware that the Chief Information Officer Group (CIOG) and
local CIS [Communications and Information Systems] staff may access any
information stored on the system for administrative purposes
investigat[ion] of any security issues.”
question arose as to the scope of the word “administrative” in
Exhibit 66. Counsel for the respondent drew on evidence
from the appellant at
trial to submit that the term should be confined to tasks related to the
appellant’s roles as an ISE
and ISSO as they pertain to system management;
it should not be read as encompassing other aspects of his job or personal
administration.
Paragraph 11 of Exhibit 65 was also said by the
respondent to give some content to the term “administrative”. That
paragraph provided: “For security, compliance and maintenance purposes
authorised personnel monitor equipment, systems and
network traffic. Breaches
will be referred to the chain of command, Defence investigative authorities or
the Australian Federal
Police as appropriate.” It was agreed between the
parties that, at the relevant times, WO2 Randall fitted within the
description
of “authorised personnel”. It may be observed, however,
that Exhibit 66 is directed more to what a user of the networks
rather than to the duties and authorisation of a person in
WO2 Randall’s position.
terms of documentary evidence, greater particularity as to the duties undertaken
by WO2 Randall when posted to the FCU was provided
by the duty statement
which formed part of Exhibit 73. In that document, his duties were specified as
the following:
in the production of all CIS Operational Orders, Directives and
Instructions.
of advice for Classified Information Systems and Deployable Local Area
of UNCLAS Amenities Internet Access across the MEAO.
with external agencies on Information Systems Issues.
meetings and teleconferences with BAE wrt FCU Sharepoint issues.
direction and advice on Information systems to Squadron Communications Control
Information Systems projects and implementations.
other tasks assigned by the OPSO.
Within this duty statement, we understand that the meaning of the service
abbreviations used is as follows:
means “with respect to”;
means “Classified Information Systems”;
means “Operations Officer”; and
means “Unclassified”.
The express reference in this duty statement to “BAE” and to
“SharePoint” will be noted. It is also a feature
of these specified
duties that they are broadly stated (especially paragraph 7) and ultimately
open-ended (having regard to paragraph
Nominally, this duty
statement has a limited duration but in context it appears to be descriptive of
WO2 Randall’s duties while
posted to the FCU.
Randall was also the Information System Security Officer (“the
ISSO”). The duties of a person in this role were detailed
in Exhibit 84,
the Defence Security Manual, Part 2.6 Security Officer, at Annex
Information System Security Officer
support of a system owner, Information System Security Officers (ISSO) may be
required to carry out the following duties:
and maintain network security in accordance with the Defence Security Manual
system-specific standard operating procedures;
Maintain a system-specific security register;
advice and briefings to that system owner and to commanders and managers on ways
in which network security could be enhanced;
administrative tasks in support of network security and the application of
Defence security policies and standards as required;
network security incident response if instructed by Defence Investigative
Authorities (for further information see DSM Part
2:12 Security Incidents and
Investigations);
with the accreditation authority and other information system security
organisations within Defence, other ISSOs, Information
System Security Liaison
Officers (ISSLO), and security officers on matters related to network security;
post-accreditation activities as required by the DSM, system-specific
instructions and the Australian Government Information
and Communications
Technology Manual (ISM), including ongoing testing for vulnerabilities.
pithy way of describing the position occupied by WO2 Randall within the FCU was
offered in evidence (transcript, p 1745) by a peer
of commensurate experience,
WO1 Wright, in expressing his agreement with the proposition that WO2 Randall
was “the top of the
pile, so to speak, in terms of the technical chain of
command”. WO1 Wright was familiar both with the duties undertaken in
practice on deployment by a member posted to this position as well as with the
particular skills and repute of WO2 Randall. As to
WO2 Randall’s
skills and repute, WO1 Wright was asked to assess his level of knowledge of
policy during the period in 2009
in which he was deployed in the United Arab
Emirates and the appellant was deployed in Afghanistan. WO1 Wright offered
(transcript, p 1739) in his evidence in chief:
WO2 Randall is held in high regard and there’s
probably two things that I can say that he is probably very good at, from my
opinion, is policy and the other one is Lotus Notes as well
. So I would
defer on occasions to his knowledge because I believe he’s got a very good
understanding of that.
(Emphasis added.)
Significantly,
the evidence was that each of the networks (the DDRN and DDSN) in the theatre of
operations to which WO2 Randall was
deployed had Lotus Notes databases.
The evidence also was that, for the purpose of discharging the duties of
the position to which
he was posted, he was entitled to access all Lotus Notes
in the charges.
asked in examination-in-chief (transcript, p 1739) to detail the tasks on
deployment of an Information System Manager, WO1 Wright
Look, to list the set of tasks, accreditation is high on
one of those tasks, you know, maintenance, monitoring, performance, auditing.
could go through security. I guess you advise policy, advise officers on
technology. Some of the tasks that you do is development,
so new technology. You
provide advice. And improvements to the network would be something that
you’d be responsible for as
well. That’s a list but essentially
you could say anything to do with computers is the remit of the ISE and the
demarcation would be the router, all the way to the user,
or the computer. So
anything that belongs in that space and has a remit is your responsibility. So
it’s pretty wide and pretty
broad and there’s a lot of sort of
knowledge to be had to sort of be across it all.
(Emphasis added.)
will be noticed that WO1 Wright used the abbreviation ISE (“Information
Systems Engineer”) in this answer. Immediately
after giving that answer,
the prosecutor specifically asked him (transcript, p 1739) about the tasks of an
ISE, to which he replied:
I’m going to say the same but at a higher level. I
know it’s probably not the answer but the - I guess you get a broader
requirement. You look after more servers and you may step away from some of the
- and may go more into policy, would be my characterisation
WO1 Wright’s view (transcript, p 1740), the tasks of Information System
Manager and Information System Engineer were not
mutually exclusive.
his evidence in chief, WO1 Wright also confirmed (transcript, pp 1741-1742) that
the duties of an Information System Manager included
a number of tasks, amongst
which were:
planning and
managing the implementation of Information Systems (“IS”) networks,
domains, to assist the commander in meeting
his intent;
managing an IS
node in order to provide integrated information systems support to command;
managing IS
networks and domains within the tactical environment;
interpreting
data-routing requirements and providing solutions to enable routing of data
around the battlespace;
providing advice
on and managing all security aspects of IS and data protection;
maintenance of IS for the purpose of assuring system accreditation;
threat risk assessments on local systems for the purpose of assuring system
accreditation;
managing the
conduct of trials or tests of equipment configuration at all levels; and
acting as a
communications duty officer.
relation to an ISE, WO1 Wright confirmed (transcript, pp 1741-1742) that
the duties of the holder of that position included:
designing and managing an integrated IS network to support the command and
control of subordinate units and headquarters
formations;
acting as an
equipment fleet manager for equipment controlled;
planning future
data communications and migration plans;
interpreting the
detailed plans, policies and doctrines for the deployment, employment and
management of varied IS devices;
employed IS for possible security breaches and implementing security measures to
ensure an integrated security approach
across the battlespace;
planning and
managing the implementation of IS networks/domains to assist the commander in
meeting his or her intent;
acting as the
subject-matter expert in the operations group in his or her role as the manager
of command support systems;
liaising with
strategic defence planners for the integration of tactical and operational
preparing and
delivering technical orders for IS equipment configuration and deployment;
faulty complex systems or designing communication systems for implementing
formation moves;
classified electronic media;
liaising with
national and foreign service personnel in order to develop interoperable
systems, communications and foster cooperation;
maintaining the
confidentiality, integrity and availability of IS applications and data through
passive and active computer network
defence measures; and
instructing and
counselling trainees, managing instructors and administering training.
of this evidence was challenged in the cross-examination by the defence of
WO1 Wright. In the course of that cross-examination,
this exchange
occurred (transcript, p 1746) between the Defending Officer and him in
relation to WO2 Randall:
Is that, to your knowledge, his reputation more widely
within the signals community? — So most of my peers would probably
that - within our trade there are certain people that are good at certain
things. Some people specialise in Cisco. Some people
specialise in VoIP. WO2
Randall is very professional, a consummate professional, and
I would say his
speciality is probably both Lotus Notes and policy. He’s deployed on
numerous occasions and has done it more
times than anybody I know. So if I have
a question about it, I would ask him.
(Emphasis added.)
Once again, the explicit reference to “Lotus Notes” will be
to whether, either as a System Administrator or System Manager, his
understanding was that advance permission from the account
holder was needed on
deployment to access a personal account on a network, WO1 Wright cited multiple
examples as to circumstances
when access without such permission might occur.
There was some exploration of this in reexamination with the essence of that
found in this passage (see transcript, p 1760):
The examples you gave, what they are conducting - what
is that hypothetical system administrator doing? — So the primary goal
a system administrator in this instance is to make the system run at its peak
performance, to ensure that it’s maintained
- predominantly maintained and
that operational effectiveness of the system is of the highest order.
They’re the three sort[s]
of mandates that I think I have, or an ISE has,
to that system. If you’re not doing it with those three things in mind,
I suggest, you’re probably doing something wrong, if there’s a
nefarious thing.
prosecution led no evidence that any of the access events in respect of which a
conviction was recorded by the panel fell outside
mandates” to which WO1 Wright referred. Certainly in respect of the
unauthorised access (or modification)
charges, and also, in our view, in respect
of the prejudicial conduct charges, the legal burden of so doing so as to prove
reasonable doubt want of authority fell on the prosecution. It was never
up to WO2 Randall to prove that any conceded access fell
within these
“mandates”. At most, the prosecution could point to evidence given
in respect of some of the charges of
so-called apologies by WO2 Randall.
We deal with these below.
that its own case contained evidence that access to (or modification of) a
personal email account could permissibly occur without
the approval of the
holder of that email account, it was never sufficient for the prosecution to
prove that the account holder had
not given WO2 Randall permission to
access (or modify) his or her personal email account. The respondent’s
description in
submissions of the evidence of the personal account holders as
“competing evidence” to that of WO2 Randall utterly misapprehends
this feature of the prosecution evidence and the legal burden which fell on it
in relation to lack of access (or modification) authority.
it raises the distinct and reasonable possibility that, in respect of the
prejudicial conduct charge convictions the panel
thought that the negation of
the existence of a reasonable excuse was nothing more than a matter of
preferring the evidence of the
personal account holders over that of WO2
Randall. For reasons already given in relation to what was present in the
prosecution’s
own evidentiary case, it was never so confined.
same misapprehension by the prosecution and possibility are evident, for
example, in the reference in the written submissions
on appeal in respect of
Charges 4, 5 and 6 (relating to Lieutenant (“LEUT”) Jagiello), to
“his computers”
and “his email accounts”.
The prosecution’s own evidence was that these computers were
“ICT assets”
owned by the Commonwealth of Australia, not by an
individual member, and that no member permitted to have a personal account on
networks had exclusive dominion over that account. That is an apt note upon
which to consider the position in relation to particular
convictions against the
background of the evidence as to authority.
Charges 4, 5 and 6
charges relate to an alleged accessing without authority of LEUT
Jagiello’s DDSN account on 28 May 2014 at 0539 hours
(Charge 4) and on 30
May 2014 at 0719 hours (Charge 5) and of his DDRN account on 28 May 2014 at
1010 hours (Charge 6). WO2 Randall
gave evidence that he was not sure what
the access to the account on 30 May 2014 involved but that it “would have
work related”; he thought it may have had to do with
LEUT Jagiello’s SameTime instant messaging. Each of the emails
accessed on 28 May 2014 related to the SharePoint project. The SharePoint
project, it will be recalled, fell expressly within WO2
duties. LEUT Jagiello was but one of the addressees to these emails.
WO2 Randall was not an addressee. LEUT Jagiello
gave evidence that, in the
past, WO2 Randall had been afforded access by LEUT Jagiello to emails
concerning SharePoint which he had
received. This had occurred by LEUT Jagiello
forwarding the emails to WO2 Randall. Where they differed was whether
express permission
had been given in respect of the accessing of these emails.
WO2 Randall’s evidence was that he had been told by
LEUT Jagiello
of his receipt of these emails, expressed an interest in
reading them and been told that they were in his (LEUT Jagiello’s)
His evidence was that their further conversation on this subject had been
interrupted but that, based on past practice, he
thought that he had approval
from LEUT Jagiello. His further evidence was that, in any event, he had
responsibilities in relation
to configuring and managing SharePoint on the JTF
633 systems and related dealings with BAE Systems.
“apology” in respect of access to these emails which LEUT Jagiello
related as having been given to him by WO2 Randall
was, at best, equivocal and
included, on LEUT Jagiello’s own account given at trial (transcript, p
91), this passage:
These are the words that he was using?— ... He
said, “I know I needed to access them. I should have asked you
beforehand,”
because - we had a good peer-to-peer relationship, so if he
asked me specifically for an email I would forward it to him.
Had you done that in the past?—Yes, I had, in the
may be accepted that access to these emails was either expressly or implicitly
conceded by WO2 Randall. What was never conceded
was want of authority.
respect of WO2 Randall’s duties and access rights, acceptance of LEUT
Jagiello’s evidence by the panel was never, in
itself, determinative of a
want of authority. Contrary to the respondent’s submission, it was not
the case in respect of these
charges that the panel’s verdict was nothing
more than a preference by the panel for LEUT Jagiello’s evidence over that
of WO2 Randall. The disposition of these charges cannot be explained by an
advantage enjoyed by the panel in seeing and hearing
these two witnesses. Even
if the panel rejected WO2 Randall’s evidence, there remained LEUT
Jagiello’s evidence as to
WO2 Randall’s assertion of a “need
to know” and, in any event, an apparent “need to know” on his
arising from the prosecution’s other documentary and oral evidence,
described above, as to the breadth of WO2 Randall’s
duties (which
expressly included duties in relation to SharePoint and BAE Systems)
access rights. Further, there was nothing in this additional evidence which
expressly proved that LEUT Jagiello’s permission
was needed in order
for WO2 Randall to access official emails addressed to LEUT Jagiello, as opposed
to his personal emails. The
emails in question were duty-related, not
personal. The prosecution’s other oral evidence (from WO1 Wright) and its
documentary
evidence contained no such qualification. Further, to the
extent that LEUT Jagiello’s evidence went to WO2 Randall’s
belief as to the existence of some need to obtain permission, that belief was
never evidence that such a requirement truly existed,
having regard to the terms
of the manuals, instructions and duty statements and practices on deployment,
which also formed part of
the prosecution case.
this additional evidence is taken into account, the result, in our view, is
that, on the whole of the evidence, it was unreasonable
to conclude that absence
of authority was proved beyond reasonable doubt. There exists the significant
possibility that an innocent
man has been convicted in circumstances which
cannot be explained by an advantage enjoyed by the panel. That being so, these
convictions
must be quashed.
primary charge in this instance was an alleged breach of s 478.1 of the Criminal
Code. That charge, as particularised, was as
Unauthorised access to restricted data
Being a defence member in Al Minhad Air Base, United Arab Emirates, on 05 May
2014, did intentionally cause unauthorised access to
restricted data held in a
Commonwealth computer, knowing that the access was unauthorised, by accessing
the email account of CAPT
Ami Hansen on the ADF Deployed Defence Secret
Particulars
05 May 2014 at about 1049h, WO1 Randall accessed the Lotus Notes email account
of CAPT Ami Hansen, titled
(“the email
email account was held on a Commonwealth computer system, and had been
restricted in its accessibility by way of an access control
system associated
with a function of the computer, namely a username and password for access to
the computer network, as well as
system-based restrictions that limited who
could open email accounts to the relevant user, system administrators and
specifically
authorised personnel.
Randall used his administrator privileges to access the email account without
authorisation.
The panel acquitted WO2 Randall in respect of this primary
is, with all respect to the panel members, distinctly odd to have acquitted WO2
Randall in relation to the primary charge and yet
convicted him in respect of
the alternative, prejudicial conduct charge. As to the physical element, the
conduct alleged to constitute
prejudicial conduct, unauthorised access, was the
same as that particularised in respect of the alleged breach of s 478.1 of the
Criminal Code. The primary charge contained fault elements whereas the
alternative prejudicial conduct charge did not. In theory,
the panel might have
been satisfied in each instance that the physical element of unauthorised access
was proved beyond reasonable
doubt, not so satisfied in respect of the fault
elements in relation to the s 478.1 of the Criminal Code charge, but not
on the balance of probabilities that WO2 Randall had a reasonable
excuse for access under s 60(3) of the DFDA. However, given that
the first of
the Hansen emails, which was accessed on 5 May 2014, concerned an update of
SharePoint “look and feel”,
such a reconciliation is untenable in
light of the prosecution’s documentary and oral evidence (described above)
nature and extent on deployment of WO2 Randall’s duties,
which expressly included SharePoint responsibilities. The panel could
been satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant’s purpose in
accessing LEUT Hansen’s email account
on 5 May 2014 was not in order to
perform duties in relation to SharePoint, a reasonable hypothesis consistent
with his innocence.
8 and its alternative were the only charges where the fact of WO2
Randall’s access to the subject email account was not
expressly conceded
by him or readily inferred from his concessions. He had no recollection of
accessing the email account. But
there was evidence, independent of CAPT
Kimberley’s evidence, that WO2 Randall had accessed
LEUT (the reference to her rank
as CAPT in the charges is an error of
no moment) Hansen’s email account on 5 May 2015 at 1049 hours. So much
was accepted
by WO2 Randall in his submissions on the appeal. His
submissions focussed on the want of proof of absence of authority.
the emails accessed and copied, as already noted, the first one was in respect
of SharePoint. At or about the same time, also
accessed was an exchange of
emails concerning LEUT Ami Hansen’s participation in 2013 in a
visit by a party of Australian service
personnel to a United States warship, USS
Boxer. WO2 Randall’s evidence was that he had no recollection of
effecting this
access but assumed from the SharePoint topic that he had needed
to access that email and that he must have been requested to access
Boxer emails by someone. He readily accepted in his evidence that the USS Boxer
exchange was of no interest to him either
personally or professionally. There
was no other evidence at all which would suggest that he had any personal reason
for wanting
to access the emails related to the USS Boxer visit.
like reasons to those which we have given in respect of Charges 4, 5 and 6,
LEUT Hansen’s evidence as to an absence of permission
never a sufficient proof of want of authority. Also for like reasons, when one
takes into account the other documentary
and oral evidence led by the
prosecution as to the nature and extent of WO2 Randall’s duties and
access rights on deployment,
it was, in our view, on the whole of the evidence,
unreasonable to conclude that absence of authority was proved beyond reasonable
doubt. The very incongruity of accessing the SharePoint-related email for
which, in light of its subject, there was an obvious reason
prosecution’s own evidence and, at or about the same time, accessing the
USS Boxer emails for purportedly non-official
purposes, raised an
interrogative note which was never negatived by the prosecution in terms of
proof of want of authority.
Charges 12 and 13
two charges are best considered in conjunction with Charges 9, 10 and 11. That
is because each related to CAPT Healy’s
deployed email accounts. Charges
9, 10, 11 and 12 related, respectively, to her DDSN account on 17 April 2014 at
19 May 2014 at about 1316 hours, 3 June 2014 at about 1207
hours and 8 June 2014 at about 1253 hours. Charge 13 related to her
account on 8 June 2014 at about 1257 hours.
panel acquitted WO2 Randall in respect of Charges 9, 10 and 11. One possible
explanation for that is that they were not satisfied
that his accessing of the
account concerned as alleged was proved beyond reasonable doubt. On these
charges, in evidence, WO2 Randall
expressly conceded access only in respect
of the occasions alleged in Charges 12 and 13. So the verdicts of
acquittal and conviction
are not necessarily inconsistent and WO2 Randall did
not seek to overturn these convictions on this basis.
Randall’s explanation for accessing the emails was that he undertook this
in order to ascertain the meaning of a particular
military acronym otherwise
unfamiliar to him in order to complete a situation report (“SITREP”)
for Headquarters, Joint
Operations Command (“JOC”). That he had
such a purpose could not, in light of s 476.2(2) of the Criminal Code, be
as inconsistent with the existence of authorisation.
again, CAPT Melissa Healy’s evidence as to an absence of having given
personal access permission to WO2 Randall was never
in itself sufficient to
prove absence of access authority in respect of these two charges. Nor was her
evidence of an “apology”
by WO2 Randall, which really amounted
to nothing more than a confession of access. The prosecution never expressly
proved that the
nature and extent of the duties and access rights of an ISE (or
System Manager, if that be any different) did not extend to the preparation
SITREP or to accessing the network for purposes related to that preparation.
The documentary evidence (Exhibit 65) and oral
evidence (given by WO1 Wright)
was at least consistent with the existence of such a duty and related access
respondent submitted that the panel was entitled to use service knowledge in
order to conclude that, in conjunction with CAPT
Healy’s evidence, want of
authority had been proved beyond reasonable doubt as completing a SITREP may
well have been part
of the appellant’s general staff responsibilities but
was not an aspect of his specific roles as the ISE or ISSO. No case
authority was cited for this proposition. The point raised is nonetheless an
important one in relation to service discipline law
generally and warrants
detailed consideration. Further, observations which we make on this
subject are applicable not just to Charges
12 and 13 but to each of the charges
upon which a conviction was recorded.
relation to the use of service knowledge by a court martial panel, s 147 of
the DFDA materially provides:
147 Judicial notice of service matters
(1) In addition to the matters of which judicial notice may be taken by a court
under the rules of evidence referred to in section
146, a court martial ...
shall take judicial notice of all matters within the general service knowledge
of the tribunal or of its
provision has a very lengthy provenance in service discipline law. It may be
traced back at least to the rules of procedure
made under the
(UK), 44 & 45 Vict, c 58. Those rules were revised or remade from
time to time as occasion was thought fit as a result of amendments
to that Act.
Rule 74 of the
Rules of Procedure 1907
(UK) made under that Act
court may take judicial notice of all matters of notoriety,
including all
matters within their general military knowledge.
(Emphasis added.)
In the British
Manual of Military Law
(1907, War Office) the
commentary in respect of rule 74 includes the following at Chapter VI, p
58, paragraph 10:
Thus, evidence need not be given as to the relative rank
of officers,
as to the general duties, authorities, and obligations of
different members of the service
, or generally as to any matters which an
officer, as such, may reasonably be expected to know (a). Nor, again, would it
be necessary
to prove that an important battle was fought on the 18th of June,
(Emphasis added.)
As is not uncommon in this work, no authority is cited for this commentary.
1941 Australian edition of the
Manual of Military Law
(1941, Military
Board) repeated, without qualification, the British commentary in respect of
rule 74 (see Chapter VI, p 77, paragraph
is the similarity of language, the British commentary in respect of rule 74 was
undoubtedly the source of the following statement
(at paragraph 1071) in the
Explanatory Memorandum in respect of clause 147 in the Bill which became the
expression “general service knowledge” is taken to mean knowledge of
matters relating to an arm of the Defence Force
which are matters of general
knowledge in that arm (eg, matters such as relative ranks of members or the
general duties, obligations
and authority of different classes of
The explanatory memorandum also notes (at p 268
and paragraph 1072) that cl 147 reflected existing Australian law applicable to
courts-martial
by virtue of rule 74 of the
Rules of Procedure
(UK) and by virtue of s 58(2) of the
Naval Discipline Act
(UK), 5 & 6 Eliz 2, c 53.
Army Act 1881
(UK), 44 & 45 Vict, c 58, re-enacted, with some
amendments, the major reforms made to British military law by the
Discipline and Regulation Act 1879
(UK), 42 & 43 Vict, c 33. That Act,
for the first time, enacted a comprehensive service disciplinary code for the
British Army
in place of the hitherto disparate provisions found in statutes and
the Articles of War. Those statutory reforms and the related
rules of procedure
were, unsurprisingly, influential in respect of the service discipline law of
former colonies within the then
British Empire and, later, of members the
Commonwealth of Nations.
Notwithstanding
this breadth of application and influence and the vast number of personnel who
served in British or Commonwealth forces
in the world and other wars of the
twentieth century, and the related volume of service discipline cases, authority
concerning the
meaning and effect of rule 74 is sparse. In his article,
“Courts-Martial Appeals in Australia”
[1964] FedLawRw 4
Federal Law
, Mr K P Enderby, Barrister-at-Law (afterwards, Commonwealth
Attorney-General and then Enderby J of the Supreme Court of New South
with commendable scholarship, refers (at p 120) to two unreported cases, one
Canadian, the other British, concerning the
proof of prejudicial conduct charges
in which, seemingly, the permissible evidentiary application of a provision akin
and s 147 of the DFDA was considered:
Reg. v. Owen
[(1961) No. 18, unreported],
the Canadian Board ... said
... the judicial notice of general service
knowledge introduced a highly speculative element because of inadequate and
meagre prosecution
evidence; [but] in the present case there is clearly
established a set of facts to which the general military knowledge of the Court
can be applied without introducing an element of difficult speculation, for the
Reg. v. Jarman
[(1953) No. 21, unreported] the
English court allowed the use of general service knowledge in circumstances
consistent with the Canadian
(Citations incorporated.)
neither of the excerpts cited by Mr Enderby is there discussion of what may be
the permissible limits of the use of general service
knowledge to establish
guilt once other facts are proved. On this subject, we have located a judgment
of Nigeria’s ultimate
appellate court, the Supreme Court of Nigeria,
Nigerian Air Force v Obiosa
(2003) 4 NWLR (pt 810) 233;
(2003) 1 NILR
Such is the dearth of authority in relation to the permissible use of
general service knowledge and as this is a considered judgment
of an ultimate
appellate court, it is desirable to refer to this case in detail.
of the issues in
Nigerian Air Force
concerned the
permissible evidentiary use of general service knowledge in Nigerian Air Force
discipline law, which contained a provision
akin to s 147 of the DFDA. As
related in the judgment, Nigeria’s
Manual of Air Force Law
VI, paragraph 6(a) contained the following commentary:
[C]ourt[s] martial are specially authorized to take
notice of all matters within their general service knowledge. Evidence therefore
need not be given as to the relative rank of officers, as to the general duties,
obligations and authority of different members of
the service, or generally as
to any matter which an officer as such might reasonably be expected to
As with the explanatory memorandum in respect of what is now s 147 of the DFDA,
the influence of the commentary in the British
Manual of Military Law
respect of rule 74, on this commentary, in respect of the Nigerian analogue, is
inferentially likely. That there is such a provision
and related commentary
should not be surprising, given the British heritage of Nigeria’s armed
forces and its membership of
the Commonwealth of Nations. The respondent,
Obiosa, was, at the time of the charge, a Squadron Leader in the Nigerian Air
Materially, he was charged (Count 14) with “disobedience to a
standing order, contrary to Section 57(l) of the Armed Forces
Decree, 1993
(Nigeria) in that he at Lagos in April. 96, contravened Administrative
Instruction S/No 3 dated Feb., 96 which Order
was known to him or which he might
reasonably be expected to know by engaging in private business.” Section
57(1) of the Armed
Forces Decree provided:
A person subject to service law under this Decree who
contravenes or fails to comply with a provision of an order to which this
being a provision known to him, or which he might reasonably
be expected to know
is guilty [of an] offence under this section and liable
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or any less punishment
provided by decree.
(Emphasis added.)
The order in question, Administrative Instruction S/No 3 of February 1996, was
in these terms:
Except as authorised by HQ, NAF, an officer or airman is
(1) Carry on any profession, engage in trade or accept any profitable employment
while still in the NAF service.
(2) Be a member of the governing body of any corporation, company, partnership,
undertaking or individual which or who is carrying
on any trade, profession or
is engaged in trade or is profitably employed.
The respondent was convicted in respect of this and other offences by a general
court martial but these convictions were quashed
on appeal by Nigeria’s
intermediate appellate court, the Court of Appeal. From this order, the Chief
of Air Force appealed
to the Supreme Court of Nigeria. The Chief of Air Force
was successful, save in respect of the issue raised concerning count 14
relating to the permissible use of general service knowledge.
question raised in relation to count 14 was “[w]hether or not the evidence
led by the prosecution in respect of the 14th
count had been sufficient to
ground a conviction”. One of the issues raised under this ground by the
respondent was whether
the Court, having regard to its ability to take judicial
notice of general service knowledge, could take judicial notice of the fact
an officer was aware of the order; the respondent argued that it was not
permissible for an administrative instruction to be
“judicially
noticed”. Relatedly, the respondent also argued that knowledge by the
respondent could not be presumed but
must be proved. A second issue was whether
there was sufficient proof that the respondent had contravened the
administrative instrument:
the mere appearance of a person’s name on a
particular form was said to be insufficient evidence that that person was
participating
in the management or running of a business. As to this issue,
Akintola Olufemi Ejiwunmi JSC, in delivering the judgment of a unanimous
There can be no doubt that the above provision enable[s]
courts martial to take judicial notice of all matters within their general
service knowledge. Hence, evidence need not be given as to the relative ranks of
officers, as to the general duties, obligations
and authority of different
members of the service, or generally as to any matter which an officer as such
might reasonably be expected
to know. But the case in hand has raised two
questions[. First] can judicial notice be taken that an officer was aware of
for which the respondent was charged? If for present purpose such
knowledge could be presumed, the next question then is, whether
martial could properly without any evidence to the effect know that an officer
was carrying on any profession, etc while
still in the NAF [Nigerian Air Force]
service? I think not. It is my humble view that in order to successfully
establish that the
respondent was engaged in any other trade, profession or had
accepted any profitable employment while still in the NAF service, there
credited evidence other than what [Form] C07 revealed that [effect]. As no such
evidence had been proved in respect of the
14th count against the respondent,
the appeal against the decision of the [court] below must fail. It is therefore
dismissed accordingly.
The reference in the passage quoted to “form C07” is a reference to
a form containing the particulars of company directors
filed with the Corporate
Affairs Commission.
thus contains express approval of commentary, in
respect of rule 74 in the British
Manual of Military Law
repeated in the explanatory memorandum in respect of s 147 of the DFDA. It also
exemplifies, implicitly, if not expressly,
a limit as to the permissible
evidentiary use of such a provision.
respectfully agree with the view expressed in
Nigerian Air Force
as to what a provision such as s 147 of the DFDA permits. It follows
that we agree with the view expressed in the explanatory memorandum.
provision such as s 147 of the DFDA is not a universal palliative for
evidentiary deficiencies otherwise present in a prosecution
case. The subject
must, truly, be one of “general service knowledge”. The relevant
Nigerian Air Force
, engaging in other
employment or being the member of the governing body of a corporation while a
defence member, was, with respect,
clearly not a subject of service knowledge,
general or otherwise, at all.
is reflected in two paragraphs of the explanatory memorandum of the DFDA which
precede the paragraph quoted above at [99]:
147 requires a service tribunal to take judicial notice of matters within the
general service knowledge of the tribunal or
its members.
expressions “judicial notice” and “general service
knowledge” are not defined. The expression “judicial
means the act by which a court will, of its own motion and without the
production of evidence, take cognizance of matters
which are so notorious or
clearly established that formal evidence of their existence is unnecessary (eg,
matters of law and custom
and matters of common knowledge and everyday
examination, the limits of the duties and rights of access of the position held
by WO2 Randall are not a subject for the application
of general service
knowledge. Those duties and rights of access are the subject of express
documentary provision in instructions
and duty statements mentioned. General
service knowledge could not be used to contradict what is found in these
relation to prejudicial conduct charges, general service knowledge can
permissibly be used in the objective assessment of whether
particular proved
conduct is likely to prejudice the discipline of, or bring discredit on, the
Defence Force contrary to s 60 of
Komljenovic v Chief of Navy
(2017) 319 FLR 215
[2017] ADFDAT 4
offers a recent example of the application
by a Defence Force Magistrate, upheld on appeal, of general service knowledge so
convict a naval officer of an offence of prejudicial conduct constituted
by an act of physical intimacy whilst in public and in view
of fellow crew
member view on short term shore leave on deployment abroad. If, however, that
relationship had been expressly recognised
and authorised under a relevant
instruction, which extended to the circumstances of the charged conduct, no
amount of general service
knowledge as to the likelihood that the conduct would
nonetheless prejudice the discipline of, or bring discredit on, the Defence
Force could have been used to contradict the authorisation.
service knowledge, as with the worldly experience of a jury, doubtless has a
role also to play in the assessment by a panel
of witness credibility. This use
apart, there may conceivably also be occasions when, if it is to be relied upon
by the prosecution
for a particular proof, procedural fairness may dictate that
advance notice be given of this intention. However, it is neither necessary
desirable to canvas the limits of permissible application of general service
knowledge in relation to the proof of service offences.
It is enough for
present purposes for us to state that, for the reasons given, general service
knowledge does not offer an adequate
explanation for any want of proof of
authority in respect of Charges 12 and 13 or, for that matter, any other of the
charges in respect
of which the panel has recorded convictions.
convictions in respect of these charges must therefore be quashed.
Charges 14, 15 and 16
14 related to WO2 Randall’s accessing on 19 February 2014 an email from
CAPT Kimberley to a Mr Campbell in connection
with employment opportunities
at BAE Systems. Charge 15 related to his moving this email from CAPT
Kimberley’s “sent
items” into his own email account inbox
on the same date. Charge 16 related to a second access by WO2 Randall to CAPT
Kimberley’s
account also on 19 February 2014.
Randall gave evidence that he had accessed the Charge 14 email as a management
function. His further evidence, which was also
relevant to Charge 15, was that,
as part of his maintenance of the system, he had to remove the email as it was
blocking the system
and had put it in his own account. In relation to Charge 16
his evidence was that he had accessed CAPT Kimberley’s email account
to see if the email to Mr Campbell had actually been sent, which he confirmed
later in a telephone conversation with Mr Campbell
who told him that he had
received the email.
reasons already given, in detailing the responsibilities and authorities which
he had as a System Manager, System Administrator,
the Information System
Engineer and a Domino administrator, as specified in his duty statement and in
practice by WO1 Wright, WO2
Randall had express authority to access this email
account and to remove from it an email causing blockage. Absence of permission
from CAPT Kimberley was never sufficient proof of lack of authority.
Further, in light of WO2 Randall’s evidence as to his
purposes, it
was, and is, not possible, given the evidence as to his authority, to exclude
beyond reasonable doubt a hypothesis consistent
with his innocence. He also had
express authority to deal with BAE Systems as part of his duties.
convictions in respect of these charges are not maintainable.
Alternative to Charge 19 and Charge 22
19 and its alternative related to WO2 Randall’s accessing two emails in
the DDSN email account of WO1 Saunders on 29
December 2013. WO2 Randall
admitted to this. His evidence was that he was justified in so doing,
because he knew that there were
emails related to the upgrade of the phone
system that existed, he had asked for them and didn’t get them so he went
took them for himself (transcript, pp 1948-1949). Charge 22 related to
access by WO2 Randall to the email account of WO1 Saunders
on 15 May 2014. He
also admitted to this. His evidence (at transcript, p 1950) was that he became
aware of the email concerned
and that the email “contained a whole heap of
configuration entries and who was doing them. That was very much in my
He stated that he took it “as it was directly relevant to
what I was doing at the network”.
again, and with all due respect to the panel and as with Charge 8 and its
alternative, in relation to the prejudicial conduct
alternative to Charge 19, it
was distinctly odd to have acquitted WO2 Randall in respect of the primary
charge and yet to have convicted
him in respect of the alternative.
this as it may, once again, the evidence, documentary and oral, as to WO2
Randall’s authority in the position that he held
and particularly his
overarching responsibility in that position to maintain the system so as to
support the mission of JF 633 made
it unreasonable for the panel to have
concluded that it was proved beyond reasonable doubt that he lacked authority to
account. Absence of express permission from WO1 Saunders was
never sufficient proof in this regard.
convictions also are unsafe and unsatisfactory.
these reasons, the appeal should be allowed, the convictions quashed and the
sentences imposed set aside.
wish to add the following. The outcome differs from the conclusions of the
respective reviewing officers. Unlike us, they did
not have the benefit of the
very focussed adversarial exchange which we enjoyed in the course of submissions
on the appeal. One
of the intentions of Parliament in providing for an appeal
of the present kind was that its hearing would entail such a
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
twenty one (121) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision
of the Honourable Justices Tracey (President), Logan (Deputy President)
and Hiley (Member).
Dated: 10 July 2018
RTF format (695 KB)
Signed PDF/A format