Application by Controlabill Pty Ltd [2021] ACompT 6 (6 December 2021)
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
Application by Controlabill Pty Ltd
[2021] ACompT 6
Merger authorisation MA 1000020 determination made on 9 September
File number:
ACT 3 of 2021
JUSTICE O'BRYAN (Deputy President)
DR D ABRAHAM
PROF K DAVIS (Member)
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
COMPETITION
– application for review
of merger authorisation granted by the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission under
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
– proceeding listed for hearing of question whether applicant has a
“sufficient interest” within the meaning
s 101(1AA)(b)
application for leave to withdraw application for review – leave granted
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
s 103(1)(a)
Cases cited:
Application by New South Wales Minerals
Council (No 4)
[2021] ACompT 5
Re Country Television Services Limited
(1984) 73 FLR 68
Re Nursing Agencies Association of Australia
[2003] ACompT 2
Re Football Queensland Limited
[2012] ACompT 15
Re Lakes R Us Pty Ltd
[2006] ACompT 3
200 FLR 233
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Representative for Controlabill Pty Ltd:
Mr Gavan Farley, the Chairman of Directors of Controlabill Pty Ltd
Counsel for Mr Milliner in his capacity as Chairperson of Industry
Dr R C A Higgins SC with Mr M T Sherman
Solicitor for Mr Milliner in his capacity as Chairperson of Industry
King & Wood Mallesons
Counsel for the ACCC:
Ms P P Thiagarajan
Solicitor for the ACCC:
Johnson Winter & Slattery
IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION
ACT 3 OF 2021
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW OF MERGER AUTHORISATION MA 1000020 DETERMINATION
MADE ON 9 SEPTEMBER 2021
CONTROLABILL PTY LTD
DETERMINATION
JUSTICE O’BRYAN (Deputy President)
DR D ABRAHAM
PROF K DAVIS (Member)
THE TRIBUNAL DETERMINES AND DIRECTS THAT
1. The applicant, Controlabill Pty Ltd, be given leave to withdraw its
application for review to the Tribunal.
2. Industry Committee has leave to uplift from the Tribunal’s file the
confidential version of the affidavit of Robert Ian Milliner
sworn 19 November
2021 and that document is to be removed from the Tribunal’s file.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
THE TRIBUNAL:
Introduction
1 On 30 September 2021, Controlabill Pty Ltd
Controlabill
) filed an application with the Tribunal under
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
review of an authorisation granted by the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission (
) in respect of a proposed merger (merger authorisation
MA 1000020 granted on 9 September 2021).
2 On 5 December 2021, Controlabill sought leave to withdraw its application
for review.
3 For the following reasons, the Tribunal is satisfied that it has power to
grant leave and that it is appropriate to do so. In accordance
Act, the reasons below concerning the power of the Tribunal to grant leave to
withdraw have been prepared by O’Bryan
J as the presiding member, whereas
the balance of the reasons have been prepared by the Tribunal as a whole.
Application for authorisation
4 On 18 March 2021,
Industry Committee, an unincorporated association, submitted an application to
the ACCC pursuant to
of the Act on behalf of its members who are
shareholders and/or members of BPAY Group Holding Pty Ltd (
BPAY HoldCo
eftpos Payments Australia Ltd (
) and NPP Australia Ltd (
The application sought authorisation of the proposed amalgamation of two wholly
owned subsidiaries of BPAY HoldCo, BPAY Group Pty
Ltd and BPAY Pty Ltd, with
EPAL and NPPA (the
proposed amalgamation
). The proposed amalgamation is
to be effected by:
(a) a newly formed company, Australian Payments Plus Ltd (
), acquiring
the shares in each of BPAY Group and BPAY Pty Ltd (together
eftpos and NPPA; and
(b) the existing shareholders and members of BPAY Holdco, eftpos and NPPA being
issued shares in AP+.
5 BPAY, EPAL and NPPA, through their respective payment schemes, provide a
number of payment services that are utilised every day
by Australian consumers
and businesses. BPAY primarily operates a domestic electronic bill payment
service that enables users to
make payments through a financial
institution’s online, mobile or telephone banking facilities to
organisations which are registered
billers. EPAL’s main business is
facilitating electronic payments from customer bank accounts to merchant bank
accounts at
the point of sale. EPAL owns and operates the eftpos debit card
scheme and associated infrastructure (
). eftpos is most commonly
associated with the use of plastic debit cards as a payment method for the
purchase of goods and services.
However, eftpos also facilitates some online
debit card payments and debit card withdrawals at automatic teller machines. The
Payments Platform (
) was launched in February 2018 and is an open
access infrastructure used to facilitate real-time payments between bank
accounts within
Australia. It is a more modern version of the existing Direct
Entry infrastructure used in transferring money between bank accounts.
6 In broad terms, the stated rationale for the proposed amalgamation is to
enable the three existing payment schemes, whose activities
are largely
complementary, to:
(a) co-ordinate innovations, creating efficiencies for customers, businesses and
(b) reduce the risk of stranded assets from innovations that were not able to
succeed due to their inability to achieve network effects
in a timely manner;
(c) enable the payment schemes to compete better against existing and future
global payment companies, enhancing competition in domestic
payment markets.
7 The members of Industry Committee on whose behalf the application for
authorisation was made comprise the following entities:
(a) Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Limited;
(b) Australian Settlements Limited;
(c) Bendigo and Adelaide Bank Limited;
(d) Commonwealth Bank of Australia;
(e) Coles Group Limited;
(f) Cuscal Limited;
(g) First Data Network Australia Limited trading as Fiserv;
(h) HSBC Bank Australia Limited;
(i) Macquarie Bank Limited;
(j) National Australia Bank;
(k) Tyro Payments Limited;
(l) Westpac Banking Corporation; and
(m) Woolworths Group Limited.
8 For the purposes of
of the Act, the following additional entities
will receive the benefit of the authorisation:
(a) EPAL, EPAL foundation shareholders, BPAY Holdco, NPPA and persons who are
members of EPAL and/or shareholders of NPPA;
(b) the Reserve Bank of Australia;
(c) AP+; and
(d) the individuals directly involved in the administration and oversight of
Industry Committee, including the Chairperson and the
Secretary of Industry
9 The proposed amalgamation is conduct to which the provisions of
Act might apply.
prohibits the acquisition of shares or assets if the
acquisition would have the effect, or be likely to have the effect, of
substantially
lessening competition in any market. As such, the authorisation is
defined in the Act as a “merger authorisation” to
which statutory
time limits are applicable in respect of the decision of the ACCC (by
and related provisions) and the decision of the Tribunal on review (by
and related provisions).
, the ACCC was empowered to grant authorisation if,
relevantly:
(a) the ACCC is satisfied in all the circumstances that the conduct would not
have the effect, or would not be likely to have the
effect, of substantially
lessening competition; or
(b) the ACCC is satisfied in all the circumstances that:
(i) the conduct would result, or be likely to result, in a benefit to the
public; and
(ii) the benefit would outweigh the detriment to the public that would result,
or be likely to result, from the conduct.
ACCC authorisation
11 On 9 September 2021, the ACCC granted
authorisation for the proposed amalgamation of BPAL, EPAL and NPPA, subject to
an undertaking
from AP+ given under
of the Act (the
Undertaking
and published its determination (
ACCC Determination
12 In relation to the competition test in
of the Act, the ACCC
observed that the key aspects of the ACCC’s competition analysis
(a) the likely effect of the amalgamation on the future availability of eftpos
and least-cost routing (
(b) the overlap between current BPAY, EPAL and NPPA services;
(c) the loss of potential competition between BPAY, EPAL and NPPA in the future;
(d) the likely effect of the amalgamation on third party access to the NPP.
13 The ACCC expressed the following conclusions in relation to its
competition analysis:
Taking into account the Undertaking from AP+, the ACCC
is satisfied that the amalgamation is unlikely to result in a substantial
of competition in relation to the routing of debit card payments. The
Undertaking imposes obligations on AP+ aimed at ensuring that
eftpos services
are maintained, that eftpos facilitates and promotes the availability of LCR for
4 years and requires investment
in and the development of the Prescribed
Services, some of which facilitate eftpos online payment services.
The amalgamation will soften competition to some extent between BPAY, EPAL and
NPPA in relation to several services. The amalgamation
may also lessen
competition between the 3 parties to innovate and develop new infrastructure and
services, because development decisions
will be made centrally by AP+. However,
it is important to consider these potential competitive effects in the context
of the markets
in which they may arise. In this regard, the ACCC considers that
AP+ will continue to face significant competitive constraints, most
significantly from Mastercard and Visa. Given the level of complementarity
between the services provided by EPAL, NPPA and BPAY and
the substantial
constraints that would remain on the merged entity, the ACCC considers that any
loss of competitive tension between
the 3 entities is not likely to be
substantial.
The ACCC is satisfied that third party access to the NPP is unlikely to
materially change as a result of the amalgamation, and that
there are sufficient
constraints to mitigate the risk of third parties being foreclosed access
following the amalgamation.
In all the circumstances, including the Undertaking from AP+, the ACCC is
satisfied that the amalgamation would not have the effect,
or would not be
likely to have the effect, of substantially lessening competition, in any
14 The ACCC observed that, under
, it may grant an authorisation if it
is satisfied in all the circumstances that no substantial lessening of
competition is likely.
Since the ACCC was satisfied that no substantial
lessening of competition is likely from the amalgamation (when assessed with the
Undertaking), the ACCC was not required to consider whether net public benefits
are likely to arise from the amalgamation. Nevertheless,
the ACCC stated that,
in light of the interest in and concerns raised by interested parties about the
amalgamation and the fact that
this is an application for merger authorisation,
it was appropriate for the ACCC to provide its view on the “net public
limb of the authorisation test. In that regard, the ACCC
expressed the following conclusions with respect to public benefits:
The ACCC considers that the primary benefit of the
amalgamation is that a single overarching body could enable information sharing,
coordination and alignment of roadmaps across the 3 parties. This is likely to
result in a more unified roadmap for AP+, and greater
clarity of proposals for
consideration by AP+ shareholders. The efficiencies arising from the single
roadmap will primarily benefit
the banks, but more timely and efficient
investment in new or innovative services is likely to constitute a public
The amalgamation will enable the 3 schemes to combine their respective strengths
and work collaboratively to consider what hybrid
products could be offered to a
greater extent than would be the case without the amalgamation (as they will no
longer be competing
with each other). The amalgamation will also provide greater
clarity and confidence for AP+ shareholders to agree to initiatives
sooner, and
with a greater degree of confidence that the other major banks will support that
initiative, than what is possible without
the amalgamation.
Notwithstanding that the banks will continue to make their own decisions to
implement payment initiatives, the amalgamation will
likely enable the banks to
better coordinate their own adoption of payment initiatives and this may reduce
the risk of stranded payment
The ACCC considers that improved coordination and alignment of payments
initiatives through the amalgamation, together with AP+’s
commitment to
the EPAL Prescribed Services in the context of the Undertaking, are likely to
result in increased ability for eftpos
(as a part of AP+), or AP+, to compete
against Mastercard and Visa and international technology companies. The ACCC
considers that
this represents a public benefit that is tangible, but also notes
that any such benefit is not readily quantifiable.
The ACCC has considered a number of other public benefits the applicants
(represented by Industry Committee) claim are likely to
result from the
amalgamation. The Undertaking provided by AP+ includes a commitment that one of
the 4 independent directors appointed
to the AP+ Board will have substantial
small business experience. The amalgamation, together with AP+’s
commitment, is likely
to result in some public benefit in the form of increased
engagement with small business and other participants.
While the amalgamation is likely to result in some cost synergies, reduced
transaction costs and reduced compliance obligations,
they are not likely to be
substantial. The ACCC is not satisfied, based on the information available, that
the claimed public benefit
of improving payments system resilience is likely to
arise from the amalgamation.
The ACCC considers that the amalgamation is likely to result in a material
public benefit.
15 In relation to public detriments, the ACCC noted that it had considered
the public detriments arising from the amalgamation in
the context of a
lessening of competition arising from the amalgamation and that its overall
conclusion was that it was satisfied
that the amalgamation would not have the
effect, or would not be likely to have the effect, of substantially lessening
competition
in any market.
16 The ACCC Determination specified that, if no application for review were
made to the Australian Competition Tribunal, the authorisation
would come into
force on 1 October 2021, and be valid for a period of 12 months, until 1 October
2022. As discussed in the next section,
Controlabill filed its application for
review on 30 September 2021. As a result, and by virtue of
of the Act,
the authorisation granted by the ACCC did not come into effect but will take
effect from the date of the Tribunal’s
determination of the application or
any earlier withdrawal of the application.
Controlabill’s application for review
17 On 30 September 2021, Controlabill filed an
application with the Tribunal under
of the Act seeking review of the ACCC
Determination. In its application for review, Controlabill states its grievance
with the ACCC’s
Determination in the following manner:
Controlabill owns Patented intellectual property
regarding “authority/mandate” management services for all forms of
authorised payments. Patents were granted in 2012 by the Australian
Patents Office.
All the major banks including the RBA are aware of our IP, including granted
patents, and have executed NDAs with Controlabill dating
Controlabill’s issue remains with NPPA’s behaviour toward us and
their intended and now deliberate and publicised breach
of our Patents and
wherein it proposes to centralise
customer authorities in the same manner
covered in our patents and is claiming the same functionality. NPPA will not
engage with
us to discuss settlement of the issue and Controlabill does not have
the resources to take 13 of the largest financial institutions
through the Court
process at this time.
The payment system is characterised by push and pull transactions. Examples of
Push transactions are eftpos and Bpay where the account
holder sends money to
service provider and directly authorises the transaction. Pull transactions are
exemplified by Direct Debit,
Credit Card Direct Debits and Subscription services
and now by the NPPA PayTo service. Each of these transactions must be
pre-authorised
and the service provider must get permission from the customer in
the form of a standing authority or mandate.
Authorities are the driver of BECS direct debit, recurring credit card payments
and soon to be NPPA PayTo and cover around 70% of
all household expenditure and
even more in dollar volume when small business is rolled in. The party that
controls these authorities
between the billers and the customers controls the
payments system. We have said this should reside in a competitively neutral
such as Australia Post or some other entity such as the CDR. Controlabills
(sic) invention was to make managing these authorities
across all of the pull
payment systems easy to manage and to switch. The ACCC decision as it stands
embeds NPPA with price competitive
parties and enables cross subsidisation of
revenues and costs that enable anti-competitive conduct. This merger as it has
been approved
may allow NPPA pull systems to exist where because of it (sic)
inherent costs it would fail to compete with Direct Debit. There is
clear econometric modelling and price forecasting in the ACCC decision to
analyse this potential matter.
Also, we maintain the theft of our patented IP by a party to the merger is an
example of abuse of market power and unconscionable
conduct. We believe this
behaviour should have led to a different outcome for the MPS or Payto service
under the ACCC decision.
Controlabill has raised this grievance with the ACCC and the RBA without
response at this time.
As a result of 13 financial of Australias (sic) largest service companies being
the owners of NPPA, potential customers for the Controlabill
service have
evaporated.
Consequently, this has catastrophic financial damage in the millions of dollars.
This anti-competitive behaviour should not be allowed
18 It can be seen that Controlabill’s core grievance is an allegation
that NPPA is infringing Controlabill’s intellectual
property rights. What
is not explained in the application is how the proposed amalgamation (which is
the conduct the subject of the
authorisation) will affect Controlabill’s
asserted intellectual property rights or its dispute with NPPA. In that regard,
Tribunal notes from the ACCC’s authorisation that NPPA is a joint
venture entity the membership of which is similar to the
proposed membership of
AP+. It follows that the proposed amalgamation will not materially alter the
ownership or governance of NPPA.
The proposed amalgamation will merely bring
NPPA, BPAY and EPAL under the same common ownership. In its application,
Controlabill
does not contend that it competes with BPAY or EPAL or that BPAY or
EPAL are infringing its intellectual property rights. Nor does
Controlabill
contend that its competitive position in any market is affected by the proposed
amalgamation.
Sufficient interest application
19 On 6 October 2021, Mr Milliner, in his capacity
as Chairperson of Industry Committee, filed an interlocutory application with
Tribunal seeking a determination by the Tribunal that the application filed
by Controlabill be dismissed on the basis that Controlabill
is not a person with
a “sufficient interest” within the meaning of
s 101(1AA)(b)
Act. The application was supported by an affidavit of Sharon Henrick dated 6
October 2021 and outline submissions of that
date. Ms Henrick is a partner at
King & Wood Mallesons, solicitors for Industry Committee and its
Chairperson, Mr Milliner. Industry
Committee sought to have this application
heard at the earliest convenient date to the Tribunal and in advance of any
substantive
20 On 15 and 20 October 2021, the President of the Tribunal, Justice
Middleton, made directions timetabling the interlocutory application
hearing on 6 December 2021. The directions provided for the filing of affidavits
and written submissions.
21 In accordance with those directions, on 11 November 2021 Controlabill
filed three affidavits:
(a) an affidavit of Gavan Farley, who is a director and chairman of
Controlabill, dated 11 November 2021;
(b) an affidavit of Bernard Wright, who is a director and shareholder and
described as a co-founder of Controlabill, dated 11 November
(c) an affidavit of Stephen Coulter, who is a shareholder and described as a
co-founder of Controlabill, dated 11 November 2021.
22 Controlabill did not file any written submissions.
23 On 19 November 2021, Industry Committee filed an affidavit of Robert
Milliner sworn that day and reply submissions. Industry Committee
confidentiality orders in respect of parts of Mr Milliner’s affidavit and,
accordingly, filed a confidential version
and a public version which redacted
the confidential parts.
24 On 26 November 2021, the ACCC filed written submissions in respect of the
interlocutory application.
25 On 3 December 2021, Industry Committee filed a further affidavit of Mr
Milliner to update certain matters referred to in Mr Milliner’s
Application for leave to withdraw
26 At 8.49pm on 5 December 2021, Controlabill sent
an email to the Registry of the Australian Competition Tribunal applying for
to withdraw its application for review to the Tribunal.
27 On 6 December 2021, the Tribunal heard Controlabill’s application to
withdraw. At the hearing, Controlabill was represented
by Mr Farley.
Section 110
of the Act provides that, in proceedings before the Tribunal, a body corporate
may be represented by an employee, or a director or
other officer, of the body
corporate approved by the Tribunal. The Tribunal approved Mr Farley’s
appearance on behalf of Controlabill.
Power to grant leave to withdraw
28 The Tribunal has granted leave for the withdrawal
of an application for review made under
of the Act on a number of previous
occasions: see
Re Country Television Services Limited
(1984) 73 FLR 68
Country Television Services
Re Nursing Agencies Association
of Australia
[2003] ACompT 2
175 FLR 423
Re Football Queensland
[2012] ACompT 15.
29 As noted in each of those decisions, there is no express power in
of the Act or the
Competition and Consumer Regulations 2010
governing the withdrawal of an application for review made under s 101 of the
Act. Section 102 addresses the powers of the
Tribunal in respect of the
substantive determination of the review and provides that the Tribunal may make
a determination affirming,
setting aside or varying the ACCC’s
determination and, for the purposes of the review, may perform all of the
functions and
exercise all of the powers of the ACCC.
30 Nevertheless, the Act contemplates that an application for review under s
101 may be withdrawn. Relevantly, and in respect of the
authorisation under
review in this proceeding,
provides that an authorisation granted by
the ACCC comes into force on the day specified for the purpose in the
authorisation, not
being a day earlier than:
(a) where paragraph (b) or (c) does not apply – the end of the period in
which an application may be made to the Tribunal for
a review of the
determination by the Commission of the application for the authorisation;
(b) if such an application is made to the Tribunal and the application is not
withdrawn – the day on which the Tribunal makes
a determination on the
(c) if such an application is made to the Tribunal and the application is
withdrawn – the day on which the application is withdrawn.
31 The effect of
is that an authorisation granted by the ACCC will
not come into force while there is an application for review before the
but the authorisation will come into force if the application for
review is withdrawn.
32 In each of the Tribunal decisions referred to earlier, the presiding
member of the Tribunal concluded that an applicant for review
does not have an
unfettered right to withdraw an application, but the Tribunal has power under s
103(1)(a) of the Act to grant leave
to the applicant to withdraw. Section
103(1)(a) stipulates that, in the conduct of a review, the procedure of the
Tribunal is within
the discretion of the Tribunal. In
Country Television
, Lockhart J observed (at 70):
Rules of court generally provide for the discontinuance
of proceedings and they define the circumstances in which a moving party may
discontinue as of right or by leave. No such provision appears in the Act or the
Trade Practices Regulations governing proceedings
before the Tribunal. The
withdrawal of applications raises difficult concepts and has been the subject of
some discussion by courts
in various contexts, including bankruptcy proceedings,
where petitioning creditors have sought the court’s leave to withdraw
petitions to sequestrate a debtor’s estate, rather than an order of the
court that they be dismissed. ... Although procedures
before courts, including
bankruptcy petitions, are different in nature to applications for review before
the Tribunal, they nevertheless
suggest that caution should be exercised before
deciding that an applicant for review has a right to withdraw his application so
that, upon the withdrawal taking effect according to its terms, the Tribunal's
functions and powers thereupon cease. The proceedings
before the Tribunal are
inter partes
: they involve the public interest.
33 The Tribunal respectfully agrees with the conclusions expressed by the
Tribunals in each of the decisions referred to above. The
Tribunal notes for
completeness that a similar approach was taken by the Tribunal in
[2006] ACompT 3
200 FLR 233
, but in that proceeding the Tribunal
was concerned with the withdrawal of a different type of application, being an
application for
review of a decision not to declare a service made under Part
IIIA of the Act.
Whether leave should be granted
34 At the hearing, Mr Farley submitted that
Controlabill had applied for leave to withdraw its application to review the
ACCC Determination
because Controlabill had reached a compromise with NPPA in
respect of its dispute. Mr Farley submitted that the application for withdrawal
had been made late on the evening of 5 December 2021 (immediately prior to the
hearing scheduled for 6 December 2021) because the
parties had only reached
their compromise at that time. As noted above, it is apparent from
Controlabill’s application for
review filed with the Tribunal that the
dispute between Controlabill and NPPA concerns Controlabill’s allegations
is infringing intellectual property rights claimed to be held by
Controlabill.
35 The Industry Committee supported Controlabill’s application for
leave to withdraw and made no submissions with respect to
the compromise which
was the subject of Mr Farley’s submission.
36 The ACCC took no position on the application and assisted the Tribunal
with brief submissions concerning the power of the Tribunal
to grant leave to
37 In circumstances where the only person that had applied to review the ACCC
authorisation wished to withdraw their application,
and no person opposed that
course, there is no reason why the Tribunal should not grant leave.
38 However, the Tribunal wishes to record its disquiet as to the basis of the
original application for review filed by Controlabill
and the resolution of the
application by compromise and withdrawal. As the brief summary above indicates,
the proposed amalgamation
which is the subject of the ACCC authorisation is a
matter of significant public interest, and the ACCC concluded that the proposed
amalgamation will give rise to public benefits. The filing of the application
for review by Controlabill has caused delay to the
ACCC authorisation coming
into force and, the Tribunal infers, to the completion and implementation of the
proposed amalgamation.
The application has also occasioned expense to be
incurred by Industry Committee and the ACCC in responding to the application,
public expense by reason of the Tribunal having to be convened to address
the application. It is notable that Controlabill’s
application for review
did not address the primary question with which the ACCC authorisation was
concerned, whether the proposed
amalgamation would be likely to substantially
lessen competition in any market, and failed to identify any error in the
conclusion that the proposed amalgamation would not be likely to
substantially lessening competition. Instead, the application stated
grievance with respect to alleged intellectual property infringement by one of
the merging parties, NPPA. As noted above, the application
did not explain how
the proposed amalgamation (which is the conduct the subject of the
authorisation) would affect Controlabill’s
asserted intellectual property
rights or its dispute with NPPA.
39 The object of the Act is to enhance the welfare of Australians through the
promotion of competition and fair trading and provision
for consumer protection.
The ACCC’s power to grant authorisation under Part VII of the Act, and the
Tribunal’s power
to review an authorisation under Part IX, are powers to
be exercised in furtherance of the objects of the Act. It would be contrary
the objects of the Act for authorisations to be delayed by, and the Tribunal
burdened by determining, applications for review
that are frivolous or made for
collateral purposes and thereby vexatious. A collateral purpose would include
filing an application
for the purpose of causing commercial inconvenience to
another party with the object of gaining some collateral benefit.
40 The Tribunal notes that it is not empowered to award costs in proceedings
commenced under s 101 of the Act. The position can be
contrasted with
proceedings under s 44K, in respect of which the Tribunal is given power to
award costs under s 44KB. As discussed
recently in
Application by New South
Wales Minerals Council (No 4)
[2021] ACompT 5
, the discretion to award costs
in that context may be exercised where there is a reason to do so arising out of
the nature of the
issues raised or out of the conduct of a party in the
proceeding. In that context, the power to award costs is available where an
application is frivolous or vexatious. The Tribunal observes that the
introduction of such a power may be warranted in the context
of applications to
review authorisation determinations under s 101 of the Act which are decisions
of considerable public importance.
41 In conclusion, the Tribunal gives leave to
Controlabill to withdraw its application for review to the Tribunal.
42 Industry Committee also sought a direction that, in lieu of the Tribunal
making confidentiality orders in respect of the confidential
version of Mr
Milliner’s affidavit sworn 19 November 2021, the Industry Committee be
permitted to uplift that document from
the Registry file. The Tribunal makes
that direction as the affidavit was not read or relied upon in the proceeding.
I certify that the preceding forty-two (42)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination of the
Justice O'Bryan, Dr D Abraham and Prof K
Dated: 6 December 2021
RTF format (373 KB)
Signed PDF/A format