C v Charity [2011] PrivCmrA 3 (3 May 2011)
Case Citation:
C v Charity
[2011] PrivCmrA 3
Subject Heading:
Improperly using personal information
National Privacy Principles 2 in Schedule 3 of the
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner (the Commissioner)
prior to 1 November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the
powers of the
Commissioner under the
were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
The complainant, an employee of a charity, sought assistance in a personal
matter from one of the charity's publicly available services.
complainant alleged the charity improperly used their personal information when
it informed the complainant's immediate supervisors
of their application for
assistance.
NPP 2 provides that an organisation must not use or disclose personal
information other than for the primary purpose of collection,
exception applies.
Section 7B(3)
exempts the handling of employee records.
To be exempt, the act or practice complained of must be directly related
to a current
or former employment relationship, and the personal information
subject to the complaint must be held in an employment record.
section 27(1)(ab)
the Commissioner may conciliate a
matter to bring about its resolution.
The Commissioner investigated the matter under
section 40(1)
In response to the Commissioner's investigation, the charity took the view
that it should not have used the complainant's personal
information in the way
that it had. The charity apologised to the complainant. It advised
no interference with the complainant'
its confusion between the complainant acting as a client of one of its services,
The Commissioner attempted to conciliate the matter under
section 27(1)(ab)
The complainant sought compensation for health treatment and other costs
incurred after the use of their personal information, and
for injury to
feelings. Ultimately, the charity agreed to pay some compensation but not
for all of the elements sought by the complainant.
The complainant provided further evidence to support their claim for
compensation. The charity offered an increased monetary sum
complainant agreed to settle the matter.
The Commissioner was satisfied that the charity had adequately dealt with the
matter, and closed the complaint under
section 41(2)(a)
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
RTF format (37.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format