GOM18 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FedCFamC2G 1862 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
GOM18 v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1862
File number(s):
SYG 3541 of 2018
Judgment of:
JUDGE D HUMPHREYS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Safe Haven Enterprise
(subclass 790) visa – Application for an extension of time –
Immigration Assessment Authority
– Whether the Authority took an unduly
narrow construction of s 473DD – Whether the Authority did not consider
of the applicant's claims – Grounds of judicial review have no
merit – Extension of time refused – Application
dismissed with costs
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
Cases cited:
AUS17 v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2020] HCA 37
(2020) 269 CLR 494
BTK19 and Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCA 658
CSR16 v Minister for Immigration & Border Protection
DZAAD v Department of Immigration and Citizenship
Re Commonwealth of Australia; Ex parte Marks
(2000) 177 ALR 49
SZTES v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
Tu'uta Katoa v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services
and Multicultural Affairs
[2022] HCA 28
Division 2 General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Self-represented litigant
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Mr Vethecan, Clayton Utz
Solicitor for the Second Respondent:
Submitting appearance, save as to costs
SYG 3541 of 2018
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
Second Respondent
JUDGE D HUMPHREYS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Application for an Extension of Time is refused.
Application is dismissed.
Applicant is to pay the First Respondent’s costs fixed in the sum of
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or
order to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
or to record a variation to the order pursuant to
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2)
(General Federal Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE D HUMPHREYS
INTRODUCTION
is an Application for judicial review of a decision of the Immigration
Assessment Authority
(the Authority) dated 5 October 2018, affirming a
decision of a delegate of the first respondent (the delegate) to refuse to grant
the applicant a Safe Haven Enterprise (Class XE) Subclass 790 visa (the
applicant requires an Extension of Time to seek judicial review pursuant to
Migration Act 1958
Court had regard to both Applications on the date of hearing.
the reasons set out below, the Application for an Extension of Time is refused.
Accordingly, the judicial review Application
is dismissed.
applicant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.
applicant arrived in Australia as an unauthorised maritime arrival on 17
September 2012.
25 November 2015, the applicant applied for the visa. In his application, the
applicant claimed to be a Tamil Christian and to
fear harm due to imputed
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) involvement and support as a result of
his sister’s involvement
with the LTTE.
15 January 2018, the delegate refused to grant the applicant the visa on the
basis that they were not satisfied that
19 January 2018, the delegate’s decision was referred to the Authority for
merits review.
5 October 2018, the Authority affirmed the delegate’s decision not to
grant the applicant the visa.
applicant now seeks judicial review of the Authority’s decision of 5
October 2018. The Application however was lodged on
17 December 2018, well
outside of the specified 35-day time frame. Accordingly, the first issue is
whether an extension of time should
be granted.
THE LAW IN RELATION TO AN EXTENSION OF TIME
SZTES v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2015] FCA 719
following matters were held to be relevant as to whether an extension of time
should be granted:
(a) the extent of the delay;
(b) the explanation for the delay;
(c) prejudice to the respondent due to the delay; and
(d) the merits of the proposed application.
Court may extend the 35-day period if it is satisfied that it is necessary in
the interests of the administration of justice to
make an Order extending time
for filing of the Application.
decision to grant an extension of time is a discretionary one:
Department of Immigration and Citizenship
[2013] FCA 204
The Application is brought under r 36.05 of the
Federal Court Rules 2011
Minister has submitted, r 36.05 confers upon a court a broad discretion whether
or not to grant an extension of time. The
considerations generally relevant in
determining whether an extension of time should be granted are well known. They
include the
length of the delay, whether the applicant has provided an
acceptable explanation for the delay, whether there is any prejudice to
respondents and the merits of the appeal if an extension is granted (Hunter
Valley Developments Pty Ltd v Minister for Home Affairs
and Environment
[1984] FCA 176
at 348-349 (per Wilcox J); Jess v Scott
[1986] FCA 365
(1986) 12 FCR 187
(per Lockhart,
Sheppard and Burchett JJ); Parker v The Queen
[2002] FCAFC 133
Spender, O'Loughlin and Dowsett JJ); Peck v Secretary, Department of Families,
Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs
[2009] FCA 810
(per Foster J); SZQBI v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2011] FCA 1388
(per Cowdroy J)).
the above, the Court would add that the greater the delay the more persuasive
the explanation for the delay has to be. In considering
whether to grant an
extension of time, there are no mandatory relevant considerations:
Katoa v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2022] HCA 28 (Tu'uta
Katoa) at [12]:
On its face, the power conferred by s 477A(2) is unfettered except by the
requirements of a written application in conformity with
s 477A(2)(a) and the
Court's satisfaction that an order extending time "is necessary in the interests
of the administration of justice".
Other than the "interests of the
administration of justice", there are no mandatory relevant considerations,
whether express or to
be implied from the "subject-matter, scope and purpose" of
the Act. The focus of s 477A(2)(b) is not on the interests of the applicant,
the broader interests of the administration of justice. So framed, the paragraph
allows the Court to look at a myriad of facts
and circumstances, including the
length of the applicant's delay, reasons for the delay, prejudice to the
respondent, prejudice to
third parties and the merits of the underlying
application. The level of satisfaction for the Court to reach is not low: the
must be satisfied not just that an extension of time is desirable, but
that it is needed in the interests of the administration of
APPLICATION FOR AN EXTENSION OF TIME
Application for judicial review and an Extension of Time was filed on 17
December 2018, some 73 days outside of the 35-day time
frame prescribed by s
477(1) of the
This is a moderate period of time which, in and of
itself, mitigates against an extension being granted. As such, the reasons for
the delay will need to be persuasive.
applicant relies upon the following eleven matters in relation to the delay:
Second Respondent’s decision was made on 5 October 2018.
did not file an application for judicial review of the Second Respondent’s
decision within the prescribed time period because
the Second Respondent’s
decision notification was not sent to my home address.
3 December 2018 I received a phone call from a private number.
speaker identified himself as a person working for the First Respondent. This
person said words to the effect that I no longer
held a valid visa.
responded and said words to the effect that I was waiting for the Second
Respondent to make a decision on my visa application.
person gave me a number (1800 205 219) on which I could contact the Second
Respondent.
the same day, I called 1800 205 219 and spoke to a person who identified himself
as a staff of the Second Respondent.
person notified me that the Second Respondent affirmed the decision of the First
Respondent’s delegate on 5 October 2018.
this person said words to the effect that the Second Respondent decision was
sent to my email address and not my home address
because the First Respondent
did not have my contact address on file.
don’t have access to the email address and at all times I had given my
Respondent.
Second Respondent’s decision was sent to my home address on 4 December
applicant claimed that the delay was occasioned by a number of factors as set
out above. He conceded at the hearing that he had
given an email address for the
purposes of contact by the Authority. I am satisfied that the Authority acted
properly by sending
its decision via email. The applicant failed to regularly
access his email. There was no requirement for the Authority to send a
of its decision via post to the applicant. I do not accept the explanation as
being persuasive. Again, this mitigates against
leave being granted.
first respondent's position is that the factors in this case tend against
granting an extension of time. The first respondent
submits that there is a
public interest in the finality of public decision-making:
Re Commonwealth of
Australia; Ex parte Marks
(2000) 177 ALR 49; even if the length of delay is
accepted as moderate and there is no specific prejudice to the first respondent
if time were extended. The first respondent further noted that the applicant has
not adequately explained the delay.
accept there is no real prejudice to the first respondent other than the need
for these types of matters to be finalised. I consider
this factor to be
final consideration for the grant of an extension of time is the merits of the
proposed application. This is considered below.
THE AUTHORITY’S DECISION
[3] of the decision, the Authority considered the material before it, given by
the Secretary under s473CB of the
. The Authority further considered
submissions provided by the applicant on 15 February 2018 and noted that they
contained argument
rather than new information. It therefore had regard to them
[4]. However, the Authority noted that the submissions also included
a number of
new claims [4].
[7], the Authority considered the applicant’s new claim that Sri Lankan
authorities were aware of his personal contact with
his sister, who was in the
LTTE, and as a result the applicant feared arrest on return to Sri Lanka. The
Authority noted that the
applicant did not refer to this claim during the SHEV
interview, despite ample opportunity to do so, and accordingly was not satisfied
that there were exceptional circumstances to justify the consideration of this
[8], the Authority considered the applicant’s new claim that an informant
had notified the applicant’s father that
his sister was being held in an
army detention camp and demanded money for her release. The applicant further
claimed his father
was arrested by the Criminal Investigation Division (CID),
his mother was questioned by the CID and threats were made that the
applicant’s
family would be killed if they attempted to locate the
applicant’s sister.
Authority noted a distinct lack of details in the applicant’s submissions
regarding these incidents, particularly the date
on which they occurred and how
the applicant he learned of these incidents [8]. The Authority considered the
applicant fabricated
this claim to support his visa application and therefore it
was not satisfied the information was credible due to the lack of corroborative
evidence and coincidental timing.
Accordingly,
the Authority was not satisfied s 473DD(b) of the
was met in relation
to these new claims [8].
applicant’s claims for protection are summarised at [12] as follows:
He is a citizen
of Sri Lanka, a Tamil, and a Christian, who was born in Jaffna District in the
Northern Province of Sri Lanka.
His sister was
a leader of one of the LTTE regiments, and because he was the only able­
bodied male in the family he was targeted
by authorities for persecution. His
aunty told him his sister was killed while fighting for the LTTE in the final
war in 2009.
In about the
beginning of 2009 he was approached by the Sri Lankan Navy (SLN) when he came
he was assisting the LTTE and punished
In 2010 the SLN
were looking for him because they were suspicious he was an LTTE member. The CID
told him to go to their camp for
enquiries. At the camp he was accused of
assisting the LTTE, and his sister was accused of assisting the LTTE. He was
interrogated,
beaten and tortured. He was burned with a hot metal pole, leaving
scars on his arms and lower left leg.
In June 2012
the CID came to his home looking for him because his sister was involved with
the LTTE. He was not home at the time
and they told his mother he was to report
to them when he returned home. He went to a relative's house in Vanni, and while
there several people came looking for him at his home.
He left Sri
Lanka because his life was in danger from Sri Lankan authorities because of his
sister's involvement with the LTTE, and
being imputed with that political
If he returns
to Sri Lanka, he would be at real risk of facing serious harm by agencies of the
government like the CID and the Sri
Lankan Army (SLA), because his sister was in
the LTTE, and because anyone who has contact with the LTTE could face
persecution from
Sri Lankan authorities.
In 2013 the CID
came looking for him once, and his family received over 20 threatening phone
calls in which his mother was told that
if he returns to Sri Lanka, she will not
see him again because they will kill him.
His family told
him that when his cousin visited his family home in late 2013 the CID contacted
the family and asked whether he had
returned home. After this incident a man on
a motorcycle visited his family and asked where he was. The man threatened that
returned home his family would not see him again.
[22], the Authority accepted that the applicant may have been hesitant to fully
disclose his claims during the initial interview
with the Department and made no
adverse inferences as a result. However, the Authority found it “highly
significant”
that the applicant did not detail his sister’s role as
a leader in the LTTE until his 2015 statement, despite reportedly being
her role since at least 2004. The Authority found it implausible for the
applicant’s sister to be in such an important
position in the LTTE at her
young age. The Authority was prepared to accept that the applicant’s
sister was an LTTE combatant
and had been missing since the end of the conflict
in 2009. However, the Authority did not accept she was a leader or a high
LTTE member and found the applicant had “embellished his later
evidence regarding his sister’s role”.
[26], the Authority accepted that the applicant worked as a fisherman and found
it plausible that he provided fuel to the LTTE
during 2005 and 2012. Further,
the Authority accepted that the applicant suffered adverse attention from Sri
Lankan authorities in
2010, whilst living in the previously LTTE-controlled area
and working as a fisherman. However, the Authority found it implausible
the applicant was the only family member of interest to authorities because of
his sister’s involvement with the LTTE
and did not accept the applicant
was targeted from 2012 onwards.
applicant claimed the CID had continued interest in him even after leaving Sri
Lanka, referring to incidents where his family
were questioned about his
whereabouts [28]. The Authority found it implausible that the applicant’s
brothers or father would
not be of similar interest to the Sri Lankan
authorities, given his primary claim relates to his sister’s involvement
[29]. Further, the Authority considered that the authorities had ample
opportunity to detain and question the applicant had they
wished to [29].
applicant further claimed to fear harm as a Tamil, and due to an imputed
political opinion as a supporter of the LTTE [35]. With
reference to country
information, the Authority at [36] – [38] considered that there was no
longer a systemic practice of detaining
those suspected of any involvement with
the LTTE in Sri Lanka, and did not accept the applicant had a high-risk profile
detained [39].
[40], the Authority did not accept the applicant would be at risk of harm from
Sri Lankan authorities as a Tamil fisherman from
light of the reasoning above and considering the circumstances as a whole, the
Tribunal concluded at [41], that there was no real
chance the applicant would be
at risk of harm on return to Sri Lanka.
Authority also considered country information regarding returnees and illegal
departees, but was not satisfied that the treatment
the Applicant would receive
would amount to harm or persecution [47].
Accordingly,
at [48], the Authority concluded that the applicant did not meet the
requirements of s 36(2)(a) of the
Authority found that there were not substantial grounds for believing that, as a
necessary and foreseeable consequence of being
returned from Australia to Sri
Lanka, there was a real risk that the applicant would suffer significant harm
[49] – [53]. Therefore,
the Authority found that the applicant did not
meet s 36(2)(aa) [54].
Accordingly,
the Authority affirmed the decision to not grant the applicant the
GROUNDS OF JUDICIAL REVIEW
applicant advances two grounds of judicial review contained in an Application
filed with the Court on 17 December 2018. They are
as follows:
Error. The Authority failed to consider the new information in accordance with
law and adopted an unduly narrow construction
on s 473DD of the
Migration Act
, thereby failing to exercise jurisdiction, leading to jurisdictional error.
Particulars:
paragraph 7 of the Decision Record the Tribunal referred to new claims and new
information that were not before the delegate. With
respect to the Applicant's
claim that the Authorities were aware himself and his sister, who was in the
LTTE had personal contact
with each other, through informants who are
rehabilitated former LTTE militants, the Authority found that (i) the Applicant
refer to informants during the interview; and (ii) the claim was a
recent invention to support his claims for protection and on that
basis was not
satisfied that there were exceptional circumstances to justify consideration of
paragraph 8 of the Decision Record the Tribunal referred to a new claim relating
to present problems for the Applicant’s
family in Sri Lanka. The Authority
found that (i) the Applicant had not specified the particular date any of the
incidents occurred
or how and when he learnt about them and therefore he had not
satisfied the Authority that the new information could not have been
prior to the delegate’s decision (ii) the timing of the events is too
coincidental to be believed; and (iii) the Applicant
has fabricated the new
claim to support his protection visa application and had not satisfied the
Authority that the new information
is credible personal information.
Subsequently, the Authority concluded that s 473DD(b) had not been met and as
such the Authority
could not consider the new claim.
2. Jurisdictional Error. The Authority failed to consider certain integers of
the Applicant’s claims which if accepted might
establish a well-founded
fear of persecution for a convention reason, amounting to a failure by the
Authority to exercise its jurisdiction,
leading to jurisdictional error.
Particulars:
Paragraph 4 of his supplementary statement dated 15 November 2015, the Applicant
recounts his experience with the CID in 2010.
He claimed that the CID came to
his house and asked him to go to camp because they needed to make enquiries. At
the camp he was accused
of helping the LTTE and assisting his sister, he was
beaten. Subsequently he was told to come in whenever the called and to ensure
that (i) he couldn’t hide; and (ii) they can identify him, they put a hot
metal pole on him leaving scars on both of his harms
and lower left leg (the
2010 CID Incident).
paragraph 12 and 23 of the Decision Record, the Authority mentions the 2010 CID
Incident and (i) accepted that the Applicant suffered
adverse attention from Sri
Lankan authorities in 2010 (Paragraph 26); and (ii) considered it entirely
implausible that the applicant
was the only family member of interest to
authorities as a result of his sister’s involvement with the LTTE
paragraph 14 of the Statutory Declaration dated 8 September 2013, the Applicant
noted that he would be at risk of serious harm
by the CID and the SLA because
his sister was in the LTTE and because of his imputed political belief.
Subsequently in paragraph
15 he stated “In the minds of Sri Lankan
officials anyone who had contact with the LTTE could face persecution from state
authorities.
The extent of LTTE association is not correlated with the
likelihood of arrest and torture so I am still vulnerable to attacks and
intimidation from the Sri Lankan authorities”. Also, in paragraph 16 he
reiterated that he would be harmed by the authorities
because in the mindset of
the Sri Lankan authorities, the LTTE is a terrorist organisation and as a Tamil,
he has been imputed with
political belief.
THE APPLICANT’S SUBMISSIONS: PROPOSED GROUNDS OF JUDICIAL
applicant appeared before the Court unrepresented. He was assisted by an
interpreter. Prior to the hearing commencing, the Court
ensured that the
applicant was in possession of a copy of the relevant Court Books and that the
respondent’s written submissions
had been translated to him. The Court
also ensured the applicant had access to a pen and paper so he could take notes
course of the hearing should he so wish to.
the commencement of the hearing, the Court explained was undertaking judicial
review, not merits review, and the difference between
the two types of review.
The Court explained the matters it was required to consider in an extension of
time application. The Court
also explained the procedure by which the hearing
would be undertaken.
Court orders, no written submissions or other material was provided to the Court
by the applicant in support of his case.
The applicant told the Court in
relation to his proposed grounds of judicial review that these had been prepared
by a lawyer and
he was not able to speak to them. He confirmed he had been
subject to torture by Sri Lankan authorities and that his sister had
disappeared.
the conclusion of the respondent’s oral submissions, the applicant was
asked if you wish to state anything in reply. He
THE FIRST RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS: PROPOSED GROUNDS OF
JUDICIAL REVIEW
Ground One, the applicant alleges that the Authority took an unduly narrow
construction of s 473DD of the
in relation to its consideration of
new information at paragraphs [7] and [8]. The first respondent submits that the
Authority undertook
the assessment of s 473DD of the
as required by
the principles from
AUS17 v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2020] HCA 37
(2020) 269 CLR 494
relation to paragraph [7], the applicant claimed that Sri Lankan authorities
were aware that the applicant had personal contact
with his sister via
"rehabilitated former LTTE militants" and that he feared arrest on return to Sri
Lanka as a result. The Authority
relevantly reasoned that:
(a) the applicant had not provided details regarding when the authorities became
aware of the contact with his sister;
(b) the applicant had not stated how he came to know about the informants;
(c) the applicant had given evidence at his SHEV interview that he had met his
sister once in 2004, and the last time he spoke to
her on the phone was in 2008
or 2009; and
(d) having had personal contact with his sister through informants, the
applicant did not refer to the informants during the interview
despite having
ample opportunity to do so.
Accordingly,
the Authority considered the new claim was a “recent invention” to
support his claims for protection, and
that there were no exceptional
circumstances to justify consideration of the claim. Although the Authority did
not expressly refer
to s 473DD(b)(ii) of the
, it clearly considered
whether the claims were credible personal information for the purpose of the
subclause. The Authority’s
finding of “recent invention”
connotes that the claim was not “credible” and thus failed s
473DD(b)(ii).
relation to paragraph [8], the applicant claims present problems for his family
members in Sri Lanka, including his father being
held in an army detention camp,
demands by the CID for money in return for the release of his sister, the
applicant's mother being
questioned, and general threats against the family if
they tried to locate his sister. The Authority considered whether the
information
could have been provided prior to the delegate's decision, noting
the applicant claims that these events "took place very recently
interview with the officer". The Authority noted that the applicant had not
specified any particular date, or even any
approximate date when any of the
incidents occurred, or how and when he learned about them, and accordingly was
not satisfied the
claim could not have been provided earlier. The Authority's
reasons concerning the lack of detail in the submission, lack of corroborative
evidence and timing of the events each went to the issue of whether s
473DD(b)(ii) of the
was satisfied.
it can be accepted that the Authority was required to assess whether the
information was "capable of being believed at the
deliberative stage" of its
review as per
CSR16 v Minister for Immigration & Border Protection
[2018] FCA 474
, [41]-[42]) (
), it plainly did consider
whether the information was "capable of being believed", before considering it
could not be believed due
to the improbability of the claim. Even if the Court
were to find error against the
standard, such error was immaterial
in the sense that it could not have resulted in a different outcome on the
review, as the Authority
would ultimately have found, as it did, that the claim
had been fabricated to support his protection visa application.
Ground Two, the applicant alleges that the Authority did not consider "integers"
of the applicant's claims. Specifically, the applicant
claimed the Authority
failed to consider an incident in 2010 in which the CID took the applicant to a
camp, accused him of assisting
the LTTE and his sister, beat him and burned him
with a hot metal pole; and further failed to consider that the applicant would
harm due to imputed political belief as a supporter of the LTTE due to his
Authority considered the applicant's claimed harm due to imputed political
belief at [29], [35] – [41], and the events in
2010 at [25] – [26]
and [29]. Regarding the 2010 incident, the Authority accepted that the applicant
had suffered the harm
he claimed but found it to be part of the "routine, but
troubling, treatment of Tamils at that time" at [26]. In relation to the
applicant's imputed political belief, the Authority found that the applicant was
not subsequently of interest to the authorities
at [29], and would not be of
interest upon return, either by reason of his profile or otherwise because for
a period of 18 months
after the cessation of the war, the Sri Lankan authorities
showed no interest in him at [29].
CONSIDERATION: MERITS OF THE PROPOSED GROUNDS OF JUDICIAL
generally it is only necessary to consider the grounds of judicial review at an
impressionistic level, on some occasions this
will require consideration at a
somewhat deeper level due to the nature of the grounds advanced.
473DD of the
(now repealed) placed strict limits on the
Authority’s ability to accept new information.
made it clear
that in considering whether or not to accept new information, the provisions of
s 473DD(b)(i) and (ii) were required
to be considered first before considering
if there were exceptional circumstances to warrant the acceptance of the new
information.
it is preferable that any consideration pursuant to s 473DD be explicit in its
processes and the steps in the process, as found
by Perry J in
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2024] FCA 658
, a ‘commonsense and realistic approach
should be undertaken to understand the reasons as a whole to see what the
Tribunal was
Court understands that, provided it is clear that the process outlined in
has been followed, this will be sufficient, even in the absence of
clear references to the section and the two-stage process prior
to coming to a
conclusion.
applicant’s first complaint relates to the reasoning in paragraph [7].
This relates to new claims the applicant had access
to informants, who were
rehabilitated LTTE, that authorities were aware that the applicant had been in
was in the LTTE. The Authority found this was a
recent invention to support his claim for protection and found there were not
exceptional
circumstances such as to consider this new claim.
reasoning process clearly indicates that the Authority found there were no good
reasons as to why the applicant could not have
raised the issue of informants
before the delegate in his SHEV interview: s 473DD(b)(i); and further the
Authority did not consider
the information credible as it found it to be a
recent invention: s473DD(b)(ii). After considering these two matters, the
determined that there were not exceptional circumstances to justify
considering the claim: s473DD(a). This reasoning process follows
required by the High Court in
. No jurisdictional error is
second complaint under Ground One relates to paragraph [8] of the
Authority’s decision. This relates to a new claim that
applicant’s father was arrested and threats made in relation to him if the
applicant was not surrendered to authorities.
The Authority noted the applicant
had not specified a date that these events occurred, but that they took place
‘very recently
after the interview with the officer’, presumably
meaning the applicant’s SHEV interview. The Authority noted the interview
took place on 19 September 2017 and the delegate’s decision is dated 15
January 2016.
date as to when he received that information was provided by the applicant or
how and when he learnt about them . The Authority
concluded it was not satisfied
this information could not have been provided prior to the delegate’s
decision. The Authority
ultimately concluded this claim was fabricated and thus
not credible. The Authority determined not to accept this information pursuant
to s 473DD(b).
there is not specific reference to s 473DD(b)(i) and (ii), however the
discussion is present such as to clearly indicate this
was the reasoning
process. Again, while there is no specific reference to s 473DD(a) as to the
lack of exceptional circumstances,
the requirements of s 473DD(a) and (b) are
cumulative as a result of the use of the word ‘and” at the end of s
Thus, if neither of the requirements of s 473DD(b) were met, the
Authority was entitled to reject the new information. No jurisdictional
present. Ground One has no merit
Two is a claim the Authority failed to consider certain integers of the
applicant’s claims. These are particularised
as follows:
(a) An incident in 2010 in which the CID took the applicant to a camp, accused
him of assisting the LTTE and his sister, beat him,
burnt him with a hot metal
(b) The applicant would face harm due to an imputed political belief as a
supporter of the LTTE due to his contact with the LTTE
and his sister being a
member of the LTTE.
accept the respondent’s submissions that these two integers were
specifically noted by the Authority at [12] and [23] of the
these claims were comprehensively considered and discussed at [29], [35] –
[41] and in relation to the 2010 incident
at [25] – [26]. The Authority
ultimately found Sri Lankan authorities would no longer have an adverse interest
in him due to
effluxion of time since the end of the civil war. I am satisfied
that the Authority did consider these integers but rejected them
for the reasons
given. Ground Two has no merit.
the applicant is unrepresented, the Court has perused the relevant Court Books
and associated documentation. No other jurisdictional
error is apparent.
DETERMINATION
neither of the grounds of judicial review have any merit, it would be pointless
to grant an extension of time. Accordingly, the
Application for an Extension of
Time is refused and the Application dismissed.
I certify that the preceding sixty-three (63)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge D
Dated: 13 November 2025
RTF format (513 KB)
Signed PDF/A format