URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/FamCA/2018/164.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gaynor & Tseh [2018] FamCA 164 (20 March 2018)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAYNOR & TSEH
[2018] FamCA 164
FAMILY LAW –
INTERLOCUTORY ORDERS – dispute over the extent of discovery – where
there is asserted no knowledge
of the business dealings of the applicant and the
respondent seeks extensive documents in circumstances where the applicant is
to have not told the truth to his bankers and otherwise conducts business
by a “handshake”.
FAMILY LAW – PROPERTY – interlocutory order – interim
property proceedings – where the parties dispute ownership
and possession
of a dog – where a pet is property within the meaning of the Family Law
Act and the approach to the determination
of an interim property dispute is the
same – where there is not sufficient evidence to justify the exercise of
application for interim relief refused.
FAMILY LAW – COSTS – where despite findings of incomplete
discovery, a large number of matters were otherwise resolved
by consent and
where a significant portion of the litigation was around orders associated with
the dog. Where the court finds there
is no justifiable circumstance to depart
from the principle that each party pays their own costs.
Family Law Act 1975
RESPONDENT:
DATE DELIVERED:
20 March 2018
PLACE DELIVERED:
PLACE HEARD:
JUDGMENT OF:
HEARING DATE:
13 March 2018
REPRESENTATION
COUNSEL FOR THE APPLICANT:
SOLICITOR FOR THE APPLICANT:
Taussig Cherrie Fildes
COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENT:
Ms Smallwood
SOLICITOR FOR THE RESPONDENT:
Blackwood Family Lawyers
5 days, the applicant MR GAYNOR comply with paragraph 3 of the orders made 16
November 2017 including the payment of any
interest accrued on any outstanding
(2) That forthwith, the applicant produce to the respondent details of all
storage costs’ arrangements in respect of payment
for the period from 16
November 2017 to date.
(3) That within 14 days, the applicant make disclosure of all contracts and
memoranda of understanding for the period from 1 July
2015 to date relating to
services either as an individual or by an entity in which he has an interest
including any partnership or
joint venture.
(4) That the respondent’s application that the applicant pay the costs of
these proceedings is dismissed.
(5) BY CONSENT that there be orders in terms of the attached minute.
(6) That the solicitors for the respondent engross the minute and provide it in
a Word format.
(7) That otherwise, the application in a case filed 1 February 2018 and the
response thereto filed 8 March 2018 are dismissed.
form of the order is subject to the entry of the order in the Court’s
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Gaynor & Tseh
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for Judgment may be
subject to review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the
order pursuant to r 17.02
Family Law Rules 2004
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA AT MELBOURNE
FILE NUMBER:
MLC 3090 of 2017
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
these interlocutory proceedings between Mr Gaynor (“the applicant”)
and Ms Tseh (“the respondent”) most
of the issues in dispute were
resolved between the parties themselves and I shall make orders now in the terms
agreed. These reasons
address the issues that were not resolved.
were four categories of issues in dispute. They relate to:
application for the return of a dog;
enforcement of an outstanding money obligation of the applicant;
(c) Discovery
issues; and
(d) A claim for
application was brought by the applicant on 1 February 2018 seeking orders for
property injunctions against the respondent which
were very widely drawn. In
addition to injunctions, the applicant sought access to various storage
facilities and the return of
items of chattels not stored in those facilities.
Then, the applicant sought the following order that the
respondent:
(d) cause the dog known as “[B]”, the
ownership of which is registered in the Respondent’s name, to be delivered
to the Respondent’s nominated agent.
curious part of the application was that the applicant sought that the matter be
dealt with urgently. Much of the evidence to which
I now turn focusses on what
happened as long ago as April 2017. There was significant litigation between
the parties throughout
that year but the urgency is not apparent.
the proceedings initially began, the jurisdiction of the court was denied by the
applicant who was the respondent to the substantive
proceedings. It was not
until 28 August 2017 that a concession was made. All of that puts the current
dispute over non-payment
of the ordered obligation (which is not disputed by the
applicant), the unresolved issues associated with discovery and the return
the dog, in some context.
evidence of each of the parties was set out in their respective affidavits filed
1 February 2018 and 8 March 2018. It is only
necessary that I deal with some of
the matters there raised because of the discrete issues requiring
determination.
his affidavit filed 1 February 2018 which ran to 52 paragraphs, the applicant
devoted 22 paragraphs to the issue of B. He referred
to this dog as his, having
“first met” B in 2010 which was prior to his relationship with the
respondent. He then went
on to say how the dog was cared for. The respondent
does not agree with the applicant. She also devoted 15 paragraphs to the same
issue saying that she was concerned that the applicant was seeking the
dog’s return to “further isolate, intimidate and
punish” her
for pursuing a property settlement and spousal maintenance. She devoted much of
the affidavit to how the dog was
currently being housed. She met B for the
first time about a year after the applicant did.
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”) makes no reference to
pets. It was conceded by the applicant that a dog does not fit within any other
category of property than a chattel. Hard as that may be for the applicant, and
perhaps other dog lovers to accept, the law here
concerns the alteration of
interests in property. Most significantly, the issue is the question of the
alteration of a property
interest on an interim basis. Thus, the interest must
be determined by reference to
of the Act.
application in relation to the return of the dog was treated by the applicant as
an application for interim property settlement.
The principles to be applied
were set out by the Full Court in
Strahan and Strahan (interim property
[2009] FamCAFC 166
(2011) FLC 93-466.
The first of two steps is
the court must consider whether there is jurisdiction to make the orders sought.
Both parties agree that
the dog is property. The second step requires a
consideration of the relevant factors under
of the Act.
, Boland and O’Ryan JJ, articulated the test at [132] as
In relation to the first stage, in our view, when
considering whether to exercise the power under
to make an interim property order, the “overarching consideration”
is the interest of justice. It is not
necessary to establish compelling
circumstances. All that is required is that in the circumstances it is
appropriate to exercise
the power. In exercising the wide and unfettered
discretion conferred by the power to make such an order, regard should be had to
the fact that the usual order pursuant to
is a once and for all order made
after a final hearing.
fair reading of the respective positions of the parties as set out in their
affidavits would not indicate that there is some overarching
consideration here
warranting the intervention of the court on an interim basis, the intervention
of the court. Although the reference
in the quote is to
of the Act, the
same provision is found in
, as Thackray J observed
(at [226]) the court should approach an application by first identifying the
circumstances that make it appropriate
to give consideration to the exercise of
its power to make an interim order as distinct from a final order. As his
Honour observed,
the conditions upon which the power is to be exercised, are
governed only by the obligation to make an order that is appropriate
circumstances and to ensure that that order is just and equitable.
is clear from reading the affidavits of the parties that there is much angst
The various claims for
ownership by reference to registration, or undertaking the attendances on a vet,
are hardly matters that
would indicate it is appropriate in the circumstances to
make an order here. Whilst one might sympathise with the applicant who
that he has an “emotional attachment” to the dog, so too, the
respondent asserts a similar feeling but she desires
the issue to be determined
as part of an overall property settlement. Indeed, it will be obvious that
there are significant factual
disputes at play as to who undertook what tasks in
relation to this dog.
is also significant to note in determining whether it is appropriate to make an
order here, the dog has been in the possession
of the respondent for some time.
There appears no logical reason why it is urgent for the court to intervene to
protect property.
the circumstances, I could not be satisfied that it is appropriate to exercise
the relevant power.
second issue relates to the enforcement of money orders. Bizarre as it may
seem, the difficulty here really relates to the timing
of a payment rather than
whether it would be paid.
were made on 16 November 2017 by the Senior Registrar, at the urging of the
parties, based on their consent. The order provides
for a regime of significant
payments which were not only precise as to quantum but also as to the relevant
dates. Similarly, the
order provided for the applicant to pay the storage
applicant filed his application in a case on 1 February 2018 but sought no
variation of the orders of 16 November 2017. It was
when the respondent filed
her application that she sought not only an outstanding payment but also
interest on it. In her affidavit,
the respondent said that the payment was due
on 28 February 2018 and by a week later, payment had not been made.
Correspondence
followed during which the applicant’s lawyer’s
advised that the payment could not be made due to “cash flow
difficulties”.
That prompted the respondent’s lawyers to request
details as to the financial records that might have enlightened them as
there were “cash flow difficulties”.
submissions, counsel for the applicant said that despite the difficulties, the
payment could be made on 29 March 2018, not within
24 hours as the respondent
had sought by her application filed on 8 March.
applicant’s counsel observed that as interest was an accruing obligation,
the respondent was not prejudiced. That submission
has no merit in
circumstances where someone is unemployed and reliant upon a payment which was
not only the subject of a court order
but one to which the payer had consented.
problem however was exacerbated by the fact that having received certain
documents, it came to light that the applicant had paid
$8000 to his lawyers on
6 March which was the day upon which the solicitors wrote to indicate that there
were cash flow difficulties.
No explanation was given (nor probably could be
given) as to why a priority was given to the lawyers.
for the respondent also observed that various records showed significant cash
sums in banking accounts but I am not confident
that I can draw any inference
adverse to the applicant because I am not sure what legal obligations there were
involved. However,
subsequent to the order in November 2017, the applicant paid
$17,000 rent on a beach house. He concedes that he has also given his
accommodation because her partner who has arrived from overseas, is not able to
earn an income at this stage. Other payments
were made in December including
$6600 to the applicant’s former wife. It was submitted that if one
examined his credit cards
after November 2017, a significant sum of money would
be then seen to have been spent.
am not in the position to make a finding one way or the other as to whether or
not there is a plausible explanation for the “cash
flow problems”
but at the time the applicant’s affidavit was sworn on 25 January 2018,
one would have to conclude that
there was a paucity of evidence of the nature to
which the submissions just mentioned were directed.
my view, there is no justification for this payment not having been made having
regard to the evidence before the court. In my
view, the payment should be made
within five days of the delivery of these orders.
third issue relates to discovery. Again, the issue was discrete. Much work was
done between the respective counsel to arrive
at a consensual position but the
issue that was contentious related to the following order sought by the
respondent:
Within 14 days of these orders, the de facto husband
provide copies of the following documents to the wife (sic):
Any deeds, agreements, contracts and memorandums (sic) of understanding
entered into by the de facto husband (individually or on
behalf of a company or
trust in which the de facto husband holds an interest) for the period 1 July
2015 to date that relate to:
(i) The de facto husband providing services (individually or on behalf of a
company or trust in which the de facto husband holds
an interest).
(ii) The de facto husband (individually or on behalf of a company or trust)
receiving interest in real estate and/or money benefits.
(iii) The de facto husband otherwise entering into a partnership or joint
venture (individually or on behalf of a company or trust).
width of the proposed order is perplexing. Obviously, the draftsperson saw some
distinction between a deed and an agreement or
a contract. Obviously, an
agreement, in a commercial sense, having regard to (i), (ii) and (iii) concerns
the same thing. Counsel
for the applicant did not disagree.
for the applicant said that her client’s objection was to the
“memorandums (sic) of understanding” because
(it was said) various
commercial arrangements were entered into but not fulfilled and the exercise was
cumbersome. That is not at
all clear from the material provided by the
respondent’s counsel submitted that the modus operandi of the applicant
was to operate commercially by doing “handshakes”.
There could be
no suggestion of any confusion about his understanding of legal obligations
because he has a law degree.
defies logic to say that the applicant did not know what was discoverable and
what was not in the circumstances of this case.
He must understand what earns
an income either for him, as an individual or in some corporate sense, in the
same way that he must
understand his obligations in relation to taxation and the
need to explain expenditure. I found the submission difficult to understand
a jurisdiction where disclosure obligation is absolute. Both parties are
represented by lawyers so there can be little excuse
for confusion about the
extent of the obligation. Absent that plausible explanation, the applicant must
provide not only the memoranda
if they have a relevance to any of the financial
circumstances of the applicant but also any correspondence surrounding those
obligations.
In my view, the applicant must fulfil his obligations. He has not
done so to date.
explanation was given that would justify a conclusion that the exercise was
cumbersome albeit the assertion was made. The applicant
conducts a business
which appears to have property development as its base. Exhibit R1 showed that
his financial circumstances had
altered by almost $1 million from what he last
year told his commercial bankers. His explanation for some of the figures that
the disparity was that he did not tell the truth to his bank. That gives
me little comfort but more importantly, it shows that there
are commercial
operations going on and nothing I heard, indicated that there was a reason for
not fulfilling the disclosure obligations.
Orders will therefore be made.
fourth issue relates to costs. Counsel for the respondent sought costs in the
sum of $7184. Those fees are not within the scale.
Counsel for the applicant
submitted that time had been used productively and a mechanism had been put in
place for a variety of
actions including stock takes and valuation not to
mention the fact that there had been a resolution of a number of issues.
of the Act provides that in proceedings under the Act, each party shall bear
their own costs unless there are circumstances that
justify a departure from
that principle. If the court finds that the circumstances justify a departure
from that principle, it must
take into account the matters set out in
of the Act.
Notwithstanding
my reservations about the approach taken by the applicant, both parties had come
to court focussing on a number of
different issues; the only common ones seemed
to be the dog. The case has moved forward and both parties spent the day
productively
as submitted by counsel for the applicant.
accept the submission by counsel for the respondent that the applicant had to be
brought to court to fulfil his obligations in relation
to discovery including
those that I have just mentioned but it still seems to me that the costs
incurred would have largely been
incurred for the day including counsel’s
fees to deal with other matters that had advanced the proceedings to the point
some serious consideration to a resolution can be made.
a jurisdiction where each party is expected to pay their own costs, there is
nothing unusual about the matter, notwithstanding
my reservations as expressed.
There is nothing here that I find justifies a departure from the main principle.
I decline therefore
to make any order for costs.
I certify that
the preceding thirty-four (34) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for
judgment of the Honourable Justice Cronin
delivered on 20 March
Date: 20 March 2018
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (153 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter