NRRM and Secretary, Department of Social Services (Social security second review) [2025] ARTA 2397 (10 November 2025)
NRRM and Secretary, Department of Social Services (Social security second
review) [2025] ARTA 2397 (10 November 2025)
Applicants:
Secretary, Department of Social
Secretary, Department of Education
Respondent:
Tribunal Numbers:
2023/5743, 2023/5750, 2023/5751, 2023/5752,
2023/5753, 2023/5754, 2023/5756, 2023/5757
2023/5758, 2023/5759, 2023/5760 & 2023/5761
Senior Member T Hamilton-Noy (second review)
The Tribunal sets aside the decision under review and
substitutes a decision that:
The Respondent
was a member of a couple, for social security purposes, from 30 November
Respondent’s parenting payment (single) was correctly cancelled from 30
November 2015;
The Respondent
owes debts to the Commonwealth for overpayment of parenting payment of $927.79
in the period 30 November 2015 to 6
April 2016 and $100,061.44 in the period 25
April 2017 to 30 March 2022;
Overpayments of
family tax benefit for the period 12 April 2017 to 30 June 2017, and for the
2017/18, 2018/19, 2019/2020 and 2020/21
financial years, and a newborn upfront
payment paid on 28 March 2018, are to be recalculated by the Applicants and any
amounts recalculated
are debts owed to the Commonwealth by the Respondent;
The Respondent
owes a debt to the Commonwealth for overpayment of child care benefit of
$10,692.18 for the period 3 July 2017 to 1
The Respondent
owes a debt to the Commonwealth for overpayment of covid supplement of $9,250
for the period 27 April 2020 to 13 April
The Respondent
owes a debt to the Commonwealth for overpayment of an economic support payment
of $750, paid on 2 April 2020; and
The debts are
all recoverable by the Commonwealth.
Statement made on 10 November 2025 at 2:57pm
Names used in all published decisions are pseudonyms. Any references
appearing in square brackets indicate that information has been
removed from
this decision and replaced with generic information so as not to identify
involved individuals as required by
subsections 201(1A)
(1B) of the
Security (Administration) Act 1999
subsections 161(1B)
(1C) of the
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
Member of a couple – whether partnered – cancellation of
parenting payment – parenting payment debt – family
tax benefit
debts – child care benefit debt – covid supplement debt –
economic support payment debt – no
reason to waive or write off debts
Legislation
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) Act 1999
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
Administrative Review Tribunal (Consequential and Transitional Provisions
1) Act 2024
Coronavirus Economic Response Package Omnibus Act 2020
Social Security Act 1991
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Drake and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No 2)
Haddara and Secretary, Department of Social Services
[2023] AATA
Nassimi and Secretary, Department of Social Services
[2015] AATA
Pelka v Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services
(2006) 151 FCR 546
Re Boscolo v Secretary, Department of Social Security
Re Kazmierczak and Secretary, Department of Families, Housing, Community
Services and Indigenous Affairs
[2010] FCA 1084
Staunton-Smith v Secretary, Department of Social Security
[1991] FCA 513
Taleb and Secretary, Department of Social Services
[2020] AATA
Wall and Secretary, Department of Education, Employment and Workplace
[2010] AATA 740
Statement of Reasons
matter relates to a series of decisions made by the Applicants that the
Respondent was partnered for social security purposes
from November 2015 and to
raise and recover a number of social security and family assistance debts from
Respondent received social security and family assistance payments from the
Applicants (Services Australia – Centrelink)
between November 2015 and
March 2022 at the single rate of payment.
a review of her circumstances, decisions were made to find that the Respondent
was a member of a couple with her Alleged
Partner (AP) from 30 November 2015, to
cancel her parenting payment on 14 December 2021 and to raise and recover the
following debts
payment debts of $927.79 for the period 30 November 2015 to 6 April 2016 and
$100,061.44 for the period 25 April 2017 to
30 March 2022;
benefit debts of $887.20 for the period 12 April 2017 to 30 June 2017, $5,084.68
for the 2017/18 financial year, $8,942.09
for the 2018/19 financial year,
$8,925.25 for the 2019/20 financial year, $7,338.55 for the 2020/21 financial
year and $540 in respect
of a payment made on 28 March 2018;
A child care
benefit debt of $10,692.18 for the period 3 July 2017 to 1 July 2018;
supplement payment debt of $9,250 for the period 27 April 2020 to 13 April 2021;
An economic
support payment debt of $750 in respect of a payment made on 2 April 2020.
above decisions were affirmed by an authorised review officer of Centrelink on
17 January 2023, following a request for an internal
review by the Respondent.
Respondent then sought a review of the decision by the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal (the AAT) and on 26 June 2023, the AAT
at first review set aside the
decision and decided in substitution that the Respondent was not a member of a
couple between 30 November
2015 and 3 June 2020 and social security and family
assistance payments were payable to her in that period at the single rate of
payment. The AAT found that the Respondent did not owe debts to the Commonwealth
for overpayment of childcare benefit from 3 July
2017 to 1 July 2018, covid
supplement for the period 27 April 2020 to 3 June 2020, family tax benefit debts
covering periods from
1 July 2017 to 3 June 2020 and an economic support payment
debt for a payment made on 2 April 2022. The AAT found that the Respondent
member of a couple from 4 June 2020 and that debts were to be recalculated for
parenting payment for the period 3 June 2020
to 30 March 2022, covid supplement
from 4 June 2020 to 13 April 2021 and family tax benefit for the period 4 June
2020 to 30 June
4 August 2023, the Applicants sought a second review of the AAT decision.
14 October 2024, the AAT became the Administrative Review Tribunal (the
Tribunal). Under the transitional provisions in the
Administrative Review
Tribunal (Consequential and Transitional Provisions No.
(the Transitional Act)
applications for review to the
AAT that were not finalised before 14 October 2024 are taken to be an
application for review to the
Tribunal. The Transitional Act gives the Tribunal
the authority to continue and finalise any aspect of the review not already
by the AAT. This decision and statement of reasons is made by the
Issues and evidence before the Tribunal
Tribunal hearing was held over multiple days on 11 August, 12 August, 13 August
and 9 September 2025. The Respondent appeared
in person and gave evidence on
affirmation and the Tribunal also heard evidence from AP, who also appeared in
person and gave evidence
on affirmation. A representative for the Applicant
appeared at the hearing in person.
addition to the oral evidence and submissions made at the hearing, the Tribunal
had the following documents before it, copies of
which were also provided to all
of the parties to the review:
(i) Bundle of “T” documents T1 to T194;
(ii) Bundle of supplementary T documents ST1 to ST69;
(iii) Provided by the Applicants: historical and current home and postal
addresses for the Respondent and AP, summary of bank statements
emailed response to this, tables of unexplained deposits for the Respondent and
AP, with a response for the Respondent’s
information, and a call record
dated 22 October 2015;
(iv) The Applicants’ Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions.
Applicants submit that the AAT at first review erred in finding that the
Respondent and AP were not members of a couple, for social
security purposes, in
the period from 30 November 2015 to 3 June 2020. The Applicants do not dispute
the AAT’s finding that
the Respondent and AP were partnered from 4 June
2020. The Applicants submit that, as a result of being a member of a couple with
AP throughout the period under review, there are debts due to the Commonwealth,
as had been affirmed by the authorised review officer,
and that these debts are
recoverable by the Commonwealth.
the scope of the authorised review officer and AAT first review decisions before
it, and the submissions made by the Applicants
as to their reasons for seeking a
review of the first review decision, the Tribunal considered that the legal
issues in this matter
(i) Whether the Respondent was partnered with AP from 30 November 2015;
(ii) Whether the Respondent’s parenting payment should have been cancelled
on 14 December 2021;
(iii) Whether the Respondent owes debts to the Commonwealth for overpayment of
parenting payment;
(iv) Whether the Respondent owes debts to the Commonwealth for overpayment of
family tax benefit for periods covering 12 April 2017
to 30 June 2021;
(v) Whether the Respondent owes a child care benefit debt for the period 3 July
2017 to 1 July 2018;
(vi) Whether the Respondent owes a covid supplement debt for the period 27 April
2020 to 13 April 2021;
(vii) Whether the Respondent owes an economic support payment debt for a payment
made on 2 April 2020; and
(viii) If there are debts, whether there is any reason the debts should not be
recovered by the Commonwealth.
Whether the Respondent was partnered with AP between November
2015 and March 2022
person’s rate of social security and family assistance payments is
affected by a range of factors, including whether they
are partnered (a
“member of a couple”) or are single.
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) Act 1999
(Cth) (the Family
Assistance Act) provides that a “member of a couple” has the same
meaning as in the
Social Security Act 1991
Social Security
Social Security Act
provides that:
(2) Subject
of a couple
for the purposes of this Act if:
legally married to another
is not, in the Secretary's opinion (formed as mentioned in
living separately and apart from the other
a permanent or indefinite basis; or
(aa) both of the following conditions are met:
(i) a relationship between the
of the same sex or a different sex) is registered under a law of a State or
Territory prescribed for the purposes of section
Interpretation Act 1901
as a kind of relationship prescribed for
the purposes of that section;
not, in the Secretary's opinion (formed as mentioned in
living separately and apart from the other
a permanent or indefinite basis; or
(b) all of the following conditions are met:
a relationship with another
whether of the same sex or a different sex (in this
not legally married to the
(iii) the relationship between the
in the Secretary's opinion (formed as mentioned in
subsections
and (3A)), a de facto relationship;
(iv) both the
over the age of consent applicable in the State or Territory in which they
not within a
relationship
Social Security Act
then states that:
(3) In forming an
opinion about the relationship between 2 people for the purposes of
subparagraph (2)(aa)(ii) or subparagraph (2)(b)(iii), the Secretary is
to have regard to all the circumstances of the relationship
including, in
particular, the following matters:
(a) the financial aspects of the relationship, including:
(i) any joint ownership of real estate or other major assets and any joint
liabilities; and
(ii) any significant pooling of financial resources especially in relation
to major financial commitments; and
(iii) any legal obligations owed by one
respect of the other
(iv) the basis of any sharing of day-to-day household expenses;
(b) the nature of the household, including:
(i) any joint responsibility for providing
(ii) the living arrangements of the people; and
(iii) the basis on which responsibility for housework is distributed;
(c) the social aspects of the relationship, including:
(i) whether the people hold themselves out as married to, or in
a de facto relationship with, each other; and
(ii) the assessment of friends and regular
the people about the nature of their relationship; and
(iii) the basis on which the people make plans for, or engage in, joint
social activities;
(d) any sexual relationship between the people;
(e) the nature of the people's commitment to each other, including:
(i) the length of the relationship; and
(ii) the nature of any companionship and emotional support that the people
provide to each other; and
(iii) whether the people consider that the relationship is likely to
continue indefinitely; and
(iv) whether the people see their relationship as a marriage-like
relationship or a de facto relationship.
Social Security Act
states that the Secretary must not form the
opinion that the relationship between a person and his or her partner is a de
facto relationship
if the person is living separately and apart from the partner
on a permanent or indefinite basis.
Staunton-Smith v Secretary, Department of Social Security
[1991] FCA 513
(1991) 32 FCR
, the Federal Court stated (at 20)
suggested that this list is exhaustive nor will each of these subjects fall to
be considered in every case. It must also
be emphasised that a particular answer
to a single subject will rarely, if ever, supply a final solution. The
responsibility of the
fact-finding tribunal is to have regard to all the
material facts of each case, treating the matters listed above only as
indicators.
The Tribunal will make its determination whether a particular man
and woman are or are not living separately and apart only after
assessing the
totality of the evidence and other material that is before it.
Pelka v Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services
(2006) 151 FCR 546
, the Federal Court noted that (at
Having regard to the current provisions of
approaches discussed in the earlier authorities mentioned, a decision-maker
concerned with whether an unmarried person is
in a marriage-like relationship
with another person of the opposite sex:
1. Must have regard to their interpersonal relationship as a whole not
limited by the factors listed in
2. Must have regard to each of:
(a) the financial aspects of the
relationship;
(b) the nature of the household;
(c) the social
aspects of the relationship;
(d) any sexual relationship between the
(e) the nature of the people’s commitment to each
3. In having regard to the preceding five matters, must have regard to all
factors relevant to each and, in particular, must have
regard to the factors
listed under each heading in
4. Must specifically consider the
total picture of the relationship created by all of these factors bearing in
mind that consideration
must be given to those which weigh against a
marriage-like relationship and those which weigh in favour of it.
undertake the preceding consideration bearing in mind that a marriage-like
relationship is not disclosed solely by any one
of the following
(a) financial cooperation;
(b) cohabitation;
sexual relationship;
(d) cooperative household arrangements;
mutual commitment.
then states that a person is not a member of a couple if a determination
is in force in relation to the person.
Subsection 24(2)
Social Security Act
provides that:
a relationship with another
whether of the same sex or a different sex (the
not legally married to the
(c) the relationship between the
a de facto relationship; and
(d) the Secretary is satisfied that the
for a special reason in the particular case, not be treated as a
of a couple
the Secretary may determine, in writing, that
not to be treated as a
of a couple
for the purposes of this Act.
Re Boscolo v Secretary, Department of Social Security
[1999] FCA 106
Federal Court noted (at [18]-[20]) that:
.....The core of the
requirement for "special circumstances" or "special reasons" is that there be
something unusual or different
to take the matter the subject of the discretion
out of the ordinary course -
Minister for Community Services and Health
v Chee Keong Thoo
[1988] FCA 54
(1988) 78 ALR 307
at 324 (Burchett J). But
that does not require that the case be extremely unusual, uncommon or
exceptional -
Secretary, Department of Social Security v
[1992] FCA 338
(1992) 108 ALR
(supra) the Full Court, having
concluded that the term "special" was sufficiently well understood not to
require a judicial gloss
said the matter was one for the decision-maker, in that
case the Director-General of Social Security.
The decision-making process under
is notionally in two stages. First, is the assessment whether there
is a special reason in the particular case for which the Secretary
is satisfied
that the person the subject of his discretion should not be treated as a member
of a couple. There follows the determination
that the person is not to be
treated as a member of a couple. The latter determination involves the exercise
of discretion although
as a practical matter assessment and determination will
tend to be rolled up as one decision.
It is of importance in the present case to note that
requires the decision-maker to focus on the position of one person,
not the couple, and to assess whether that person should for
a special reason
not be treated as a member of the couple. It is possible that in the case of two
married persons in receipt of different
benefits, each paid at a married rate,
one person might not be treated as a member of the couple while the other might
continue to
be so treated.
Re Kazmierczak and Secretary, Department of Families, Housing, Community
Services and Indigenous Affairs
[2010] FCA 1084
, the Federal Court stated
(at [37]-[42]):
I agree generally with what French J said
Boscolo v Secretary, Department of Social Security
[1999] FCA 106
(1999) 90 FCR 531
that the core of the requirement for “special reasons” under s 24(1)
is that there be something unusual and
different to take the matter the subject
of the discretion out of the ordinary course. But that does not require that the
extremely unusual, uncommon or exceptional. I also agree with the
observation of French J, at [18], that the word “special”
essence “instrumental”, a direction to the decision-maker that the
discretion it constrains is not lightly to be
The decision of French J in
was referred to in the
decision of the AAT in
. It was also referred to in the recent
decision of the AAT in
Re Holt and Secretary, Department of Education,
Employment and Workplace Relations
[2010] AATA 143
), where the senior
member, Professor RM Creyke, was at pains to emphasise that caution must be
exercised in the interpretation and
application of the “special
reasons” discretion. At [30], the senior member emphasised that particular
caution should
be taken about importing a requirement mentioned in the Guide to
Social Security Law that a “special reason must be outside
couple’s or individual’s control and cannot be changed”.
Senior Member Creyke, at [32], also emphasised that
the expression must be
interpreted in context consistent with the scope and purpose of the Act and in
that regard referred to the
statement made in the Explanatory Memorandum to
Security Legislation Amendment Bill (No 4) 1991
which states (at
there is justification in paying a higher rate to an unpartnered person
than to a member of a couple if both members of the couple
are living together.
This justification is based on the premise that the unpartnered person does not
enjoy the same economies of
shared living costs as does the member of a couple
in those circumstances. If the economies of scale are not available to the
of the couple because he or she is living apart from his or her partner
because, for example, of the illness of one or both members
of the couple, then
each would face similar living costs as an unpartnered person.
I generally agree with these further observations of the Senior Member.
, Senior Member Creyke went on to consider the relevant
provisions of the Guide and the case law that has dealt with the capacity
persons such as the applicant and his wife to pool resources for their mutual
benefit. At [48], the Senior Member identified the
issue as being whether, for
practical reasons, they could not reasonably be expected to enjoy the pooling of
resources that usually
occurs in a marital relationship. A number of decisions
of the AAT, including
circumstances will arise from time-to-time as a result of which the s 24
“special reasons” discretion should
be exercised in favour of the
pension holder, on the basis that for practical reasons the income enjoyed by
the pension holder’s
partner is not available for pooling.
The case law canvassed by Senior Member Creyke in
case confirms, in my view correctly, that there is a particular focus under the
Act on the practical ability of the resources
of the partner being available for
pooling with the resources of the person holding the pension. This fundamentally
derives from
s 1064-A2 of the Act which provides that where two people are
members of a couple, they will be treated as pooling their resources
(income and
assets) and sharing them on a 50/50 basis.
It stands to reason that if for some legal or other practical reason the
partner member of the couple cannot be treated as sharing
income and assets then
there is a ground for exercising the discretion under s 24 so as not to treat
the holder of the pension as
a member of a couple who are capable of sharing
resources. In that regard, in effect, the s 1064-A2 expectation that there will
pooling is negatived.
Social Security Guide at Point 2.2.5.40 sets out the Department’s policy
guideline for exercise of the discretion under
Social Security
. In respect of a couple’s inability to pool resources –
discussed in the case law above – the Guide notes
Inability to pool resources
In general, an income support payment is paid at a partnered rate where a
person is a member of a couple in recognition that a couple
living together
typically pool resources and therefore have lower living costs in comparison to
2 single people living separately.
Where a couple is unable to pool resources,
it may result in extra expenditure causing financial difficulty, which would
unfair to treat the person as partnered.
If there are practical or legal reasons a couple cannot share income and
assets, then there MAY be grounds for exercising the discretion
provisions.
would NOT be appropriate where:
a couple is able
to pool resources but chooses not to do so, or
if one or both
members of a couple has access to other sources of support and either has not
explored or realised the support or choose
not to access
does NOT generally apply if the
couple is living together overseas. In assessing couples living together
overseas, the decision maker
must be satisfied that the information provided is
a special situation to warrant the application of
section 24.
It is important to
consider whether the couple is able to benefit from pooling of resources.
Financial difficulty
For the purposes of
, financial difficulty is often considered
if there is an
inability to provide accommodation and the basic necessities of life
if the couple is
without adequate means of support, and
if there is
income or readily available funds from other sources.
Consideration
should be given to the couple’s overall financial situation, compared to
their necessary expenditure. All sources
of readily available funds and/or
income are to be taken into account, as well as any in-kind support
addition to an inability to pool resources, the Guide further notes that
relationships where there is family violence may also
give rise to exercise of
the discretion in
Social Security Act
& domestic violence
The presence of family and/or domestic violence in a relationship may
indicate that a person is not a member of a couple under the
5 factors (
However, there may be situations where
should be applied due to a
person’s particular circumstances. In general, the application of
should only be considered in circumstances where:
the person who
is experiencing family and/or domestic identifies as partnered, or
a member of a
couple assessment has resulted in finding the 2 people are a couple, but due to
the existence of family and/or domestic
violence both members of the couple
should be treated as single.
When a person experiencing family
and/or domestic violence is not subject to the partnered income and asset test
and is paid a higher
rate, it could enable them to leave a situation they would
not have been able to otherwise.
Tribunal is not bound by the commentary in the Guide but will generally follow
the Department’s policy unless there are
cogent reasons for not doing so
Drake and Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No 2)
(1979) 2 ALD 634
at 639-645).
Background: Events between
October 2014 and August 2015
Tribunal accepted that the Respondent and AP met while AP was in prison, on or
around 6 October 2014, where the Respondent visited
to see her brother who was
also incarcerated at the time. Records provided by the prison stated that the
Respondent and AP had had
860 phone calls from the time they met to the end of
December 2014 and that the Respondent had visited AP on 23 occasions in prison.
The Respondent did not dispute the accuracy of the information provided by the
prison, describing to the Tribunal that she and AP
had probably been wanting to
get to know one another, that the maximum phone call time allowed had been 10 or
12 minutes and that
the visits had occurred on both weekdays and weekends, and
that she had also been going to see her brother.
Respondent updated her Facebook profile in October 2014 to being in a new
relationship as of that month. When this profile was
put to the Respondent at
the hearing, she stated that “if it’s there, it’s
there”. AP had also updated his
Facebook profile on the same date, to
reflect he was in a relationship. When this was put to the Respondent at
hearing, she stated
in response that they had not had internet and access to
social media in prison.
information provided by the prison further reflected that the Respondent and AP
had made a further 1,210 phone calls with each
other between 1 January 2015 and
7 July 2015, and that the Respondent had visited the prison on a further 69
occasions between January
2015 and August 2015. The Respondent did not dispute
this information, stating that August 2015 had been just before AP was released
and that she had visited every weekend, including taking her children with her
perhaps once and taking AP’s children in also.
Tribunal also accepted that the Respondent made seven transfers to AP’s
bank account while he was in custody, in amounts
totalling $195. The Respondent
told the Tribunal that these amounts would have been for AP to make phone calls
to his release, a parole suitability assessment was undertaken for AP on 18 July
2015. During the assessment, AP advised the
assessor that he was “now in a
de facto relationship” with the Respondent, that they had met in 2014
while he was incarcerated
and that they had been in a relationship for nine
months. AP advised the assessor that they had a good supportive relationship and
the Respondent would be residing with him upon release. The Respondent is
reported to have advised the assessor that: “confirmed
with this service
that she has been in a relationship with [AP] since October 2014, and is now
residing with his parents at his proposed
residence. She reported that she has
not lived with [AP] and they have not had a relationship in the
community”. The proposed
household arrangements for AP’s release on
parole were described as including his parents, the Respondent, the
Respondent’s
two children and AP’s daughter.
the Respondent agreed the above record was correct and that she had given the
information as described, she stated that she
had not been living at the
property in question after AP’s release.
to AP’s release from prison, the Respondent wrote a letter to the Adult
Parole Board to support his application for parole.
A copy of the letter was
before the Tribunal and read, in relevant part:
I am writing to you
regarding the upcoming parole hearing of my partner [AP]. [AP] and I have been
in a relationship for just over
9 months. We met while he was incarcerated
through my brother. We are religiously married. We plan to get engaged once he
is released
on parole. I am currently living at his parents’ house with my
two children whom have taken to him very well. Since meeting
[AP] I have visited
every weekend. I take in his children every Sunday and my kids every opportunity
I get. [AP] has four children
to past relationships. I, his ex-wife and children
all have a great relationship. His ex wife [name redacted] has just moved back
to [city] so the kids will be close to their father upon his release.
I am imploring you to favorably consider his release as I can assure you he
has addressed his past behaviour and I am certain that
he will do his best upon
his release. If he is granted parole I am prepared to give him all the support
he needs including guidance,
encouragement, love, accountability and financial
support. I am 100% committed to doing what I can to ensure my partner stays on
straight and narrow road so we can start our future together out of prison.
the letter was put to her at the hearing, the Respondent stated that she
remembered writing the letter and her reference to being
AP’s partner was
because he needed a letter of support. As to whether the contents of the letter
were true, the Respondent
stated yes, that’s what she wrote, although she
doesn’t remember writing all of it. She then stated no, not everything
true; she and AP’s ex-wife did not get along; and she had stayed at his
house before to help with his children and the
plan they had was that she would
move in with him when he was released. As to her indication in the letter that
she and AP had been
religiously married, the Respondent stated that she thinks
it was a few words that were said, which classed it as a temporary marriage
“sexual stuff” and it was not a formal thing. As to the indication
that they intended to be engaged, the Respondent
stated that that’s what
AP had told her his intention was. As to the intentions expressed in the final
paragraph, the Respondent
stated that that was the plan.
Tribunal accepted that AP was released from prison on 26 August 2015.
The financial aspects of the relationship
Tribunal accepted the Respondent’s evidence that, one week after AP was
released from prison, they applied for a joint bank
account and the purpose of
this had been because the people monitoring AP’s parole wanted to see
their relationship was continuing.
She did not think the account had been used,
but just that it had been opened.
Applicants had provided the Tribunal, and the Respondent and AP, summaries of
transactions it submits occurred between various
bank accounts held by the
Respondent and AP. When asked whether she recalled finance exchanges with AP,
the Respondent stated she
didn’t recall.
Respondent was asked about four transactions into her account between 29
September 2015 and 29 December 2015 totalling $750. These
referenced AP’s
name and, variously, the Respondent’s child, “love u”,
“me no love u” and “mummy
me love”. The Respondent
stated she had no recollection of the payments but accepted they had been made.
She stated she had
“no idea” of the reasons for the particular
references in the transactions.
Respondent was asked about two transactions from AP’s account to her
account on 12 October 2015 and 13 October 2015, totalling
$605 and references to
“eBay”. The Respondent stated that it would have been when AP was
selling stuff through eBay,
that she had let him use her account and it was not
a big deal, as she had let her sister do this too.
Respondent was asked whether AP had deposited $22,742 to the Respondent during
2016 and she disagreed with this assertion made
by the Applicants.
Respondent was taken to a summary of payments made by AP to the Respondent.
These included payments to one of the Respondent’s
bank accounts between
16 June 2016 and 23 November 2016 (21 transactions) totalling $17,922, with
references to SF’s name and
one of his aliases and to “love
u”, “me love you” and “luvu”. When asked about the
transactions,
the Respondent stated she guesses she received these. Another
table prepared by the Applicant outlined deposits to another of the
Respondent’s bank accounts from AP between 18 January 2016 and 27 July
2016 totalling $4,820, also referencing “me no
“love you” and similar comments. When asked about the transactions,
the Respondent did not dispute the
payments had been made to her.
Respondent was also asked about two transfers from her account to AP’s
account, totalling $3,000, made on 6 January 2016
and 28 January 2016,
referencing “rent” and “two of you”. The Respondent
stated that she has no idea about
the rent deposit and the “two of
you” comment didn’t make sense either.
Respondent was taken to a summary of transfers from her account to AP’s
account between 11 February 2016 and 6 April 2016
(six transactions) totalling
$18,748.31. Each transfer referenced “pay”. When asked about the
transactions, the Respondent
stated she has “zero idea”. When the
Applicants suggested that SF may have been taking her earnings, the Respondent
yes, potentially, if the dates match up with the day care work she did,
but she had no recollection of transferring her pay to AP.
Respondent was taken to a summary of payments made from her bank accounts to AP
between 18 February 2016 and 22 December 2016
(eight transactions) totalling
$3,278. The transactions referenced “me no love u”, the Respondent
and her children’s
names and “rent”. When asked about the
transactions, the Respondent stated she assumes they weren’t on good terms
and he was still taking her money from daycare. She was unable to explain the
reference to rent. When asked whether she had been
aware that AP had been
receiving large sums to his own bank accounts during 2016, she stated no.
response to the Applicants’ observation that during 2016, the Respondent
and AP had been living generally together, were
pooling resources and AP was
disagreed with their perception
of the living arrangements; she agreed AP had
been helping out with her children; and she doesn’t remember any financial
to the relationship. She stated she agreed she may have been on and off in
a de facto relationship, but this was not consistent.
Respondent had completed an income tax return for the 2015/16 financial year in
which she declared business income of $31,953,
TAC payments of $13,958 and
parenting payment (single) of $15,220. When taken to this document during the
hearing, the Respondent
stated that she has never gone somewhere and done a tax
return, and she assumes that AP completed this on her behalf. She has never
lodged a tax return for herself.
Respondent was taken to a summary of payments made from her account to
AP’s accounts between 4 January 2017 and 21 December
transactions) totalling $7,790. The transactions referenced “rent”,
“poo”, “car”, “love
you”, “me no love
you”, “jerk”, “Layby” “bday lunch” and
AP’s name. When
asked about the reasons for the transactions, the
Respondent stated she had no idea. As to why AP had been paying her sums for
she stated she doesn’t know. The Applicants noted during the hearing
that an amount of $3,100 had also been paid to the Respondent
Applicant asserted, AP. While not disputing the amount had come from AP, the
Respondent stated that she had paid it back.
She disputed that the sums moving
between the accounts were evidence of a member of a couple relationship. She
stated she was not
aware that AP had received deposits totalling $101,532 into
one of his accounts (held in a variation to his name) during 2017.
to the hearing, the Respondent had been provided a summary of bank deposits that
had been made to and from her account and had
been asked to comment on the
purpose of each of the deposits. She was taken to her responses during the
hearing and, in particular,
to deposits made to one of her accounts during 2017
that were described as “TAC insurance”. The explanation that had
been provided in the document was “From car accident”. When asked
completed the form and AP
had. She described other deposits as being from AP and as being movements
between her two accounts, on
the basis she had had savings for her
Respondent was taken to a summary of deposits into one of her other accounts,
which contained six deposits between 6 September
2016 and 30 December 2017, of
amounts between $1,100 and $7,000, and totalling $16,350. The explanation that
had been given for the
person who had made each of the deposits was
“don’t remember”. The Respondent did not respond to the
Applicants’
observation that most people receiving Centrelink payments did
not have that amount of money to deposit. In response to the Applicants’
comment that the amounts were income, the Respondent stated that she
couldn’t determine whether someone put money into her
accounts or whether
they were transfers and she was unaware that deposits were treated as income.
Respondent was taken to a summary of deposits into AP’s account, where
corresponding withdrawals had been made from one
of her accounts. The transfers
were made between 19 March 2018 and 29 October 2018 and totalled $2,775. The
Respondent did not dispute
the transfers had been made. When asked about
references in the transfers to “Bad husband”, “Evil”,
“Good bye” and “Rent”, the
Respondent stated that they were on poor terms at that stage and the nice
she assumes were during good stages. When asked about the
“husband” reference, she stated he was potentially at that
it was very up and down. She was unable to explain the “goodbye” and
“rent” references.
Respondent was taken to a summary of deposits into another of AP’s
accounts, where corresponding withdrawals had been made
from one of her
accounts. Five transfers had been made between 4 November 2018 and 20 December
2018, with references of “Bday”
and “Car”, totalling
$1,800. The Respondent accepted they had been from her, but stated she
wasn’t sure what they
related to.
Respondent was also taken to a summary of deposits to one of AP’s accounts
from her account during 2018, totalling $800
and referencing “rent”
and “poo” and stated she didn’t know what they related to.
Applicants submitted at the hearing that, during 2018, AP had received deposits
totalling $407,608 into his accounts during 2018.
When this was put to the
Respondent, she stated she didn’t know and wasn’t aware he was
receiving the money. As to her
own unexplained deposits into one of her
accounts during 2018, being amounts totalling $27,070.32 in ten transactions
January 2018 and 30 October 2018, the Respondent stated she
couldn’t explain because there wasn’t enough information.
that some related to purchasing a car.
Respondent was taken to a summary of deposits made to AP’s account in 2019
with corresponding withdrawals from the Respondent’s
accounts. The amounts
were transferred between 3 January 2019 and 20 June 2019 and totalled $19,230
and the reference in many of
the transactions was “car”. When taken
to the transactions, the Respondent stated she didn’t know about the
and didn’t have any memory of transferring money to AP’s
bank account.
Respondent was taken to a summary of deposits into an account made into a varied
name of AP. The summary set out transactions
made between 2016 and 2020 and
showed tens of thousands of dollars being deposited into the account. The
Respondent did not dispute
that the account was AP’s account. She was
unable to comment on the deposits that had been made. As to deposits that
to relate to income from employment, she stated she wasn’t aware
he was earning a wage and, as far as she’s concerned,
worked. In response to the Applicants’ observation that it was hard to
understand she would be unaware of such
volumes of money being controlled by AP,
the Respondent stated that she had never had access to AP’s accounts and
it was never
a topic of discussion unless it was about her money; his money was
not up for discussion.
Respondent was asked about unexplained deposits into her accounts during 2019.
She was unable to explain a deposit of $1,500 made
on 14 January 2019 or a
deposit of $16,293.49 made on 27 May 2019. Another deposit of $1,451.99 made on
18 September 2019 referenced
“CCS payment” and the Tribunal accepted
the Respondent’s evidence that this appeared to relate to a child care
subsidy payment made by Centrelink.
Respondent was taken to a summary of deposits into AP’s account with
corresponding withdrawals from her accounts, made between
31 December 2019 and
16 July 2020 and totalling $3,800. The transactions referenced “Ford
ranger” and the Respondent
stated she thought the amounts were for a car
she bought. When asked whether AP had given her money for the car, she stated
she could have purchased the car for him, or he could have assisted.
Respondent was also taken to a summary of transactions into an account the
Applicants submit was one of AP’s accounts. During
2020, amounts had been
paid into the account between 13 January 2020 and 23 October 2020, including an
amount of $3,000 appearing
to be from AP’s sister and an amount of
$616,447.79 described as settlement funds. The Respondent stated that she was
aware of a large sum to AP’s account, that he had taken out a loan on
his parents’ house and had gambled around $550,000.
Respondent was asked about unexplained deposits into her own account in 2020,
made between 14 February 2020 and 21 September 2020
and totalling $5,440. The
Respondent stated that she assumed they were transfers between different
accounts she had. She stated that
she knows how to save, scrimps when she can
and doesn’t gamble or waste money. She disputed that any of the money was
AP and stated that she hadn’t had any financial gain from him. When
asked about any cash payments from AP, she stated that
he had not given her
The nature of the household
evidence before the Tribunal about the residential addresses of the Respondent
and AP from August 2015, when AP was released from
prison, was contradictory and
somewhat unclear.
Tribunal accepted that, at the time he was released from prison, AP’s
family resided at an address with two houses on it
(Address 1). AP advised the
Adult Parole Board he would be residing there upon release and the Respondent
represented to the Adult
Parol Board that she was residing there with her
children. The Respondent changed her address with Centrelink to Address 1 two
prior to AP being released from jail. She was asked about her reasons for
having done this at the hearing and stated that there would
have been an
intention for her to move there, but AP’s ex-wife was living there with
his parents when he was released, and
because of that she hadn’t moved in.
The Respondent gave evidence of having picked AP up from prison and going back
1 with him, and not being aware his ex-wife was at the property until
they were at the house.
Department of Justice and Community Safety made home visits to Address 1 on 15
September 2015 and 25 January 2016. The report
of the visits noted that there
were two separate properties and that the Respondent and AP were residing in one
of the properties
with AP’s parents, the Respondent’s children and
AP’s daughter.
Respondent provided a rent certificate to Centrelink on 4 November 2015 for a
property at another address (Address 2). The rent
certificate stated the
Respondent was residing at the property with a female and that her landlord was
a varied name of AP, with
an address at Address 1. The Respondent was asked
property with her sister-in-law. She asserted she had not moved into Address 1.
Tribunal had great difficulty accepting the evidence of the Respondent that she
had resided at Address 2 for a period of time,
on the basis that AP was not her
landlord at the property and it is implausible that she would be unable to
provide the correct landlord’s
details if she was in a genuine rental
arrangement at the property. Having considered the evidence before it about the
the Tribunal does not accept that the Respondent resided at Address 2
in or around November 2015 for a period of time, with another
female, under a
rental agreement. The Tribunal considers it most likely that the Respondent and
AP were residing at Address 1 after
AP’s release from prison, as
represented to the Adult Parole Board prior to his release and as observed in
post-release visits
by Corrections staff.
Respondent advised Centrelink on 10 March 2016 that she had been living at
another address (Address 3) since 30 November 2015
and that she was not sharing
the property. There was evidence in the documents that the Respondent had
entered a residential tenancy
bond for the property as of December 2015.
was presented to the Tribunal by the Applicants, regarding contact between
Centrelink and the agent who had managed the lease
for the property at Address
3. The agent reported having had contact with both the Respondent and AP and
advised the property had
been vacated on 22 June 2016. The record of the email
from the agent noted that:
The tenant in 2016 tried to take our
company for compensation due to someone breaking into his home apparently but
was not granted
any compensation.
I have attached a photo of some items left behind by the tenant and the goods
left behind request.
I also found a photo of a box from Ebay with his name and address on it.
I apologise that I wasn't able to provide any more information, we had some
incompetent staff at the time that must have lost the
Respondent was taken to the email during the hearing and stated there were times
when AP was present, he helped her get the lease
there and she was helping him
with parole, so to a certain extent he needed to paint that picture. In response
to the reference to
“the tenant” and “his home”, the
Respondent stated she recalls the house being broken into but doesn’t
recall AP attempting to get compensation.
addition to the above information, the Tribunal was also provided copies of text
messages from the agent to a mobile number that
the Tribunal accepted was
AP’s number (on the basis of its correlation with other documents in which
he had provided the number
in question, including Centrelink claim forms). In a
text message dated 16 June, the agent noted that rent was overdue and requested
payment. The response from AP was “I’m vacating buy tomorrow”
and then “so u want money”. When taken
to this email exchange, the
Respondent stated that she had left because she was robbed. As to whether she
was out of the property
prior to 16 June 2016, she stated she didn’t know.
As to who was paying rent, she stated it had been her. As to why an agent
be texting AP rather than herself, she stated he knew someone who worked for the
Tribunal finds from the above evidence that the Respondent and AP were residing
at the Address 3 property from November 2015 to
June 2016. AP spoke to the agent
deliveries. The Tribunal was
satisfied from this evidence that AP was at the
property on at least a part-time basis and, given this finding, did not accept
Respondent’s evidence that she was residing at the property with only
her children. The Tribunal notes that these findings
are complicated by
AP’s ongoing use of the Address 1 address and a post office box after this
time, and the lack of cohesion
between leases signed by the Respondent and
addresses notified to Centrelink.
Tribunal accepted that the Respondent moved into Address 4 after leaving Address
3, in or around June 2016. The Respondent changed
her address with VicRoads to
Address 4 from 15 July 2016 and, in May 2016 and August 2016, AP advised
Corrections he was residing
with the Respondent at both Address 3 and Address 4.
When taken to the information about AP, the Respondent stated that AP needed
permission to stay anywhere other than Address 1 and he potentially could have
said that; he could have been residing there or just
staying there for the
night. When asked whether AP’s representation was correct, the Respondent
then stated no, he had resided
for the whole parole period at Address 1; what he
told them and the actual situation was very different.
had advised Corrections that the relationship had broken down as of December
2016 and he was residing at Address 1 in a converted
garage. When asked about
this, the Respondent stated she could not pinpoint any date, because the
relationship was up and down. When
asked whether there was a period that AP had
returned to Address 1, the Respondent stated that there was never a situation
AP was living with her full-time, and so she disagrees with the statement
that he moved back to Address 1.
advised Corrections on 11 January 2017 that he had reunited with the Respondent
and was living between Address 1 and Address 4.
When taken to this evidence, the
Respondent stated that he was staying there every now and then. She disagreed
that he was residing
with her at Address 4.
Tribunal accepted the Applicants’ submissions that the Respondent and AP
had left Address 4 by June 2017, on the basis that
the new owners had provided
information to Centrelink that they had purchased the property on 2 June 2017
and the new owners were
residing there from that date. The new owner had
confirmed he had received mail in the Respondent’s surname and for a male
with a name of a similar ethnicity to AP’s. The Respondent agreed she was
no longer at Address 4 by July 2017. She asserted
she had not returned to
Address 1, but rather was residing at an address in another suburb with a
friend. As to her use of Address
4 for Centrelink purposes in August 2017, she
stated that she had no idea. As to why she had never advised Centrelink of the
in the other suburb she was claiming to have lived in, she stated that
she hadn’t updated her details; her friend was charging
rent to her. The
Tribunal had difficulty accepting that, in circumstances where the Respondent
was paying rent for a property, she
would not have advised Centrelink and would
not have sought rent assistance.
Tribunal noted that, when asked for details of the landlord for the other
property, the Respondent stated she didn’t have
his contact number any
more. A letter had been prepared by the landlord in question stating that a
verbal arrangement had been in
place for $260 per week, and that the Respondent
had stayed there between July 2017 through to late 2020. The contents of the
by the claimed landlord were not tested in evidence at the hearing.
individual with AP’s varied name purchased a property at Address 5 on 13
February 2019. When asked whether that individual
was AP, the Respondent stated
she had no idea and was told his brother had purchased the property. She
asserted she had not moved
into the property with AP until 2020. When asked
lived there for several years by then.
the Respondent’s continued use of Address 4 some two years after she had
left the property, and given the Respondent’s
failure to advise Centrelink
she was residing at an address in another location and was paying rent at that
address, the Tribunal
found it most likely that the Respondent and AP returned
to reside at AP’s family home at Address 1 for a period of time between
mid-2017 and February 2019 and that the Respondent was residing with AP at the
Address 5 address from February 2019 onwards.
Respondent’s mother had prepared a letter for the Respondent, stating that
the Respondent and her children periodically
come to visit her at her home, that
she usually stays one to three days per week, but sometimes she may not see the
Respondent for
a month so there was no regular format. The Respondent’s
mother stated that that had been going on for approximately six or
seven years.
When taken to this letter at the hearing, the Respondent agreed her children
were at childcare and primary school Monday
to Friday and that she had not been
going to her mother’s every weekend. The Tribunal did not consider the
letter prepared
by the Respondent’s mother provided compelling or
persuasive evidence that the Respondent had not been living at the above
addresses during the period under review. The Tribunal notes that the
Respondent’s mother was not called as a witness at the
Tribunal hearing.
Tribunal further notes that the above findings are complicated by the Respondent
and AP’s use of Address 1 for billing purposes
for bank statements, the
use of PO boxes for Centrelink correspondence at various points, and the
continued use by the Respondent
of Address 4 for some two years after her
arrangement for the property ended. These circumstances lead the Tribunal to
conclude that
the Respondent and AP had not been forthcoming with Centrelink, in
the period under review, about where they were residing. The Tribunal
Applicants’ submissions about the deliberate nature of this, to represent
themselves as not partnered for social
security purposes in order to access
single rates of payments of various social security and family assistance
The social aspects of the relationship
noted above, the Respondent and AP had both updated their Facebook accounts in
October 2014 to represent that they were each in
a relationship. In August 2016,
AP had updated his Facebook profile picture to a photo of himself and the
Respondent. The Respondent’s
mother had commented on the post, about the
photo being her darling baby and her partner, and when asked about this, the
stated she has never denied that she and AP were in a relationship.
She agreed that her mother saw AP as her partner based on the
comment and stated
she was surprised, because her mother never liked him.
March 2017, the Respondent had updated her profile photo on Facebook to a photo
of herself and AP, with their heads close together.
The Respondent’s
mother had commented that it was a nice picture of them. When taken to the
photo, and in response to an observation
by the Applicants that she and AP
looked like members of a couple, the Respondent stated no, and that all photos
had been about AP’s
ex-wife, to get a rise out of her.
September 2017, the Respondent posted on Facebook that she and AP were excited
to announce they were having a baby girl. In response
to the Applicants’
observation that the post had been two days after the Respondent had contacted
Centrelink to inquire about
parenting payment (single), the Respondent stated
yes, she had made the post and that just because she was having a kid with
doesn’t mean anything.
May 2018, the Respondent posted a photo to her Facebook account of herself, AP
and a number of children. When asked about the representation
in the photo, the
Respondent stated it had been based on the day, not her pregnancy or birth.
Respondent gave birth to AP’s biological children in February 2018 and
July 2020. The Tribunal was provided records kept
by the hospital, which reflect
that the Respondent advised the hospital in July 2020 that her partner was
working long hours away
from home. When asked about this representation to the
hospital, the Respondent stated that she didn’t want to look like a
mother and she was unsure why she had said he was working away from home. When
asked about the representation that AP was
her partner, the Respondent stated
that she can’t agree or disagree if they were at that time or not; she
doesn’t know
the times they were or weren’t together. She would say
that the period preceding the birth they were still on rocky terms.
hospital records further reflect that on another occasion in July 2020, the
Respondent advised the hospital that she had three
children, that her husband
was working for insurance and was often away, and that she would like to ensure
care was organised for
the children and her husband was able to attend the birth
as she had had a “precip” birth the last times. When taken
record, the Respondent stated AP had not been working in insurance. As to her
reference to a “husband” she stated
yes, she was telling them
whatever she wanted and didn’t want to appear as a single mother of four
children. The Respondent
stated that she had wanted to be induced and agreed the
record was reflecting that she wanted her husband to be there in time.
Respondent stated that AP had been at the birth in July 2020. As to a patient
registration form completed for the hospital that
reflected AP as her
“husband/male partner”, the Respondent stated he was potentially
that at the time, she is not sure.
As to the address reflected in the record,
being Address 5, the Respondent stated she had not been living there at that
until late 2020. As to why she had given that address to the hospital,
she stated it was a mailing issue and she didn’t want
anything to come to
the other address she had been residing at. She stated she had not been living
Address 5 with AP.
Any sexual relationship between the
Tribunal accepted the evidence of the Respondent and AP that they had a sexual
relationship between 2015 and 2022. The Tribunal
noted that the Respondent had
given birth to two children during this period, who are AP’s biological
children. The Respondent
gave evidence that, in or around June 2017, she had a
relationship with another person who was abusive. She referred in her closing
submissions at the hearing to both herself and AP having had sexual
relationships with other people during the period being reviewed
The nature of the people’s commitment to each
to his release from custody, AP had represented to the Adult Parole Board that
he was intending to marry the Respondent upon
release. When asked about this
statement, the Respondent stated that’s what AP had told her his intention
Respondent had represented to the Adult Parole Board that she and AP had been
religiously married, by the time her letter in support
of AP was prepared. When
asked about this, the Respondent stated that there had been a few words said and
it was classed as a temporary
marriage, sexual stuff, not a formal thing. The
Respondent described the relationship to the Tribunal as on and off, with AP
to get married but with no detailed time line.
Respondent gave birth to a child in February 2018, who was given AP’s
surname. When asked about this, the Respondent stated
that traditionally
children are given their father’s surname and it was not reflective of AP
being her partner. When asked
Respondent stated that AP had said she had to have that as her middle name.
Respondent and AP have a second child who was born in July 2020. The Respondent
gave evidence that AP had attended the birth.
The Tribunal accepted the
Respondent and AP’s second child was also given AP’s surname.
Respondent had given evidence at the AAT first review hearing that she accepted
she had been a member of a couple with AP from
4 June 2020, being the date of
birth of their second child. When asked about this evidence at the hearing, the
Respondent stated
that if that’s what she said, she would accept that, but
that the date “doesn’t ring a bell”.
Respondent provided a “Relationship Details” form to Centrelink on
20 October 2021, in which she stated she was not
partnered with AP; described
the relationship as “co-parenting” and “sexual”; that
they did not own property
and all of the expenses at the house were for herself
and the children and were covered by her; they have no joint accounts,
have access to each other’s accounts and don’t have
joint debts. The Respondent stated in the form that she pays for
phone/internet, electricity, gas and food; they don’t have joint insurance
policies and have not nominated each other in
wills, superannuation or life
insurance; don’t share a bedroom; and she does the washing. In response to
the question as to
whether relatives, friends or regular associates considered
them to be partnered, the Respondent ticked “yes” and stated
social media, never felt the need to change the relationship status, other
than that, no
. The Respondent stated that she and AP shared family
occasions, Australian holidays such as Christmas and Easter, and that they had
sexual relationship. In response to a question as to how long they intended to
share accommodation, the Respondent stated they
didn’t live together, AP
sleeps over occasionally. She stated that they provided support to one another
if sick and help with
the children was offered, but did not provide support in a
personal crisis, with money matters or family disputes. The Respondent
that her relationship with AP differed from a married, registered or de facto
relationship because they had sexual relations
with other people, there was no
financial support and they didn’t live together.
the above information was put to the Respondent at the hearing, the Applicants
submitted that the information was false, on the
basis that she had accepted she
had been a member of a couple with AP from June 2020. The Respondent asked, in
response, why was
it false and stated it was correct. She disagreed that the
information supported that she was in a relationship with AP at the time.
whether her representation in the form about shared expenses was incorrect, she
stated she disagreed.
Tribunal accepted from the Respondent’s evidence that AP had proposed to
her in 2021 and they had been married in either
December 2021 or February 2022
(the Tribunal noted that the Respondent gave evidence at the hearing that they
had been married in
February 2022 and that this differed to the evidence
reported to have been provided to the first review Tribunal that the marriage
had occurred in December 2021). The Tribunal accepted the Respondent’s
evidence that she had converted to another religion
before marrying AP. She was
unclear as to where the marriage had taken place, stating when asked that it was
a “person who
signs paperwork” and referring to AP’s empty
Tribunal noted that the Respondent had provided details to Centrelink in August
2024, stating she had been separated from AP since
22 March 2023. The Tribunal
also noted that both parties described the relationship as on and off. The
Respondent gave evidence
that she didn’t feel the relationship was
consistent for a long enough period to advise Centrelink, and didn’t feel
there was a long period of stability. Both parties had been sleeping with
other people. When asked about any application for a divorce,
the Respondent
stated that there is no real reason for this, perhaps laziness.
Respondent submitted that, while she is now separated from AP, she is not sure
when it occurred. They have not formally divorced,
it’s “just a
piece of paper”, but her view is that it is a final separation. The
Respondent gave evidence of remaining
AP’s carer and receiving carer
payment for the care she is providing to AP. The Tribunal noted that material
provided by AP
indicated that AP had changed his surname to the
Respondent’s, which the Respondent confirmed.
asked whether there was anything else she wanted to tell the Tribunal about the
relationship, the Respondent stated it has been
very on and off, very rocky,
that AP has made ample promises, enough to make her stay interested. She stated
she understands there
has been money in and out of the accounts, but there was
never financial gain. As to any reasons they should not be considered to
been a member of a couple for social security purposes, the Respondent stated
she had called on multiple occasions about when
she needed to declare her
relationship, but she didn’t feel the relationship was consistent enough,
or stable for an ongoing
amount of time. It was pure laziness and she should
have changed it. They were sleeping with other people on and off throughout the
relationship.
Respondent stated that, when they were married AP sent off the paperwork, but it
was him making empty promises. She was promised
they would be married
religiously, but she thinks he married her to change his last name and
doesn’t think it was what she
thought it was. She confirmed she had
converted to AP’s religion a bit before they were married and that she had
do that. She confirmed that AP has now changed his family name to her
Respondent submitted in closing submissions that her representation to the
hospital that AP was her “husband” and
working in insurance is
evidence that she would lie about her circumstances, and that this was about how
she felt about her situation,
as a single mother of four children. She describes
herself as insecure, loyal, forgiving and reliable, which are all qualities a
narcissist looks for in a victim. She had genuinely believed in the relationship
at the start, and she disregarded red flags. She
has not denied there has been
an on-off relationship, but she genuinely believed she was not doing anything
wrong and rang Centrelink
many times, and was always told that financial
reliance and living together full-time were the relevant factors. She described
relationship as having been one of love bombing and coercive control and she
believes that AP lied and was manipulative.
Other evidence
before the Tribunal
Tribunal had before it a number of “tip-offs” made anonymously to
Centrelink about the Respondent’s relationship
with AP. The Tribunal noted
that the tip-offs contained a level of detail in them, that was suggestive of
the person having a reasonable
level of knowledge of the Respondent’s
circumstances. The Respondent herself suggested they may have been from a male
Tribunal understood was a former partner. However, in the absence of any
clear evidence as to the identity of the individuals who
had provided the
information, their motivation for doing so, or their level of knowledge of the
Respondent’s circumstances,
the Tribunal placed little weight on the
contents of the tip-offs in this matter.
Tribunal was also provided information about several contacts made with
Centrelink about a “person permitted to enquire”.
The Applicants
submitted that the contacts were made by AP and that they evidence that the
Respondent and AP were members of a couple.
The Tribunal did not accept these
submissions, on the basis that individuals selected as persons permitted to
enquire with Centrelink
have a range of relationships with Centrelink
recipients, not necessarily a marriage-like one. The Tribunal did not consider
the evidence presented with respect to the “person permitted to
enquire” for the Respondent’s Centrelink account
added any weight to
the range of other information before the Tribunal.
Tribunal heard evidence from AP at the hearings, about his relationship with the
Respondent. The Tribunal has had regard to this
evidence where the evidence in
question was put to the Respondent for her comment.
the Tribunal notes that it had extensive evidence before it, being some 8,000
pages of documentary evidence and oral evidence
provided by the Respondent and
AP over multiple hearing days. The Applicants have made extensive written
submissions to the Tribunal,
commenting on a range of matters contained in the
documentary evidence. The Tribunal has ultimately relied, in making a decision
in this matter, on the matters put to the Respondent at the Tribunal hearing,
that she was provided an opportunity to view documents
relating to the questions
put to her and to provide comments on.
Findings of the
Tribunal about the relationship between the Respondent and AP
Tribunal considered that the Respondent gave plausible evidence about the
circumstances in which she had met AP and their level
of contact while he was in
custody. The documentary evidence indicates a significant level of contact
between the Respondent and
AP while AP was in custody, a representation of
themselves as partnered on social media by October 2014, and representations to
services by the Respondent as being religiously married and intending to
be engaged upon AP’s release from prison. AP, similarly,
represented them
as de facto in a parole assessment and the Adult Parole Board was advised that
the Respondent was living with AP’s
parents at Address 1 prior to his
release. The representations made by both the Respondent and AP, for the
purposes of AP’s
parole, is strongly suggestive of the presence of a de
facto relationship.
Tribunal accepted that, within a week of AP’s release from custody, the
Respondent and AP opened a joint bank account. From
29 September 2015 onwards,
there were significant amounts transferred from the Respondent to AP, and from
AP to the Respondent. The
Tribunal noted that several of the accounts in
question were in a varied name to AP’s name. The Tribunal found that the
in the varied name were accounts held by AP, on the basis of the use of
common addresses attached to the accounts, the movement from
the accounts in
question to the Respondent’s account and the Respondent not asserting at
any stage during the lengthy hearing
that AP was not the holder of any of the
accounts discussed with her at the hearing. The Tribunal noted that many of the
transactions
between the Respondent and AP’s accounts referenced
“love you” and related variations, and referred to the parties
lovers and husband. The Respondent was unable to explain many of the
transactions that had occurred and the Tribunal had difficulty
understanding the
reasons for this, within the context of the Respondent’s claimed reliance
on social security and family assistance
payments over this period. The Tribunal
finds that there was significant sharing of financial resources between the
Respondent and
AP and that this supports the presence of a de facto relationship
between them.
noted above, the living arrangements for the Respondent and AP were unclear and,
at points, contradictory. The Applicants assert
that this was a deliberate
attempt by the Respondent and AP to present themselves as not in a relationship,
and as living separately,
to Centrelink so that they were both able to access
payments at a single rate of payment. Also as noted above, the Tribunal
that the Respondent and AP were residing in AP’s family address
at Address 1 from the time he was released from custody and
that they shared the
premises at Address 3 from November 2015 to June 2016, Address 4 until mid-2017
and then it is likely that they
returned to Address 1 for a period of time. The
Tribunal has also found that the Respondent was then residing with AP at a
he purchased in February 2019.
Respondent and AP have both asserted that their living arrangements were
part-time. The Applicants have urged the Tribunal to
follow the approach of the
Haddara and Secretary, Department of Social Services
[2023] AATA
, where the Tribunal had accepted that (at [40]-[42] and
Tribunal accepts that during the relevant period there were extended periods of
physical separation where Ms Haddara and
the Applicant lived apart in
circumstances of some animus, it does not accept that this separation
necessarily compels a conclusion
that Ms Haddara and the Applicant had ceased to
be in a de facto relationship during those times.
.... It is also significant that the Applicant did not seek to establish
himself in any permanent accommodation when excluded from
Ms Haddara’s
house, but chose to
sleep rough
living predominantly in his
car, often outside Ms Haddara’s house or in the general area....
The Court recognised in
Melvin v Secretary, Department of Social
where a couple live together from time to
time, it is not determinative of the question whether they are living separately
The Court noted that:
There is both a physical and mental element involved and the mental
element is independent of whether the parties lived in the same
The High Court in
Fairbairn v Radecki
considered the
question of whether a de facto relationship had broken down in the context
Law Act 1975
(Cth). The Court recognised that the question of
whether a de facto or married relationship had broken down is not simply a
of whether the parties had ceased to live at the same property. The Court
recognised that a couple may live under the same roof and
separated or may be in a couple relationship even where they live at
different locations.
Tribunal was not persuaded that the Respondent and AP were residing apart for
significant periods between late 2015 and March
2022. The Tribunal considers it
more likely that they were residing together, supporting each other’s
children at various points,
and were sharing a household where they were raising
their own two biological children. There were various transfers between them
the 2016, 2017 and 2018 calendar years which were described as
“rent”, which further supports the inference drawn
by the Tribunal
that they were sharing premises but otherwise representing themselves at
different addresses to Centrelink and, on
occasions, to other institutions such
as banks. Noting the comments of the AAT in
, above, the Tribunal
finds that any part-time living arrangements between the Respondent and AP were
not indicative that their relationship
had broken down on a permanent basis or
that they did not remain committed to one another, as evidenced by other factors
the Tribunal
is required to consider in this matter.
Tribunal finds that the Respondent and AP represented themselves on social media
from October 2014 onwards as in a relationship
and subsequently as excited to
expand their family by welcoming a baby together. Comments made by the
Respondent’s mother suggest
that she viewed them as partnered. The
Respondent represented herself as partnered with AP to the hospital she gave
birth in twice.
The Tribunal was not persuaded that the Respondent represented
herself as partnered because of a concern as to how she would be perceived
the hospital staff, but rather considered that she represented herself in that
way because she considered herself partnered with
AP at the time. The Tribunal
finds that the way the Respondent and AP have represented themselves on social
media and to the hospital
where the Respondent gave birth is strongly suggestive
of the presence of a de facto relationship.
Tribunal accepts that the Respondent and AP have had a sexual relationship in
the period under review. The Tribunal is prepared
to accept that the Respondent
and AP may have had sexual relationships with other people during this time, but
did not accept that
that was indicative that their relationship had broken down
permanently.
Tribunal finds that the Respondent and AP have two biological children together,
born in February 2018 and July 2020 and that
both children were given AP’s
family name. They were married in either December 2021 or February 2022 and the
Respondent converted
to AP’s religion prior to the marriage. Subsequent to
the marriage, AP commenced using the Respondent’s family name.
Tribunal finds that the Respondent and AP’s biological children, their
marriage, the Respondent’s religious conversion
and AP’s use of the
Respondent’s family name all strongly suggest a level of commitment that
is demonstrative that they
were members of a couple.
Respondent described, at various points in the hearing, difficulties in her
relationship with AP. She described the relationship
as on and off, and as
characterised by coercive control, although did not provide details or examples
of this to the Tribunal. The
Applicants have noted the comments of the AAT in
, where the AAT stated (at [59]) as follows:
that the parties experienced difficulties in their relationship at times does
not preclude a finding that a couple relationship
existed. The Tribunal is not
required to be satisfied that the relationship was happy or socially
conventional. It does not require
that there was a total commitment to a couple
relationship by both parties at all times. It does not require a finding that
was a romantic relationship. The task for the Tribunal is to assess the
true nature and character of the relationship between the
parties having regard
to the matters and factors specified in s 4(3) of the Act by weighing up the
factors which point in favour
of a de facto relationship and those that point
against it.
Tribunal is prepared to accept that the relationship between the Respondent and
AP was perceived by the Respondent to be on and
off at times, and that it was
not always a happy relationship. However, having weighed up all of the evidence
before it, the Tribunal
considers that the evidence overwhelmingly supports the
presence of a “member of a couple” relationship between the
and AP from November 2015 onwards. The Tribunal accepted that this
was initially by way of a de facto relationship and, subsequently
time they were married, as a married relationship.
to whether a determination should be made under
Security Act
, the Tribunal finds that there has been substantial financial
support provided by the Respondent to AP and from AP to the Respondent.
has been substantial pooling of resources, the Tribunal declines to make a
determination on the basis of any financial reasons.
Social Security Guide sets out that a
determination may also be made
in situations of family violence. The Respondent described during the hearing
having had her earnings
from employment intercepted by AP (although was unclear
as to how this had occurred in practice) and to him having exercised a degree
coercive control over her. She did not provide details or examples of the
presence of family violence, or coercive control and,
based on the evidence
before it, the Tribunal was not persuaded that there was a level of family
violence such that the discretion
should be exercised.
weighed up all of the above evidence, the Tribunal finds that the Respondent was
partnered with AP for social security purposes
and, for this reason, the first
review decision on this issue is set aside and the Tribunal substitutes its
decision that the Respondent
and AP were members of a couple from 30 November
Cancellation of parenting payment
Applicants submit that the Respondent’s parenting payment should have been
cancelled from 30 November 2015 under
Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999
(Cth) (the Social Security Administration Act) on
the basis that she did not comply with notices sent to her under section 68 of
the Social Security Administration Act.
68(2) of the Social Security Administration Act provides that:
The Secretary may give a person to whom this
a notice that requires the person to do any or all of the following:
(a) inform the Department if:
(i) a specified event or change of circumstances occurs; or
(ii) the person becomes aware that a specified event or change of
circumstances is likely to occur;
(b) give the Department one or more statements about a matter that might
affect the payment to the person of the social security
(c) give the Department one or more statements about a matter that might
affect the operation, or prospective operation, of Part
3B in relation to
the person.
Respondent was sent a notice dated 19 October 2015 headed “Your Parenting
Payment”, which set out her payment from
9 October 2016 and then rate of
regular payment from 28 October 2015. Under the heading “What you must
tell us”, the
notice provided the following information, in relevant part:
You must tell us
within 14 days
(28 days if residing outside
Australia) if any of the changes listed below happen or are likely to happen to
you. If you get a fortnightly
Reporting and Income Statement, report your
earnings or changes in circumstances on your reporting day.
This is an information notice given under social security law.
Your gross income changes. Changes mean your income starts,
stops, recommences or amounts vary. Gross income includes, but is not
- Earnings:
Employment income; if you voluntarily salary sacrifice earnings into a
superannuation fund; paid leave such as annual, long service
or sick leave, sick
or accident insurance; or commissions, director’s fees and non-cash fringe
benefits from your employer.
You receive income from Family Day Care,
baby-sitting or receive income from sales work (for example, party-plan or
catalogue sales).
- Business:
Net profit from sole trader or business operation, private company or trust that
you control; director’s fees, dividends and
distributions; or any new
involvement or changes to your involvement in a business, company or trust.
and annuities:
An income stream from an allocated lifetime or term pensions
and annuities, defined benefit pensions or income streams or pensions
Income from rent, boarders or lodgers, lump sum payments, other
regular payments, regular gifts or allowances, other government payments,
matured life insurance policies, fringe benefits or any other income from any
source (including income from other countries).
Tell us if you marry; are in or commence a registered or de
facto relationship (either opposite or same sex); reconcile with a former
partner or start living with someone as their partner; have a baby or have a
child come into your care, start to share the care of
the child, change the
amount of time the child spends living with you or if an immediate family member
94(1) of the Social Security Administration Act then provides for consequences
to a person’s receipt of a social
security payment where they have not
complied with a section 68 notice. This provision states as follows:
(1) Subject to
(a) a person who is receiving a social security payment is given a notice
(b) the notice requires the person to inform the Department of the
occurrence of an event or change of circumstances within a specified
notification period
(c) the event or change of circumstances occurs; and
(d) the person does not inform the Department of the occurrence of the event
or change of circumstances within the notification period
in accordance with the
notice; and
(e) because of the occurrence of the event or change of circumstances:
(i) the person ceases to be qualified for the social security payment;
(ii) the social security payment ceases to be payable to the person;
the social security payment is cancelled, by force of this
on the day on which the event or change of circumstances occurs.
Tribunal found that the above notice, dated 19 October 2015, was issued under
subsection 68(2) of the Social Security Administration
Act. The requirement in
the notice included a requirement for the Respondent to advise if she was in a
de facto relationship. The
Tribunal is satisfied that, at the time the notice
was issued to the Respondent, she was in a de facto relationship with AP.
Tribunal finds, on the evidence before it, that the Respondent did not advise
Centrelink that she was a member of a couple with
AP until 16 December 2021,
being the date that her parenting payment (single) was cancelled and she lodged
a claim for parenting
payment (partnered). She therefore did not comply with the
requirement in the notice to notify within 14 days that she was in a de
relationship.
Tribunal is satisfied that, because of the de facto relationship, parenting
payment ceased to be payable to the Respondent on
the basis of her level of
combined earnings. In so finding, the Tribunal notes that it is not satisfied
the payment ceased to be
payable because the Respondent was no longer qualified
for parenting payment altogether (noting that the qualification requirements
the same, but the rate of payment is calculated differently for a partnered
person compared to a single person).
these circumstances, the payment is cancelled by force of subsection 94 on the
day on which the event occurs. The Tribunal accepted
that the correct date is 30
November 2015, being the date on which AP’s income meant that parenting
payment was no longer payable
to the Respondent.
the above reasons, the Tribunal finds that the Respondent’s parenting
payment is to be cancelled from 30 November 2015.
payment debts
the Tribunal has found, above that the Respondent’s parenting payment was
cancelled from 30 November 2015, she was not qualified
to receive one-off
payments between 30 November 2015 and 6 April 2016. The Tribunal accepted from
the information presented by the
Applicants that the payments totalled
Applicants submit that there is a second parenting payment debt in the amount of
$100,061.44 for the period 25 April 2017 to 30
March 2022. The Tribunal has
found that the Respondent was partnered with AP in this period. In these
circumstances, section 503
of the Social Security Administration Act provides
that the Respondent’s rate of parenting payment was to be calculated using
the Benefit PP (Partnered) Rate Calculator in
section 1068B
Security Act
. The rate calculated under
section 1068B
is affected by the
person’s partner’s income and by whether the person’s partner
is receiving a social security
received deposits into his bank accounts totalling $1,967,484.45 between 26
April 2016 and 27 January 2021. Some of the accounts
were in AP’s name and
some were in aliases that the Respondent did not dispute were AP’s
accounts. Both the Respondent
and AP were invited to comment on various
transactions into the accounts and neither could explain any of the amounts put
at hearing. The Tribunal noted, in particular, the references in
transactions to a trade industry and noted the Respondent’s
that she had not been aware AP was working in the period under review; AP
similarly asserted that the transactions in
question had not been income from
employment.
Social Security Act
provides for the treatment of amounts
received by a person in calculating their rate of payment and states
(1) Subject to points 1067G - H5 to
1067G - H20 (inclusive), 1067L - D5 to 1067L - D16
(inclusive), 1068 - G7AF to 1068 - G7AR (inclusive),
1068A - E2 to 1068A - E12 (inclusive) and
1068B - D7 to 1068B - D18 (inclusive), if a
whether before or after the commencement of this section, an amount that:
the meaning of Division 1B or 1C of this Part; and
(b) is not:
the form of periodic payments; or
from remunerative
for the purposes of this Act, taken to receive one fifty-second of that amount
each week in the 12
on the day on which the
entitled to receive that amount.
on the oral evidence of the Respondent and AP at the hearing – being that
neither party was able to provide any level
of detail about the significant
transactions into AP’s accounts and AP’s assertions that the amounts
did not relate to
income from employment – the Tribunal finds that the
amounts paid into AP’s various bank accounts were not amounts as
in paragraphs 1073(1)(a) or (b) and, in these circumstances, AP was taken to
have received one fifty-second of each amount
during each week in the 12 months
commencing on the day on which he became entitled to receive that amount.
Tribunal notes that this approach is in line with similar approaches taken by
Nassimi and Secretary, Department of Social Services
, where the AAT stated (at
[10]-[15]):
present case significant amounts of money were deposited to the
Applicant’s bank accounts during the debt period.
The Applicant gave a number of explanations for the deposits...
In view of the wide definition and the available evidence, the deposits in
the Applicant’s bank account justify a conclusion
that they were for his
own use and benefit because they were under his control. It is therefore
necessary to consider the evidence
to determine whether it indicates that the
deposits were not for his own use or benefit.
The evidence does not satisfy me that the monies in question were not for his
own use or benefit. There are substantial discrepancies
in the Applicant’s
evidence and much of his material is uncorroborated, as outlined by the SSAT at
[22] and [28] – [30]
of their reasons. He did not produce any reliable
independent evidence to the Respondent to substantiate his
“explanations”.
At the hearing before me no additional significant evidence was produced by
the Applicant to substantiate his submissions, with the
exception of the sums
said to have been advanced by his wife’s mother to establish her daughter
when she moved to Australia,
together with a payment from the inheritance and
several other transfers referred to in paragraph [31] of the SSAT decision. I
these amounts were not income for the purposes of s 8 of the Act.
As to the balance of the payments, the Applicant has not persuaded this
Tribunal on the available evidence that his assertions as
to the source and
purpose of the deposits sought to be accepted in view of the lack of specificity
and insufficiency of independent
supporting evidence.
Taleb and Secretary, Department of Social Services
[2020] AATA 3451
the AAT observed that (at
[46]-[47]):
considers the numerous bank deposits frequently made in large sums as recorded
in the bank statements, it appears that Mr
Taleb was running his taxi business
at a scale that has not been accurately reflected in his tax returns to the ATO,
noting that
in some years, Mr Taleb has claimed that he only received a net
income of less than $10,000 per annum from this business after expenses,
which he was raising a very large family and paying off a mortgage on his home.
The Tribunal also notes the significant number
of hours during which Mr Taleb
was “logged” as having worked a shift in his taxi as indicated in
the taxi shift reports
provided by the Taxi Services Commission. The Tribunal is
satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that those monies (comprising
unexplained bank deposits) were derived as cash payments made to Mr Taleb
through his taxi business or by some other means which
he has not disclosed to
the Centrelink, the Secretary or the Tribunal.
The Tribunal finds that those bank deposits remain unexplained and as such,
they are to be counted as “income” and therefore
factors into the
calculation of Mr and Mrs Taleb’s social security entitlements.
Tribunal accepts, based on the evidence of the Respondent and AP about amounts
paid into AP’s bank accounts, that there
was an overpayment to the
Respondent of parenting payment totalling $100,061.44 for the period 25 April
2017 to 30 March 2022 based
on her combined income.
Social Security Act
provides that an overpayment of a social
security payment is a debt due to the Commonwealth and is taken to arise when
obtained the benefit of the payment. The Tribunal finds that the
amounts of $927.79 and $100,061.44 are debts due to the Commonwealth
section 1223
Social Security Act
Family tax benefit
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) Act 1999
(Cth) (the Family
Assistance Act) states that, for the purposes of family tax benefit and
schoolkids bonus, where a person is a member
of a couple, their adjusted taxable
income for an income year includes the adjusted taxable income for that year of
their partner.
The Tribunal has found that the Respondent was partnered with AP
during the 2016/17, 2017/18, 2018/19, 2019/20 and 2020/21 financial
AP’s adjusted taxable income was relevant to the Respondent’s annual
rate of family tax benefit in these years.
Applicants have sought that the family tax benefit debts be remitted for
recalculation on the basis that the Secretary had made
differing findings as to
the correct debt amounts since the authorised review officer’s decisions
and the debts will be impacted
by the Tribunal’s findings about the
Respondent and AP’s social security debts. The Tribunal considered this an
appropriate
approach in the circumstances of this particular case. Any
recalculated overpayments for the 2016/17, 2017/18, 2018/19, 2019/20 and
financial years are debts due to the Commonwealth under
New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
Family Assistance Administration Act).
Applicants have noted that the Respondent was paid a newborn upfront payment of
$540 on 28 March 2018 and submit that this is
a debt due to the Commonwealth as
the Respondent’s rate of family tax benefit was nil at the relevant time.
The Applicants
have, however, sought recalculation of the family tax benefit
debt for the 2017/18 financial year and, given this and until the recalculation
is undertaken, the Tribunal cannot be satisfied that the Respondent did not have
any entitlement to family tax benefit as of 28 March
2018. This debt is also
sent back for recalculation and any overpayment is a debt due to the
Commonwealth under section 71 of the
Family Assistance Administration Act.
Child care benefit debt
the time the Respondent received child care benefit, in the 2017/18 financial
year, Schedule 2 to the Family Assistance Act provided
the method to calculate
the amount of benefit payable and required, in part, consideration of whether a
person or their partner was
receiving a social security benefit or pension.
Applicants submit that, due to there being periods where the Respondent and AP
were not qualified for a social security payment,
a child care benefit debt
arose due to the Respondent’s combined adjusted taxable income impacting
her rate of child care benefit.
The Tribunal accepted these submissions and
accepted that, in the period 3 July 2017 to 1 July 2018, the Respondent was
child care benefit totalling $10,692.18.
the time the overpayment accrued, section 71C of the Family Assistance
Administration Act provided that where an amount had been
paid by way of child
care benefit and the received amount was greater than the correct amount, the
overpayment is a debt due to the
Commonwealth. The Tribunal finds that the
Respondent owes a debt of $10,692.18 under section 71C (as it was at the
relevant time)
of the Family Assistance Administration Act.
Covid supplement debt
Applicants submit that there was an overpayment of covid supplement to the
Respondent for the period 27 April 2020 to 13 April
2021, on the basis that she
had no entitlement to parenting payment for that period and was therefore not
eligible for covid supplement.
Tribunal accepted covid supplement was introduced by the
Coronavirus Economic
Response Package Omnibus Act 2020
(Cth) (the Covid Response Act), which
provided at subsection 501(1) that where a person was receiving parenting
payment, their rate
of parenting payment was to be increased by the amount of
the covid supplement, beginning on 27 April 2020.
Tribunal accepted that, due to parenting payment not being payable to the
Respondent between 27 April 2020 and 13 April 2021,
she was not qualified for
covid supplement payments made to her in this period. The Tribunal accepted the
Respondent was paid covid
supplement totalling $9,250 between 27 April 2020 and
13 April 2021 and that this amount is also a debt due to the Commonwealth under
section 1223
Social Security Act
Economic support payment
The Covid Response Act also provided for an economic support payment under
subsection 304(1) in circumstances where, in relevant
part, a person was
receiving parenting payment. The Respondent was paid an economic support
payment by Centrelink on 2 April 2020.
As parenting payment was not payable to
her at that date, due to her combined income, she was not qualified for the
economic support
payment paid to her. The Tribunal finds that this amount, being
$750, is also a debt due to the Commonwealth under
section 1223
Security Act
Are the debts recoverable by the
Commonwealth?
discretion to write off a debt for a period of time is contained in
Social Security Act
and section 95 of the Family Assistance
Administration Act. These provisions allows for write off of a debt
(a) The debt is irrecoverable at law; or
(b) The debtor has no capacity to repay the debt; or
(c) The debtor’s whereabouts are unknown after all reasonable efforts have
been made to locate the debtor; or
(d) It is not cost effective for the Commonwealth to take action to recover the
debts are recoverable at law, the Respondent’s whereabouts are known and
the Tribunal considers it is cost effective for
the Commonwealth to take action
to recover the debts, given the amounts involved.
debtor is taken to have the capacity to repay a debt unless recovery by means of
withholding from payments would result in the debtor
being in severe financial
hardship. The Applicants submit that the Respondent is receiving carer payment,
carer allowance and family
tax benefit, and has demonstrated a capacity to
previously repay a debt raised by Centrelink. The Respondent stated that she has
paid a previous debt, but referred in her oral submissions to Australia being in
a current financial crisis with respect to food,
house and fuel costs.
the evidence before it, and in the absence of any clear evidence as to the
Respondent’s current income and level of necessary
expenses, the Tribunal
was not persuaded that the Respondent has no capacity to repay the debts.
Tribunal concluded that none of the debts are able to be written off for a
period of time.
Waiver for administrative error
Social Security Act
provides for waiver of a debt where the debt
has been caused by sole administrative error by the Commonwealth and the debtor
the payments in good faith.
97 of the Family Assistance Administration Act provides the same requirements,
in addition to requiring that there would be
severe financial hardship to the
Respondent if the debts were not waived.
Respondent asserted at the Tribunal hearing that she had contacted Centrelink on
numerous occasions to inquire about her relationship
status and had repeatedly
been advised that a member of a couple would be determined by financial
interdependence and residing together
on a full-time basis. The Tribunal noted
that there were no records of any of the claimed contacts in the documents
provided by the
Applicants.
addition to the above evidence given by the Respondent, the Tribunal had regard
to the following evidence in considering whether
administrative error has caused
any of the debts in this matter.
Respondent was asked during the hearing about Centrelink notices that had been
sent to her throughout the debt period. When asked
late 2015, she agreed she had been sent notices, but stated that she and AP had
phoned Centrelink and
been advised that the two factors used to define a
relationship were living together and financial dependence.
Respondent agreed she had been in a motor vehicle accident in April 2016 and had
received TAC payments for a year, at which point
she had stopped running a
business. She was taken to a record of contact made on 7 April 2016, in which
she is recorded as having
stated that both children had left her care to live
with AP. When asked about the record of contact, the Respondent stated that AP
was helping her look after the children, she is pretty sure for school drop
offs, and she thinks he got her to phone Centrelink for
extra money. The
Respondent stated that the children definitely were not residing with AP, as she
never had a situation when the
children were not living with her. When asked
no recollection of making a call to say her children had left her care and
had never said the children were not in her care, and
Centrelink’s interpretation.
Respondent was asked whether, given the TAC payments, she was aware she
wouldn’t have continued to receive social security
payments, to which she
stated she was definitely aware of that. When asked whether she agreed that she
had allowed AP to take over
the Centrelink payments and had said something
incorrect to Centrelink, she stated no, she has never benefitted financially
AP; he was receiving parenting payment and shouldn’t have been
receiving it. As to whether the two of them had agreed that
should happen, the
Respondent stated she has no idea. As to why she hadn’t rung Centrelink on
7 April 2016 to advise of the
TAC payments, she stated she can’t answer
that, has no idea, and it was about her believing whatever story AP told her and
he was doing it to gain financially. As to whether she had been complicit
because of her romantic feelings, she stated never; he
was helping her look
after the children, but they weren’t residing with him. As to why she had
let that happen, she stated
that she doesn’t agree she told Centrelink she
had relinquished care of the children, she is just going to agree that AP said
to tell them that.
received family tax benefit for the Respondent’s two children from 7 April
2016. When asked about this arrangement, the Respondent
confirmed her earlier
evidence that her two children had always been residing with her.
Respondent was taken to a record of a conversation on 2 October 2017, which
reflected that the Respondent had contacted by phone
to advise one of her
children had re-entered her care from 26 September 2017. When taken to the
record, the Respondent stated she
had never said the child was not in her care.
When asked about the timing of the call, which coincided with her TAC payments
the Respondent stated she has no idea.
Respondent provided a Newborn Child Declaration to Centrelink by form dated 25
February 2018. When taken to the form, which answered
no to the question
“Do you have a partner?”, the Respondent stated this had not been a
false statement.
Respondent made a claim for carer allowance and carer payment on 13 July 2018.
In the claim form, she stated her relationship
status was “Never married
or lived with a partner”. She gave her address as Address 4 and, when the
Applicant observed
she had not been there at that time, the Respondent agreed
that was correct and that she had provided a false address. As to why
provided a false address, she stated she had never changed it. She agreed that
the end of the form had asked her to confirm
the accuracy of the information and
that she had not been giving Centrelink an accurate picture.
the birth of her second child with AP in July 2020, the Respondent provided a
Newborn Child Declaration form to Centrelink
on 13 August 2020. In the form she
used Address 4 (which she had left as of mid-2017). When asked why she had used
this address,
she stated she had no idea. In response to the Applicants’
assertion that the use of the address was so the Respondent could
parenting payment (single) and wanted to look like she was living at a different
address to AP, the Respondent stated she didn’t
have an answer to that. In
the form, the Respondent had stated no to the question, “Do you have a
partner?” When asked
stated that this was according to the date she gave a court.
Respondent agreed she had received family tax benefit in the 2019/20 financial
year. In response to the observation that she hadn’t
reported a partner,
she stated not consistently, no.
Respondent agreed she had used Address 4 again for a crisis payment claim on 14
February 2021, stating she didn’t update
her address. She contacted
Centrelink on 24 September 2021 to update her address to Address 5 from 28 July
2021 and, when asked whether
this had been truthful, stated she doesn’t
really recall. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal considers that the
had been at Address 5 since February 2019.
Respondent was taken to a record of contact between herself and a fraud
investigator which had occurred on 28 September 2021.
The record of contact
reflects the Respondent as advising she had been at Address 4 until a month
prior to the conversation and had
been living there alone with her children. The
Respondent agreed she had had provided false information to the fraud
investigator
and accepted the information was incorrect. When asked about her
representation that, at the time of the conversation, she was residing
parents and not paying any rent, she stated that she was going to her parents to
get away, but couldn’t stay there
the whole time because her children were
attending school. She confirmed she was not living there.
Respondent told the fraud investigator that her boyfriend (referencing an alias
used by AP) was the father of her two youngest
children, she had never lived
with him and they had not supported each other financially. When taken to this
record, the Respondent
stated that she agreed she had never lived with him
full-time, and she was surprised how much money had gone back and forth as he
was not supporting her. As to her indication to the investigator, when asked to
spell his name, that she could not do so and couldn’t
provide his date of
birth, the Respondent stated that she was declining to do so.
Respondent provided an accommodation details form to Centrelink on 20 October
2021 in which she stated she had moved into Address
5 in October 2020. She
stated in the form that she didn’t have a partner and, when asked whether
this was incorrect, stated
she is inclined to say it was a lie.
Respondent’s parenting payment (single) was cancelled on 16 December 2021
and she submitted a claim for parenting payment
(partnered) on the same date,
advising that she was living at Address 5 and that she was in a de facto
relationship with a relationship
date of 16 December 2021, but they were unable
to live together until 25 February 2022 due to “respite / care”.
taken to the claim form at hearing, the Respondent stated she had no memory
of advising the relationship had commenced on 16 December
2021, but feels like
she did this because her other payment was cancelled and she was putting in the
date she completed the form.
When asked about the respite / care arrangement
indicated in the form, she stated she was not sure, AP has been a carer for one
his children, but she is not 100% sure that he was requiring care.
into account the above evidence, the Tribunal found that the debts in this case
were not caused by sole administrative error
by Centrelink. The
Applicant’s failure to advise Centrelink that she was partnered with AP
meant that Centrelink did not have
complete information about her circumstances
to determine the correct rate of the various payments she received. The
Applicant and
AP’s failure to advise of the amounts being received by AP,
and the Respondent’s incorrect representation to Centrelink
she was residing, also meant that Centrelink did not have necessary information
to determine the Respondent’s correct
rates of payment.
letters were sent to the Respondent during the debt periods and these were
discussed with her at the hearing. Her consistent
response regarding the notices
was that she had not read or engaged with any of the information Centrelink was
sending to her.
circumstances where the Respondent was being sent notices by Centrelink which
set out her reporting obligations, where she did
not read any of the notices
sent to her, where she did not advise of her correct relationship status or
correct address, and where
she and AP did not advise of the significant
transactions being made into AP’s bank account that were assessable in
the Respondent’s rates of payment, administrative error has not
caused (or even necessarily contributed to) any of the debts
in this matter. The
social security debts are unable to be waived under
section 1237A
Security Act
. The family assistance debts are unable to be waived under section
97 of the Family Assistance Administration Act.
Waiver due to
special circumstances
Social Security Act
provides for discretionary waiver of a debt
in the following circumstances:
The Secretary may waive the right to
recover all or part of a debt if the Secretary is satisfied that:
(a) the debt did not result wholly or partly from the debtor or
(i) making a false statement or a false representation; or
(ii) failing or omitting to comply with a provision of this Act, the
Administration Act or the 1947 Act; and
(b) there are special circumstances (other than financial hardship alone)
that make it desirable to waive; and
(c) it is more appropriate to waive than to write off the debt or part of
101 of the Family Assistance Administration Act provides the equivalent
provisions with respect to discretionary waiver of
family assistance debts, but
refers to a failure or omission to comply with a provision of the family
assistance law.
Wall and Secretary, Department of Education, Employment and Workplace
[2010] AATA 740
(at [28]-[29]) the AAT stated
Taylor’s Central Garages (Exeter) Ltd v Roper
[1951] WN 383
Devlin J considered the meaning of “knowledge” and found that actual
knowledge can be inferred form the evidence
and the nature of the acts done.
Further, in
RCA Corporation v Customs Cleared Sales Pty Ltd
(1978) 19 ALR
at 125, the Court of Appeal in the Supreme Court of New South Wales said:
In inferring knowledge, a court is entitled to approach the matter in two
stages; where opportunities for knowledge on the part of
the particular person
are proved and there is nothing to indicate that there are obstacles to the
particular person acquiring the
relevant knowledge, there is some evidence from
which the court can conclude that such a person has the knowledge. However, this
conclusion may be easily overturned by a denial on his part of the knowledge
which the court accepts, or by a demonstration that
he is properly excused from
giving evidence of his actual knowledge.
Following the decision in RCA Corporation, it is open to the Tribunal to
infer that a person had actual knowledge of their obligations
under the Act
where there were opportunities for them to gain that knowledge and where there
were no obstacles to them acquiring
the knowledge. In the present case, the
respondent sent letters to the Applicant notifying him of his obligations under
noted above, the Respondent was sent a number of notices between 2015 and 2022
which set out her notification requirements, required
her to advise if she was
in a de facto relationship and set out a definition of “income”
relevant to determining her
rates of payment.
addition, the Tribunal noted that subsection 66A(1) of the Social Security
Administration Act provides a general obligation on
a person who has made a
claim for a social security payment, which has either been granted or not yet
determined, to advise of any
event or change of circumstances that might affect
the payment within 14 days of the event or change occurring. This obligation
for example, to advise of combined income that impacts a rate of payment
– existed aside from the obligations imposed on the
specific notices sent
to the Respondent. The Tribunal noted that an equivalent provision exists under
section 25 of the Family Assistance
Administration Act, with respect to
notification of matters affecting a person’s rate of family tax benefit.
Tribunal has found that the Respondent and AP were partnered between November
2015 and March 2022. The Tribunal did not accept
the Respondent’s
assertions that she had contacted Centrelink on several occasions to discuss her
relationship. The Tribunal
finds that the Respondent was receiving parenting
payment (single) while residing with AP, while they were both representing to
wider community on social media that they were partnered, throughout the
births of their children in February 2018 and July 2020
and while they were
supporting each other financially through a large range of transactions between
their accounts. The Tribunal
finds that the Respondent knew she was partnered
with AP and, given her evidence of contacting Centrelink to check her
relationship
status, that she knew she was required to advise Centrelink if she
was partnered because of the potential impact to her payments.
The Tribunal
finds that, in failing or omitting to advise Centrelink of her relationship
between November 2015 and December 2021,
the Respondent failed to comply with
sections 66A of the Social Security Administration Act and 25 of the Family
Assistance Administration
Act, and that this failure or omission was done
Respondent provided a rent certificate to Centrelink on 4 November 2015 in which
she represented that AP, in the name of one of
his aliases, was her landlord at
Address 2. The Tribunal has found, above, that the Respondent was not residing
at Address 2 and
finds that AP was not her landlord at Address 2. The Tribunal
finds that the Respondent provided a false statement to Centrelink
in the rent
certificate and that, because she knew the information in the rent certificate
was incorrect, the false statement was
made knowingly.
Respondent contacted Centrelink on 7 April 2016 to advise that her children had
left her care and were in AP’s care. The
Respondent asserted she had not
provided any such information to Centrelink. The Tribunal did not accept this
assertion, on the basis
that the Tribunal has no reasonable grounds to find that
the record made by a Centrelink customer service officer was inaccurate
the basis that AP proceeded to be paid family tax benefit without contacting to
advise that this was incorrect. The Respondent
was clear in her evidence at the
hearing that her children had never been out of her care. The Tribunal finds
that the Respondent
provided a false statement to Centrelink on 7 April 2016
made knowingly, on the basis that the Respondent knew her children remained in
her care at the time the statement was made.
Respondent was investigated in respect of the alleged overpayments by a fraud
investigator, at which time she advised she had
only just moved from Address 4
and that AP was her boyfriend and she was unable to spell his name or provide
his birthdate. The Respondent
acknowledged at the hearing that this information
had been incorrect. The Tribunal finds that, in her discussions with a fraud
investigator,
the Respondent provided a false statement or representation and
that this was done knowingly.
regard to the evidence given by AP at the hearing, the Tribunal has found that
AP made false representations to Centrelink
that his marital status was divorced
and/or separated and that he was aware he was required to declare significant
amounts being
received into his bank accounts as income to Centrelink.
Tribunal finds that the Respondent’s debts have arisen, at least partly,
from the Respondent and another person knowingly
providing false statements and
representations to Centrelink and knowingly failing or omitting to comply with
provisions of the relevant
legislation. Given this finding, the social security
debts are unable to be waived under
section 1237AAD
Social Security Act
and the family assistance debts are unable to be waived under section 101 of the
Family Assistance Administration Act.
other provisions relating to non-recovery of debts, as set out in
Social Security Act
, are relevant to the Respondent’s circumstances.
The Respondent’s debts are all recoverable by the Commonwealth.
The Respondent
was a member of a couple between 30 November 2015 and 30 March 2022;
Respondent’s parenting payment (single) was correctly cancelled from 14
December 2021;
The Respondent
owes debts to the Commonwealth for overpayment of parenting payment of $927.79
in the period 30 November 2015 to 6
April 2016 and $100,061.44 in the period 25
April 2017 to 30 March 2022;
Overpayments of
family tax benefit for the period 12 April 2017 to 20 June 2017, and for the
2017/18, 2018/19, 2019/2020 and 2020/21
financial years, and a newborn upfront
payment paid on 28 March 2018, are to be recalculated by the Applicants and any
amounts recalculated
are debts owed to the Commonwealth by the Respondent;
The Respondent
owes a debt to the Commonwealth for overpayment of child care benefit of
$10,692.18 for the period 3 July 2017 to 1
The Respondent
owes a debt to the Commonwealth for overpayment of covid supplement of $9,250
for the period 27 April 2020 to 13 April
The Respondent
owes a debt to the Commonwealth for overpayment of an economic support payment
paid on 2 April 2020; and
The debts are
all recoverable by the Commonwealth.
Dates of hearing:
11 August, 12 August, 13 August, 9 September 2025
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Ms L Martin of counsel
Instructed by Ms K Lieschke, Sparke Helmore
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Self-represented
Cited in Applicant’s
SFIC at 4.48.
Cited in Applicants’ SFIC
at paragraph 6.14.
Cited in Applicant’s SFIC
at paragraph 8.28.
Cited in Applicant’s SFIC
at paragraph 8.29.
Cited in Applicant’s SFIC
at paragraph 10.34.
RTF format (13.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format