Commissioner of Taxation v CPG Group Pty Ltd [2025] FCAFC 147 (24 October 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Commissioner of Taxation v CPG Group Pty
[2025] FCAFC 147
Appeal from:
CPG Group Pty Ltd and Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] AATA 199
File number:
VID 73 of 2024
Judgment of:
DERRINGTON, GOODMAN AND FEUTRILL JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– goods and services tax
– taxable supplies – GST liabilities – creditable
acquisitions – input tax
credits – precious metal – GST-free
– input taxed – anti-avoidance provisions – third parties
into or carried out dishonest scheme for creation of taxable supplies of
precious metal ending with non-payment of GST liabilities
– taxpayer got
GST benefits from scheme – Administrative Appeals Tribunal found getting
taxpayer a GST benefit from the
scheme was not the dominant purpose or principal
effect of the scheme – Tribunal found getting taxpayer a GST benefit was a
facilitative purpose of an ultimate (dishonest) dominant purpose of non-payment
of GST liability – Tribunal found that principal
effect of scheme was
changing the form of precious metal – whether Tribunal misconstrued and
misapplied the statutory tests
for dominant purpose and principal effect –
whether the Tribunal failed to take into account the object or purpose of Div
as a mandatory relevant consideration – whether Tribunal failed to
consider if getting taxpayer a GST benefit and non-payment
of GST liability were
composite dominant purposes – whether Tribunal failed to consider the
importance of the taxpayer getting
input tax credits to the economic feasibility
of the scheme
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
– appeal on a question of
law – consideration of questions of law and questions of fact –
whether notice of appeal
raises a question of law
Legislation:
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
Taxation Administration Act 1953
Cases cited:
ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (in liq) v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2020] FCAFC 190
(2020) 282 FCR 455
Automotive Invest Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] HCA 36
Azzopardi v Tasman UEB Industries Ltd
(1985) 4 NSWLR 139
Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia v Consolidated
Press Holdings Ltd
[2001] HCA 32
(2001) 207 CLR 235
Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia v Hart
[2004] HCA 26
(2004) 217 CLR 216
Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia v Spotless
Services Ltd
[1996] HCA 34
(1996) 186 CLR 404
Commissioner of Taxation v ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (in liquidation)
[2025] FCAFC 146
Commissioner of Taxation v Complete Success Solutions Pty Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 19
CPG Group Pty Ltd and Commissioner of Taxation (Taxation)
Dranichnikov v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
(2003) 197 ALR 389
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Ludekens
(2013) 214 FCR 149
Mills v Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia
[2012] HCA 51
(2012) 250 CLR 171
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZMTA
[2019] HCA 3
Waterford v Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54
General Division
National Practice Area:
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
18 – 19 November 2024
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr E Wheelahan KC with Ms C Pierce SC and
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Australian Government Solicitor
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr D McInerney KC with Mr A de Wijn SC and
Mr G Redenbach
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Sladen Legal
VID 73 of 2024
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
CPG GROUP PTY LTD ACN 164 269
DERRINGTON, GOODMAN AND FEUTRILL JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appeal be allowed.
2 of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal’s decision of 5 January 2024 be
for that part of the applicant’s objection decision affirmed by paragraph
1 of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal’s
decision of 5 January 2024, the
respondent’s application for review of the applicant’s objection
decision in respect
of the operation of Division 165 of the
A New Tax System
(Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999
(Cth) and the imposition of scheme penalty
under Sub-Division 284-C of Schedule 1 of the
Taxation Administration Act
(Cth) be remitted to the Administrative Review Tribunal for further
hearing and determination according to law.
be no order as to the costs of the appeal.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
DERRINGTON J:
have had the advantage of considering the respective draft reasons of both
Goodman and Feutrill JJ. I agree with the orders proposed
by Feutrill J for the
reasons which his Honour
I certify that the preceding one (1) numbered
paragraph is a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Justice
Dated: 24 October 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
A. INTRODUCTION
appeal concerns a decision of the Administrative Appeals
Division 165 of the
A New Tax System (Goods and Services) Tax Act 1999
) did not operate so as to deny the respondent
an entitlement to input tax credits in the order of
$9.5 million.
Tribunal’s reasons for doing so were published as
CPG Group Pty Ltd and
Commissioner of Taxation (Taxation)
[2024] AATA 199
Commissioner now appeals. The appeal was instituted under
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
appeal was heard together with the appeal in proceeding NSD1580/2023 (the
). The Court’s reasons for judgment in the ACN 154
appeal have been published as
Commissioner of Taxation v ACN 154 520 199 Pty
Limited (in liquidation)
[2025] FCAFC 146
Commissioner’s grounds of appeal are set out in an amended notice of
appeal, which the Commissioner was granted leave to
file during the hearing of
the appeal.
are a number of areas of overlap between the ACN 154 appeal and the present
appeal. These arise from:
(1) the similarity of the salient underlying facts;
(2) the fact that a Deputy President of the Tribunal published: (a) the Second
Tribunal Decision considered in
ACN 2025 FC
(together with a senior
member of the Tribunal); and (b) the Tribunal Decision the subject of this
appeal (alone);
(3) the use of a number of common or similar paragraphs in the Second Tribunal
Decision and in the Tribunal Decision. In this regard,
the Tribunal, in the
first footnote to the Tribunal Decision noted that the events underlying the
Second Tribunal Decision and the
Tribunal Decision were of a similar nature and
that there is a commonality of reasoning in the two decisions;
(4) the Commissioner’s grounds of appeal in the present appeal being
substantially similar to the first six grounds in the
ACN 154 appeal; and
(5) the Commissioner’s submissions on those grounds in the ACN 154 appeal
and the present appeal being substantially the same.
a consequence, there is inevitably considerable overlap also between various
aspects of these reasons for judgment and my reasons
for judgment in
the reasons set out below, the appeal should be dismissed.
B. THE GST ACT CONTEXT
relevant GST Act context is set out at paragraphs [5] and [6] of my reasons for
judgment in
ACN 2025 FC.
For the purposes of these reasons for judgment I
adopt, without repeating, those paragraphs from
ACN 2025 FC
C. BACKGROUND
relevant background is described in the reason for judgment of Justice Feutrill
at [73] to [83], in terms which I gratefully adopt.
scheme propounded by the Commissioner was, as the Tribunal explained at T[42],
one involving the following steps:
(1) the supply by the taxpayer to Galaxy, and further or alternatively by Baird
& Co to QN Traders, of gold as bullion in precious
metal form that was not
subject to GST, for an amount roughly equivalent to the spot price for gold;
(2) the supply by Galaxy or QN Traders to one or more Intermediaries of that
gold as bullion in precious metal form that was not
subject to GST;
(3) the transformation of that gold from a precious metal form that was not
subject to GST, into gold in a non-precious metal form
that was subject to
(4) the supply by an Intermediary of that gold, if not directly to the taxpayer,
then to a subsequent purchaser (an Intermediary);
(5) any on-sale of that gold by a subsequent purchaser (an Intermediary) to
another subsequent purchaser (an Intermediary);
(6) the taxable supply of that gold by an Intermediary to the taxpayer, for an
amount less than the spot price for gold before the
addition of GST, which the
taxpayer accounted for as an acquisition of scrap gold that was not in the form
of precious metal;
(7) the transformation by the taxpayer of the gold it acquired from
Intermediaries in non-precious metal form back into gold bullion
taking the form
of precious metal; and
(8) the supply by the taxpayer of that bullion to Galaxy as GST-free precious
metal for an amount roughly equivalent to the spot
price for gold.
D. THE TRIBUNAL DECISION
5 January 2024, the Tribunal delivered the Tribunal Decision. That decision
occupies 150 pages. For present purposes, the following
summary of the Tribunal
Decision suffices, noting that the impugned aspects of that decision are
described in greater detail in Part
E below when the questions and grounds of
appeal set out in the amended notice of appeal are addressed.
summary below focuses upon the Division 165 aspect of the Tribunal Decision,
noting that there were several other aspects of the
Tribunal Decision which are
not directly relevant to this appeal.
T[41(c)], the Tribunal identified the issue concerning the application of
Division 165 relevantly as:
... whether ... [the taxpayer] obtained GST benefits to which s 165-5 of the GST
Act applies as a result of claiming input tax credits
for acquisitions of scrap
gold from the Intermediaries. [It] concerns disputed ITCs entitlements of
$9,457,634 ... and ... whether,
taking into account the matters described in s
165-15, it is not reasonable to conclude that:
(i) an entity that entered into or carried out a scheme or part of the scheme
did so with the sole or dominant purpose of [the taxpayer]
getting a GST benefit
- the Denied ITCs - from the scheme; or
(ii) the principal effect of the scheme, or of part of the scheme, was that [the
taxpayer] got a GST benefit, being the Denied ITCs,
from the scheme directly or
indirectly.
Tribunal next identified the scheme propounded by the Commissioner, at T[42] in
the terms identified at [11] above.
T[46] to [47], the Tribunal stated:
essence of the Commissioner’s Division 165 case is that gold bullion
supplied to [the taxpayer] had its origins in gold
bullion acquired from [the
taxpayer] and other sources which was artificially and uneconomically
adulterated so that it became scrap
gold, and then was sold to [the taxpayer] as
taxable supplies at a GST-informed price to be refined to become bullion again.
who sold the adulterated bullion to [the taxpayer] did not meet their GST
obligations to the Commissioner and retained all of the
GST informed prices paid
to them by [the taxpayer] for the adulterated bullion.
holistically, the Commissioner’s review of [the taxpayer’s] and
others business and financial records reveals purchases
and sale of gold product
suggesting a direction in the movement of that product. The [taxpayer], almost
exclusively, sold the refined
gold bullion it produced to its related party,
Galaxy. Galaxy exclusively purchased from [the taxpayer]. Galaxy sold to three
of purchasers: entities who sold gold to [the taxpayer] directly (the
Direct Suppliers) and entities who sold gold to direct suppliers
(the Indirect
Suppliers) and other entities who did not sell any gold to either [the taxpayer]
or Direct or Indirect Suppliers. The
[taxpayer] acquired gold product from both
Direct Suppliers and other suppliers. The Direct Suppliers to [the taxpayer]
gold from Galaxy, Indirect Suppliers and other suppliers.
a recitation of the evidence and other materials before the Tribunal (T[50] to
[126]), the Tribunal set out various findings
of fact (T[127] to [221]).
T[259], the Tribunal turned to the Division 165 issue.
T[267] to [270], the Tribunal set out some general views concerning “[t]he
legislative scheme in which Division 165 sits”.
The Tribunal noted that
the general legislative scheme within the GST Act is varied by Division 165
where it applies (T[269]) and
provided the following overview of Division 165:
is readily apparent that the scheme of the GST anti-avoidance provisions is very
similar to the scheme of the anti-avoidance provisions
in Part IVA of the 1936
Assessment Act. Neither party disputes that the principles from the Part IVA
authorities inform the construction
of Division 165.
The legislation
165, in particular s 165-40, allows the Commissioner to make a declaration
negating the benefits obtained from a scheme where
the Division operates. For
Division 165 to operate, it is necessary that there be a scheme, that there be a
GST benefit from the
scheme and that either the sole or dominant purpose of a
person who entered into or carried out the scheme, or part of it, was to
obtain the GST benefit or the principal effect of the scheme, or part of it, was
that the avoider got or obtained the GST
Division operates where each of the four matters specified in s 165-5(1) are
satisfied. They are:
(a) an entity (the
) gets or got a *GST benefit from a *scheme;
(b) the GST benefit is not attributable to the making, by any entity, of a
choice, election, application or agreement that is expressly
provided for by the
*GST law, the *wine tax law or the *luxury car tax law; and
(c) taking account of the matters described in section 165-15, it is reasonable
to conclude that either:
(i) an entity that (whether alone or with others) entered into or carried out
the scheme, or part of the scheme, did so with the
sole or dominant purpose of
that entity or another entity getting a *GST benefit from the scheme; or
(ii) the principal effect of the scheme, or of part of the scheme, is that the
avoider gets the GST benefit from the scheme directly
or indirectly; and
(d) the scheme:
(i) is a scheme that has been or is entered into on or after 2 December 1998;
(ii) is a scheme that has been or is carried out or commenced on or after that
day (other than a scheme that was entered into before
(emphasis in original)
T[273], the Tribunal described the task before it in the following
The substantive aspect of the present task is to answer the question posed by
s 165-5(1)(c)
. Recognising undeveloped propositions to the contrary, which
have not been ignored, the parties have largely conducted the dispute
footing that
the battle ground lies in whether the requisite dominant purpose
or principal effect ought to be found
. That said, it is still necessary to
identify the relevant scheme and GST benefit because without them any test of
purpose or effect
cannot be undertaken in the required way.
(emphasis added)
Tribunal then addressed the questions of “scheme”,
“benefit”, “purpose” and “effect”.
Tribunal noted that there was no contest that the scheme propounded by the
Commissioner was a scheme for the purposes of the GST
Act against which the
purpose and effect tests could be considered (T[274]).
to “benefit”, the Tribunal recorded at T[275] that s 165-10(1) sets
out the circumstances in which an entity gets a
GST benefit from a scheme and
that only s 165-10(1)(b) was relevant.
to the test in s 165-5(1)(c) of the GST Act, the Tribunal stated at T[276] to
are two limbs to the test, one of which, at least, must be satisfied before
Division 165 can apply; the sole or dominant purpose
limb (s 165-5(1)(c)(i)) and
the principal effect limb (s 165-5(1)(c)(ii))
matters to be taken into account in determining purpose or effect are set out in
s 165-15(1) of the GST Act in the following terms:
(1) The following matters are to be taken into account under section 165-5 in
considering an entity’s purpose in entering into
or carrying out the
*scheme from which the avoider got a *GST benefit, and the effect of the scheme:
(a) the manner in which the scheme was entered into or carried out;
(b) the form and substance of the scheme, including:
(i) the legal rights and obligations involved in the scheme; and
(ii) the economic and commercial substance of the scheme;
(c) the purpose or object of this Act, ... and any relevant provision of this
Act ... (whether the purpose or object is stated expressly
(d) the timing of the scheme;
(e) the period over which the scheme was entered into and carried out;
(f) the effect that this Act would have in relation to the scheme apart from
this Division;
(g) any change in the avoider’s financial position that has resulted, or
may reasonably be expected to result, from the scheme;
(h) any change that has resulted, or may reasonably be expected to result, from
the scheme in the financial position of an entity
(a connected entity) that has
or had a connection or dealing with the avoider, whether the connection or
dealing is or was of a family,
business or other nature;
(i) any other consequence for the avoider or a connected entity of the scheme
having been entered into or carried out;
(j) the nature of the connection between the avoider and a connected entity,
including the question whether the dealing is or was
at arm’s length;
(k) the circumstances surrounding the scheme;
(l) any other relevant circumstances.
(emphasis added)
T[279] the Tribunal reiterated that the principal issue was whether it is
reasonable to conclude that:
(1) the sole or dominant purpose of an entity that entered into the scheme or
part of the scheme was for the taxpayer to get the
entitlement to the input tax
credits; or
(2) the principal effect of the scheme or part of the scheme was that the
taxpayer got the entitlement to the input tax credits.
describing the competing contentions of the parties, the Tribunal noted that
“[t]he Part IVA authorities, and more recently
Division 165
authorities” informed the “correct purpose and effect
analysis” (T[308]). The Tribunal addressed Division
165 of the GST Act and
those authorities in some detail and noted, of particular relevance,
(1) the inquiry as to purpose required consideration of the objective purposes
of each person that entered into or carried out the
scheme or part of the scheme
(2) following the decisions of the Full Court of this Court in
ACN 154 520
199 Pty Ltd (in liq) v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2020] FCAFC 190
(2020) 282 FCR 455 (Perram
, Moshinsky and Thawley JJ) (
Commissioner of Taxation v Complete Success Solutions
[2023] FCAFC 19
(2023) 116 ATR 9 (Moshinsky
, Thawley and Hespe JJ)
Complete Success Solutions
), a matter for consideration was
whether a supplier’s purposes of: (a) obtaining and not remitting GST
non-remittance of GST purpose
); and (b) ensuring, by selling refining
materials to the taxpayer, that the taxpayer was in a position to obtain input
tax credits
input tax credits purpose
) (together, the
), should be found to be a single composite purpose (T[311] to
(3) in an appropriate case the two purposes might be regarded as a composite
purpose. However, this did not exclude the possibility
of the non-remittance of
GST purpose being the dominant purpose (T[314]); and
(4) it considered that the Full Court in
Complete Success Solutions
[85] contemplated the possibility of finding of such a single composite purpose,
but did not mandate that such a finding be made
Tribunal then (at T[316]) referred to paragraphs [64] and [66] of the judgment
of Gageler J in
v Commissioner of Taxation
Commonwealth of Australia
[2012] HCA 51
(2012) 250 CLR 171.
The Tribunal
expressly recognised that the analysis therein was focussed on a different
statutory setting and test.
Tribunal next considered both the purpose and effect limbs of s 165-5(1)(c) by
addressing each of the s 165-15(1) factors (at
T[317] to [371]). This is
described in greater detail in Part E below.
Tribunal then made the following further observations concerning whether the two
purposes should be regarded as a single composite
Purpose or effect – further observations
further observations are called for.
A single composite purpose or non-dominant incidental purposes
facilitating a dominant purpose?
passages from
Complete Success Solutions
above indicate that a single purpose may appropriately be found in some
circumstances. They did not go on and consider
whether those purposes were
facilitative of an ultimate purpose in the sense contemplated by Gageler J in
also noted above. The
analysis is apposite in the
present circumstances for two reasons: first, creating taxable supplies that
also produced GST-informed
prices being paid and ITC entitlements to arise, was
a necessary preliminary to an ulterior and ultimate goal as contemplated by
Honour’s analysis, and second because His Honour suggests that the text of
the Explanatory Memorandum under discussion
confirmed the ordinary meaning of
language and natural reading of statutory text. Thus, the hierarchy of
incidental and dominant
purposes to which His Honour refers can and should have
wider application. This analysis informs how facilitative steps in a wider
design ought to be characterised. Viewed through this lens, any purpose of
obtaining ITCs in the present circumstances, assuming
there was one, was a
purpose properly regarded as central to the design of a scheme directed to
achieving an ulterior and ultimate
purpose, and therefore any purpose of
obtaining ITCs was incidental and not dominant.
the present case, what was essential for the scheme to operate was the creation
of a product that the marketplace traded at a GST-informed
price, and the Direct
Suppliers receiving that price and not paying the GST to the Commissioner, or
more fundamentally, for the Direct
Suppliers not to pay their GST liability
having received a market driven price that assumed they would. As already noted,
that feature there would not have been ongoing sales by the suppliers,
as they would have traded at a loss. The availability of the
ITCs was an
ordinary incident of a purchase of a taxable commodity on commercial terms by a
GST-registered entity in the course of
its enterprise.
those circumstances, the non-payment of amounts referrable to GST stands aside
from the creation of the GST liability and the entitlement
to corresponding
ITCs. The [taxpayer’s] entitlement to ITCs was dependent only upon the
acquisition of gold in a taxable supply
for which it paid a full commercial
price for what it acquired.
short, even if it would be correct to view the making of taxable supplies and
obtaining of ITCs as a single purpose, that single
purpose was a step in a wider
process. The Tribunal sees the Direct Suppliers’ non-payment of GST as a
separate and ulterior
and ultimate purpose to any purpose of making taxable
supplies and the [taxpayer] obtaining ITCs.
T[381] to [382], the Tribunal expressed the following conclusions:
the reasons indicated in the foregoing consideration of the s 165-15 factors, it
would not be reasonable to conclude any entity
entered into either scheme or a
part of either scheme identified by the Commissioner with the sole or dominant
purpose of, or that
the principal effect of either scheme or any part of either
scheme was, the [taxpayer] obtaining the Denied ITCs.
follows that the power to make the declarations under s 165-40 negating the GST
benefit being the Denied ITCs is not enlivened.
That being the only basis
contended for the remaining Disputed ITCs to be disallowed, the assessments of
net amount are excessive.
E. THE APPEAL
E.1 Introduction
noted above, during the hearing, senior counsel for the Commissioner was granted
leave to file an amended notice of appeal. The
extant questions and grounds of
appeal challenge the following three aspects of the Tribunal’s
(1) the Tribunal’s conclusion, for the purposes of s 165-5(1)(c)(i) of the
GST Act, that it would not be reasonable to conclude
that any entity entered
into or carried out either scheme or part of either scheme with the sole or
dominant purpose of the taxpayer
receiving the income tax credits (questions 1
to 4; grounds 1 to 3 and 5);
(2) the Tribunal’s conclusion, for the purposes of s 165-5(1)(c)(ii) of
the GST Act, that it would not be reasonable to conclude
that the principal
effect of either scheme or part of either scheme was that the taxpayer became
entitled to receive the input tax
credits (question 5 and ground 6); and
(3) the Tribunal’s treatment of s 165-15(1)(c) which requires that account
be taken, when considering questions of purpose
and effect under s 165-5(1)(c)
of the GST Act, of the purpose and object of that Act (question 6 and ground 8).
E.2 Identification of questions of law
this is an appeal under s 44 of the AAT Act, it is an appeal limited to
questions of law. As with
ACN 2025 FC
, a central issue on this appeal is
the extent to which the Commissioner’s amended notice of appeal raises any
questions of
law, or merely takes issue with the merits of the Tribunal’s
conclusions as to purpose and effect. For the purposes of these
reasons for
judgment I adopt, without repeating, paragraphs [47] to [61] of my reasons for
judgment in
ACN 2025 FC
, where I discussed the identification of
questions of law.
extant questions raised by the Commissioner and the attendant grounds of appeal
set out in the amended notice of appeal are addressed
E.3 The first four questions – purpose
first four questions posited by the Commissioner correspond to the first four
questions in
ACN 2025 FC
and concern the Tribunal’s conclusions as
to the purposes of participants in the schemes. Those questions are supported by
the first to third and fifth grounds of appeal which are in relevantly identical
terms to the correspondingly numbered grounds relied
ACN 2025 FC
E.3.1 The Tribunal’s consideration of s
165-5(1)(c)(i) of the GST Act
noted above, at T[319] to [371], the Tribunal considered each of the s 165-15(1)
factors. In doing so, the Tribunal made the following
observations relevant to
the question of purpose:
(1) as to the manner in which the scheme was carried out (s 165-15(1)(a)):
a case where the relevant competition or comparison is between pursuit of
commercial ends and pursuit of a GST benefit with no
illegal evasion involved,
the existence of steps that are uncommercial or extraordinary in the manner or
execution of the scheme
might suggest pursuit of the GST benefit is dominant.
However, where the relevant comparison is between pursuit of a dishonest end
pursuit of a GST benefit, extraordinary, or irrational or uncommercial steps
might be expected in the sequence of events. In
that setting such steps might
more appropriately indicate, as part of the analysis of the manner of execution
of a scheme, that that
other goal was either the sole or dominant purpose of a
participant in the scheme.
adulteration of gold bullion, in many respects the relevant transactions were
carried out in the way of ordinary transactions.
The steps taken were largely as
would be expected in arm’s length sales of scrap gold and gold bullion.
Indeed, aside from
the one respect noted immediately below, but for the
non-payment of GST by the Direct Supplier the transactions would likely have
been regarded as unremarkable from a fiscal perspective.
was extraordinary that the Direct Suppliers adulterated bullion, destroyed some
of its value and then, ignoring GST effects on
prices, sold what had become
scrap gold at prices that were less than their acquisition costs. But those
prices at which they transacted
were not remarkable as a bargain struck between
the suppliers and the [taxpayer] for scrap gold.
[taxpayer] paying dollar for dollar amounts as components of GST-informed
purchase prices, in a setting where for the [taxpayer],
only refining profits
were generated, suggests the manner of execution test does not point to a
dominant purpose of the [taxpayer]
or any other participant in entering into or
carrying out the scheme that the [taxpayer] obtain ITC entitlements.
pricing issue is, of course, linked to the adulteration of bullion which is
certainly out of the usual. However, in the Tribunal’s
view that part of
the scheme is explicable by the Direct Suppliers’ purpose of securing a
GST-informed amount of money and
its retention through evading GST liabilities.
It does not suggest a separate dominant purpose of the [taxpayer] obtaining
these reasons, the manner in which the scheme was entered into or carried out
does not support a conclusion that any entity entered
into the scheme or any
part of the scheme with the dominant purpose of the [taxpayer] obtaining the
Denied ITCs
. Even with the [taxpayer] turning a blind eye to others’
activities, the manner in which it was carried out supports a conclusion
the Direct Suppliers had a dominant if not sole purpose of securing a
GST-informed amount of money and its retention through
evading GST liabilities.
It would not support a conclusion that any entity had a dominant purpose of the
[taxpayer] obtaining the
Denied ITCs. The [taxpayer] would still have obtained
refining profits only.
(emphasis added);
(2) as to the form and substance of the scheme (s 165-15(1)(b)):
legal form of the transactions was not consistent with the economic and
commercial substance. What was precious metal in investment
form was altered so
that it no longer conformed to the “in investment form” standard. It
was an alteration that facilitated
a different attribute in the marketplace that
attracted a different trading price structure which in turn facilitated a
money that the Direct Suppliers would keep. Where an actual purpose
is to effectuate illegal GST evasion, it can be expected that
trickery or
facades may be involved, and that form and substance might differ.
Tribunal does not consider the form and substance of the scheme support a
conclusion that any entity entered into or carried out
the scheme or a part of
the scheme with the dominant purpose of the [taxpayer] obtaining ITCs
(emphasis added);
(3) as to the purpose or object of the GST Act (s 165-15(1)(c)):
far as the [taxpayer] obtained the Denied ITCs on the acquisition of taxable
supplies in the course of its enterprise, that is
an unremarkable outcome under
the GST Act. It is well-known that, with limited exceptions, GST on acquisitions
is intended to have
a neutral impact on a GST-registered taxpayer’s costs.
That is a fundamental feature of value-added taxation systems throughout
world. It does not support a conclusion that any entity entered into the scheme
or a part of the scheme with the dominant purpose
of the [taxpayer] obtaining
artificial creation of a GST liability, and corresponding ITC entitlement, by
defacing bullion may be seen as not an object of
the GST Act. However, a
liability arising on a taxable supply is an intended outcome under GST law
regardless of the circumstances
giving rise to the liability. Even illegal
supplies may be taxable supplies. Once the gold was no longer precious metal its
supply being taxable was unremarkable and an intended outcome under
the GST Act.
purpose or object of the GST Act includes, fundamentally, to create a liability
for GST on taxable supplies. That is what occurred
here. It is the failure to
pay the GST that departs from the object of the GST Act, not the allowance of
ITCs on business-to-business
acquisitions which is the standard and intended
object of value-added taxation
factor does not suggest a conclusion that producing the GST benefit was the
dominant purpose of the scheme for these supplies
(emphasis added) ;
(4) as to the timing of the scheme and the period over which it was entered into
and carried out (ss 165-15(1)(d) and (e)):
two tests can be considered together.
does not appear to be any timing aspect of the scheme that suggests a dominant
purpose or principal effect of securing the ITCs
for the [taxpayer]
anything, the timing aspects suggest the contrary.
the extent it happened, the round robin nature of the movement of the same gold
from the [taxpayer] to and through the Direct Suppliers
and back to the
[taxpayer], and the repetition of the cycle of transactions, and the timing of
those steps suggest that the scheme
was structured to be, to the extent of this
circularity, self-contained and possibly self-perpetuating. The timing of the
steps suggests, if anything, pursuit of securing a GST-informed amount
of money and its retention through evading GST liabilities.
factors do not suggest a conclusion that producing the GST benefit was the
dominant purpose of any entity entering to or carrying
out the scheme or any
part of the scheme
discontinuance after the Commissioner stopped refunds goes to affordability. The
[taxpayer] could no longer afford to pay
market prices for scrap gold so stopped
paying them. That prevented continued enjoyment of a normal refining profit.
(emphasis added) ;
(5) as to the effect that the GST Act would have in relation to the scheme apart
from Division 165 (s 165-15(1)(f):
conventional analysis is that this test necessarily reveals that, absent the
operation of Division 165, less GST would be payable,
or a bigger refund would
ensue. Just because a transaction has an effect of lowering tax liability or
increasing a credit does not
necessarily attract an inference that the parties
to the transaction entered into it or carried it out for the sole or dominant
of obtaining that tax consequence. This is particularly so when other
benefits and taxation liabilities are also produced by the
scheme identified.
Under this conventional analysis, little weight would be attached to this
factor. This is so because the mere
fact of a GST benefit cannot lead to the
result that the dominant purpose of the relevant scheme was to secure that
benefit. If it
did there would be no need for the other factors to be
alternative approach rests on a premise that any test ought be capable of
pointing in either a positive or negative way in the
analysis required and
should be capable of supporting or contradicting the requisite conclusion in
different settings. There seems
little point in having a test factor which can
only point in one direction. Under the alternative approach, it is necessary to
to whether the outcome of the scheme transactions absent Division 165
applying is consistent with the operation as intended by the
the GST Act intends to allow an ITC to an entity carrying on an enterprise that
has paid for an acquisition, and paid dollar
for dollar for it, in a
business-to-business transaction under a practical business tax system that
places great reliance on the
use and acceptance of tax invoices. On that
footing, absent the operation of Division 165, the outcome in the present
circumstances
is entirely consistent with an intended outcome of the GST Act.
This factor, analysed this way, suggests that the dominant purpose of
participants in the scheme was not to secure a GST benefit
. This is not a
case where, by some artifice on the part of the taxpayer, a GST benefit ensues
without the full cost of securing it
having been paid.
Tribunal considers that either little weight ought to be given to this factor,
or it should suggest a non-GST benefit purpose
is true that if one considers only the part of the scheme that is the defacing
of bullion before its sale to the [taxpayer], that
part of the scheme causes a
change in the GST status of the commodity and its subsequent sale. But that is a
change that causes GST
to become payable where it would not otherwise have been
payable. And, more importantly, the economic impact is neutral because of
[taxpayer’s] entitlement to ITCs.
That supports a conclusion that the
dominant purpose of the Direct Suppliers was to secure for themselves money and
to evade payment
of GST rather than for any entity to obtain ITCs
not support a conclusion that the principal effect of the scheme or a part of
the scheme was for the [taxpayer] to obtain
(emphasis added) ;
(6) as to any change in the taxpayer’s financial position that has
resulted, or may reasonably be expected to result, from
the scheme (s
165-15(1)(g)):
is difficult to dispute the Commissioner’s contention that the
[taxpayer’s] net asset position and cash flow depended
on entitlements to
the Disputed ITCs. Two observations are self-evident: first, in any arrangement
where prices are paid for inputs
equal to the ITCs claimed, net asset positions
will be affected by ignoring half of the money flows or entitlements to money
and second, if margins are very tight, denying an entitlement to 10% of
the revenue flows to a business without ignoring 10% of the
expenses of the
business is likely to affect profitability in a material way.
the test and necessary comparison is not:
any change in the
avoider’s financial position that has resulted, or may reasonably be
expected to result, from the
GST benefit
a comparison of balance sheets with and without the GST benefits recognised
might be permissible if the test were as stated.
The test has to have regard to
the scheme. Here the scheme includes payment of a GST-informed price.
the [taxpayer’s] perspective, namely an enterprise that produced precious
metal and sold it thus making GST-free supplies:
(a) ITC entitlements arose in respect of all of its inputs to that process that
were taxable supplies to it including all of the
supplies underlying the
Disputed ITCs;
(b) for each of the taxable supplies it paid a price that was informed by the
fact that they were taxable supplies and that exceeded
the price that would have
been payable had the supplies not been taxable, and that excess equalled the ITC
entitlement mentioned
(c) the [taxpayer] enjoyed enhanced turnover from its participation in the
scheme and resultant trading profits from that enhanced
globally, the only potentially measurable financial benefit was enhanced
profitability from enhanced trading.
Full Court ACN decision made clear that availability of ITCs has a neutral
effect on profit which is determined net of GST considerations.
availability of ITCs cannot be regarded as a source of profit.
Tribunal also considers this factor does not support a conclusion that the
principal effect of the scheme or a part of the scheme
was the [taxpayer]
obtaining the Denied ITCs
. The obtaining of the ITCs had a neutral impact on
the [taxpayer] since it was matched by the obligation, which it met, to pay a
price for the scrap gold that was informed by a corresponding GST amount.
(underline and bold emphasis in original; italic emphasis added) ;
(7) as to any change that has resulted, or may reasonably be expected to result
from the scheme in the financial position of any
entity connected to the
taxpayer (s 165‑15(1)(h)):
is no question that the Direct Suppliers were financially disadvantaged by the
scheme if the non-payment of GST, which does
not form part of either of the
Commissioner’s articulated schemes, is ignored. That is because their
sales prices for the scrap
gold were less than they paid for bullion in
investment form.
Commissioner’s submission, which stops there, analyses half the story, and
ignores the facts revealed by the evidence he
is artificial to ignore the non-payment of the evaded GST when that is
undeniably the end goal of the scheme. It is objectively
clear that without that
non-payment the Direct Suppliers Intermediaries participation in the scheme
would have made no sense, and
would not have happened. The artificiality in
ignoring the non-payment by the Direct Suppliers probably explains the extensive
led by the Commissioner of the financial affairs of the Intermediaries
and their lack of GST compliance.
Direct Suppliers were, if outstanding liabilities are not taken into account,
enriched in a cash sense by not paying the GST they
were liable to pay. That
enrichment exceeded the spot price differential between what they paid for
bullion and what they sold the
scrap gold for. That suggests those entities had
a dominant purpose of enriching themselves by collecting money but not paying
– that was the sole source of their enrichment.
are no identifiable financial changes for any other entity that could be
regarded as supporting a conclusion that an entity
had a dominant purpose of the
[taxpayer] obtaining the Denied ITCs. It may be the case, that entities enjoyed
an enhanced turnover
and profitability from the scheme, but they continued to
enjoy refining styled profits.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal concludes that any changes in the financial position of the other
parties would not support a conclusion
that any entity entered into or carried
out the scheme or a part of it with the dominant purpose of the [taxpayer]
obtaining the
(emphasis added) ;
(8) as to other consequences for the taxpayer or a connected entity of the
scheme having been entered into or carried out, and the
relevance of the
connection between the taxpayer and the connected entity including whether the
dealing is or was at arm’s
length (s 165‑15(1)(i) and (j)):
is no suggestion that the dealings between the Direct Suppliers other than CFGA
and the [taxpayer] were other than at arm’s
length in both the
relationship sense and in the sense that commercial prices were paid for the
relevant supplies. The latter is
not surprising since there is no common
ownership between the Direct Suppliers and the [taxpayer] or Galaxy.
factor does not support a conclusion that any entity entered into the scheme or
a part of the scheme with the dominant purpose
, or that the principal
the scheme or any part of the scheme was, the [taxpayer] obtaining
the Denied ITCs
knowledge of activities of transacting parties as contended for by the
Commissioner could be attributed to pursuit of the end
goal of the GST evasion
in any event.
(emphasis added) ; and
(9) as to the circumstances surrounding the scheme and any other relevant
circumstances (ss 165-15(1)(k) and (l)):
such circumstance, excluded by the Commissioner from his articulated scheme, is
the illegal evasion by non-payment of the Direct
Suppliers’ GST
liabilities
circumstance points in favour of a conclusion that the dominant purpose of the
Direct Suppliers participating in the scheme or
a part of the scheme was those
suppliers enriching themselves by evading liabilities to the Commonwealth. It
does not support a
conclusion that any entity entered into the scheme or a part
of the scheme with the dominant purpose of, or that the principal effect
scheme or any part of the scheme was, the [taxpayer] obtaining the Denied
a structure of separate refining company and bullion dealing company pointed to
by the Commissioner is quite equivocal in
what it suggests. The
Commissioner’s private ruling suggests that that is a normal event. The
GST system of taxing transactions
in gold specifically provides for two types of
sale by a refiner, input taxed and GST free, both of which do not involve a GST
to the refiner. Creation of the GST free sale pathway is the measure
intended so as to allow ITCs to be claimed by a refiner. Creating
that structure
does not of itself, as the Commissioner’s ruling suggests, involve any GST
(emphasis added)
E.3.2 The Commissioner’s challenge
first four questions described in the amended notice of appeal are:
the Tribunal applied the test required by s 165-5(1)(c) of the GST Act.
in taking account of the matters described in s 165-15, and determining whether
it was reasonable to conclude under s 165-5(1)(c)
that one or more of the
entities that entered into or carried out the scheme, or part of the scheme, did
so with the sole or dominant
purpose of the Respondent getting a GST benefit
from the scheme, the Tribunal correctly applied
Mills v Commissioner of
[2012] HCA 51
(2012) 250 CLR 171
and distinguished
ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (in
liquidation) v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2020] FCAFC 190
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Complete Success Solutions Pty
Ltd ATF Complete Solutions Trust
[2023] FCAFC 19.
on the authority of
ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (in liquidation) v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2020] FCAFC 190
(2020) 282 FCR 455
Commissioner of Taxation v Complete Success Solutions Pty Ltd ATF Complete
Solutions Trust
[2023] FCAFC 19
, the Tribunal erred in concluding (at
[368]-[371]) that the purpose of making taxable supplies and creating
entitlements to input
tax credits in the Respondent was separate from and
preliminary to an ulterior and ultimate purpose of the Direct Suppliers not
the Tribunal correctly took account of the matters described in s 165-15, as
required by s 165-5(1)(c)?
Commissioner relies upon the following grounds of appeal in support of the above
Tribunal failed to apply the test required by s 165-5(1)(c) of the GST Act.
concluding that the purpose of making taxable supplies and creating entitlements
to input tax credits in the Respondent was separate
from and preliminary and
incidental to an ulterior and ultimate purpose of the Direct Suppliers not
paying GST, the Tribunal misapplied
ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (in liquidation)
v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2020] FCAFC 190
(2020) 282 FCR 455
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Complete Success Solutions Pty Ltd ATF
Complete Solutions Trust
[2023] FCAFC 19
Mills v Commissioner of
[2012] HCA 51
250 CLR 171.
the authority of
ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (in liquidation) v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2020] FCAFC 190
(2020) 282 FCR 455
Commissioner of Taxation v Complete Success Solutions Pty Ltd ATF Complete
Solutions Trust
[2023] FCAFC 19
, the Tribunal ought to have found that the
Direct Suppliers’ purpose of obtaining (and not remitting) GST was not
inconsistent
with the conclusion that the dominant purpose was obtaining the
relevant input tax credits for the Respondent and that the purpose
of obtaining
(and not remitting) GST and the purpose of obtaining input tax credits for the
Respondent were one purpose.
or in the alternative, the Second Tribunal failed properly to address s
165-5(1)(c) by:
(a) failing to consider whether the purpose of obtaining (and not remitting) GST
and the purpose of obtaining input tax credits for
the Respondent were
inextricably linked, as required by
Commissioner of Taxation v
Complete Success Solutions Pty Ltd ATF
Complete Solutions Trust
[2023] FCAFC 19
(b) distinguishing between the pursuit of a dishonest end and the pursuit of a
GST benefit as the relevant comparison at [319].
E.3.3 Consideration
Commissioner’s submissions are to the same effect as the
Commissioner’s submissions in the ACN 154 appeal. I adopt,
repeating, paragraphs [76] to [102] of my reasons for judgment in
particularly, it is plain from the Tribunal’s reasons – at T[271] to
[273], [276] to [277], [279] and [310] –
that the Tribunal understood its
statutory task. Those reasons also demonstrate that during the course of
carrying out its statutory
task the Tribunal reached the views that:
(1) most of the s 165-15 factors did not support a conclusion that any entity
entered into the scheme with the dominant purpose of
the taxpayer obtaining the
input tax credits (see T[323], [324], [327], [333], [336], [338], [353], [362]);
(2) some of the factors – namely s 165-15(1)(f), (k) and (l) –
supported a conclusion that the non-remittance of GST
purpose, and not the input
tax credits purpose, was the dominant purpose of the suppliers (see T[343],
[345], [365], [378] and [379]).
the Tribunal did not find that any of the s 165-15 factors supported a
conclusion that any entity entered into the scheme
with the dominant purpose of
the taxpayer obtaining the input tax credits.
E.4 The fifth question – principal effect
fifth question posited by the Commissioner corresponds to the fifth question in
ACN 2025 FC
and concerns the Tribunal’s conclusions as to the
principal effect of the scheme. It is supported by the sixth ground of appeal,
which is in similar terms to the sixth ground of appeal in
ACN 2025 FC
E.4.1 The Tribunal’s consideration of s
165-5(1)(c)(ii) of the GST Act
Tribunal addressed the task under s 165-5(1)(c)(ii) of the GST Act – of
determining whether the taxpayer had proven, taking
into account the s 165-15
factors, that it was not reasonable to conclude that the principal effect of the
scheme (or part of it)
was that the taxpayer became entitled to receive the
inputs tax credits – in conjunction with its task under s 165-5(1)(c)(i)
of the GST Act (see E.3.1 above). Thus, there is some overlap in the analysis
which follows.
considering the s 165-15 factors the Tribunal made the following observations
relevant to the question of principal effect:
(1) as to the manner in which the scheme was carried (s 165-15(1)(a)):
a case where the relevant competition or comparison is between pursuit of
commercial ends and pursuit of a GST benefit with no
illegal evasion involved,
the existence of steps that are uncommercial or extraordinary in the manner or
execution of the scheme
might suggest pursuit of the GST benefit is dominant.
However, where the relevant comparison is between pursuit of a dishonest end
pursuit of a GST benefit, extraordinary, or irrational or uncommercial steps
might be expected in the sequence of events. In
that setting such steps might
more appropriately indicate, as part of the analysis of the manner of execution
of a scheme, that that
other goal was either the sole or dominant purpose of a
participant in the scheme.
adulteration of gold bullion, in many respects the relevant transactions were
carried out in the way of ordinary transactions.
The steps taken were largely as
would be expected in arm’s length sales of scrap gold and gold bullion.
Indeed, aside from
the one respect noted immediately below, but for the
non-payment of GST by the Direct Supplier the transactions would likely have
been regarded as unremarkable from a fiscal perspective.
was extraordinary that the Direct Suppliers adulterated bullion, destroyed some
of its value and then, ignoring GST effects on
prices, sold what had become
scrap gold at prices that were less than their acquisition costs. But those
prices at which they transacted
were not remarkable as a bargain struck between
the suppliers and the [taxpayer] for scrap gold.
[taxpayer] paying dollar for dollar amounts as components of GST-informed
purchase prices, in a setting where for the [taxpayer],
only refining profits
were generated, suggests the manner of execution test does not point to a
dominant purpose of the [taxpayer]
or any other participant in entering into or
carrying out the scheme that the [taxpayer] obtain ITC entitlements.
pricing issue is, of course, linked to the adulteration of bullion which is
certainly out of the usual. However, in the Tribunal’s
view that part of
the scheme is explicable by the Direct Suppliers’ purpose of securing a
GST-informed amount of money and
its retention through evading GST liabilities.
It does not suggest a separate dominant purpose of the [taxpayer] obtaining
the Tribunal does not identify any aspect of the manner in which the scheme was
entered into or carried out that supports
a conclusion that the principal effect
of the scheme or any part of the scheme was the [taxpayer] obtaining ITCs. The
principal effects
of the scheme as a whole were the change of ownership of very
high values of gold and after that securing a GST-informed amount of
its retention through evading GST liabilities. The principal effect of the
adulteration aspect of the manner of execution
was to transform the character of
the relevant gold and to devalue it
(emphasis added);
(2) as to the form and substance of the scheme (s 165-15(1)(b)):
legal form of the transactions was not consistent with the economic and
commercial substance. What was precious metal in investment
form was altered so
that it no longer conformed to the “in investment form” standard. It
was an alteration that facilitated
a different attribute in the marketplace that
attracted a different trading price structure which in turn facilitated a
money that the Direct Suppliers would keep. Where an actual purpose
is to effectuate illegal GST evasion, it can be expected that
trickery or
facades may be involved, and that form and substance might differ.
Tribunal does not consider the form and substance of the scheme support a
conclusion that any entity entered into or carried out
the scheme or a part of
the scheme with the dominant purpose of the [taxpayer] obtaining ITCs.
the Tribunal does not consider that the difference between the form and
substance of the scheme leads to a conclusion that
the principal effect of the
scheme or any part of the scheme was for the [taxpayer] to obtain ITCs
system of levying GST on dealings in gold substances is very much form driven.
Metal in substance, i.e., chemically and atomically,
identical, may be treated
differently depending on its presentation or its form.
Producing something
that is in form different to its substance and transacting in it, as has
happened here, transformed the character
and its sale transferred the ownership
of the highly valuable commodity. This was the principal effect to be
recognised.
(emphasis added);
(3) as to the purpose or object of the GST Act (s 165-15(1)(c)):
far as the [taxpayer] obtained the Denied ITCs on the acquisition of taxable
supplies in the course of its enterprise, that is
an unremarkable outcome under
the GST Act. It is well-known that, with limited exceptions, GST on acquisitions
is intended to have
a neutral impact on a GST-registered taxpayer’s costs.
That is a fundamental feature of value-added taxation systems throughout
world. It does not support a conclusion that any entity entered into the scheme
or a part of the scheme with the dominant purpose
of the [taxpayer] obtaining
artificial creation of a GST liability, and corresponding ITC entitlement, by
defacing bullion may be seen as not an object of
the GST Act. However, a
liability arising on a taxable supply is an intended outcome under GST law
regardless of the circumstances
giving rise to the liability. Even illegal
supplies may be taxable supplies. Once the gold was no longer precious metal its
supply being taxable was unremarkable and an intended outcome under
the GST Act.
purpose or object of the GST Act includes, fundamentally, to create a liability
for GST on taxable supplies. That is what occurred
here. It is the failure to
pay the GST that departs from the object of the GST Act, not the allowance of
ITCs on business-to-business
acquisitions which is the standard and intended
object of value-added taxation.
is there anything in the object of the GST Act that suggests the principal
effect of the scheme, or a part of the scheme was for
the [taxpayer] to obtain
(emphasis added) ;
(4) as to the timing of the scheme and the period over which it was entered into
and carried out (ss 165-15(1)(d) and (e)):
does not appear to be any timing aspect of the scheme that suggests a ...
principal effect of securing the ITCs for the [taxpayer].
If anything, the
timing aspects suggest the contrary.
the extent it happened, the round robin nature of the movement of the same gold
from the [taxpayer] to and through the Direct Suppliers
and back to the
[taxpayer], and the repetition of the cycle of transactions, and the timing of
those steps suggest that the scheme
was structured to be, to the extent of this
circularity, self-contained and possibly self-perpetuating. The timing of the
steps suggests, if anything, pursuit of securing a GST-informed amount
of money and its retention through evading GST liabilities.
Tribunal is unable to identify any basis on which timing matters could support a
conclusion that the principal effect of the scheme
or a part of the scheme was
the [taxpayer] obtaining ITCs.
(emphasis added) ;
(5) as to the effect that the GST Act would have in relation to the scheme apart
from Division 165 (s 165-15(1)(f):
conventional analysis is that this test necessarily reveals that, absent the
operation of Division 165, less GST would be payable,
or a bigger refund would
ensue. Just because a transaction has an effect of lowering tax liability or
increasing a credit does not
necessarily attract an inference that the parties
to the transaction entered into it or carried it out for the sole or dominant
of obtaining that tax consequence. This is particularly so when other
benefits and taxation liabilities are also produced by the
scheme identified.
Under this conventional analysis, little weight would be attached to this
factor. This is so because the mere
fact of a GST benefit cannot lead to the
result that the dominant purpose of the relevant scheme was to secure that
benefit. If it
did there would be no need for the other factors to be
alternative approach rests on a premise that any test ought be capable of
pointing in either a positive or negative way in the
analysis required and
should be capable of supporting or contradicting the requisite conclusion in
different settings. There seems
little point in having a test factor which can
only point in one direction. Under the alternative approach, it is necessary to
to whether the outcome of the scheme transactions absent Division 165
applying is consistent with the operation as intended by the
the GST Act intends to allow an ITC to an entity carrying on an enterprise that
has paid for an acquisition, and paid dollar
for dollar for it, in a
business-to-business transaction under a practical business tax system that
places great reliance on the
use and acceptance of tax invoices. On that
footing, absent the operation of Division 165, the outcome in the present
circumstances
is entirely consistent with an intended outcome of the GST Act.
This factor, analysed this way, suggests that the dominant purpose of
participants in the scheme was not to secure a GST benefit
. This is not a
case where, by some artifice
on the part of the taxpayer, a GST benefit
ensues without the full cost of securing it having been paid
is true that if one considers only the part of the scheme that is the defacing
of bullion before its sale to the [taxpayer], that
part of the scheme causes a
change in the GST status of the commodity and its subsequent sale. But that is a
change that causes GST
to become payable where it would not otherwise have been
payable. And, more importantly, the economic impact is neutral because of
[taxpayer’s] entitlement to ITCs. That supports a conclusion that the
dominant purpose of the Direct Suppliers was to secure
for themselves money and
to evade payment of GST rather than for any entity to obtain ITCs.
not support a conclusion that the principal effect of the scheme or a part of
the scheme was for the [taxpayer] to obtain
Commissioner’s propositions to the effect that the scheme made no sense
without the Disputed ITC entitlements, and an inability
to trade viably without
them, in respect of this test seem misplaced. However, the Commissioner’s
proposition under this test
Intermediaries obtained a GST inclusive price that depended on [the
taxpayer’s] GST refunds for input tax credits
(the GST benefits), many
evaded their obligation to remit GST that [the taxpayer] paid them in the price
of its scrap acquisitions.
The Tribunal ought to find that such evasion would not have occurred but for the
creation of [the taxpayer’s] entitlement to
GST refunds under the scheme,
as it was uneconomical for the Intermediaries to acquire bullion, supply scrap
and pay the GST on their
scrap supplies to [the taxpayer].
reveals the facilitative nature
of the payment of a GST-informed price and the taxable supplies that lead to it
and any ITC entitlement
associated with it in a scheme to acquire and keep money
in an illegal evasion
(emphasis added) ;
(6) as to any change in the taxpayer’s financial position that has
resulted, or may reasonably be expected to result, from
the scheme (s
165-15(1)(g)):
is difficult to dispute the Commissioner’s contention that the
[taxpayer’s] net asset position and cash flow depended
on entitlements to
the Disputed ITCs. Two observations are self-evident: first, in any arrangement
where prices are paid for inputs
equal to the ITCs claimed, net asset positions
will be affected by ignoring half of the money flows or entitlements to money
and second, if margins are very tight, denying an entitlement to 10% of
the revenue flows to a business without ignoring 10% of the
expenses of the
business is likely to affect profitability in a material way.
the test and necessary comparison is not:
any change in the
avoider’s financial position that has resulted, or may reasonably be
expected to result, from the
GST benefit
a comparison of balance sheets with and without the GST benefits recognised
might be permissible if the test were as stated.
The test has to have regard to
the scheme. Here the scheme includes payment of a GST-informed price.
the [taxpayer’s] perspective, namely an enterprise that produced precious
metal and sold it thus making GST-free supplies:
(a) ITC entitlements arose in respect of all of its inputs to that process that
were taxable supplies to it including all of the
supplies underlying the
Disputed ITCs;
(b) for each of the taxable supplies it paid a price that was informed by the
fact that they were taxable supplies and that exceeded
the price that would have
been payable had the supplies not been taxable, and that excess equalled the ITC
entitlement mentioned
(c) the [taxpayer] enjoyed enhanced turnover from its participation in the
scheme and resultant trading profits from that enhanced
globally, the only potentially measurable financial benefit was enhanced
profitability from enhanced trading.
Full Court ACN decision made clear that availability of ITCs has a neutral
effect on profit which is determined net of GST considerations.
availability of ITCs cannot be regarded as a source of profit.
Tribunal also considers this factor does not support a conclusion that the
principal effect of the scheme or a part of the scheme
was the [taxpayer]
obtaining the Denied ITCs
The obtaining of the ITCs had a neutral impact
on the [taxpayer] since it was matched by the obligation, which it met, to pay a
for the scrap gold that was informed by a corresponding GST amount.
(bold and underline emphasis in original; italic emphasis added) ;
(7) as to any change that has resulted, or may reasonably be expected to result
from the scheme in the financial position of any
entity connected to the
taxpayer (s 165‑15(1)(h)):
is no question that the Direct Suppliers were financially disadvantaged by the
scheme if the non-payment of GST, which does
not form part of either of the
Commissioner’s articulated schemes, is ignored. That is because their
sales prices for the scrap
gold were less than they paid for bullion in
investment form.
Commissioner’s submission, which stops there, analyses half the story, and
ignores the facts revealed by the evidence he
is artificial to ignore the non-payment of the evaded GST when that is
undeniably the end goal of the scheme. It is objectively
clear that without that
non-payment the Direct Suppliers Intermediaries participation in the scheme
would have made no sense, and
would not have happened. The artificiality in
ignoring the non-payment by the Direct Suppliers probably explains the extensive
led by the Commissioner of the financial affairs of the Intermediaries
and their lack of GST compliance.
Direct Suppliers were, if outstanding liabilities are not taken into account,
enriched in a cash sense by not paying the GST they
were liable to pay. That
enrichment exceeded the spot price differential between what they paid for
bullion and what they sold the
scrap gold for. That suggests those entities had
a dominant purpose of enriching themselves by collecting money but not paying
– that was the sole source of their enrichment.
are no identifiable financial changes for any other entity that could be
regarded as supporting a conclusion that an entity
had a dominant purpose of the
[taxpayer] obtaining the Denied ITCs. It may be the case, that entities enjoyed
an enhanced turnover
and profitability from the scheme, but they continued to
enjoy refining styled profits.
this factor does not support a conclusion that the availability of the ITCs was
the principal effect of the scheme or a
part of the scheme. A financial effect
of ITCs would be illusory when, as here, matched by a liability to pay a price
that includes
a corresponding amount of GST.
(emphasis added) ;
(8) as to other consequences for the taxpayer or a connected entity of the
scheme having been entered into or carried out, and the
reliance of the
connection between the taxpayer and the connected entity including whether the
dealing is or was at arm’s length
(s 165‑15(1)(i) and (j)):
is no suggestion that the dealings between the Direct Suppliers other than CFGA
and the [taxpayer] were other than at arm’s
length in both the
relationship sense and in the sense that commercial prices were paid for the
relevant supplies. The latter is
not surprising since there is no common
ownership between the Direct Suppliers and the [taxpayer] or Galaxy.
factor does not support a conclusion
that any entity entered into the scheme
or a part of the scheme with the dominant purpose of, or
that the principal
effect of the scheme or any part of the scheme was, the [taxpayer] obtaining the
Denied ITCs
knowledge of activities of transacting parties as contended for by the
Commissioner could be attributed to pursuit of the end
goal of the GST evasion
in any event.
(emphasis added) ; and
(9) as to the circumstances surrounding the scheme and any other relevant
circumstances (ss 165-15(1)(k) and (l)):
such circumstance, excluded by the Commissioner from his articulated scheme, is
the illegal evasion by non-payment of the Direct
Suppliers’ GST
liabilities.
circumstance points in favour of a conclusion that the dominant purpose of the
Direct Suppliers participating in the scheme or
a part of the scheme was those
suppliers enriching themselves by evading liabilities to the Commonwealth.
does not support a conclusion
that any entity entered into the scheme or a
part of the scheme with the dominant purpose of,
or that the principal effect
of the scheme or any part of the scheme was, the [taxpayer] obtaining the Denied
a structure of separate refining company and bullion dealing company pointed to
by the Commissioner is quite equivocal in
what it suggests. The
Commissioner’s private ruling suggests that that is a normal event. The
GST system of taxing transactions
in gold specifically provides for two types of
sale by a refiner, input taxed and GST free, both of which do not involve a GST
to the refiner. Creation of the GST free sale pathway is the measure
intended so as to allow ITCs to be claimed by a refiner. Creating
that structure
does not of itself, as the Commissioner’s ruling suggests, involve any GST
(emphasis added)
E.4.2 The Commissioner’s challenge
fifth question in the amended notice of appeal is:
Whether for the purposes of s 165-5(1)(c)(ii) the Tribunal correctly applied the
meaning of the principal effect of the scheme, or
part of the scheme.
question is supported by the sixth ground of appeal:
6. Further or in the alternative, in concluding at [317], [325] and [329] that:
(a) the principal effects of the scheme were to transform the character of the
gold, to transfer the ownership of it and after that
the fraud on the
Commissioner, and
(b) the creation of the input tax credits for the Respondent was an incidental
and facilitative part of the scheme,
the Tribunal failed correctly to apply the meaning of the principal effect of
the scheme, or part of the scheme under s 165-5(1)(c)(ii).
E.4.3 Consideration
Commissioner’s submissions are to the same effect as the
Commissioner’s submissions in the ACN 154 appeal. Subparagraph
ground 6 (which was not part of the corresponding ground in the ACN 154 appeal)
was not separately developed. For the reasons
given in paragraphs [111] to [116]
of my reasons for judgment in
ACN 2025 FC
– and substituting
references to T[325] and [329] for T[172] and [176] – this question must
E.5 The sixth question – treatment of the object and
purpose of the GST Act
sixth question posited by the Commissioner corresponds to the sixth question
considered in
ACN 2025 FC
. It is supported by the eighth ground of
appeal, which is in relevantly identical terms to the eighth ground of appeal in
ACN 2025 FC
sixth question and the eighth ground of appeal described in the amended notice
of appeal concern the Tribunal’s treatment
of one of the s 165-15 factors,
namely s 165‑15(1)(c). That sub-section relevantly provides that when
considering an entity’s
purpose in entering into or carrying out a scheme
and the effect of a scheme under s 165-5, account must be taken of the purpose
or object of the GST Act and any relevant provision of that Act (whether the
purpose or object is stated expressly or not).
E.5.1 The Tribunal’s consideration of s 165-15(1)(c)
of the GST Act
T[320], the Tribunal stated:
Absent adulteration of gold bullion, in many respects the relevant transactions
were carried out in the way of ordinary transactions.
The steps taken were
largely as would be expected in arm’s length sales of scrap gold and gold
bullion. Indeed, aside from
the one respect noted immediately below, but for the
non-payment of GST by the Direct Supplier the transactions would likely have
been regarded as unremarkable from a fiscal perspective.
Tribunal addressed s 165-15(1)(c) of the GST Act at T[330] to [334]:
far as [the taxpayer] obtained the Denied ITCs on the acquisition of taxable
supplies in the course of its enterprise, that is
an unremarkable outcome under
the GST Act. It is well-known that, with limited exceptions, GST on acquisitions
is intended to have
a neutral impact on a GST-registered taxpayer’s costs.
That is a fundamental feature of value-added taxation systems throughout
world. It does not support a conclusion that any entity entered into the scheme
or a part of the scheme with the dominant purpose
of [the taxpayer] obtaining
artificial creation of a GST liability, and corresponding ITC entitlement, by
defacing bullion may be seen as not an object of
the GST Act. However, a
liability arising on a taxable supply is an intended outcome under GST law
regardless of the circumstances
giving rise to the liability. Even illegal
supplies may be taxable supplies. Once the gold was no longer precious metal its
supply being taxable was unremarkable and an intended outcome under
the GST Act.
purpose or object of the GST Act includes, fundamentally, to create a liability
for GST on taxable supplies. That is what occurred
here. It is the failure to
pay the GST that departs from the object of the GST Act, not the allowance of
ITCs on business-to-business
acquisitions which is the standard and intended
object of value-added taxation.
factor does not suggest a conclusion that producing the GST benefit was the
dominant purpose of the scheme for these supplies.
is there anything in the object of the GST Act that suggests the principal
effect of the scheme, or a part of the scheme was for
[the taxpayer] to obtain
paragraphs are relevantly identical to paragraphs [166] and [177] to [181] of
the Second Tribunal’s reasons in
ACN 2025 FC.
E.5.2 The Commissioner’s challenge
sixth question in the amended notice of appeal is:
Whether the Tribunal was correct in its determination and consideration of the
policy and purpose of the GST Act.
question is supported by the eighth ground of appeal:
Further or in the alternative, in determining and considering the purpose and
object of the GST Act, the Tribunal erred by failing
to take into account the
purpose and object of Division 165 of the GST Act (being to deter schemes to
give entities benefits by reducing
GST, increasing refunds or altering the
timing of payment of GST or refunds) and by failing to consider that object and
purpose having
regard to the matters set out in s 165-15(1)(c).
E.5.3 Consideration
Commissioner’s question, grounds and submissions are relevantly the same
as those advanced as the sixth question (supported
by the eighth ground) in
ACN 2025 FC
. As noted above, the salient paragraphs of the Second
Tribunal’s reasons in
ACN 2025 FC
and the present Tribunal Decision
are relevantly identical. For the reasons given in my reasons for judgment at
paragraphs [122]
to [124] of
ACN 2025 FC
– and substituting
references to T[330] to [334] for T[177] to [181] – this question must
F. CONCLUSION
the reasons set out above, the appeal should be
I certify that the preceding fifty-four (54) numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Justice
Dated: 24 October 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
FEUTRILL J:
INTRODUCTION
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999
(Cth) contained
certain general anti-avoidance provisions aimed at negating the fiscal
consequences of artificial or contrived schemes
that reduce the GST tax base.
Division 165 operated if an entity (avoider) got a GST benefit from a scheme
and, taking into account
certain mandatory matters, it was reasonable to
conclude that either: (1) an entity that entered into or carried out the scheme
so with the dominant purpose of that entity or another entity getting a GST
benefit from the scheme; or (2) the principal effect
of the scheme was that the
avoider got the GST benefit from the scheme: s 165-5(1)(c)
165 applied, the applicant (Commissioner) had power to make a declaration that
had the effect of negating a GST benefit of
the avoider: s 165-40. The
Commissioner also had power to make assessments or amended assessments of the
amount payable by or to
the avoider under certain provisions contained in Sch 1
Taxation Administration Act 1953
for reasons unrelated to Div 165, the Commissioner exercised certain powers
by which refunds in the total amount of $9,457,634
which the respondent
(taxpayer) had received were disallowed and administrative penalties were
imposed. The taxpayer objected to
the assessments under the provisions of
Taxation Administration Act
. After a deemed disallowance of
the taxpayer’s objections, the taxpayer sought review of the objection
decision in the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal. The Commissioner contended that
the objection decision should be affirmed on the ground, amongst others, that
165 applied because the taxpayer had obtained refunds for input tax
credits under a gold refining scheme entered into or carried
out by a number of
entities (referred to as the Direct Suppliers, Indirect Suppliers and
collectively Intermediaries) which had supplied
scrap gold to the taxpayer. The
Tribunal affirmed part of the disallowance decision, including a shortfall
penalty, on a separate
ground, but, otherwise found that it was not reasonable
to conclude that an entity had the s 165-
(1)(c)(i) ‘dominant
purpose’ or the scheme had the s 165-
(1)(c)(ii) ‘principal
effect’. As a consequence, the taxpayer was entitled to the majority of
the refunds that the Commissioner
had disallowed.
Commissioner commenced an appeal from that decision under
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth). The AAT Act has since
been repealed and the
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
enacted by which the Administrative Appeals Tribunal has been abolished and
replaced by the Administrative Review Tribunal.
Under certain transitional
provisions this appeal continues as if it were an appeal under s 44 of the
AAT Act and, if the Tribunal
decision is set aside, the matter may be remitted
to the Administrative Review Tribunal.
the form in which it was ultimately pressed, the notice of appeal identifies six
questions of law and six grounds in support of
asserted errors of law. The
overall question of law posed is whether the Tribunal correctly applied the
legal test mandated in s
165-5(1)(c) of the GST Act and, thereby, correctly
concluded that it was
reasonable to conclude that an entity had the
statutory ‘dominant purpose’ or the scheme had the statutory
effect’ (Question 1). The answer to that question
essentially turns on the answers to each of the other questions posed in
notice of appeal. The aspects of the Tribunal’s decision challenged and
the issues raised in the appeal may be summarised
as follows.
(1) The Commissioner challenges the conclusion, for the purposes of
s 165-5(1)(c)(i), that it was not reasonable to conclude that
entered into or carried out the scheme or part of the scheme with the dominant
purpose of getting the taxpayer a GST benefit
from the scheme. There were a
number of strands to the Commissioner’s contentions, but these largely
boil down to two main
issues. First, whether in the application of a
facilitative purpose of an ultimate purpose analysis drawn from
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2012] HCA 51
250 CLR 171
the Tribunal
disregarded the statements of principle applicable to consideration of composite
purposes in
ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (in liq) v Federal Commissioner of
[2020] FCAFC 190
282 FCR 455
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Complete Success Solutions Pty Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 19
and, thereby, misconstrued and misapplied the s 165-5(1)(c)(i)
‘dominant purpose’ test. Second, whether there was a failure
consider the importance of the taxpayer getting input tax credits to the
economic feasibility of the scheme and, thereby, the
Tribunal failed to exclude
that potential importance in its consideration of which of the competing
purposes was dominant (Questions
1 – 4, Grounds 1 – 3, 5).
(2) The Commissioner challenges the conclusion, for the purposes of
s 165-5(1)(c)(ii), that it was not reasonable to conclude that
principal effect of the scheme or part of the scheme was that the taxpayer got
the GST benefit. Here, there are also two issues.
First, whether there was a
misconstruction and misapplication of the s 165-5(1)(c)(ii)
‘principal effect’ test because
the Tribunal incorrectly focussed on
the general non-fiscal effects of the change in ownership and form of gold and
the evasion of
GST liabilities rather than on the fiscal effect of the
particular scheme or part of the scheme. Second, as with dominant purpose,
whether there was a failure to consider the importance of the taxpayer getting
input tax credits to the economic feasibility of the
scheme and, thereby, the
Tribunal failed to exclude that potential importance in its consideration of the
effect of the scheme, in
particular, that part of the scheme in which the
taxpayer participated (Question 5, Ground 6).
(3) The Commissioner challenges the manner in which the matter described in
s 165-15(1)(c), the purpose or object of the GST Act
or any provision of
that Act, was taken into account in considering the statutory questions posed in
s 165-5(1)(c). The relevant
issue is whether the purpose or object of Div
165 to deter artificial or contrived schemes was a mandatory matter to be taken
account and that matter was disregarded in considering the statutory
questions (Question 6, Ground 8).
appeal was heard at the same time as a separate appeal the Commissioner
commenced from a decision of the AAT (comprised of the
same member) in the
proceeding remitted to AAT as a consequence of the judgment of the Court in
Full Court ACN 2020
. That proceeding concerned the review of an objection
decision of the Commissioner involving the negation of refunds under Div 165
connection with a scheme entered into or carried out by a number of entities
which had supplied scrap gold to the relevant taxpayer
(also a refiner of
precious metals). Although involving different parties and facts, the scheme the
subject of the other appeal and
circumstances in which that scheme was entered
into and carried out were substantially the same as the scheme and circumstances
to this appeal. The Tribunal identified the same legal principles and
applied them in the same manner as they were applied to the
facts of this case.
Questions 1 – 4 and grounds 1 – 3, 5, 6 and 8 in this appeal are
common and raise the same issues
as the corresponding questions and grounds
considered in the other appeal. The Court allowed the Commissioner’s
appeal in that
proceeding and delivered reasons for its decision immediately
before pronouncing judgment in this appeal:
Commissioner of Taxation v ACN
154 520 199 Pty Ltd
[2025] FCAFC 146.
statutory context and provisions of Div 165 are set out, summarised, analysed
and explained in the reasons for judgment in
Full Court ACN 2025
[144]-[153]. Those reasons also explain the principles applicable to
identification of s 165-5(1)(c) ‘dominant purpose’
‘principal effect’ and the significance and applicable principles to
be derived from the Full Court decisions in
Full Court ACN 2020
Complete Success
and the High Court decision
at [193]-[228]. I adopt that summary and explanation and, except as
is necessary to explain my reasons in this appeal, none of those
matters need be
repeated. However, due to the similarity and overlapping nature of the issues,
in order to explain my reasons in
this appeal, it has been necessary to
duplicate in more-or-less the same terms significant parts of the reasoning in
Full Court ACN 2025
short, in my view, in the application of the applicable principles to the facts
as found in this case the Tribunal misconstrued
and misapplied
s 165-5(1)(c)(i) in adopting and applying a facilitative purpose analysis
in its consideration of the ‘dominant
purpose’ statutory inquiry
mandated in Div 165. The Tribunal also misconstrued and misapplied the
s 165-5(1)(c)(ii) ‘principal
effect’ inquiry by failing to
focus on the fiscal effect of the scheme. Further, the Tribunal misconstrued and
misapplied s
165-5(1)(c) and s 165-15(1)(c) by disregarding that a
purpose or object of Div 165 is to deter artificial or contrived schemes.
I do not accept that any of the other matters the Commissioner raised
involve errors of law. The Tribunal’s decision should
be set aside for
errors of law and the matter remitted to the Administrative Review Tribunal for
determination according to law.
relevant taxpayer in
Full Court ACN 2025
also contended that the
Commissioner’s notice of appeal failed to raise a question of law. The
taxpayer in this appeal raised
a similar contention in its written submissions
and, to an extent, adopted the other taxpayer’s oral submissions on that
But, the taxpayer accepted that an error in the application of the legal
principles to the facts as found is an appeal ‘on
a question of law’
for the purposes of s 44 of the AAT Act. Having regard to the nature of
the errors the Tribunal made in
this case, for the reasons given in the other
appeal regarding errors of the same kind, this is also an appeal ‘on a
Full Court ACN 2025
at [182]-[192].
STATUTORY CONTEXT
brief, the GST Act provided that GST is payable on ‘taxable
supplies’ and entitlements to ‘input tax credits’
‘creditable acquisitions’: s 7-1. Amounts of GST and amounts of
input tax credits are set off against each other
to produce a ‘net
amount’ for a tax period: s 7-5. The amount assessed as being the
‘net amount’ for a tax
period is the amount that the entity must pay
to the Commonwealth or the Commonwealth must refund to the entity in respect of
period: s 7-15. A person must pay GST on any taxable supply made by
that person: s 9-40. A person is entitled to input tax credits
creditable acquisition made by that person: s 11-20. The amount of the GST
liability is 10% of the value of the taxable supply
or one eleventh of the
consideration for the taxable supply.
Relevantly,
a taxable supply is made if the supply is for consideration, made in the course
or furtherance of an enterprise the taxpayer
carries on, and the taxpayer is
registered or required to be registered. However, the supply is not a taxable
supply to the extent
that it is ‘GST-free’ or ‘input
taxed’: s 9-5. A ‘creditable acquisition’ is made if
is acquired solely or partly for a creditable purpose, the supply of
the thing is a taxable supply, consideration is provided for
the supply, and the
acquirer is registered or required to be registered: s 11-5. A thing is
acquired for a ‘creditable purpose’
to the extent that it is
acquired in carrying on the acquirer’s enterprise: s 11-15. An
‘enterprise’ is an activity
or series of activities, done in the
form of a business or in the form of an adventure or concern in the nature of
trade: s 9-20(1).
A person is required to be registered under the GST Act
if the person is carrying on an enterprise and the person’s GST turnover
meets the registration turnover threshold: s 23-5.
the GST Act assumes that a GST liability will be included in the consideration
for a taxable supply and where the thing acquired
is used in the course or
furtherance of an enterprise the notional GST liability embedded in the
consideration will be refunded through
an entitlement to an input tax credit.
Through this system of setting off GST liability against input tax credit and
assessment and
payment or refund of the ‘net amount’, the burden of
the tax is borne by the ultimate consumer of goods and services.
are special rules relating to certain supplies that are ‘GST-free’
or ‘input taxed’: Div 38, Div 40.
These rules include certain
supplies of ‘precious metal’. The expression ‘precious
metal’ is defined to mean
gold, silver or platinum in investment form of
at least 99.5%, 99.9 or 99% fineness or any other substance in investment form
particular fineness specified in regulations: s 195-1.
special rules, dealers in precious metal would not be able to ‘pass
on’ a liability incurred to pay GST on an
otherwise taxable supply of a
precious metal because the consideration for the supply of the precious metal
would be fixed by the
international price for that precious metal. To avoid that
outcome, the first supply of precious metals after it is refined is
if the entity that refined the precious metal is a
‘refiner of precious metal’ and the recipient of the supply is a
in precious metal’: s 38-385. Likewise, subsequent
transactions involving precious metal where the consideration is also fixed
internationally are ‘input taxed’: s 40-100. To the extent that
a supply is both ‘GST-free” and ‘input
general, the supply is GST-free and not input taxed for the purposes of the GST
Act: s 9-30(3). See, also, Explanatory
Memorandum to
A New Tax System
(Goods and Services) Tax Bill 1998
(Cth), paras 5.125 – 5.127.
General anti-avoidance provisions
165 contains general anti-avoidance provisions that are in similar terms and
operate in a similar way to other general anti-avoidance
provisions in
Commonwealth taxation legislation.
the relevant period, ss 165-5, 165-10 and 165-15 of the GST Act
165-5 When does this Division operate?
General rule
(1) This Division operates if:
(a) an entity (the
) gets or got a *GST benefit from a
(c) taking account of the matters described in section 165-15, it is reasonable
to conclude that either:
(i) an entity that (whether alone or with others) entered into or carried out
the scheme, or part of the scheme, did so with the
sole or dominant purpose of
that entity or another entity getting a *GST benefit from the scheme; or
(ii) the principal effect of the scheme, or of part of the scheme, is that the
avoider gets the GST benefit from the scheme directly
or indirectly; ...
165-10 When does an entity get a GST benefit from a scheme?
(1) An entity gets a
GST benefit
from a *scheme if:
(a) an amount that is payable by the entity under this Act apart from this
Division is, or could reasonably be expected to be, smaller
than it would be
apart from the scheme or a part of the scheme; or
(b) an amount that is payable to the entity under this Act apart from this
Division is, or could reasonably be expected to be, larger
than it would be
apart from the scheme or a part of the scheme;
What is a scheme?
(a) any arrangement, agreement, understanding, promise or undertaking:
(i) whether it is express or implied; and
(ii) whether or not it is, or is intended to be, enforceable by legal
proceedings; or
(b) any scheme, plan, proposal, action, course of action or course of conduct,
whether unilateral or otherwise.
GST benefit can arise even if
no economic alternative
(3) An entity can get a *GST benefit from a *scheme even if the entity or
entities that entered into or carried out the scheme, or
a part of the scheme,
could not have engaged economically in any activities:
(a) of the kind to which this
Act applies; and
(b) that would produce an effect equivalent (except in terms of this Act) to the
effect of the scheme or part of the scheme;
other than the activities involved in entering into or carrying out the scheme
or part of the scheme.
165-15 Matters to be considered in determining purpose or effect
(1) The following matters are to be taken into account under section 165-5 in
considering an entity’s purpose in entering into
or carrying out the
*scheme from which the avoider got a *GST benefit, and the effect of the scheme:
(a) the manner in which the scheme was entered into or carried out;
(b) the form and substance of the scheme, including:
(i) the legal rights and obligations involved in the scheme; and
(ii) the economic and commercial substance of the scheme;
(c) the purpose or object of this Act, the
Customs Act 1901
(so far as it
is relevant to this Act) and any relevant provision of this Act or that Act
(whether the purpose or object is stated
expressly or not);
(d) the timing of the scheme;
(e) the period over which the scheme was entered into and carried out;
(f) the effect that this Act would have in relation to the scheme apart from
this Division;
(g) any change in the avoider’s financial position that has resulted, or
may reasonably be expected to result, from the scheme;
(h) any change that has resulted, or may reasonably be expected to result, from
the scheme in the financial position of an entity
) that has or had a connection or dealing with the avoider,
whether the connection or dealing is or was of a family, business or other
(i) any other consequence for the avoider or a connected entity of the scheme
having been entered into or carried out;
(j) the nature of the connection between the avoider and a connected entity,
including the question whether the dealing is or was
at arm’s length;
(k) the circumstances surrounding the scheme;
(l) any other relevant circumstances.
(2) Subsection (1) applies in relation to consideration of an entity’s
purpose in entering into or carrying out a part of a
*scheme from which the
avoider gets or got a *GST benefit, and the effect of part of the scheme, as if
the part were itself the *scheme
from which the avoider gets or got the GST
Div 165 operated, the Commissioner had a discretion to negate a GST benefit by
making a declaration about the avoider’s net
amount for a specified tax
period under s 165-40. Schedule 1 of the
Taxation Administration Act
contained provisions by which the Commissioner could make assessments and
amended assessments based on the ‘net amount’
for a tax period.
pre-conditions to the operation of Div 165 were: (1) there was a scheme; (2) an
entity got a GST benefit from that scheme; and
(3) taking into account the
matters described in s 165-
, an entity entered into or carried out the
scheme or part of the scheme with a s 165-
(1)(c)(i) ‘dominant
purpose’ or a s 165(1)(c)(ii) ‘principal
Salib was the sole director and shareholder of Cash for Gold Australia Pty Ltd,
Galaxy Coins and Bullion Pty Ltd and the taxpayer.
for Gold Australia was incorporated in 1996. From around 2002, in its capacity
as trustee of the Salib Family Trust, it traded
as a licensed second-hand gold
dealer. In 2009, as trustee, it changed its business to acquire scrap gold and
sell it to refiners.
was incorporated and registered for GST under the GST Act in 2016. It was a
dealer in precious metals.
taxpayer was incorporated and registered for GST under the GST Act in 2013. Mr
Salib established the taxpayer to refine ‘his
own gold’ from his
other entity to save money and grow the business. Mr Salib invested $935,000 in
the taxpayer to enable it
to acquire scrap gold and plant and equipment for use
in the refining process. The funds were sourced from distributions of income
from the Salib Family Trust.
taxpayer’s business involved acquiring scrap gold and refining that gold
into gold metal in investment form (precious metals).
It used the ‘aqua
regia’ refining process. That process requires hydrochloric acid, nitric
acid and sulphur dioxide gas.
The taxpayer secured the right to apply the
registered C4G hallmark to the precious metal it produced from Cash for Gold
The taxpayer sold the gold metal in investment form to Galaxy. Galaxy
sold the gold (precious metal) to unrelated parties.
Commissioner conducted an audit of the taxpayer and reached the following
conclusions with respect to input tax credits the taxpayer
had claimed for the
tax periods July, August, September, October and November 2016.
(a) The taxpayer sold almost all the gold (precious metal) it produced to
(b) Galaxy sold the gold (precious metal) to parties that formed part of one or
more of 11 supply chains. The supply chains involved
eight parties referred to
as the Direct Suppliers and 12 parties referred to as the Indirect Suppliers.
Each supply chain had a Direct
Supplier and one or more Indirect Suppliers. The
Direct Suppliers and Indirect Suppliers were referred to collectively as the
Intermediaries.
(c) Almost all the taxpayer’s scrap gold purchases during the relevant
period were purchases from the Direct Suppliers. The
Direct Suppliers were
participants in one or more of the supply chains.
(d) Direct Suppliers acquired gold (precious metal) from Galaxy or Indirect
Suppliers which had acquired gold (precious metal) from
(e) Somewhere within the supply chains gold metal in investment form was
adulterated and became scrap gold.
(f) In nearly every supply chain culminating in a supply of scrap gold to the
taxpayer, one Intermediary did not pay GST liabilities.
(g) There was insufficient evidence that the taxpayer had made creditable
acquisitions from one of the Direct Suppliers.
(h) With respect to all Direct Suppliers the scrap gold acquired had been
previously refined with the effect that the taxpayer was
not entitled to input
tax credits in respect of those acquisitions.
the relevant period the taxpayer lodged business activity statement (or BAS)
returns in which it claimed input tax credits
on the acquisitions of scrap gold
from the Direct Suppliers. The taxpayer treated its supplies of gold metal in
investment form as
input taxed under s 40-100 of the GST Act. Some of these
returns resulted in assessments and refunds and other to prospective refunds
that the Commissioner retained under
Administration Act
Intermediaries failed to lodge a BAS return for the relevant period or lodged
returns that understated the net amount of GST
payable on supplies of scrap
gold. Evidently, the Commissioner has not recovered the GST liabilities the
Intermediaries incurred
on notional taxable supplies of scrap gold during the
relevant period.
5 December 2017, at the conclusion of the audit, the Commissioner issued amended
assessments to the taxpayer in which he denied
the taxpayer input tax credit
claims to the extent of $9,457,634 for the tax periods July, August, September,
October and November
2016. The Commissioner also issued assessments for
shortfall penalties in the total sum of $5,371,390.40.
17 December 2017 the taxpayer objected to the amended GST and penalty
assessments. On 17 July 2018 the Commissioner informed the
taxpayer that
pursuant to
Taxation Administration Act
the Commissioner was
taken, on 23 April 2018, to have disallowed the objections. The taxpayer then
sought review of the objection
decisions in the Tribunal. In the Tribunal
proceeding the Commissioner refined the grounds for disallowing the input tax
credit claims
and included a contention that Div 165 applied and that the
Tribunal should make or direct the Commissioner to make a declaration
s 165-40 of the GST Act negating the GST benefits the taxpayer
Tribunal affirmed the decision to disallow $1,854,316 in input tax credits
claimed and the shortfall penalty of $1,569,731.40
on the ground that the
taxpayer had not demonstrated that it had made creditable acquisitions from one
of the Direct Suppliers (Golden
Angel supply chain). Otherwise, the Tribunal
concluded that Div 165 was not applicable and, therefore, the taxpayer was
to the remaining $7,603,318 in claimed input tax credits.
TRIBUNAL DECISION
Tribunal made findings to the effect that the taxpayer acquired scrap gold from
the Direct Suppliers through one or more of supply
chains involving Indirect
Suppliers. Many of the supply chains were somewhat complicated, but the common
features were:
(1) a supply of gold (precious metal) from Galaxy to an Indirect Supplier;
(2) further supplies of gold involving one or more Indirect Suppliers and ending
with a supply to a Direct Supplier; and
(3) a supply from a Direct Supplier to the taxpayer.
In the one exception, the gold (precious metal) was supplied to the Direct
Supplier and the Direct Supplier supplied the taxpayer
with scrap gold.
supply chains included one in which Cash for Gold Australia was the party to
which Galaxy supplied investment form gold metal.
Cash for Gold Australia
supplied that gold to various Indirect Suppliers. Cash for Gold Australia, in
turn, acquired scrap gold from
various Indirect Suppliers and supplied the scrap
gold to the taxpayer. That is, Mr Salib was involved in the management of all
in that supply chain except for the various Indirect Suppliers.
Tribunal also made findings of fact consistent with essential elements of the
scheme the Commissioner articulated. In substance,
the scheme during the
relevant period comprised the following steps:
(a) The taxpayer supplied gold metal in investment form to Galaxy for
consideration based on the spot price for gold plus a small
margin. Baird &
Co (another refiner of precious metal) supplied gold metal in investment form to
QN Traders (another dealer of
precious metal) for consideration roughly
equivalent to the spot price of gold.
(b) Galaxy supplied gold metal in investment form to Intermediaries for
consideration of 100.50% to 101% of the prevailing spot price
of gold. QN
Traders supplied certain Indirect Suppliers with gold metal in investment form
bearing the Baird & Co hallmark.
(c) An unascertained portion of gold metal in investment form acquired by Direct
Suppliers or Indirect Suppliers was adulterated
by Direct Suppliers or somewhere
in the applicable supply chain so that it was no longer in investment form
(scrap gold).
(d) Intermediaries supplied gold metal, if not directly to the taxpayer, then to
a subsequent acquirer (another Intermediary).
(e) The Intermediary that supplied gold metal directly to the taxpayer was a
Direct Supplier. The Intermediaries that supplied gold
metal to another
Intermediary were Indirect Suppliers. Indirect Suppliers supplied gold metal to
Direct Suppliers through the various
supply chains described earlier each ending
with the supply of gold metal to a Direct Supplier.
(f) Direct Suppliers supplied scrap gold to the taxpayer. The consideration for
the gold metal was 105.47% to 107.99% of the prevailing
spot price for gold
which equated to 95.89% to 98.18% of the prevailing spot price of gold plus a
10% margin for GST.
(g) The taxpayer refined the scrap gold acquired from the Direct Suppliers to
produce gold metal in investment form.
(h) The taxpayer supplied to Galaxy gold metal in investment form for
consideration based on the spot price for gold plus a small
total gold (precious metal) the taxpayer supplied to Galaxy through step (a) and
step (h) of the scheme was 1.8 million grams
representing all the 1kg hallmarked
gold bars the taxpayer produced in the relevant period. The value of that gold
metal was $103.1
million (excluding GST). The taxpayer received $79.6 million
for the gold. (These amounts include the value and consideration received
transactions in the Golden Angel supply chain.)
gold (precious metal) Galaxy supplied to the Direct Supplier was 771,000 grams
and to the Indirect Suppliers was 1.02 million
grams in the relevant period
(1.79 million grams in total). The total supplied to the Direct Suppliers by
Indirect Suppliers through
the supply chains was 1.426 million grams.
total scrap gold Direct Suppliers supplied to the taxpayer was 1,785,903 grams
representing 99.39% of the taxpayer’s scrap
gold acquisitions and 92.64%
of the Direct Supplier’s supplies of scrap gold during the relevant
period. The value of that
scrap gold was $108.3 million (including GST). The
taxpayer paid $83.6 million for the gold. (These amounts include the value and
price of transactions in the Golden Angel supply chain.)
considerable portion of the scrap gold the taxpayer acquired was already of a
high percentage of fineness. An unascertained portion
of gold metal that the
taxpayer had refined found its way back to the taxpayer as scrap gold and was
again refined into investment
supply of scrap gold referred to in step (f) of the scheme was notionally a
‘taxable supply’ within the meaning of
the GST Act. As a
consequence, the Intermediaries incurred a liability to the Commonwealth to pay
GST calculated as one eleventh
of the consideration for the supply. At the same
time, the acquisition of the scrap gold was notionally a ‘creditable
acquisition’
within the meaning of the GST Act. As a consequence, the
taxpayer was ultimately entitled to input tax credits calculated as one
of the consideration for the taxable supply.
difference between the value of the gold (precious metal) supplied and acquired
and amounts received and paid for that gold was
due to an offset agreement
between the taxpayer and Galaxy and the participants in the Golden Angel supply
chain. Given that the
taxpayer failed to demonstrate that these transactions
involved creditable acquisitions, the difference may be ignored. However,
relevantly, as to the remaining transactions the consideration payable for the
scrap gold (including GST) exceeded the consideration
receivable for the refined
gold (precious metal) (excluding GST). Therefore, the commercial viability of
the acquisition and refining
of the scrap gold, from the perspective of the
taxpayer, depended upon an entitlement to refunds for input tax credits.
not part of the scheme as articulated, the Direct Suppliers failed to pay the
GST liabilities incurred on the notional taxable
supplies. The Tribunal
described this ‘wider design’ (i.e., the whole design including the
step of non-payment of GST
liabilities) as dishonest or fraudulent and as a
‘missing trader or carousel fraud arrangement’.
the notional effects of the GST Act are ignored, the Intermediaries made
notional gains on the acquisition of gold in investment
form as the
consideration paid was based on the value of gold (precious metal) and it was
supplied to the taxpayer for consideration
that included a 10% markup on the
value of gold metal in scrap gold. The taxpayer made notional losses because it
acquired the scrap
gold for consideration based on its value plus a 10% markup,
refined it into investment form and then supplied it for consideration
the value of the gold metal in investment form.
the notional effects of the GST Act are taken into account, the opposite is the
case. The Intermediaries made cash-flow losses
if their GST liabilities were
discharged and the taxpayer would make gains (depending on the movement in
international value of gold
metal) after refining the gold because the 10%
markup included in the consideration paid for the scrap gold would be refunded
the taxpayer through input tax credits.
is self-evident that no commercially rational refiner of precious metal would
acquire scrap gold at a 10% markup to the value of
the gold metal unless it
believed it would recover the whole consideration as part of its enterprise.
Therefore, the assumption the
taxpayer would be entitled to input tax credits,
objectively, was an inducement for the taxpayer to pay the Intermediaries the
consideration
it paid for the scrap gold.
is equally self-evident that no commercially rational dealer of precious metal
would acquire gold metal in investment form, change
its form into scrap gold and
thereby devalue the gold content and supply it to a refiner of precious metal at
a loss. Therefore,
objectively, the Intermediaries intended to supply the scrap
gold for the value of the gold metal plus a 10% markup, but not discharge
GST liability they incurred.
GST benefit
Tribunal found that the taxpayer obtained a GST benefit from the scheme. The
Tribunal found that if the scheme had not been carried
out the taxpayer would
not have been entitled to input tax credits for acquisitions of scrap gold from
the Direct Suppliers and,
as a consequence, the refunds the taxpayer received in
the relevant period were larger than they would have been but for the scheme:
T [216], [275], [283]-[288].
Dominant purpose and principal effect
made findings, in effect, that the scheme the Commissioner articulated was
entered into and carried out by the Intermediaries
and that the taxpayer was a
participant in that scheme and obtained a GST benefit, the Tribunal was required
to decide if, taking
into account the matters described in s 165-15, it was
reasonable to conclude that either: the Intermediaries (or the
taxpayer) entered into or carried out the scheme or part of the scheme
sole or dominant purpose of the taxpayer getting a GST benefit from the scheme;
or the principal effect of the scheme or
part of the scheme was that the
taxpayer got the GST benefit from the scheme directly or indirectly.
objective consequence of the steps described in steps (c) and (f) of the scheme
were as follows.
(1) To change the form of the gold metal from investment form into scrap gold.
That step changed the way a supply of the gold metal
would be treated under the
GST Act and placed the Direct Suppliers in a position in which they could obtain
consideration from the
taxpayer based on the value of the scrap gold plus a 10%
(2) To supply scrap gold to the taxpayer. That step involved a notional
‘taxable supply’ of the scrap gold.
(3) The Direct Suppliers became liable to pay a GST liability of 10% of the
value of the scrap gold and the taxpayer became entitled
to an input tax credit
of 10% of the value of the scrap gold.
is self-evident that an intended consequence of that part of the scheme was for
the Direct Suppliers to secure consideration for
the supply of scrap gold that
included a 10% markup on the value of the gold metal. The GST Act or fiscal
consequence was to ‘create’
a notional ‘taxable supply’
of gold metal. That, in turn, had the fiscal consequences of the Direct
Suppliers incurring
a GST liability and the taxpayer becoming entitled to input
tax credits. It is also self-evident that without creating a notional
‘taxable supply’ the taxpayer would not have paid consideration that
included a 10% markup on the value of the scrap
gold and the Direct Suppliers
would not have secured that consideration and the scheme would have been
loss-making. It was within
that factual and legal context that the Tribunal was
called upon to address the statutory questions posed in s 165-5(1)(c).
the proceeding before the Tribunal the taxpayer contended, amongst other things,
that the dominant purpose of the Intermediaries
was to obtain and retain for
themselves the cash flow profit by collecting GST-informed prices from the
taxpayer but not paying their
GST liabilities to the Commonwealth and that
receiving the enhanced price and failing to pay GST liabilities (in combination)
the principal effect of the scheme. Amongst other things, the Commissioner
contended that there was no dichotomy between a goal of
obtaining a GST-informed
price and absconding without paying the GST liability and a dominant purpose of
getting the taxpayer input
tax credits. Further, adulterating the gold in
investment form could only be explained as a means to ‘embed GST into the
of the metal’, and create a market for scrap gold. It was
embedding the GST in the on-sale of the metal that ‘gives life
to a market
for the transactions, because [it is] the refund from the Commissioner to the
refiner that adds value to the whole transaction’:
Tribunal reasoning on dominant purpose
the oral hearing the Full Court delivered judgment in
Complete Success
and the Tribunal gave the parties the opportunity to make further
submissions on the application of that judgment which they did.
Although the
Tribunal’s reasons do not directly address the parties’ submission
on that judgment, it is evident that
the arguments regarding dominant purpose
were refined to raise the issue of whether creating creditable acquisitions with
entitlements
to input tax credits formed part of a single composite purpose with
creating taxable supplies or was incidental to a purpose of obtaining
GST-informed consideration for the scrap gold.
Tribunal set out the relevant parts of Div 165 and principles applicable to
consideration of dominant purpose: T [267]-[277],
[308]-[316]. Relevantly,
the Tribunal made the following observations regarding single composite purpose
and incidental purpose:
A single composite purpose or non-dominant incidental purposes
facilitating a dominant purpose?
the Full Court
Complete Success Solutions
decisions, it is
necessary to address whether purposes of a supplier creating a taxable supply
and therefore creating (or creating
and not paying) a GST liability and for the
recipient of the supply of a corresponding ITC entitlement are effectively
sides of the one coin, so to speak, such that they could be regarded
as a single composite purpose. Both decisions involved Division
165 declarations
negating ITCs where taxable supplies of gold materials were made after defacing
gold bullion and the suppliers failed
to pay the GST on those supplies.
decision expressed the principle in this way [
520 199 Pty Ltd (in liquidation) v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
Insofar as ACN 154 submits that
the dominant purpose of the scheme was for the Direct Suppliers to obtain the
GST (which they would
fail to remit to the Commissioner), rather than for ACN
154 to obtain input tax credits, this submission seems to go to the merits
the Tribunal’s conclusion. In any event, we consider that it was open to
the Tribunal to view the obtaining (by ACN 154)
of the input tax credits and the
obtaining (by the supplying entities) of the GST as comprising one purpose, in
circumstances where
the two were inextricably linked: cf Federal
Commissioner
of Taxation v Ludekens
(2013) 214 FCR 149
cited passage from
In assessing the purpose and evaluating its importance, and whether it is
dominant, one must appreciate that it is the scheme in
question to which the
enquiry is directed, not a general state of affairs other than the scheme.
Persons engaged in trade and commerce
do so for personal gain. The purpose of
all commercial arrangements is, in a broad sense, the making of profit . . .
Here the respondents
undoubtedly wished to make profits from the purchase of
woodlots and from running a foreign exchange business. They chose the Plan
effect that. Integral to the Plan was that the entities acquiring woodlots on 30
June 2007 ... would obtain scheme benefits from
the GST refunds from the
purchase of the woodlots and that the Secondary Investors would obtain scheme
benefits from tax deductions
and tax refunds from their participation. Those are
not two purposes: they comprise one purpose – that scheme benefits in
of lowered tax-related liabilities and increased amounts that the
Commissioner must pay or credit (s 284-50(1)(a) and (b)) would
flow to them and
others. Those two streams of funding, together with the commission from Gunns,
were to be used to prop up the foreign
exchange business ...
is, perhaps, not difficult to contemplate purposes of creation of a taxable
supply, a GST liability and a corresponding ITC entitlement,
in appropriate
circumstances, being regarded as a single purpose. But that, of course, would
not exclude the possibility of non-payment
of the GST liability and retaining
the relevant cash being the dominant purpose. The first three events, so to
speak, might be seen
as a means to an end. However,
Complete Success
takes the matter a little further:
Indeed, it would be open to conclude that
the purpose of obtaining (and not
remitting) GST and the purpose of obtaining input tax credits
for CSS were
one purpose if the facts showed them to be inextricably linked: ACN FC at 513
[224]. Such a conclusion might be open,
for example, if it were concluded that
it was important to Manila Exchange that the scheme end with a GST-free supply
by an entity
that would be refunded input tax credits, so that the scheme as a
whole would work by being sufficiently funded.
(Emphasis added [in original].)
the Full Court contemplates the possibility of the obtaining and not remitting
amounts referrable to GST and the obtaining
of ITCs being collectively a single
purpose. The Court did not mandate that there was such a purpose.
Recognising
the analysis is focused on a different statutory setting and test, Gageler
J’s comments in
regarding the standing of facilitative steps
toward an ulterior and ultimate goal inform the characterisation of steps in a
chain of events. There his Honour said:
is, in the Explanatory Memorandum for s 177EA as originally inserted into the
ITAA 1936 in 1998, already quoted, a very clear
statement that "[a] purpose is
an incidental purpose when it occurs fortuitously or in subordinate conjunction
with another purpose,
or merely follows another purpose as its natural
incident." The statement, repeated in the Supplementary Explanatory Memorandum,
employed the word "or" disjunctively because a purpose may be in subordinate
conjunction with another purpose or may do no more than
follow another purpose
as the natural incident of that other purpose without necessarily being
fortuitous. The statement accords
with standard definitions of the word
"incidental" to be found in mainstream dictionaries and with a natural reading
of the statutory
text, "an incidental purpose", in the context of s 177EA(3)(e).
The adoption of the meaning conveyed by the statement as the proper
construction
of the statutory text produces the result that a purpose of a person, in
entering into or carrying out the scheme for
the disposition of equity
interests, of enabling a holder to obtain a franking credit is "an incidental
purpose" outside the scope
of s 177EA(3)(e) if that purpose does no more than
further some other purpose or follow from some other purpose. ...
purpose can be incidental even where it is central to the design of a scheme if
that design is directed to the achievement of
another purpose. Indeed, the
centrality of a purpose to the design of a scheme directed to the achievement of
another purpose may
be the very thing that gives it a quality of subsidiarity
and therefore incidentality. That is not impermissibly to confine the scope
177EA(3)(e) to a dominant purpose: the categories of "dominant" and "incidental"
are not exhaustive. The parenthesised words
in s 177EA(3)(e) make clear
that a dominant purpose of enabling a holder to obtain a franking credit is
sufficient but not necessary
for the requisite jurisdictional fact to exist, but
it does not follow that a purpose which does no more than further or follow from
some dominant purpose is incidental. Second, counterfactual analysis is not
antithetical to the statutory inquiry mandated by s 177EA(3)(e).
Purpose is a
matter for inference and incidentality is a matter of degree. Consideration of
possible alternatives may well assist
the drawing of a conclusion in a
particular case that a [requisite] purpose ... does or does not exist and, if
such a purpose exists,
that the purpose is or is not incidental to some other
Tribunal next began its analysis of the matters described in s 165-15 by
expressing the following conclusion:
holistically as is permitted the s 165–15(1) factors lead to a conclusion
that the dominant purpose [and] principal effect
of the scheme was to create a
taxable supply, a GST informed price, payment of that price to the Direct
Suppliers to facilitate the
Direct Suppliers receiving and retaining that price
for their own use, uses that include further participation in repeat efforts
the same scheme, and evading their GST liabilities to the Commissioner. An
incidental and facilitative part of the scheme and
achievement of that purpose
was that taxable supplies would be made creating input tax credit entitlements
for the applicant.
The Tribunal then addressed the individual s 165-15 matters in a manner
that was consistent with that conclusion: T [318]-[366].
in its analysis, the Tribunal correctly identified the legal principle that Div
165 may operate even if the ultimate objective
of the transaction is not a tax
objective or the transaction producing the GST benefit also delivers a desired
non-tax outcome and
referred to
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v
Services Ltd
[1996] HCA 34
186 CLR 404
Commissioner of Taxation v Hart
[2004] HCA 26
217 CLR 216 (T
However, in its application of that principle it drew a distinction between an
honest non-tax outcome and a dishonest non-tax
outcome and evidently considered
the principle to be of diminished significance in circumstances in which the
desired non-tax outcome
is a dishonest end. In the context of considering the
manner in which the scheme was entered into or carried out, the Tribunal
a case where the relevant competition or comparison is between pursuit of
commercial ends and pursuit of a GST benefit with no
illegal evasion involved,
the existence of steps that are uncommercial or extraordinary in the manner or
execution of the scheme
might suggest pursuit of the GST benefit is dominant.
However, where the relevant comparison is between pursuit of a dishonest end
pursuit of a GST benefit, extraordinary, or irrational or uncommercial steps
might be expected in the sequence of events. In
that setting such steps might
more appropriately indicate, as part of the analysis of the manner of execution
of a scheme, that that
other goal was either the sole or dominant purpose of a
participant in the scheme.
Tribunal analysed the uncommercial and extraordinary step in the scheme
involving the adulteration and deliberate devaluation
of the bullion and
observed that the transactions downstream of devaluation were not remarkable as
a bargain struck between the Direct
Suppliers and the taxpayer for scrap gold
and the taxpayer only generated refining profit on those transactions: T
[320]-[322]. The
Tribunal then said:
pricing issue is, of course, linked to the adulteration of bullion which is
certainly out of the usual. However, in the Tribunal’s
view that part of
the scheme is explicable by the Direct Suppliers’ purpose of securing a
GST-informed amount of money and
its retention through evading GST liabilities.
It does not suggest a separate dominant purpose of the applicant obtaining ITCs.
the context of considering the form and substance of the scheme the Tribunal
legal form of the transactions was not consistent with the economic and
commercial substance. What was precious metal in investment
form was altered so
that it no longer conformed to the “in investment form” standard. It
was an alteration that facilitated
a different attribute in the marketplace that
attracted a different trading price structure which in turn facilitated a
money that the Direct Suppliers would keep. Where an actual purpose
is to effectuate illegal GST evasion, it can be expected that
trickery or
facades may be involved and that form and substance might differ.
Tribunal continued with the theme that a pursuit of a dishonest end was separate
and distinct from pursuit of a GST benefit in
its consideration of the purpose
or object of the GST Act (T [331]-[332]), the timing of the scheme and
period over which it was
entered into or carried out (T [337]), the effect
of the GST Act apart from the scheme (T [345]-[346]), change in the
financial position
of connected entities (T [357]) and circumstances
surrounding the scheme and other relevant circumstances
(T [354]-[365]).
addressing the s 165-15(1) matters, the Tribunal returned to the topic of
single composite purpose and non-dominant incidental
purposes facilitating a
dominant purpose and said:
passages from
Complete Success Solutions
above indicate that a single purpose may appropriately be found in some
circumstances. They did not go on and consider
whether those purposes were
facilitative of an ultimate purpose in the sense contemplated by Gageler J in
Mills also noted above.
analysis is apposite in the present
circumstances for two reasons: first, creating taxable supplies that also
produced GST-informed
prices being paid and ITC entitlements to arise, was a
necessary preliminary to an ulterior and ultimate goal as contemplated by
Honour’s analysis, and second because His Honour suggests that the text of
the Explanatory Memorandum under discussion
confirmed the ordinary meaning of
language and natural reading of statutory text. Thus, the hierarchy of
incidental and dominant
purposes to which His Honour refers can and should have
wider application. This analysis informs how facilitative steps in a wider
design ought to be characterised. Viewed through this lens, any purpose of
obtaining ITCs in the present circumstances, assuming
there was one, was a
purpose properly regarded as central to the design of a scheme directed to
achieving an ulterior and ultimate
purpose, and therefore any purpose of
obtaining ITCs was incidental and not dominant.
the present case, what was essential for the scheme to operate was the creation
of a product that the marketplace traded at a GST-informed
price, and the Direct
Suppliers receiving that price and not paying the GST to the Commissioner, or
more fundamentally, for the Direct
Suppliers not to pay their GST liability
having received a market driven price that assumed they would. As already noted,
that feature there would not have been ongoing sales by the suppliers,
as they would have traded at a loss. The availability of the
ITCs was an
ordinary incident of a purchase of a taxable commodity on commercial terms by a
GST-registered entity in the course of
its enterprise.
those circumstances, the non-payment of amounts referrable to GST stands aside
from the creation of the GST liability and the entitlement
to corresponding
ITCs. The applicant’s entitlement to ITCs was not dependent on that
action, only upon the acquisition of gold
in a taxable supply for which it paid
a full commercial price for what it acquired.
short, even if it would be correct to view the making of taxable supplies and
obtaining of ITCs as a single purpose, that single
purpose was a step in a wider
process. The Tribunal sees the Direct Suppliers’ non-payment of GST as a
separate and ulterior
and ultimate purpose to any purpose of making taxable
supplies and the applicant obtaining ITCs.
Tribunal reasoning on principal effect
the course of addressing the manner in which the scheme was entered into and
carried out and the form and substance of the scheme
the Tribunal identified
what it described as the ‘principal effect’ of the scheme in the
following way.
the Tribunal does not identify any aspect of the manner in which the scheme was
entered into or carried out that supports
a conclusion that the principal effect
of the scheme or any part of the scheme was the applicant obtaining ITCs. The
principal effects
of the scheme as a whole were the change of ownership of very
high values of gold and after that securing a GST-informed amount of
its retention through evading GST liabilities. The principal effect of the
adulteration aspect of the manner of execution
was to transform the character of
the relevant gold and to devalue it.
system of levying GST on dealings in gold substances is very much form driven.
Metal in substance, i.e. chemically and atomically,
identical, may be treated
differently depending on its presentation or its form. Producing something that
is in form different to
its substance and transacting in it, as has happened
here, transformed the character and transferred the ownership of the highly
valuable commodity. This was the principal effect to be recognised.
Tribunal said that the other s 165-15 matters also did not suggest or
support a conclusion that the principal effect of the scheme
or part of the
scheme was for the applicant to obtain input tax credits: T [334], [340],
[345], [353], [360], [362]. Later, in the
course of addressing its ultimate
conclusions on dominant purpose, the Tribunal said that if an alternative
principal effect of the
scheme or part of the scheme was that the Direct
Suppliers benefit from their evasion, or to place an inflated, GST-informed,
or amount of money into their hands so as to set up the possibility of the
evasion being executed profitably, it was unlikely that
it would be reasonable
to conclude that the scheme had the requisite principal effect: T [377].
Tribunal reasoning on purpose of the GST Act
Tribunal’s reasons suggest that it considered that the GST Act operated
largely as intended with respect to the activities
of the scheme: e.g.,
T [320], [330], [343]. In that context, when addressing s 165-15(1)(c)
of the GST Act the Tribunal said:
artificial creation of a GST liability, and corresponding ITC entitlement, by
defacing bullion may be seen as not an object of
the GST Act. However, a
liability arising on a taxable supply is an intended outcome under GST law
regardless of the circumstances
giving rise to the liability. Even illegal
supplies may be taxable supplies [s 9-10(3)]. Once the gold was no longer
precious metal
its subsequent supply being taxable was unremarkable and an
intended outcome under the GST Act.
purpose or object of the GST Act includes, fundamentally, to create a liability
for GST on taxable supplies. That is what occurred
here. It is the failure to
pay the GST that departs from the object of the GST Act, not the allowance of
ITCs on business-to-business
acquisitions which is the standard and intended
object of value-added taxation.
The Tribunal’s ultimate conclusion
Ultimately,
the Tribunal concluded that it would not be reasonable to conclude that any
entity entered into the scheme or part of
the scheme with the sole or dominant
purpose of, or that the principal effect of the scheme or part of the scheme
was, the taxpayer
obtaining input tax credits: T [381].
three aspects of the Tribunal’s decision that are challenged are set out
and summarised earlier in these reasons.
to the challenge to the conclusion that it was not reasonable to conclude that
the Intermediaries had the s 165-5(1)(c)(i) dominant
purpose, the core of
the Commissioner’s contentions in the appeal centres on the manner in
which the Tribunal disregarded the
observations about composite purpose in
Full Court ACN 2020
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v
[2013] FCAFC 100
214 FCR 149
Complete Success
and applied a facilitative of ultimate purpose analysis drawn from
Commissioner contends that the Tribunal disregarded
Full Court ACN 2020
Complete Success Solutions
without explanation. And, explanation was
necessary given that the observations in
Full Court ACN 2020
Complete Success Solutions
were made on facts involving the same core
elements. Further, in disregarding
Full Court ACN 2020
Success Solutions
the Tribunal gave no consideration as to whether the
purpose of obtaining (or obtaining and not paying) GST and the purpose of
input tax credits for the taxpayer were inextricably linked. The
Tribunal’s finding that the purpose of obtaining input tax
credits was
incidental to the purpose of non-payment of GST liabilities was made without
excluding the possibility it was important
to the Intermediaries that the scheme
end with a GST-free supply by an entity which would be refunded by input tax
credits so that
the scheme as a whole would work by being sufficiently funded.
Commissioner also contends that the Tribunal failed to characterise
‘purpose’ in the manner that s 165-5(1)(c)(i)
requires. In
substance, the Commissioner contends that the Tribunal focussed on the remote
and fiscally irrelevant (dishonest) purpose
of non-payment and evasion of
notional GST liabilities whereas it was required to focus on the fiscal purpose
of getting the taxpayer
input tax credits from the scheme. In so doing, the
Tribunal failed to appreciate that the remote and fiscally irrelevant purpose
was not necessarily inconsistent with a dominant purpose of getting the taxpayer
input tax credits. The Tribunal expressed no rationale
for concluding that the
purpose of evasion was separate, discrete and dominant over the input tax credit
purpose. The Commissioner
contends that the asserted errors in failing to
consider if the purposes were inextricably linked and failing to distinguish
the purposes also affected the Tribunal’s consideration of the
matters described in s 165-15(1)(a) and s 165-15(1)(b).
to the challenge to the conclusion that it was not reasonable to conclude that
the effect of the scheme or part of the scheme was
the s 165-5(1)(c)(ii)
‘principal effect’, the Commissioner contends that the Tribunal
failed to correctly apply the statutory
test. In this respect, the Commissioner
submits that the Tribunal failed to recognise the effect of change of form and
of the gold metal was not inconsistent with the effect of creation of
a taxable supply and corresponding GST liabilities and entitlements
to input tax
credits. Further, as with dominant purpose, the Tribunal did not undertake an
assessment of the importance of the refunds
to the scheme and each part of the
to the treatment of the matters described in s 165-15(1)(c), the
Commissioner contends that the object or purpose of Div 165 was
a mandatory
matter to be taken into account in the consideration of the statutory questions
under s 165-5(1)(c). The Commissioner
contends that the Tribunal
disregarded that mandatory matter in error of law because it failed to take into
account that a purpose
or object of Div 165 is to deter artificial or contrived
CONSIDERATION
The applicable statutory tests
the reasons set out in
Full Court ACN 2025
(at [206]-[228]), the
statutory inquiries under s 165-5(1)(c) required the Tribunal to consider
reasonable to conclude that:
(a) getting the taxpayer
GST benefit was the dominant purpose of the
Intermediaries entering into or carrying out the
part of the scheme the Commissioner articulated as the means by which the
Intermediaries chose to make gain or profit;
(b) if getting the taxpayer
GST benefit was the principal effect of
utilising the
scheme or part of the scheme as the means of the
Intermediaries making gain or profit.
Were Full Court ACN, Ludekens and Complete Success Solutions
disregarded without explanation?
Tribunal’s analysis of composite purpose versus incidental purpose starts
with a recognition that
, cited with approval in
Complete Success Solutions
stand for the proposition
that ‘a single purpose may be appropriately found in some
circumstances’ (T [368]). After citing
Full Court ACN 2020
, it had earlier said that in appropriate circumstances the
creation of a taxable supply, a GST liability and corresponding entitlement
input tax credit could be regarded as a single purpose, but that would not
exclude a purpose of non-payment of the GST liability
and retaining the whole
consideration being the dominant purpose. It had also cited
Complete Success
and noted that the Full Court contemplated the possibility of
obtaining and not remitting amounts referrable to GST liability and
input tax credits as a single purpose, but the Full Court had not mandated that
there was such a purpose (T [312]-[315]).
None of that explanation of
Full Court ACN 2020
Complete Success Solutions
is indicative of any misunderstanding of the correct legal principles. The
Tribunal’s observation that neither
Success Solutions
considered whether the purposes were facilitative of an
ultimate purpose in the sense contemplated by Gageler J in the passages from
set out earlier in the reasons is also accurate (T [368],
[316]). The Tribunal then applied a facilitative purpose of an ultimate
analysis and reached the conclusion that any purpose of obtaining input tax
credits was incidental and not dominant.
a fair reading of the Tribunal’s reasons, it considered that the purpose
of creating a taxable supply was a necessary preliminary
to an ulterior and
ultimate (dominant) goal of non-payment (evading payment) of notional GST
liabilities. Consequently, the Tribunal
considered that the purpose of creating
a taxable supply was incidental to the purpose of evasion and was not dominant.
On that reasoning,
it was not necessary for the Tribunal to consider if the
purpose of creating the taxable supply with resulting GST liability and
tax credit entitlements and obtaining GST-informed consideration were part of a
single composite dominant purpose because the
Tribunal had found that the
purpose of creation of the taxable supply was incidental and not dominant. The
‘different sides
of the one coin’ question the Tribunal had
identified earlier in its reasons did not need to be answered because, on the
facilitative purpose reasoning, the purpose of obtaining and
not remitting GST and the purpose of obtaining input tax credits were
inextricably linked.
follows that I do not accept the Commissioner’s submission to the effect
that the Tribunal disregarded the relevant observations
Full Court ACN
Complete Success Solutions
without proper
or adequate explanation or failed to consider if the applicable purposes were
inextricably linked. The real question
is whether adopting and applying the
facilitative purpose analysis was an error of law that resulted in
the Tribunal disregarding the principles expressed in
Full Court ACN
Complete Success Solutions
and avoiding a
fulsome consideration of the inextricably linked issue for erroneous reasons.
Was a facilitative purpose analysis apposite and
applicable?
my view, the analysis in
is inapposite and inapplicable to the
statutory inquiry required under s 165-5(1)(c). The Tribunal’s
adoption and application
of that analysis involved an error of law and
misconstruction and misapplication of the statutory dominant purpose test. In
its application
of the analysis in
the Tribunal also fell into
error in failing to focus on the
scheme as the means utilised
by the Intermediaries to achieve the more remote and fiscally irrelevant
(dishonest) end. Instead of
asking the statutory question s 165-5(1)(c)(i)
posed, the Tribunal asked itself if the scheme was facilitative of a wider and
irrelevant end. Further, in so doing the Tribunal treated the statutory
question as if the non-fiscal end and fiscal purpose were
competing or
contesting objectives when they are not inconsistent or mutually exclusive.
the reasons given in
Full Court ACN 2025
(at [213]-[227]), the meaning
given to ‘incidental purpose’ in
is confined to its
particular statutory context, purpose and object. Contrary to the
Tribunal’s reasons, the ‘hierarchy
of incidental and dominant
purposes’ to which reference is made in
does not have wider
application than the construction of
Assessment Act 1936
(Cth). The particular construction of
was declared and applied in
was that ‘a purpose of a person,
in entering into or carrying out the scheme for the disposition of equity
interests, of enabling
the holder to obtain a franking credit is “an
incidental purpose” outside the scope of
s 177EA(3)(e)
purpose does no more than further some other purpose or follow from some other
purpose’. That notion of ‘incidental
purpose’ has no bearing
on the statutory meaning of ‘dominant purpose’ in
s 165-5(1)(c)(i) of the GST Act.
contrary to the Tribunal’s reasons, that construction of
s 177EA(3)(e) does not inform ‘how facilitative steps
design ought to be characterised’ for the purposes of Div 165 of the GST
Act. A scheme or part of a scheme will
inevitably be facilitative of some wider
objective of an entity that enters into or carries out the scheme. The statutory
posed in s 165-5(1)(c)(i) is not directed to the purpose of a
wider design or whether the scheme or part of the scheme facilitates
design, it is directed to the dominant purpose of the scheme or part of the
scheme even though that scheme may form part of
a wider design.
Tribunal identified the ‘ulterior and ultimate purpose’ as
non-payment of the GST liability: T [371]. That was little
more than a
conclusion that a purpose of the Direct Suppliers was gain or profit through
supplies of scrap gold for GST informed
consideration. Non-payment of the GST
liability was said to ‘stand aside from the creation of the GST liability
and the entitlement
to corresponding [input tax credits]’: T [370]. The
Tribunal said that the ‘analysis informs how facilitative steps in
wider design
ought to have been characterised’ (emphasis added): T
[368]. The Tribunal also said that even if the making of taxable supplies
obtaining of input tax credits were a single purpose ‘that single purpose
was a step in a
wider process
’ (emphasis added): T [371].
it was permissible for the Tribunal to consider the wider design or process in
order to understand and explain the scheme and
the 12 matters described in
s 165-15, the statutory inquiry was confined to the dominant purpose of an
entity that entered into or
carried out the
scheme or part of
the scheme the Commissioner articulated. It will inevitably be possible to
characterise part of an articulated
scheme as a step that furthers, follows, or
facilitates the scheme as a whole. It will also inevitably be possible to
characterise
a narrowly articulated scheme as steps that further, follow or
facilitate a wider overall transaction. Characterising part of a scheme
which an entity gets a GST benefit as necessarily preliminary to an ulterior or
ultimate goal or facilitative step in a wider
design is inconsistent with the
construction of s 165-5(1)(c)(i)
set out earlier in these reasons.
It is also inconsistent with and undermines the object of Div 165.
Tribunal’s reasoning has echoes of an argument the High Court rejected in
Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Press Holdings Ltd
[2001] HCA 32
207 CLR 235
as to the artificiality of the Commissioner selecting part of the
overall transaction as the scheme. In so doing, the Court said:
The fact that the overall transaction was aimed at a profit making does not make
it artificial and inappropriate to observe that
part of the structure of the
transaction is to be explained by reference to a s 177D purpose. Nor is
there any inconsistency involved,
as was submitted, in looking to the wider
transaction in order to understand and explain the scheme, and the eight matters
point may be illustrated by adapting the example of an athlete competing at the
Olympics given in
Automotive Invest Pty Ltd v Federal of Commissioner of
[2024] HCA 36
by which the difference between
ultimate purpose, means and motive were explained. (For the reasons given in
Full Court ACN 2025
(at [208] that explanation is related to the
identification of purpose ‘at the proper level of generality’
the fiscal consequence to which s 165-5(1)(c)(i) is directed.)
There, a majority of the High Court said ‘an athlete might engage
sporting activity for the purpose or end of competing at the Olympics. The
motive for that end might be personal fulfillment,
profit, or glory. And the
means to achieve that end might be many hours of training’:
at [111]. But, accepting all those elements of that example will not
answer the question of whether particular medication taken by
the athlete during
training (means) was taken for the dominant purpose of enhancing performance at
the Olympics (ends). The relevant
question for that inquiry would be: what was
the dominant purpose of the athlete in taking the medication even though taking
medication formed part of the means (training) to a more remote end
(competing at the Olympics)? That question cannot be answered
by asking if
taking the medication was the means of achieving (furthered, followed or
facilitated) a wider and more remote end (competing
at the Olympics). That
question would be meaningless because it is self-evident that that means
facilitated that end. In the case
of s 165-5(1)(c)(i), the statutory
question concerns the dominant purpose of the means (scheme or part of the
scheme) utilised to
achieve (facilitate) the end (gain or profit). Therefore,
asking the question of whether the scheme or part of the scheme facilitates
wider design of gain or profit (whether honest or dishonest) is meaningless in
the context of the statutory object of Div 165.
Tribunal’s reasoning regarding s 165-15 and its further observations
on purpose or effect are also indicative of error in
that they suggest that the
Tribunal was of the view in the first instance that, typically, the nature of
the statutory inquiry under
s 165-5(1)(c)(i) involves a comparison between
a commercial end (honest gain or profit), on the one hand, and a tax benefit end
a GST benefit), on the other. For the reasons given in
(at [248]), the focus of the inquiry is on the fiscal purpose of
the scheme not any comparison between that purpose and a more remote
fiscally irrelevant purpose like gain or profit. Thus, the Tribunal’s
reasoning in this regard is suggestive of acceptance
of a false dichotomy of the
kind identified
Spotless Services
(at 415). Likewise, the statutory
inquiry does not require a comparison between obtaining a fiscally irrelevant
dishonest gain or
profit and obtaining a GST benefit.
a distinction between honest and dishonest ends is also suggestive of a false
dichotomy of a different kind. Division 165
is aimed at artificial or contrived
schemes whether they be in the pursuit of honest commercial ends or dishonest
ends. A scheme
comprised of extraordinary, irrational or uncommercial steps is
just as much artificial or contrived because it is entered into or
carried out
for dishonest gain or profit as is a scheme with such features entered into or
carried out for legitimate commercial
gain or profit. A particular course of
action may be both ‘tax driven’ and bear the character of a
dishonest design.
The presence of the latter characteristic does not determine
the answer to the question, within the meaning of s 165-5(1)(c)(i),
an entity entered into or carried out a scheme for the dominant purpose of
getting another entity a GST benefit:
Spotless Services
follows that, irrespective of the inapplicability of the
in the context of the purpose and object of Div 165, identifying gain or profit
through evasion of GST liability as the
ultimate goal or end is indicative of a
failure to focus on the statutory questions posed in s 165-5(1)(c) and the
object sought
to be achieved from the particular scheme that is of fiscal
consequence. Here, the Tribunal failed to focus on that object and, instead,
focussed almost entirely on the more remote and fiscally irrelevant object of
gain or profit. The Tribunal’s misconstruction
and misapplication of the
statutory inquiry is, perhaps, best illustrated in its ultimate conclusions
it said (footnotes omitted):
Ultimately,
the Intermediaries entered into the arrangements to profit, and did profit in
precisely the way they intended to profit,
by failing to pay GST on the taxable
sales they made to the applicant. In this regard, the term profit is used in a
cash flow profit
sense only. Properly calculated, they made no profit from their
scheme because profit ought be determined net of the impact of GST.
their profit, the Direct Suppliers needed to create or procure a system or
process where they outlaid less money than they
received. In the present setting
that entailed two steps: first, they needed to acquire the goods they sold at a
price not informed
by GST, and second, they needed to sell those goods at
GST-informed prices. It can be accepted that the applicant would not rationally
have paid GST-informed priced for the scrap gold in question had there not been
an entitlement to ITCs. In those circumstances, is
it reasonable to conclude
that the dominant purpose of any entity entering into the scheme or a part of
the scheme, or the principal
effect of the scheme or part of the scheme, was for
the applicant to obtain, or that the applicant did obtain, the Denied ITCs?
a search for an alternative purpose is not the Division 165 test, the existence
of such a purpose throws light on whether the
requisite GST benefit purpose
conclusion should be reached. When looking at a scheme, or a part thereof, if
there is an alternative
dominant purpose of any participant, or an alternative
principal effect, then it is unlikely that the dominant purpose test will
satisfied in respect of that participant or that the principal effect test will
be satisfied. If that alternative dominant purpose
of a participant in, or
alternative principal effect of, a scheme or a part thereof was that the Direct
Suppliers benefit from their
evasion, or to place an inflated, GST-informed,
price or amount of money into the hands of the Direct Suppliers so as to set up
possibility of the fraud being executed profitably, it is unlikely that it
would be reasonable to conclude that that participant
had the requisite dominant
purpose or that the scheme had the requisite principal effect.
summary, in the Tribunal’s view, the proper conclusion is that the
dominant purpose of the Direct Suppliers was to execute
their scheme to profit
by first obtaining and then retaining the GST-informed prices they charged the
applicant. Their participation
in the transactions made no sense unless they
committed that.
if the creation of the taxable supplies to the applicant and the
applicant’s entitlement to ITCs are viewed as a single
purpose, that
would, in itself, achieve no benefit for either the applicant or the
Intermediaries. As already noted, for the Intermediaries,
it would achieve a
loss because they were selling gold at a price (before GST considerations) that
was less than they paid for it.
It was only by failing to pay their GST
liabilities that the Intermediaries were able to profit in any way that explains
the scheme.
While it is not the statutory question to be addressed, an
alternative purpose suggested by the weighing of the requisite factors
the requisite process. In the present circumstances there is an alternative
purpose suggested by the requisite factors. It
is reasonable to conclude that
evading debts due to the Commonwealth was the Intermediaries’ dominant
purpose. Taking into
account the required factors, it is not reasonable to
conclude that the dominant purpose of any entity was for the applicant to obtain
the Denied ITCs.
passages confirm that the singular focus of the Tribunal was upon the motive it
attributed to the Intermediaries or Direct
Suppliers for entering into or
carrying out the wider design or process it had earlier identified and not the
purpose of the scheme
or part of the scheme as articulated (T [368], [371],
[376]). Specifically, it is evident that the Tribunal focussed on whether
was the dominant
for the Direct Suppliers
entering into or carrying out the wider design or process. Whereas, the correct
statutory inquiry was whether
the object of getting the taxpayer input tax
credits from the scheme or part of the scheme was the ruling, prevailing, or
most influential
intended consequence of the Intermediaries entering into or
carrying out that
scheme or part of that scheme as the
means by which they chose to achieve the ultimate end.
analysis in
also does not require that ‘a necessary
preliminary to an ulterior and ultimate goal’ must be characterised as an
purpose or that the ultimate goal must be characterised as dominant
for at least three reasons. First, as Gageler J observed ‘it
follow that a purpose which does no more than further or follow from some
dominant purpose is incidental’:
at [66]. Therefore, a
necessary preliminary need not be incidental. Second, the analysis of one
purpose furthering or following another
is described in
circumstances in which one purpose was already designated or identified as the
dominant purpose. The concept of a necessary preliminary
to an accepted dominant
purpose is not necessarily a useful tool for identifying at the outset which of
the competing purposes is
dominant. Further, and in any event, merely because
one purpose furthers or follows another purpose does not require that the
furthered or followed is dominant. Third, and relatedly, the
Tribunal’s reasoning is founded on an implicit but unstated assumption
that ‘ulterior and ultimate purpose’ is a synonym for dominant
purpose. This is indicative of circular reasoning.
Tribunal’s explanation of its reasons for concluding that any purpose of
obtaining input tax credits was incidental started
by identifying the creation
of a product that the marketplace traded at a GST-informed price and the Direct
Suppliers receiving that
price and not paying the GST liability as
‘essential for the scheme to operate’. In that context, the Tribunal
that ‘availability of the [input tax credits] was an ordinary
incident of a purchase of a taxable commodity on commercial terms
GST-registered entity in the course of its enterprise’: T [369]. In
substance, that is no more than an observation that
an ordinary incident of the
operation of the GST Act, in circumstances in which the Intermediaries
adulterated the gold in investment
form and sold scrap gold to the taxpayer, was
that the sale of the scrap gold was a ‘taxable supply’. Next, the
identified non-payment of amounts referrable to GST embedded in the
GST-informed consideration as separate from the creation of the
taxable supply.
The Tribunal then observed that the creation of taxable supplies was a step in a
wider process and the non-payment
of GST liabilities was a separate and ulterior
and ultimate purpose to the creation of taxable supplies: T [371]. That
analysis also
illustrates that the Tribunal failed to ask itself the statutory
question posed in s 165-5(1)(c)(i); namely, what was the dominant
of performing the step that created the taxable supply as the means by which it
achieved the ultimate end it had identified
in the wider process.
Tribunal’s observation that any purpose of obtaining input tax credits
‘was properly regarded as central to the design
of a scheme directed to
achieving an ulterior and ultimate purpose’ draws on the first of two
reasons that Gageler J gave in
for disagreeing with the
construction Jessup J had given to s 177EA(3) of the 1936
Assessment Act
at [66]. The second reason Gageler J gave for his
disagreement was that ‘counterfactual analysis is not antithetical to the
statutory inquiry’ and that consideration of possible alternatives may
well assist the drawing of a conclusion in a particular
case that a particular
purpose does or does not exist and that it is incidental to some other purpose.
As observed in
Full Court ACN 2025
(at [222]), the existence of possible
alternatives all of which had the consequence of imputation benefits was central
to the conclusion
that enabling the taxpayer to obtain
imputation benefits was an incidental purpose in that case. In the
Tribunal’s analysis
and application of
it ignored and
overlooked that important and, on the facts of
consideration that assists to draw conclusions about the relative importance of
competing purposes.
Tribunal made no findings identifying any alternative possibilities that could
have resulted in the taxpayer getting the same
or substantially the same refunds
from input tax credits as those the scheme or part of the scheme delivered to
the taxpayer. Moreover,
it is implicit in the Tribunal’s acceptance that
the taxpayer obtained GST benefits from the scheme or part of the scheme that
found, contrary to the findings in
, that there were no alternative
possibilities to the scheme. Therefore, there was no foundation for the Tribunal
to reach the conclusion
(equivalent to the conclusion in
means of issuing Tier 1 capital would result in the same tax benefit)
to the effect that
consequence of the taxpayer getting GST benefits
from the scheme was merely the natural incident to
consequence of
supplying and acquiring scrap gold for GST informed consideration.
applying the natural and ordinary meaning of ‘incidental purpose’
described in
to the facts as the Tribunal found them, the creation
of a taxable supply could not possibly be described as ‘fortuitous’.
The creation of a taxable supply was manifestly not a consequence that happened
by chance. Further, to describe the creation of a
taxable supply as a
consequence that was a ‘subordinate conjunction’ to the purpose of
non-payment of GST liabilities
or obtaining and retaining GST-informed
consideration is also inapposite because without a notional taxable supply the
Direct Suppliers
would not have received GST informed consideration. The purpose
of creating a notional taxable supply could not be described as a
insubstantial purpose that happened in mere conjunction with the purpose of
obtaining GST-informed consideration. It is
also not possible to characterise
the creation of a taxable supply as the natural incident of obtaining and
retaining GST-informed
consideration. If anything, obtaining GST-informed
consideration is the natural incident of the creation of a notional taxable
Therefore, the Tribunal cannot be taken to have applied the ordinary
meaning of ‘incidental’ as a means of explaining
its conclusion that
a purpose of obtaining input tax credits for the taxpayer was incidental to a
dominant purpose of obtaining GST-informed
consideration. Rather, the Tribunal
asked itself the question of whether a purpose of obtaining the taxpayer input
tax credits from
the scheme was incidental to a dominant purpose of evading GST
liability and in so doing applied the meaning of ‘incidental
purpose’ in s 177EA(3)(e) of the 1936
Income Tax Assessment
Conclusion on application of statutory dominant purpose
follows that, contrary to the Tribunal’s reasoning, the analysis from
is inapposite and does not inform the statutory inquiry required
under s 165-5(1)(c)(i). The Tribunal’s application of that
in its consideration of dominant purpose was an error of law.
regard to the conclusion I have reached on questions 1 – 4 and grounds
1‑ – 3, it is not necessary to address
the other questions, grounds
and issues raised in the supplementary notice of appeal. However, as these
matters were fully argued,
I will explain my reasons for accepting there were
two further errors and rejecting the other asserted errors.
Was the importance of the taxpayer getting input tax credits
considered?
Tribunal clearly considered the economic feasibility of the scheme and
considered, accepted or rejected aspects of the Commissioner’s
arguments about the relative importance of input tax credits to the scheme. The
Tribunal acknowledged and accepted that
the taxpayer was induced to pay
GST-informed consideration for scrap gold (T [376]). The Tribunal found
that the taxpayer had only
made additional refining profits (T [322],
[324], [351]). It rejected the Commissioner’s contention that the taxpayer
had profited
from the refund of GST and without that refund the transactions
made no sense (T [351]-[353]). It had regard to the ‘round
robin’ nature of the movement of gold metal and noted the scheme was
structured to be ‘self-contained and possibly self-perpetuating’
(T [337]). In substance, the Tribunal found that the economic feasibility
of the scheme depended upon the Direct Suppliers’
non-payment of the
notional GST liabilities they incurred because the transactions involved losses
if the GST Act consequences for
the Direct Suppliers were taken into account (T
[356], [370], [376], [379]). The Tribunal found, in effect, that the input tax
in itself achieved no benefit for the taxpayer or the Direct Suppliers
general, there is no error of law in failing to make a finding of fact: see,
Azzopardi v Tasman UEB Industries Ltd
(1985) 4 NSWLR 139
(Glass JA). An assertion that the Tribunal failed to make a finding of fact is
tantamount to an assertion that it made
a ‘wrong’ finding which is
no error of law:
Waterford v Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(Brennan J). Otherwise, the Commissioner made no assertion that the
Tribunal made an error of law for failing to identify,
understand and evaluate a
substantial and clearly articulated argument of the Commissioner such as might
support an error of law
in the performance of the tribunal’s review
Dranichnikov v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs
[2003] HCA 26
197 ALR 389
(Gummow and
Callinan JJ), [95] (Hayne J);
Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v SZMTA
[2019] HCA 3
264 CLR 421
(Bell, Gageler and
Keane JJ), at [105] (Nettle and Gordon JJ).
any event, I am not persuaded that the asserted failure to expressly consider
and make findings on the importance of the input
tax credits to the economic
feasibility of the scheme was in and of itself an error. If anything, the
absence of full or complete
consideration of the importance of input tax credits
is an illustration or indication of the Tribunal’s erroneous approach
dominant purpose rather than a standalone error. The absence of direct
consideration of the potential importance of input tax
credits to the economic
feasibility of the scheme is best explained by the Tribunal not having to fully
engage with the inextricably
linked issue. If the Tribunal had not erroneously
applied a facilitative purpose analysis and, thereby, sidestepped direct
consideration
of composite purpose at the level of taxable supply, it would have
been required to directly confront the importance of the creation
of notional
taxable supplies, entitlements to input tax credits and inducement to the
taxpayer paying GST-informed consideration
for the scrap gold. That forensic
enquiry was avoided because the Tribunal concluded that creation of taxable
supplies was an incidental
purpose to gain or profit.
Was there error in the application of the
s 165-5(1)(c)(ii) principal effect test?
Commissioner contends that the Tribunal applied the wrong s 165-5(1)(c)(ii)
‘principal effect’ test for two reasons.
First, it failed to
recognise the benign and mechanical non-fiscal effects of the scheme were not
inconsistent with a principal effect
of getting the taxpayer input tax credits.
Second, it did not undertake an assessment of the importance of the creation of
entitlements to the scheme and each part of the scheme. I accept the
first contention, but not the second.
the passages dealing with the s 165-15 matters in which the Tribunal
identifies what it considers to be the ‘principal effects’
scheme (T [325], [329]) there is no explanation of the reason(s) for
considering those effects to be of the highest rank or
importance except for the
association between changing the form of the gold metal and transferring it to
the taxpayer in exchange
for GST-informed consideration so as to place the
Direct Suppliers in a position to evade paying notional GST liabilities.
as with dominant purpose, the focus of the Tribunal is on the
‘effect’ of the wider design or process and the consequence
or profit through evasion which the Tribunal considered to be the principal
effect of that wider process. As with dominant
purpose, identifying an effect of
the wider design or process as gain or profit does not answer the question posed
in s 165-5(1)(c)(ii)
because that effect is not inconsistent or
incompatible with a ‘principal effect’ of the scheme or part of the
of getting the taxpayer input tax credits.
effect of changing the form of the gold metal and transferring ownership of the
gold metal to the taxpayer
the effect of creating a taxable supply
with corresponding GST liabilities and entitlements to input tax credits were
both effects
of the scheme or part of the scheme that placed the Direct
Suppliers in a position to evade payment of GST liability and retain the
GST-informed consideration. Thus, the question posed for the purposes of
s 165-5(1)(c)(ii) was whether the principal effect of the
scheme or part of the scheme by which the Direct Suppliers were placed in that
position was the exchange of gold metal (as would
be the case in an ordinary
legitimate transaction) or getting the taxpayer input tax credits. It is evident
from the Tribunal’s
reasons that it did not ask itself that question but
rather asked if the principal effect of the wider process was to place the
Suppliers in a position to evade payment for gain or profit. Thereby, the
Tribunal applied the wrong statutory test.
for the reasons already given with respect to consideration of the dominant
purpose, mere failure to consider and make
express findings about the importance
of input tax credits is not directly indicative of an error of law but more
illustrative of
the primary error and incorrect focus of the statutory inquiry.
Was there an erroneous failure to take into account the purpose
or object of Div 165?
substance, the Commissioner contends that the passages of the Tribunal reasons
in which it dealt with the purpose or object of
the GST Act (T [331]-[332])
reveal that it failed to take into account the purpose or object of Div 165;
namely, to deter schemes
to give entities benefits by reducing GST, increasing
refunds or altering the timing of payment of GST or refunds. Specifically,
focus on non-payment of GST liabilities as the element of the wider design that
departed from the object of the GST Act indicates
that it failed to fully and
completely take into account the steps in the scheme that included the
adulteration of bullion and deliberate
devaluation of the gold metal that
resulted in an artificial creation of taxable supplies and that Div 165 is aimed
at such artificial
or contrived schemes. I largely accept these
submissions.
the facts as found, the activities of the Intermediaries could only be said to
have been carried on with a view to profit or gain
if the GST liabilities
arising from notional taxable supplies of scrap gold are ignored. As taxable
supplies, the activities were
loss-making and there was manifestly no
expectation that they would ever produce a profit or gain when the notional GST
liabilities
are taken into account. Therefore, taking into account the notional
effect of the GST Act on the supplies of scrap gold tends to
undermine any
assumption that the Direct Suppliers made the supplies in the course of or
furtherance of a
enterprise. The uncommercial nature of the
activities calls into question the extent to which there were any
taxable supplies that would support
entitlements to input tax
credits. At the heart of the scheme was the ‘creation’ of taxable
supplies, but these were
not genuine transactions undertaken as part of a
genuine enterprise because gold in investment form was deliberately devalued,
at a loss based on the ‘value’ of the gold metal content of the
refining materials, and the ‘profitability’
of the transactions
depended upon non-payment of the notional GST component of the consideration. As
the Full Court observed in
Complete Success Solutions
consistent with the object or policy of the [GST] Act for GST to become embedded
in supply of goods that has been
deliberately devalued’:
Success Solutions
at [103]. To the extent that there were taxable supplies
within the meaning of the GST Act, these were clearly artificial or contrived
resulting in artificial or contrived GST liabilities and corresponding
artificial or contrived input tax credits. The Commissioner
aptly characterised
the effect of the scheme as creating an artificial market for gold.
the Tribunal acknowledged that the artificial creation of taxable supplies may
not be regarded as an object of the GST Act,
it evidently considered that,
irrespective of the circumstances in which these taxable supplies came into
existence, it was consistent
with the object of the GST Act to impose GST
liabilities on those taxable supplies. But, that is to ignore that a purpose or
of Div 165 is to deter artificial or contrived schemes from which an
avoider gets a GST benefit. Moreover, the example of the GST
Act imposing a GST
liability on illegal transactions is not to the point. An illegal transaction
may be genuine in the sense that
it is neither artificial or contrived and is
made in the course or furtherance of a genuine enterprise. It is consistent with
purpose or object of the GST Act that illegal transactions in the course or
furtherance of a genuine enterprise attract a GST liability
and result in
increased taxation revenue. The same cannot be said of artificial or contrived
transactions not made in the course
or furtherance of a genuine enterprise which
operate to decrease taxation revenue. Transactions of that character are a
Div 165. Thus, the Tribunal’s reasons indicate that it failed to
take into account that a purpose or object of Div 165 is to
deter artificial or
contrived schemes of which the scheme as articulated by the Commissioner was an
par excellence
DISPOSITION
the reasons given, I would allow the appeal and set aside the Tribunal’s
decision. The matter should be remitted to the
Administrative Review Tribunal
for determination according to law. On the basis that the applicant has decided
to provide funding
under the ATO Test Case Litigation Program to assist the
taxpayer to meet the costs of the appeal the Commissioner has sought an
that there be no order as to the costs of the appeal. In accordance with the
Commissioner’s position, I would make no
order as to the costs of the
I certify that the preceding ninety-eight (98) numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Justice
Dated: 24 October 2025
RTF format (740 KB)
Signed PDF/A format