Kosdown Printing Co Pty Ltd Trading As Kosdown Printing [2025] FWCA 3658 (12 November 2025)
[2025] FWCA 3658
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Application for approval of a single-enterprise
Kosdown Printing Co Pty Ltd Trading As Kosdown Printing
(AG2025/3203)
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF KOSDOWN PRINTING CO PTY LTD & AMWU
ENTERPRISE AGREEMENT 2025
Manufacturing and associated industries
COMMISSIONER ALLISON
MELBOURNE, 12 NOVEMBER 2025
Application for approval of the Kosdown Printing Co Pty Ltd & AMWU
Enterprise Agreement 2025
Kosdown Printing Co Pty Ltd (the Employer) has made an application,
pursuant to
Fair Work Act 2009
(the Act), for approval of a
single enterprise agreement known as the
Kosdown Printing Co Pty Ltd &
AMWU Enterprise Agreement 2025
(the Agreement).
The "Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred
Industries Union" known as the Australian Manufacturing Workers’
(AMWU) being a bargaining representative for the Agreement, has given notice
under s.183 of the Act that it wants the Agreement
to cover it. In accordance
with s.201(2) I note that the Agreement covers the AMWU.
The Agreement incorporates the Graphic Arts (General) Award 2000 as
it stood on 1 March 2006 (“the pre-reform Award”).
A number of the
provisions of the pre-reform Award incorporated into the Agreement may be
inconsistent with the National Employment
Standards (NES). These provisions
Parental leave
entitlements that are less beneficial than NES in some respects.
Clause 7.5.6(a)
of the pre-reform Award states where an employee is absent from the
employee’s employment on the working day
before or the working day after a
public holiday without reasonable excuse or without the consent of the employer,
the employee will
not be entitled to payment for such holiday.
4.2.1(e)(ii) of the pre-reform Award purports to exclude apprentices from
receiving notice of termination which is less beneficial
that the Act.
However, noting clause 6.6 of the Agreement, I am satisfied the more
beneficial entitlements of the NES will prevail where there is
an inconsistency
between the Agreement and the NES.
The Agreement does not provide for apprentice or trainee rates of pay
except for those incorporated from the
Graphic Arts (General) Award 2000
If apprentices or trainees are paid in accordance with the pre-reform Award, it
is not evident how such employees would be better
off overall. The Employer
provided an undertaking to resolve this issue stating that whilst it does not
intend to engage apprentices
or trainees under the Agreement, if they do so, the
apprentices or trainees will be paid no less than 90% of the hourly rate for
relevant level in Appendix 1 of the Agreement.
A copy of the undertakings is attached in Annexure A. I am satisfied
that the undertakings will not cause financial detriment to any
employee covered
by the Agreement and that the undertakings will not result in substantial
changes to the Agreement. The undertakings
are taken to be a term of the
Subject to the undertakings referred to above, I am satisfied that
each of the requirements of ss.186, 187, 188 and 190 as are relevant
application for approval have been met.
The Agreement is approved. Notwithstanding clause 5.1 of the
Agreement, in accordance with s.54 of the Act, the Agreement will operate
19 November 2025. The nominal expiry date of the Agreement is 8 July 2028.
COMMISSIONER
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (5.82 MB)
Signed PDF/A format