URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/FamCA/2006/1346.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Goode & Goode [2006] FamCA 1346 (15 December 2006)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GOODE & GOODE
2006] FamCA 1346
FAMILY LAW – CHILDREN – APPEAL – INTERIM PROCEEDINGS
– Discussion of the extent to which
Cowling v Cowling
[1998] FamCA 19
continues to apply after the commencement of the
Family Law Amendment
(Shared Parental Responsibility) Act 2006
(Cth) – Discussion of
principles for the conduct of interim hearings after 1 July 2006
LAW – CHILDREN – PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY AND INTERIM PROCEEDINGS
– Section 61DA – What is the significance
of the specific references
to parental responsibility and interim proceedings in the Act?
– CHILDREN – SHARED PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY – Section 65DAC
– Difference between ‘parental
responsibility’ as set out in s
61C(1) and discussed by the Full Court in
Family Law Reform Act
(1997) FLC 92-755 and ‘Shared Parental Responsibility’ as
set out in section 65DAC
FAMILY LAW – CHILDREN – PRESUMPTION
OF EQUAL SHARED PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY – Section 61DA – No
presumption
as to the amount of time that a child must spend with each of his or
her parents
FAMILY LAW – CHILDREN – PRESUMPTION OF EQUAL
SHARED PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY – Circumstances leading to rebuttal
presumption – Order for equal shared parental responsibility or equal
time, other than by application of the presumption
– Where presumption is
not applied or rebutted, the Court is at large to consider what arrangements
will best promote the child’s
best interests having regard to the objects
and principles in s 60B and the primary and secondary considerations in s
FAMILY LAW – CHILDREN – EQUAL TIME – SUBSTANTIAL
AND SIGNIFICANT TIME – In the context of s 65DAA ‘consider’
means a consideration tending to a result, or to consider positively the making
of an order
FAMILY LAW – CHILDREN – PRESUMPTION OF SHARED
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY – The significance of untested evidence which
be capable of affecting the presumption
FAMILY LAW – CHILDREN
– APPEAL – INTERIM PROCEEDINGS – Alleged error in finding that
s 65DAA did not apply
– Alleged error in applying
Cowling v Cowling
[1998] FamCA 19
(1998) FLC 92-801
– Alleged error in findings of fact – Alleged
error in failing to address aspect of application not pressed in submission
– Alleged failure to give adequate reasons
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Australian Federation of Construction
Contractors; Ex parte Billing
[1986] HCA 74
(1986) 68 ALR 416
Reform Act 1995
(1997) FLC 92-755
Chapman and Ors v Minister for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs and Ors
(1995) 55 FCR 316
(1995) 133 ALR 74
Cilento and Cilento
Cowling v Cowling
[1998] FamCA 19
(1998) FLC 92-801
Griffiths and Griffiths
(1981) FLC 91-064
(1982) FLC 91-239
Tickner and Ors v Chapman and Ors
[1995] FCA 1726
(1995) 57 FCR 451
133 ALR 226
[2002] HCA 36
(2002) 211 CLR 238
APPELLANT FATHER
RESPONDENT MOTHER:
DATE DELIVERED:
15 December 2006
PLACE DELIVERED:
JUDGMENT OF:
Bryant CJ, Finn and Boland JJ
HEARING DATE:
1 November 2006 (Sydney)
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION:
Family Court of Australia
LOWER COURT JUDGMENT DATE:
10 August 2006
LOWER COURT MNC:
[2006] Fam CA 819
COUNSEL FOR THE
Ms Christie
SOLICITORS FOR THE APPELLANT:
Watts McCray
ADVOCATE FOR THE RESPONDENT:
SOLICITORS FOR THE RESPONDENT:
Browns the Family Lawyers
IT IS NOTED IN CONNECTION WITH THESE ORDERS
that the judgment of the
Full Court delivered this day will for all publication and reporting purposes be
referred to as
Goode v Goode
(1) That the appeal be allowed.
(2) That the matter be remitted for a hearing on interim issues as a matter of
(3) That the Court grants to the respondent mother a costs certificate pursuant
to the provisions of
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act
being a certificate that, in the opinion of the Court, it would be
appropriate for the Attorney-General to authorise a payment under
that Act to
the respondent mother in respect of the costs incurred by the respondent mother
in relation to the appeal.
(4) That the Court grants to the appellant father a costs certificate pursuant
to the provisions of
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act
being a certificate that, in the opinion of the Court, it would be
appropriate for the Attorney-General to authorise a payment under
that Act to
the appellant father in respect of the costs incurred by the appellant father in
relation to the appeal.
(5) That the Court grants to the respondent mother a costs certificate pursuant
to the provisions of
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act
being a certificate that, in the opinion of the Court, it would be
appropriate for the Attorney-General to authorise a payment under
that Act to
the respondent mother in respect of such part as the Attorney-General considers
appropriate of any costs incurred by
the respondent mother in relation to the
(6) That the Court grants to the appellant father a costs certificate pursuant
to the provisions of
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act
being a certificate that, in the opinion of the Court, it would be
appropriate for the Attorney-General to authorise a payment under
that Act to
the appellant father in respect of such part as the Attorney-General considers
appropriate of any costs incurred by the
appellant father in relation to the new
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA AT SYDNEY
Appeal Number: EA 96 of
File Number: PAF 7969 of 1999
Appellant Father
Respondent Mother
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
1. This is an appeal by the appellant father against an interim decision made by
Collier J on 10 August 2006. The judgment was given
ex tempore on the same day
as the interim application was argued. The appellant father was seeking orders
which in effect enabled
the parties’ children, T ... eight years of age
and J... who was two years of age at the date of hearing, to spend equal time
with him. The respondent mother sought orders that the appellant father spend
time with the children each alternate weekend and,
in respect of T, for two
additional days during the week and half the school holidays. The regime
proposed in respect of J was slightly
different and involved lesser periods of
time. The parties had separated in late May 2006, about two and a half months
2. The effect of his Honour’s orders was that the children would live with
the respondent mother and spend time with the appellant
father. Both children
were to spend each alternate weekend with the appellant father from the
conclusion of school or childcare
on Friday to 4.00 pm on Sunday and T was to
also spend time with the appellant father on Monday in each week during school
from after school until 8.30 pm and on Tuesday from after school until
6.00 pm. These times were for the purpose of attending scouts
lessons. The orders also provided for the children to spend time with the
appellant father for one half of each school
holiday period.
3. In coming to his decision, his Honour did not make any order for equal shared
parental responsibility but he considered the provisions
of s 61DA and pursuant
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”),
determined that on the facts of this case it would not be appropriate to apply
the presumption set
that “[w]hen making a parenting order
in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the
best interests
of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared
parental responsibility for the child.”
4. His Honour referred to the decision of
Cowling v Cowling
[1998] FamCA 19
and appears to have come to his decision as a result of
application of the principles
. In paragraph 10 of
his reasons for judgment his Honour found that there were arrangements between
the parties that had been in
place since June which had worked for the benefit
of the children and that there was nothing in the evidence that he could find
suggested that the arrangements were not serving the needs of the children
to have both parents involved in their lives. His Honour
did not consider
specifically the matters in
of the Act as to how a court determines what
is in a child’s best interests, having regard to the primary
considerations in
and the additional considerations in
THE APPLICABLE LAW
Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental Responsibility) Act 2006
(“the amending Act”) came into effect on 1 July 2006 and was the
law that governed his Honour’s decision. The amending
Act builds upon the
framework of the legislation as it was prior to 1 July 2006.
Act applies to children. There are 16 Divisions to
The significant
sections for present purposes follow.
6. Orders concerning parental responsibility, who the child is to live with and
spend time with, and the communication a child is
to have with another person or
other persons are all parenting orders. Section 64B(2) provides that a
parenting order may deal with
one or more of the
the person or persons with whom a child is to live;
(b) the time a child is to spend with another person or other persons;
(c) the allocation of parental responsibility for a
(d) if 2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child
– the form of consultations those persons are to
have with one another
(e) the communication a child is to have with another person or other
(f) maintenance of a
(g) the steps to be taken before an application is made to a court for a
variation of the order to take account of the changing needs
or circumstances
(i) a child to whom the order relates; or
(ii) the parties to the proceedings in which the order is
(h) the process to be used for resolving disputes about the terms or operation
of the order;
(i) any other aspect of the care, welfare or development of the child or any
other aspect of parental responsibility for a
Section 64B(3) provides:
Without limiting paragraph (2)(c), the order may deal with the
allocation of responsibility for making decisions about major
long-term issues in relation to the child.
7. The objects and principles from which the provisions of
applied are set out in s 60B, which
(1) The objects of this Part are to ensure that the best interests of children
are met by:
(a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a
meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum
extent consistent with the
best interests of the child; and
(b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence;
(c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them
achieve their full potential; and
(d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities,
concerning the care, welfare and development of their
(2) The principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or
would be contrary to a child’s best
interests):
(a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents,
regardless of whether their parents are married, separated,
have never married
or have never lived together; and
(b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and
communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and
other people
significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and
other relatives); and
(c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care,
welfare and development of their children; and
(d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children; and
(e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy
that culture with other people who share that
(3) For the purposes of subparagraph (2)(e), an Aboriginal child’s or
Torres Strait Islander child’s right to enjoy
his or her Aboriginal or
Torres Strait Islander culture includes the right:
(a) to maintain a connection with that culture;
(b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary:
(i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the
child’s age and developmental level and the child’s
(ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that
8. Section 60CA deals with the best interests of the child and provides
In deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child,
a court must regard the best interests of the child
as the paramount
consideration.
This provision of the legislation was formerly s 65E and the wording of the
section has not changed.
9. In determining what is in a child’s best interests, s 60CC provides
that, other than in considering whether to make an order
by consent, the Court
must consider the following matters in determining what is in the child’s
best interests:
Primary considerations
(2) The primary considerations
(a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of
the child’s parents; and
(b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from
being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or
Note: Making these considerations the primary ones is consistent with the
objects of this Part set out in paragraphs 60B(1)(a) and
Additional considerations
(3) Additional considerations
(a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s
maturity or level of understanding) that the court
thinks are relevant to the
weight it should give to the child’s
(b) the nature of the relationship of the child
(i) each of the child’s parents; and
(ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the
(c) the willingness and ability of each of the child’s parents to
facilitate, and encourage, a close and continuing relationship
between the child
and the other parent;
(d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances,
including the likely effect on the child of any separation
(i) either of his or her parents; or
(ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other
relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living;
(e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and
communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty
or expense will
substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and
direct contact with both parents
on a regular
(f) the capacity
(i) each of the child’s parents; and
(ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual
(g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture
and traditions) of the child and of either of the
child’s parents, and any
other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant;
(h) if the child is an Aboriginal child or a Torres Strait Islander child:
(i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture
with other people
who share that culture); and
(ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this Part will have on
that right;
(i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood,
demonstrated by each of the child’s parents;
(j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s
(k) any family violence order that applies to the child or a member of the
child’s family, if:
(i) the order is a final order; or
(ii) the making of the order was contested by a person;
(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely
to lead to the institution of further proceedings
in relation to the child;
(m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is
Section 60CC(4) provides:
Without limiting paragraphs (3)(c) and (i), the court must consider the extent
to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled,
or failed to fulfil,
his or her responsibilities as a parent and, in particular, the extent to which
each of the child’s
(a) has taken, or failed to take, the
opportunity:
(i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation
to the child; and
(ii) to spend time with the child; and
(iii) to communicate with the child;
(b) has facilitated, or failed to facilitate, the other
(i) participating in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation
to the child; and
(ii) spending time with the child; and
(iii) communicating with the child; and
(c) has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligation to
maintain the child.
Section 60CC(4A) provides:
If the child’s parents have separated, the court must, in applying
subsection (4), have regard, in particular, to events that
have happened, and
circumstances that have existed, since the separation
10. Thus, in deciding to make a particular parenting order, including an order
for parental responsibility, the individual child’s
best interests remain
the paramount consideration (as they did prior to the amending Act – see
Family Law Reform Act
(1997) FLC 92-755 at paragraph
9.51) and the framework in which best interests are to be determined are the
factors in ss 60CC(1), (2), (3),
(4) and (4A). The objects and
principles contained in
s 60B provide the context in which the factors in s
60CC are to be examined, weighed and applied in the individual case.
THE FRAMEWORK FOR DETERMINING PARENTING ORDERS
11. Section 61DA (which is a new section)
Presumption of equal shared parental responsibility when making parenting
(1) When making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply
a presumption that it is in the best interests of
the child for the
child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the
Note: The presumption provided for in this subsection is a presumption that
relates solely to the allocation of parental responsibility
for a child as
defined in section 61B. It does not provide for a presumption about the amount
of time the child spends with each
of the parents (this issue is dealt with in
section 65DAA).
(2) The presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe
that a parent of the child (or a person who lives
with a parent of the child)
has engaged in:
(a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the
parent’s family (or that other person’s
(b) family violence.
(3) When the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless
the court considers that it would not be appropriate
in the circumstances for
the presumption to be applied when making that order.
(4) The presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that
it would not be in the best interests of the child
for the child’s parents
to have equal shared parental responsibility for the
12. Section 61DB provides that:
Application of presumption of equal shared parental responsibility after
interim parenting order made
If there is an interim parenting order in relation to a child, the court must,
in making a final parenting order in relation to the
child, disregard the
allocation of parental responsibility made in the interim
13. The relevance of the presumption of shared parental responsibility, where it
applies, is that it triggers the application of
s 65DAA, which
Court to consider child spending equal time or substantial and significant
time with each parent in certain circumstances
(1) If a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s
parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility
for the child, the
court must:
(a) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents
would be in the best interests of the child; and
(b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is
reasonably practicable; and
(c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in
the order) for the child to spend equal time with
each of the
Note 1: The effect of section 60CA is that in deciding whether to go on to make
a parenting order for the child to spend equal time
with each of the parents,
the court will regard the best interests of the child as the paramount
consideration.
Note 2: See subsection (5) for the factors the court takes into account in
determining what is reasonably practicable.
Substantial and significant time
(a) a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents
are to have equal shared parental responsibility
for the child; and
(b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for
the child to spend equal time with each of the parents;
the court must:
(c) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with
each of the parents would be in the best interests
of the child; and
(d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with
each of the parents is reasonably practicable; and
(e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in
the order) for the child to spend substantial and
significant time with each of
the parents.
Note 1: The effect of section 60CA is that in deciding whether to go on to make
a parenting order for the child to spend substantial
time with each of the
parents, the court will regard the best interests of the child as the paramount
consideration.
Note 2: See subsection (5) for the factors the court takes into account in
determining what is reasonably
practicable.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2), a child will be taken to spend
substantial and significant time
with a parent only if:
(a) the time the child spends with the parent includes
(i) days that fall on weekends and holidays; and
(ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays; and
(b) the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved
(i) the child’s daily routine; and
(ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child;
(c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved
in occasions and events that are of special significance
(4) Subsection (3) does not limit the other matters to which a court can have
regard in determining whether the time a child spends
with a parent would be
substantial and
significant.
practicality
(5) In determining for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) whether it is
reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal time,
or substantial and
significant time, with each of the child’s parents, the court must have
(a) how far apart the parents live from each other;
(b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement
for the child spending equal time, or substantial
and significant time, with
each of the parents; and
(c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each
other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing
an arrangement
of that kind; and
(d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child;
(e) such other matters as the court considers
Note 1: Behaviour of a parent that is relevant for paragraph (c) may also be
taken into account in determining what parenting order
the court should make in
the best interests of the child. Subsection 60CC(3) provides for considerations
that are taken into account
in determining what is in the best interests of the
child. These include:
(a) the willingness and ability of each of the child’s parents to
facilitate, and encourage, a close and continuing relationship
between the child
and the other parent (paragraph 60CC(3)(c));
(b) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood,
demonstrated by each of the child’s parents (paragraph
60CC(3)(i)).
Note 2: Paragraph (c) reference to future capacity—the court has power
under section 13C to make orders for parties to attend
family counselling or
family dispute resolution or participate in courses, programs or
BACKGROUND FACTS AND
DECISION AT THE INTERIM HEARING
14. The parties were married in July 1996 and although there was a separation in
December 1999 they finally separated in late May
2006. While there was some
dispute as to the circumstances of the separation, the facts allowed the judge
at first instance to find
that the appellant father chose to leave the
matrimonial home and bring the marriage to an end. Thereafter there was some
as to what happened in relation to the care of the children. Collier J
recorded that the respondent mother asserted that after a
period of time the
parties reached an agreement and the appellant father commenced spending time
with the children on each alternate
weekend. The appellant father’s case
was that the respondent mother removed the children from him and made it very
for him to have contact (as it was then termed), other than contact
that the respondent mother said he could have. The judge inferred
from a letter
written by the appellant father to the respondent mother that when he left the
matrimonial home and the marriage, he
was not concerned about the adequacy of
the care the respondent mother was providing for the children.
15. Other than to note the dates of birth and the ages of the children, which we
have recorded, that was the extent of the factual
matters dealt with in the
judgment. This is not to imply any criticism of his Honour. This was an
interim application argued on
reasonably narrow grounds.
16. The proceedings had been commenced by application of the respondent mother
filed 26 May 2006 seeking final orders in which she
sought, inter alia, an order
that “[b]oth parties have joint responsibility for the decisions
concerning the long term care,
welfare and development of the said
children.” In a response to that application filed by the appellant
father on 30 May 2006,
he also sought “[t]hat each party be jointly
responsible for the long term care, welfare and development of the children of
the marriage...”.
17. The application for interim orders was filed by the appellant father on 30
May 2006. In paragraph 1 he sought “[t]hat
each party be jointly
responsible for the long-term care, welfare and development of the children of
the marriage...”.
18. The respondent mother responded to that application in a document filed on 7
August 2006. Paragraph 3 of Part B of the response
to an application in a case
required her to state the paragraph numbers of the orders sought in the
application in a case with which
she agreed. The respondent mother set out
paragraphs 1 and 2. Germane to these proceedings is the fact that paragraph one
order sought by the appellant father that each party be jointly
responsible for the long-term care, welfare and development of the
children of
the marriage.
19. As will be apparent when we turn to discuss the legislation, the wording
used by the parties is different to that now contained
in the Act. This is
because the parties filed their documents prior to 1 July 2006 using language
which was consistent with Division
of the Act prior to 1 July
2006. Nothing turns on the distinction in the wording of the application sought
and each party conceded
that it related to parental responsibility, which is now
to be found in the amended Division 2 of
of the Act and in particular
ss 61A, 61B, 61C, 61D, 61DA and 61DB.
20. The appellant father sought a shared care arrangement according to a
proposal that we set out later in this judgment.
21. The respondent mother had different proposals which we also set out later in
the judgment but essentially provided for the children
to live with her, have
weekend contact with the appellant father and holiday contact, with different
proposals for each of the children.
22. His Honour noted that the history of the matter was to be found in the
affidavit of the appellant father sworn on 7 August 2006,
in the affidavit of
the paternal grandmother also sworn on that date and in the respondent
mother’s affidavit sworn on 4 August
23. Having briefly discussed the facts as we have described them, his Honour
turned to a discussion of the law. He noted that both
parties had addressed him
on various sections of the new amendments and in particular on the basis of the
decision in
dealing with interim applications. His Honour noted
that submissions had been made about the effect of s 61DA, which requires that
when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the Court must apply a
presumption that it is in the best interests of the
child for the child’s
parents to have equal shared parental responsibility. His Honour noted that s
61DA(2) provides that
the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable
grounds to believe that either of the parents has engaged in abuse of the
or family violence. He then noted that s 61DA(3) provides that in interim
proceedings the presumption applies unless the Court
considers it would not be
appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making
24. His Honour noted that there were no guidelines to be found in that
sub-section as to what is to be taken into account by a court
in considering
whether it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to
be applied. He observed that as he
understood the structure of the amended Act,
and in particular the presumption of shared parental responsibility, it is in
“the key, or the threshold, that must be passed if the Court is to
consider making an order for shared time between the parents
child.” His Honour noted that as
and other cases
concerning interim applications have made clear, it is not possible in the
circumstances of such a case as this to
say that he was able to accept the
assertions of either party. He noted that the allegations that each made
against the other were
untested. He noted that, insofar as domestic violence
was concerned, there were allegations but he was not able to rely upon them
constitute a rebuttal of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
because he could not be satisfied on reasonable
grounds that such a situation
had occurred. His Honour then turned to
s 61DA(3), which provides as
When the court
is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court
considers that it would not be appropriate in
the circumstances for the
presumption to be applied when making that
25. His Honour noted that there was a dispute about whether there had been any
action or activity on behalf of the appellant father
that would constitute
family violence, which if ultimately found on reasonable grounds to be family
violence within the definition
in the Act would rebut the presumption of equal
shared parental responsibility. Being unable to make such a finding, his Honour
determined that in the circumstances of the case he should rely on
s 61DA(3) and find that it was not appropriate to apply the presumption
making the order. Thus, his Honour did not consider the matters in s 65DAA that
would otherwise follow from application of the
presumption of equal shared
parental responsibility.
26. His Honour then turned to look at the arrangements that were in place. He
observed that they had been in place since June but
that he was unable to
determine whether, as the respondent mother said, the arrangements had been put
in place by agreement or, as
the appellant father alleged, he had had no choice
and was compelled to acquiesce with them. He found, in the limited
circumstances
before him, that the arrangements had been in place since June and
that nothing he had seen had indicated that they were other than
serving the
needs of the children to have both parents involved in their lives. He observed
that the material before him indicated
that the arrangement had worked for the
benefit of the children and that he was satisfied that the respondent mother,
who had been
the person principally concerned for the children when they were
sick and had hours of work that were significantly less than the
father’s. His Honour noted that as the matter would come on for hearing
“moderately quickly” and that
there needed to be some structure in
the meantime whereby the children would spend time with each of their parents,
he was of the
view that the present arrangement of each alternate weekend with
some mid-week time with the oldest child was appropriate.
THE GROUNDS OF APPEAL IN THIS CASE
27. By his amended notice of appeal the appellant father identified six grounds
of appeal as follows:
1. That His Honour erred in finding that Section 65DAA did not apply in the
circumstances of the case, including where the Wife had,
herself, sought that
both parties be ordered to have joint long term parental responsibility.
2. That His Honour erred in failing to apply
Cowling & Cowling
[1998] FamCA 19
appropriately.
3. That His Honour erred in failing to apply
of the Act as it now
4. That His Honour erred in that he made errors of fact.
5. That His Honour erred in failing to address the issue of the Injunctive Order
sought in relation to religious upbringing.
6. That His Honour erred in that he made errors of Law which include inter alia
a failure to give adequate reasons.
28. In her oral submissions, counsel for the appellant father identified nine
discrete questions that fell to be answered in a consideration
of the amendments
to the Act and the grounds of appeal. The respondent mother’s
representative replied in oral submissions
on the same basis and therefore it is
convenient for us to deal with these questions as a means of considering the
amending legislation.
1. Is there a difference between parental responsibility and equal shared
parental responsibility?
29. Parental responsibility is defined in s 61B and its effect is explained in s
61C and s 61D. Section 61B provides that parental
responsibility for a child
means all the duties, powers and responsibilities and authority which by law,
parents have in relation
to children.
30. Section 61C provides that each parent has parental responsibility for a
child who is not 18 years, despite any changes in the
nature of the relationship
of the child’s parents and in particular it is not affected, for example,
by the parties becoming
separated or by either or both of them marrying or
remarrying. The section provides that it has effect, by operation of law,
to any order of a court.
31. Section 61D provides that a parenting order confers parental responsibility
for a child on a person, but only to the extent to
which the Court confers on
the person duties, powers, responsibilities or authority in relation to the
child. Section 61D(2) provides
that a parenting order in relation to a child
does not take away or diminish any aspect of the parental responsibility of any
for the child except to the extent (if any) expressly provided for in the
order or necessary to give effect to the order.
32. Sections 61B, 61C (except for the provision of three notes) and 61D have not
been amended by the amending Act.
Family Law Reform Act 1995
, the Full Court comprising
Nicholson CJ, Fogarty and Lindenmayer JJ considered at paragraph 9.23 and
following what the definition
of parental responsibility pursuant to
meant. They said at paragraph 9.24 and
This definition provides little guidance, relying as it does on the common law
and relevant statues to give it content. It would
appear to at least cover
guardianship and custody under the previous
and may be wider. The
Attorney-General submitted that it was probably wider than that and covered
“all of the underlying and
continuing common law and statutory law that
affects the relationship of parents and their children”.
It omits any reference to rights. Whilst this omission is understandable, given
the philosophy of the amendments, it is doubtful
whether that achieves any
practical effect other than to make it clear that there are no possessory rights
to children, insofar as
this could be said to have been the case prior to the
amendments.
Read in conjunction with s 60B(2)(c) the emphasis is on the continuance of
responsibility independently of the status of the parental
relationship.
Section 61D(2) provides that a parenting order does not take away or diminish
any aspect of parental responsibility
except to the extent expressly provided
for in the order or necessary to give effect to the order.
An important issue is whether parents may exercise this responsibility
independently or whether they must do so
34. At paragraphs 9.29 and following their Honours
In the absence of a specific issues order, we think it unlikely that the
Parliament intended that separated parents could only exercise
all or any of
their powers or discharge all or any of their parenting responsibilities jointly
in relation to all matters. This
is never the case when parents are living
together in relation to day to day matters, and the impracticability of such a
requirement
when they are living separately only has to be stated to be
appreciated.
As a matter of practical necessity either the resident parent or the contact
parent will have to make individual decisions about
such matters when they have
the sole physical care of the children. On the other hand, consultation should
obviously occur between
the parents in relation to major issues affecting the
children such as major surgery, place of education, religion and the like.
believe that this accords with the intention of the
legislation.
35. Whilst we consider this is still a correct description of the concomitance
of parental responsibility where no order has been
made by a court, we do not
think in light of the amending legislation it has application once an order for
equal shared parental
responsibility is made by the Court. This is made clear by
the provisions of ss 61C, 61D and 61DA.
36. While it may be self-evident from the provisions of s 61C, note 1 makes it
clear that the legal position prevails only to the
extent it is not displaced by
a parenting order made by the Court. Note 1
This section states that the legal position that prevails in relation to
parental responsibility to the extent to which it is not
displaced by a
parenting order made by the court. See subsection (3) of this section and
section 61D(2) for the effect of a parenting
37. Thus, where no contrary order has been made, parents may exercise this
responsibility independently or jointly. This would be
so whether the parties
were married, living together, never lived together or separated as long as
there was no contrary order in
38. Section 65DAC sets out the effect of a parenting order that provides for
shared parental responsibility. The section requires
decisions about major
long-term issues about children to be made jointly by those persons who are to
share parental responsibility
and that they are
consult the other person in relation to the decisions to be made about that
to make a genuine effort to come
to a joint decision about that issue.
Section 65DAE provides that if a child is spending time with a person under a
parenting order, then that person is not required to
consult with a parent or
other person who shares parental responsibility about decisions that are not
major long-term issues, unless
the Court has made a contrary order.
39. We therefore consider it clear that there is a difference between parental
responsibility which exists as a result of s 61C and
an order for shared
parental responsibility, which has the effect set out in s 65DAC. In the
former, the parties may still be together
or may be separated. There will be no
court order in effect and the parties will exercise the responsibility either
independently
or jointly. Once the Court has made an order allocating parental
responsibility between two or more people, including an order for
equal shared
parental responsibility, the major decisions for the long-term care and welfare
of children must be made jointly, unless
the Court otherwise provides.
2. Does the presumption that equal shared parental responsibility is in the
best interests of the child carry with it any presumption
40. Neither counsel submitted to us that there was any presumption about time
arising from the application of s 61DA, namely the
application of the
presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child’s
parents to have equal shared parental
responsibility. So much is clear from the
note to s 61DA(1) itself, which
The presumption provided for in this subsection is a presumption that relates
solely to the allocation of parental responsibility
for a child as defined in
section 61B. It does not provide for a presumption about the amount of time the
child spends with each
of the parents (this issue is dealt with in section
41. We do not consider, nor was it submitted to us by either counsel, that there
was any doubt about the meaning of the note or the
3. Can one make an order for equal shared parental responsibility or equal
time, other than by application of the presumption?
42. We have already set out the provisions of s 61DA and 61DB (see paragraphs 11
and 12). Those are the provisions concerning the
presumption of equal shared
parental responsibility and the requirement that the Court at a final hearing
disregard any allocation
of parental responsibility in a parenting order made at
an interim hearing.
43. Thus, in summary, when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the
apply the presumption that it is in the best interests of the
child for the parents to have equal shared parental responsibility.
presumption however does not apply where there are reasonable grounds to believe
there has been abuse of the child or family
violence (s 61DA(2)) or, when making
an interim order, the Court does not consider application of the presumption
appropriate (s
61DA(3)). The presumption may be rebutted if the Court is
satisfied that it would conflict with the child’s best interests
44. The importance of s 61DA is that if the Court applies the presumption of
equal shared parental responsibility when making parenting
orders, then that
presumption is the starting point for a consideration of the practicality of the
child spending equal time with
each of the parents and, if it is consistent with
the best interests of the child and not impracticable, the Court must consider
making an order that the child spend equal time with each of the parents. If
the Court does not make such an order, it must consider
whether making an order
that the child spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents
would be in the best interests
of the child and not reasonably impracticable
and, if so, must consider making such an order (see s 65DAA). Section 65DAA(3)
the meaning of “substantial and significant time”.
45. Section 65DAA(5) provides some guidance to determining whether it would be
reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal
time or substantial and
significant time with both parents and includes, but is not limited to,
proximity, capacity to implement
the arrangements under consideration, current
and future capacity to communicate and resolve difficulties, the impact such an
arrangement
would have on the child and other relevant matters. It is clear
that if the presumption that it is in the best interests of the
child for the
parents to have equal shared parental responsibility is applied, then the path
described in
s 65DAA needs to be followed, starting with whether an order
for a child spending equal time with both parents would be appropriate.
46. However, this is not the only way in which the Court could consider equal
time. Even if the presumption is rebutted or is not
to apply in the interests
of the child, if one or both of the parties is seeking such an order, the Court
would normally consider,
in the making of an order, what each party was seeking
when considering the child’s best interests in accordance with the objects
s 60B and the primary and additional considerations in s 60CC.
47. Similarly, even if the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
is not applied and neither party seeks an order for
equal time (or by
implication substantial and significant time), the Court is nonetheless required
to consider, in determining what
is in the best interests of the child, the
arrangements that will promote the child’s best interests. Subject to
procedural fairness to the parties, this could include a proposal that
neither party had advanced, if it was in the Court’s
view ultimately in
the child’s best interests for such an order to be made (
[2002] HCA 36
(2002) 211 CLR 238
(2002) FLC 93-112
Bolitho and Cohen
[2005] FamCA 458
(2005) FLC 93-224).
48. Therefore whilst the application of the presumption of equal shared parental
responsibility may be the trigger for the operation
of s 65DAA, it is not the
only basis upon which the Court may make an order for equal or substantial and
significant time to be spent
by the parents with the child. However, in our
view where the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is to apply,
starting point is a consideration of whether it would be in the
child’s best interests to spend equal time with both parents
practicability of such an arrangement. When neither an outcome providing for
equal time nor substantial and significant
time promotes the child’s best
interests, the Court determines the parenting applications in the best interests
of the child
having regard to the matters found in the objects (s 60B) and s
4. What is the significance of the specific references to parental
responsibility and interim proceedings in the Act?
49. This question raises the issue of whether and to what extent the presumption
in s 61DA applies in interim proceedings. The respondent
mother submitted that
the question of equal shared parental responsibility was not in issue in the
interim proceedings before the
judge at first instance. The basis for this
submission was that the appellant father did not seek
equal shared parental
responsibility
in the interim proceedings but rather, as we have pointed
out, sought an order that each party be jointly responsible for the long-term
care, welfare and development of the children.
50. Although the respondent mother responded to the application by a document
filed on 7 August 2006 and agreed with the orders
sought by the appellant
father, it was then contended by counsel for the respondent mother that her
agreement was to an order for
joint parental responsibility, not for equal
shared parental responsibility as the Act now provides.
51. We see little purpose in this debate which is essentially about terminology.
As we have already indicated, it is not necessary
to seek an order for equal
shared parental responsibility to trigger the presumption in s 61DA. All that
is required is that the
Court be making a parenting order. Thus, it does not
matter whether the issue of equal shared parental responsibility was put in
issue by the parties, or either of them, as the Court is required to apply s
61DA in any case in which a parenting order is to be
52. Further, the respondent mother did not submit to us or the judge at first
instance that his Honour
not (as a matter of law) apply the
presumption under
s 61DA for equal shared parental responsibility in interim
proceedings, but rather that he
not. At page 102 of the appeal
book, page 5 of the transcript, line 10, the following submission to his Honour
was made by the respondent
But if I can just, before I go into that, address some of the submissions that
my friend made in relation to the presumption of
equal share [sic] parental
responsibility and consequence [sic] upon that, the obligation of the Court to
consider whether it’s
appropriate for the parents to have equal time with
the children, which seems to be largely the planks upon which [the appellant
father’s] application is based.
First of all, your Honour, clearly under section 65D - I withdraw that. I'm just
getting used to these new section numbers, your
Honour - number 61D(a)
The presumption of equal shared parental responsibility does not apply if there
are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent
of a child or a person who lives
with the parent of a child has engaged in family
I refer to section 61D(a)(2) [sic]. Now whilst it is clearly true that the
presumption of equal shared parental responsibility applies
as much to an
interim hearing as it does to a final hearing, the Act is quite explicit about
How this exception to that presumption applies at an interim – in an
interim hearing is a little more difficult to discern,
because if one takes the
analogy, for example, of an apprehended violence order in the State system, a
Court can only issue such
an order if the fear that a person has about violence
to themselves is reasonable. And usually the grounds for that reasonableness,
or that assessment of reasonableness, are based upon the Court’s
assessment as to the truth of past – of allegations
of violence that have
occurred in the past.
53. The respondent mother’s solicitor went on to discuss the allegations
made by the respondent mother in her affidavit and
submitted that there were
reasonable grounds to believe that the appellant father had engaged in family
violence and then said:
...can it be said at this interim hearing that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that a parent of a child has engaged in family
violence? In my
respectful submission, there are reasonable grounds, because the wife has made
that allegation. It is not inherently
unbelievable.... Therefore, in my
respectful submission, there are reasonable grounds to believe that the husband
has engaged in
family violence.
Now, if your Honour is of that view, then that displaces the presumption of
equal shared parental responsibility. That presumption
can’t apply.
54. It is clear from this passage that it was neither his Honour’s
consideration of the application of the presumption of equal
shared parental
responsibility pursuant to s 61DA, nor his consideration of it in interim
proceedings, to which the respondent mother’s
submissions were directed.
The respondent mother’s submissions were directed to the contention that
his Honour should find
that the presumption did not apply because there were
reasonable grounds to believe that the appellant father had engaged in family
55. We think that the Act on its face makes this clear. First, there is no
distinction drawn in s 61DA between interim and final
proceedings. Secondly, s
61DA(3) specifically refers to interim proceedings in
When the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the
court considers that it would not be appropriate in
the circumstances for the
presumption to be applied when making that
Thirdly, s 61DB, which says:
If there is an interim parenting order in relation to a child, the court must,
in making a final parenting order in relation to the
child, disregard the
allocation of parental responsibility made in the interim
assumes the making of interim orders for equal shared parental responsibility or
some other allocation of parental responsibility.
56. In our view the Act makes it clear that when a parenting order is sought,
whether it be an interim or final order, the starting
point is the application
of a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child that the
child’s parents have equal
shared parental responsibility as expressed in
s 61DA, subject to the qualifications in sub-sections (2), (3) and
5. What does “consider”
57. This question arises from what follows from an application of the
presumption of equal shared parental responsibility in s 61DA.
parenting order is made for equal shared parental responsibility then the Court
must apply s 65DAA. This requires the
spending equal time or substantial and significant time with each parent in
certain circumstances. The question therefore
arises, what does
“consider” mean.
Aboriginal & Torres Strait Island Affairs, Minister for &
Norvill v Chapman; sub nom Tickner v Chapman (The Hindmarsh Island
[1995] FCA 1726
(1995) 57 FCR 451
(1995) 133 ALR 226
the Full Court of the Federal Court
extensively examined the meaning of the word “consider”.
59. The appeal was part of litigation over the Hindmarsh Island Bridge
development. The appellants challenged pursuant to the
Administrative
Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
(Cth) both at first instance and on
appeal the decision of the Commonwealth Minister for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Affairs
to make declarations concerning the development site.
The appellants asserted the Minister had failed to consider a report prepared
determine whether or not the declaration should be made.
60. Relevantly, Black CJ held at 462:
The meaning of “consider” used as a transitive verb referring to the
consideration of some thing is given in the
Oxford English Dictionary
(2nd ed) as “to contemplate mentally, fix the mind upon; to think over,
meditate or reflect on, bestow attentive thought upon,
give heed to, take note
of”. Consideration of a document such as a representation or a submission
(there is little, if any,
difference between the two for these purposes)
involves an active intellectual process directed at that representation or
submission.
61. Burchett J held at 476-477:
What is it to “consider” material such as a report or
representations? In my opinion, the Minister is required to apply
his own mind
to the issues raised by these documents. To do that, he must obtain an
understanding of the facts and circumstances
set out in them, and of the
contentions they urge based on those facts and circumstances. Although he cannot
delegate his function
and duty under
, he can be assisted in ascertaining
the facts and contentions contained in the material. But he must ascertain them.
He cannot simply
rely on an assessment of their worth made by others: cf
Jeffs v New Zealand Dairy Production and Marketing
[1967] 1 AC 551 at 568–569. It is
task to evaluate
them, a task he can only perform after he knows what they actually are. In a
case involving a board which had a
duty to “consider” a report,
Laskin J, speaking for the Supreme Court of Canada, said: “Certainly, the
have the report before it”:
Walters v Essex (County) Board
of Education
(1973) 38 DLR (3d) 693
at 697. When Gibbs CJ in
Minister for
Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
(1986) 162 CLR 24
conceded that the Minister, in the circumstances of that case, was not obliged
“to read for himself all the
relevant papers”, and that it
“would not be unreasonable for him to rely on a summary of the relevant
facts furnished
by the officers of his Department”, he also made it plain
that the summary must “bring to his attention” all material
“which he is bound to consider, and which cannot be dismissed as
insignificant or insubstantial”. That was in the
context of legislation
expressly empowering the Minister, as Mason J pointed out at 46, to delegate his
powers and to refer matters
62. Kiefel J held at 495-496:
To “consider” is a word having a definite meaning in the judicial
context. The intellectual process preceding the decision
speaks is not different. It requires that the Minister have regard to what is
said in the representations, to bring his mind to bear
upon the facts stated in
them and the arguments or opinions put forward and to appreciate who is making
them. From that point the
Minister might sift them, attributing whatever weight
or persuasive quality is thought appropriate. However, the Minister is required
to know what they say. A mere summary of them cannot suffice for this purpose,
for the Minister would not then be considering the
representations, but someone
else’s view of them, and the legislation has required him to form his own
view upon them.
, the Full Court affirmed the decision of O’Loughlin
J at first instance (
Chapman & Barton v Tickner, Minister for Aboriginal
& Torres Strait Islander Affairs
(1995) 55 FCR 316
(1995) 133 ALR 74
) that the Minister had failed to properly
consider the report. O’Loughlin J’s comments at first instance are
of relevance
The verb “consider” is a common word used daily in language and in
documents; yet no counsel was able to refer to any
judicial determination of its
meaning. The
Macquarie Dictionary
Shorter Oxford English
ascribe to it a variety of shades of meaning giving,
respectively, as their first definitions “to contemplate mentally;
or reflect on” and “to view attentively, to survey,
examine, inspect”. American and Canadian dictionaries give
general descriptions: “advert to, analyse, appraise, assess, etc”
Legal Thesaurus
2nd ed: William C Burton) and “to examine,
inspect; to turn one’s mind to” (
The Dictionary of Canadian
: Duke Low & Niese).
64. While these observations of the Federal Court are of some assistance, we do
not think that the meaning of “consider”,
when applied to
consideration of administrative law as in the cases referred to, is entirely
apposite to the meaning of the word
in s 65DAA. This is so because the
juxtaposition of ss 65DAA(1)(a), 65DAA(1)(b) and 65DAA(1)(c) suggests a
consideration tending
to a result, or the need to consider positively the making
of an order, if the conditions in s 65DAA(1)(a), being the best interests
child, and s 65DAA(1)(b), reasonable practicability, are met. The same
considerations apply to s 65DAA(2).
65. In summary, the amendments to
have the following
the Court makes an order changing the statutory conferral of joint parental
responsibility, s 61C(1) provides that until a
child turns 18, each of the
child’s parents has parental responsibility for the child.
“Parental responsibility”
means all the duties, powers, and
authority which by law parents have in relation to children and parental
responsibility is not
displaced except by order of the Court or the provisions
of a parenting plan made between the
The making of a parenting order
triggers the application of a presumption that it is in the best interests of
the child for each of
the child’s parents to have equal shared parental
responsibility. That presumption must be applied unless there are reasonable
grounds to believe that a parent or a person who lives with a parent has engaged
in abuse of the child or family violence (s 61DA(1)
and s 61DA(2)).
If it is appropriate to apply the
presumption, it is to be applied in relation to both final and interim orders
unless, in the case
of the making of an interim order, the Court considers it
would not be appropriate in the circumstances to apply it (s 61DA(1) and
The presumption may be rebutted
where the Court is satisfied that the application of a presumption of equal
shared parental responsibility
would conflict with the best interests of the
child (s 61DA(4)).
When the presumption is
applied, the first thing the Court must do is to consider making an order if it
is consistent with the best
interests of the child and
practicable for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents. If
equal time is not in the interests of the child
or reasonably practicable the
Court must go on to consider making an order if it is consistent with the best
interests of the child
and reasonably practicable for the child to spend
substantial and significant time with each of the parents (s 65DAA(1) and (2)).
The Act provides guidance as to the meaning
of “substantial and significant time” (ss 65DAA(3) and (4)) and as
meaning of “reasonable practicability” (s
The concept of “substantial
and significant” time is defined in s 65DAA to
(a) the time the child spends with the parent includes
(i) days that fall on weekends and holidays;
(ii) days that do not fall on weekends and holidays; and
(b) the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved
(i) the child’s daily
routine; and
(ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child;
(c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in
occasions and events that are of special significance
to the parent.
neither concept of equal time nor substantial and significant time delivers an
outcome that promotes the child’s best
interests, then the issue is at
large and to be determined in accordance with the child’s best
The child’s best interests
are ascertained by a consideration of the objects and principles in s 60B and
the primary and additional
considerations in
When the presumption of equal
shared parental responsibility is not applied, the Court is at large to consider
what arrangements will
best promote the child’s best interests, including,
if the Court considers it appropriate, an order that the child spend equal
substantial and significant time with each of the parents. These considerations
would particularly be so if one or other of the
parties was seeking an order for
equal or substantial and significant time but, as the best interests of the
child are the paramount
consideration, the Court may consider making such orders
whenever it would be in the best interests of the child to do so after affording
procedural fairness to the parties.
child’s best interests remain the overriding
consideration.
6. To what extent does
continue to apply [in interim parenting
proceedings]?
66. In broader terms, the question that arises is the extent of the impact of
the amending Act to the determination of interim applications.
Prior to the
amendments, it was left to case law to formulate the methodology to be adopted
in interim applications. The decision
was handed down after
the 1995 amendments to the Act
and followed the earlier decisions
Cilento and Cilento
(1980) FLC 90-847
and Griffiths
(1981) FLC 91-064
Rainer and Rainer
FLC 91-239.
The rationale for providing assistance to trial judges in
dealing with interim applications is set out by the Full Court in
at page 85,006 in the following
Family Law Act
does not draw any distinction between the principles to
be applied in determining residence in interim and final proceedings. The
essential difference between them is one of procedure. Interlocutory
proceedings do not determine the long term rights and obligations
of the parties
and their children. The issue for determination at an interim hearing involves
a consideration of what orders should
be made to properly regulate the position
of the children pending the final determination of the matter. Such proceedings
abridged process where the scope of the inquiry is necessarily
significantly curtailed. As a consequence, the Court needs to exercise
considerable caution against being drawn into matters properly dealt with in the
trial process. Ordinarily, at interim hearings,
the Court should not be drawn
into issues of fact or matters relating to the merits of the substantive cases
of each of the parties.
Accordingly, in determining what orders should be made,
the Court traditionally looks to the less contentious matters, such as the
agreed facts, the care arrangements prior to separation, the current
circumstances of the parties and their children and the parties’
respective proposals for the future. In some cases, it may also be necessary to
consider child protection issues.
67. The Full Court then set out relevant criteria for the determination of
interim proceedings for residence and contact (at pages
85,006-85,007):
20. Firstly, having regard to the provisions of s 65E, in determining what
interim parenting order should be made, the Court must
regard the best interests
of the child as the paramount consideration.
21. Secondly, given the mode by which interlocutory proceedings are conducted,
those interests will normally best be met by ensuring
stability in the life of
the child pending a full hearing of all relevant issues. Accordingly, as a
general rule, any interlocutory
order made should promote that stability.
22. Thirdly, where the evidence clearly establishes that, at the date of
hearing, the child is living in an environment in which
he or she is well
settled, the child’s stability will usually be promoted by the making of
an order which provides for the
continuation of that arrangement until the
hearing for final orders, unless there are strong or overriding indications
relevant to
the child’s welfare to the contrary. Such indications would
include but are not limited to convincing proof that the child’s
would be really endangered by his/her remaining in that environment.
23. Fourthly, the Court is entitled to place such weight upon the importance of
retaining the child’s current living arrangements
as it sees fit in all
the circumstances. In determining what weight to place upon that factor, it is
appropriate for the Court to
take account of the circumstances giving rise to
the current status quo. In particular, the Court may examine the following
• whether the current circumstances have arisen by virtue of some
agreement between the parties or as a result of acquiescence.
• whether the current arrangements have been unilaterally imposed by one
party upon the other.
• the duration of the current arrangements and whether there has been any
undue delay in instituting proceedings or in the
proceedings being listed for
24. Fifthly, where the evidence does not establish that at the date of the
hearing the child is living in an environment in which
he or she is well
settled, some limited evaluation of the relevant matters referred to in s 68F(2)
needs to be undertaken to ensure
that the result embodied in the order promotes
the child’s best interests. In undertaking that evaluation, regard must
had to the interim nature of the proceedings and the procedure referred to in
25. Finally, in determining whether, at the date of hearing, a child is living
in a settled environment, consideration should be
given, inter alia, to the
following:-
• the wishes, age and level of maturity of the child.
• the current and proposed arrangements for the day to day care of the
• the period during which the child has lived in the environment.
• whether the child has any siblings and where they reside.
• the nature of the relationship between the child, each parent, any other
significant adult and his or her siblings.
• the educational needs of the
68. In our view some of the comments of the Full Court in paragraph 18 are still
apposite. For example, the procedure for making
interim parenting orders will
continue to be an abridged process where the scope of the enquiry is
“significantly curtailed”.
Where the Court cannot make findings of
fact it should not be drawn into issues of fact or matters relating to the
merits of the
substantive case where findings are not possible. The Court also
looks to the less contentious matters, such as the agreed facts
and issues not
in dispute and would have regard to the care arrangements prior to separation,
the current circumstances of the parties
and their children, and the
parties’ respective proposals for the future.
69. It remains the case that the Court must regard the best interests of the
child as paramount in deciding what interim parenting
order to make. However,
there are passages in
that do not sit comfortably with the Act as
amended. It is the following passage in particular which calls into question
the applicability
to the Act as presently
22. Thirdly, where the evidence clearly establishes that, at the date of
hearing, the child is living in an environment in which
he or she is well
settled, the child’s stability will usually be promoted by the making of
an order which provides for the
continuation of that arrangement until the
hearing for final orders, unless there are strong or overriding indications
relevant to
the child’s welfare to the contrary. Such indications would
include but are not limited to convincing proof that the child’s
would be really endangered by his/her remaining in that
environment.
70. There are many elements in the Act as amended that would militate against
the continued application of the principles in
and in particular
the passage cited above. While the ultimate goal in the legislation is to
provide for an outcome in the best interests
of the child, if the presumption in
applies, then the Court is obliged by
to consider the outcomes
previously discussed. First, whether the child spending equal time would be in
the best interests of the
child and whether that is reasonably practicable.
Second, if an order to that effect is not made, there is an obligation to
whether an order that the child spend substantial and significant time
would be in the best interests of the child and whether that
is reasonably
practicable.
Section 61DA
must be applied in any case, including interim
proceedings, where a court is considering making a parenting order.
71. The reasoning in
, particularly in paragraph 22 of the reasons
for decision to the effect that the best interests of the child are met by
when the child is considered to be living in well-settled
circumstances, must now be reconsidered in light of the changes to the
particularly changes to the objects
, the inclusion of the presumption of
equal shared parental responsibility
, and the necessity if the
presumption is not rebutted to consider the outcomes of equal time and
substantial and significant time.
72. In our view, it can be fairly said there is a legislative intent evinced in
favour of substantial involvement of both parents
in their children’s
lives, both as to parental responsibility and as to time spent with children,
subject to the need to protect
children from harm, from abuse and family
violence and provided it is in their best interests and reasonably practicable.
where there is a status quo or well settled environment, instead of
simply preserving it, unless there are protective or other significant
interests concerns for the child, the Court must follow the structure of the Act
and consider accepting, where applicable, equal
or significant involvement by
both parents in the care arrangements for the child.
73. That is not to say that stability derived from a well-settled arrangement
may not ultimately be what the Court finds to be in
the child’s best
interests, particularly where there is no ability to test controversial
evidence, but that decision would
be arrived at after a consideration of the
matters contained in
, particularly
s 60CC(3)(d)
s 60CC(3)(m)
appropriate,
s 60CC(4A).
74. We also acknowledge that, because of the circumscribed nature of the
proceedings, the reasons given at an interim hearing may
be brief. So too, the
filing of lengthy affidavits is unlikely to be helpful where the Court is unable
to make findings about disputed
7. In what circumstances will
of the Act be properly
Section 61DA(3)
When the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the
court considers it would not be appropriate in the
circumstances for the
presumption to be applied when making that
In this case, his Honour relied upon
in coming to the conclusion that
the presumption should not apply. In paragraph eight his Honour
To my mind, perhaps the very difficulty of doing those things, that is making a
determination as to who was telling the truth in
that regard, may well have been
what led the draftsmen to insert sub-section (3)....Where there is such dispute
in a matter such
as this about whether there has been action or activity on the
part of the father that would constitute family violence so as to
not trigger
the presumption is something of real difficulty. In the circumstances of this
case, I have come to the conclusion that
I should rely on sub-section (3) and
find that the presumption has no application in this
76. The submissions by the appellant father, to which we will return, were based
on the premise that his Honour erred in his discretion
in relying upon
but the appellant father did not otherwise address the circumstances in which
the section might properly be invoked. Similarly,
the respondent mother’s
solicitor submitted that the application by his Honour of
appropriate exercise of his discretion but did not address the circumstances in
which the sub-section might otherwise be invoked.
77. The sub-section is an important one in the context of the determination of
interim disputes and justifies consideration of the
Explanatory Memorandum (see
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Re: Australian
Federation of Construction Contractors; Ex parte Billing
[1986] HCA 74
(1986) 68 ALR 416
at 420). The Revised Explanatory Memorandum circulated in the Senate on 27
March 2006 states (at paragraph 133):
New subsection 61DA(3) provides that the presumption of equal shared parental
responsibility will apply at an interim hearing, unless
the court considers that
it is inappropriate for the presumption to apply. This implements
recommendation 15 of the LACA [House
of Representatives Standing Committee on
Legal and Constitutional Affairs] Report. This discretion is appropriate given
the limited
evidence that may be available for interim
The House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
Affairs, in their
Report on the Exposure Draft of the
Family Law Amendment
(Shared Parental Responsibility) Bill 2005
, considered the application and
effect of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility at interim
hearings at paragraphs
2.155 to 2.161 inclusive. In recommendation 15 at 2.162
the Committee said as follows:
The Committee recommends that the presumption of equal shared parental
responsibility should generally be applied at an interim hearing
although the
court should retain discretion not to apply the presumption if it thought it to
be inappropriate. The court should
continue to have regard to all the
circumstances that are in the best interests of the child when making interim
and final orders.
This should be made explicit in the Exposure
78. The combination of the Revised Explanatory Memorandum and the comments of
the House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Legal and Constitutional
Affairs suggests that s 61DA(3) provides a discretion not to be exercised in a
broad exclusionary manner,
but only in circumstances where limited evidence may
make the application of the presumption, or its rebuttal, difficult. In this
case for example, we respectfully agree with his Honour’s decision that
this consideration meant it was inappropriate to apply
the presumption.
8. What is the significance of untested evidence (and more specifically of
untested evidence which may be capable of affecting the
presumption)?
79. This question has been answered in the course of earlier discussion,
especially at paragraph 68.
9. If s 61DA(3) is invoked, do the other changes to
nonetheless require a different approach from that taken by
80. We have earlier touched upon this matter. Even absent the application of
the presumption and thus the requirement to consider
equal or substantial and
significant time where it is not contrary to the child’s best interests
and otherwise practicable,
the addition of sub-section (a) to s 60B(1), which is
to ensure that children have the benefit of both parents having a meaningful
involvement in their lives to the maximum extent consistent with their best
interests, is not necessarily consistent with a preference
at an interim stage
in favour of maintaining a status quo. That is not to say that maintenance of a
stable arrangement will not
be in the best interests of children in a particular
case, but it will be one of the factors to be considered pursuant to the
considerations in s 60CC(3) and to be determined in conjunction with
the primary consideration in s 60CC(2)(a) of the benefit to
the child of having
a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents.
HOW SHOULD INTERIM PROCEEDINGS BE
81. In making interim decisions the Court will still often be faced with
conflicting facts, little helpful evidence and disputes
between the parents as
to what constitutes the best interests of the child. However, the legislative
pathway must be followed.
82. In an interim case that would involve the
identifying
the competing proposals of the
identifying the issues in dispute
in the interim hearing;
identifying any
agreed or uncontested relevant
considering the matters in s 60CC
that are relevant and, if possible, making findings about them (in interim
proceedings there may
be little uncontested evidence to enable more than a
limited consideration of these matters to take
deciding whether the presumption in
s 61DA that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the
child applies
or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe
there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an
interim matter,
the Court does not consider it appropriate to apply the
presumption;
if the presumption does apply,
deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the
child’s best interests;
presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the
child spend equal time with the parents unless
it is contrary to the
child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the
matters in s 60CC, or impracticable;
equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering
making an order that the child spend substantial
and significant time as defined
in s 65DAA(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best
interests as a result of
consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60CC,
or impracticable;
if neither equal time nor
substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of
the child, then making such
orders in the discretion of the Court that are in
the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of
the matters in s 60CC;
if the presumption
is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best
interests of the child, as a result of
consideration of one or more of the
matters in s 60CC; and
even then the Court
may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially
if one of the parties has sought
it or, even if neither has sought it, if the
Court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in
interests of the child.
THIS APPEAL
83. Having considered the matters raised by counsel for the appellant father and
addressed by the respondent mother in relation to
the meaning and intent of the
relevant parts of the Act as amended, we now turn to the grounds of
Ground 1: that his Honour erred in
finding that s 65DAA did not apply in the circumstances of the case, including
where the wife had,
herself, sought that both parties be ordered to have joint
long-term parental responsibility.
84. As we previously described, neither party sought an order for equal shared
parental responsibility in applications and responses
both interim and final.
As we have pointed out, at least insofar as the appellant father was concerned,
this was because his documents
were filed prior to 1 July 2006.
85. In our view however nothing turns upon the wording of the applications.
That is because there is an obligation on the Court
under s 61DA when making any
parenting order to apply the presumption that it is in the best interests of the
child for the parents
to have equal shared parental responsibility, unless it is
not applicable due to violence or abuse, or the presumption is rebutted
the Court finds that it would be contrary to the interests of the child to apply
it, or it is inappropriate to apply the
presumption in interim proceedings. The
fact that the parties have sought such an order may be a relevant consideration
Court’s obligation under s 61DA in relation to the presumption
arises independently of what has been sought by the parties.
86. In this case, his Honour did commence with a consideration of the
application of the presumption and found that it did not apply
application of
s 61DA(3). In particular his Honour found that as a result
of allegations about family violence, which he was unable to make positive
findings about as a result of the evidence being untested, it would be
inappropriate to apply the presumption. In our view his Honour
applied the structure of s 61DA and was not in error in his approach.
87. The second part of this ground asserts
erred in reaching the conclusion that the presumption was not to apply because
the parenting orders (other than those concerned
with parental responsibility)
sought by both parties supported the application of the presumption. It is
submitted that both the
appellant father and respondent mother sought that the
appellant father spend extended periods of time with the parties’
there was a further error in
reaching the conclusion that the presumption ought not to apply because the
respondent mother’s
case was that the interim determination was not one in
which “risk” was an issue.
88. It is clear that the parties were not agitating before his Honour anything
other than the quantum of time the appellant father
should spend with the
children. This is apparent from the transcript at appeal book page 98,
transcript page 1, line 44:
HIS HONOUR: Whether there be contact at all or the quantum of that
MR DOWD: The quantum of contact, your
MR BROWN: That’s right. It’s just a quantum issue and I’m in
the same position as my
HIS HONOUR: Is the matter involving any allegations of risk?
MR BROWN: No.
89. The orders sought by the appellant father proposed a shared care
arrangement. He sought that the children live with
a. each alternate week from after school Friday to commencement of school
b. each other week from after school Monday to before school Wednesday;
c. Father’s Day;
d. on the children’s birthdays and on the father’s birthday; and
e. for half the school holidays.
90. The respondent mother sought an arrangement whereby the children would spend
time with the appellant father as follows:
a. each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on Friday to
4.00 pm Sunday;
b. in relation to T, on Monday in each week during school terms from 3.00 pm
until 8.30 pm for the purpose of attending scouts;
c. in relation to T, on Tuesday of each week from 3.00 pm until 6.00 pm for
the purpose of a piano lesson;
d. in relation to T, for one half of all school holidays each alternate
Christmas holiday period from the 2007 year to include Christmas
e. in relation to J, during each school term holiday period for one period of
four days from 9.00 am on the first day of such period
to 5.00 pm on the
fourth day;
f. in relation to J, during each Christmas school holiday period for two periods
of four days from 9.00 am on the first day of such
period to 5.00 pm on the
fourth day.
The appellant
father’s evidence
91. In his affidavit of 7 August 2006 the appellant father deposed to the fact
that he would pick up the children from school/pre-school
on Friday and care for
and supervise them with the assistance of his parents until Wednesday morning
the following week, when they
would be taken to school/pre-school by him or his
parents. On the alternate week he would collect the children from
school/pre-school
on Monday and return them to school or pre-school or the
respondent mother’s home on Wednesday morning.
92. The appellant father asserted that the parties separated in late May 2006
and that since separation he resided with his parents.
His parents’ home
provided for T to have his own bedroom. He deposed to the fact that since
separation the children had lived
with their mother, apart from the time they
had spent with him at his parents’ home. His parents’ home is close
current school and J’s childcare centre.
Pre-separation
93. The appellant father contended that the parties had lived with his parents
after coming to Australia in 1997 until January 2000.
During that time he
worked flexible hours in the family business and T was cared for by the
respondent mother and T’s paternal
grandmother and he shared in T’s
care after work and on weekends.
94. He asserted that when the parties moved into rented accommodation in January
2000 he continued to work in the family business
and at that time the respondent
mother commenced working in the Sydney CBD three to four days a week from 9.00
am to 5.00 pm as an
accountant. The appellant father asserted that his work
commenced between 6.00 am and 9.00 am and finished between 2.30 pm and 4.30
When the respondent mother started work, T was enrolled in childcare from 8.00
am until 12.00 pm on Mondays and Wednesdays and
was collected by the appellant
father’s parents on those days and cared for by them until he returned
from work between 3.00
pm and 4.00 pm.
95. He deposed that on other days when the respondent mother worked and T was
not at childcare, the respondent mother would drop
T at the appellant
father’s workplace where T, the appellant father and his parents would
have breakfast together and T’s
paternal grandmother would care for T at
her home until 3.00 pm – 4.00 pm, when the appellant father would return
On the days when the respondent mother did not work she supervised T
until the appellant father’s return from work.
96. In January 2001 T was enrolled at a Childcare Centre initially on Mondays,
Tuesdays and Fridays from 9.00 am until 1.00 pm and
later until 3.00 pm.
97. In 2003 T was enrolled at primary school and was collected by either the
appellant father or the appellant father’s parents
and cared for until
after dinner on the days the respondent mother worked. On the one or two days
she did not work she collected
T from school and took him home.
98. In January 2004 until April 2005 the respondent mother was on maternity
leave and J was born on 20 April 2004. During this time
the respondent mother
cared for J and cared for T after school. However, the appellant father’s
parents still collected T
from school one to two days a week and the appellant
father looked after T and had dinner at his parents’ home on those days.
99. In April 2005 the respondent mother returned to work three days a week from
9.00 am until 1.00 pm ... as an accountant. J was
enrolled at a Childcare
Centre on the days the respondent mother worked for approximately eight hours
per day from 9.00 am until
5.00 pm. The respondent mother supervised the
children on her days off and again the appellant father’s parents
T from school one to two days per week and the appellant father had
dinner with them at their home.
100. T started piano lessons and attended cub scouts. The appellant father had
been taking T to these extra-curricula activities
on Mondays and Tuesdays and to
cricket in summer from 8.00 am until 12.00 pm on Saturdays and to soccer during
the winter.
Post-separation
101. For two weeks after separation until 9 June 2006 the appellant father
deposed that the respondent mother did not allow the children
to spend any time
with him. From 9 June 2006 both children were spending alternate weekends with
him and his parents from Friday
to Sunday and on each Monday and Tuesday the
appellant father collected T from school and supervised his homework, piano
and other activities. On Mondays T had dinner with the appellant
father and his parents before going to his cub scout meeting and
on Tuesdays the
appellant father took T to his piano lesson. T had spent the first half of the
last school holidays with the appellant
father but apart from two weekends a
month the respondent mother, he alleged, had refused to allow J to spend any
further time with
The respondent
mother’s evidence
102. The respondent mother’s evidence was contained in her affidavit sworn
4 August 2006. The respondent mother asserted she
worked in the family business
from 2000 for up to two days a week and was otherwise engaged in caring for T.
In 2000 she obtained
a part-time job as an accounts assistant for two days a
week and on those days T attended at a Childcare Centre. She agreed the
appellant father’s parents picked T up at lunchtime, although she said she
had not been in favour of this arrangement.
103. The respondent mother’s work days increased from two days to three
days a week and she continued in employment until the
birth of J. She did not
work again until August 2005 except for a two week stint in July. After that,
she obtained a job working
12 hours a week as an accounts assistant. She worked
the hours over three days during school hours. She said she took T to and
school and that J went to childcare on the days she was working and she took and
collected him from childcare. She agreed that
the appellant father’s
parents collected T from school one day a week prior to separation.
104. The respondent mother said that she had the primary role during the
marriage in caring for the children. The respondent mother
spent some time in
her affidavit being critical of the appellant father’s parents. As to the
current arrangements she deposed
to the fact that she lives in the former
matrimonial home and is available to care for the children except for the 12
she works. Her work hours are flexible and she said when she was at
work T was at school and J was at day-care. It is notable in
our view that she
did not indicate in her affidavit why a shared arrangement or, if not a shared
arrangement, the children spending
substantial and significant time with the
appellant father, should not occur.
105. Under the sub-heading “Family Violence” the respondent mother
asserted that she was subjected to physical abuse
by the appellant father after
the first few months of marriage. She asserted that on one occasion when she
was pregnant he pushed
her onto the floor and on another occasion between 1997
and 1999 the appellant father pushed her and then slapped her with an open
She asserted that in about 1999 the appellant father’s mother hit her on
the back. She further asserted that in January
2006 she and the appellant
father had an argument in which she was physically abused and thrown around the
bedroom. This incident,
she asserted, was sufficiently serious that she could
not attend work the next day. She alleged there were numerous other examples
violence during the marriage. The appellant father had not had an opportunity
to respond to the respondent mother’s allegations.
However, the solicitor
for the respondent mother conceded that they were denied (at page 102 of the
Appeal Book).
[Mr Brown:] [W]hilst the husband hasn’t specifically answered them –
I’m prepared to accept for present purposes
that he denies them –
nevertheless, can it be said at this interim hearing that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that
a parent of a child has engaged in family
106. Thus in summary, his Honour was dealing with a matter in which there was
little in dispute, in reality, about the ability of
either party to adequately
care for the children. He could comfortably have found, on uncontested facts,
not using the words of the Act as amended, both parties invited the Court to
make an order that parental responsibility be
exercised (albeit jointly and
severally) by both parents;
T attends school
and J attends childcare on three days a week on Monday, Thursday and Friday from
8.30 am to 4.30 pm when the mother
since separation the appellant father
has been spending time with the children each alternate weekend from Friday
afternoon to Sunday
afternoon and with T on Monday afternoon and Tuesday
afternoon each week;
the respondent mother
proposed that T spend one half of the school holidays with the appellant father
and J spend block periods of
four consecutive days with the appellant father,
including two of such blocks during school
T spent one half of the July
school holidays with the appellant
the respondent mother lives in the
former matrimonial home and the appellant father lives with his parents in close
proximity to the
school, day-care and the former matrimonial
the appellant father has the
assistance of his parents to care for the children and works in the family
business with them;
the respondent mother
conceded there was no issue of risk to the children and the only issue was the
amount of time the children should
spend with the appellant
107. In considering whether the presumption applied, his Honour identified the
allegations of family violence made by the respondent
mother. Whilst his Honour
did not expand upon the nature of the allegations, we observe that the
definition of “family violence”
in s 4(1) of the Act is a broad
definition and would undoubtedly encompass the conduct complained of by the
respondent mother. His
Honour recognised this but said at paragraph seven of
the reasons for judgment:
...they are no more than allegations insofar as domestic violence is concerned,
family violence is concerned, to use the wording
of the section, and therefore I
am not able to rely upon them to constitute a rebuttal of the presumption for
equal shared parental
responsibility. The section talks about being satisfied
on reasonable grounds to believe that such a situation
His Honour then went on to postulate that s 61DA(3) may have been inserted for
this very purpose; namely that where there was a dispute
there had been family violence but where no finding could be made,
enabled him to determine in interim proceedings that it would not be appropriate
to apply the presumption.
108. We observe that his Honour did not give any consideration or weight to the
surrounding circumstances; namely that it was conceded
that there was no risk to
the children and that both parties were seeking an order which would involve
them in joint and several
parental responsibility. Although considering those
facts we might come to a different conclusion, given the wide discretion vested
in the Court to make orders in the best interests of the children, we do not
consider that his Honour erred in the exercise of his
discretion in not applying
the presumption. This is especially so when his Honour could still make the
orders sought by the appellant
father for essentially shared time within his
general powers to make orders that are in the best interests of the
Ground 2: that his Honour erred in
failing to apply Cowling appropriately.
109. As we explained at the commencement of these reasons, his Honour appears to
have come to his decision as a result of the application
of the principles in
and particularly by his reliance on the arrangements that were in
place since June, which his Honour found served “the needs
of the children
to have both parents involved in their lives”. His Honour found in
particular that the respondent mother’s
hours of work were significantly
less than the appellant father’s and that she was the person who had been
principally concerned
when the children, for example, had been sick.
110. We agree with the appellant father’s submission that his Honour, once
he had determined that the presumption under s 61DA(1)
did not apply, did not
address the matters in s 60CC(2) and in particular “the benefit to the
child of having a meaningful
relationship with both of the child’s
parents”. Nor did he address the additional considerations in s 60CC(3).
to have accepted that the status quo, absent any adverse impact on
the children, was appropriate to continue, but without a consideration
factors involved in coming to a decision on best interests and particularly s
60CC(2)(a) to which we have referred. As we
have said at paragraph 80,
maintenance of the status quo, as sanctioned by
, is insufficient
to meet the requirements under
s 60CC and his Honour, who was of course
working without the benefit of appellate guidance, erred in not giving
consideration to those
Ground 3: that
his Honour erred in failing to apply
of the Act as it now exists;
Ground 6: that his Honour erred in that he made errors of law which
include inter alia a failure to give adequate reasons.
111. These two grounds overlap and thus we will consider them together. The
appellant father contends that the legislation required
his Honour to consider
the objects, the paramountcy principle, the question of parental responsibility
and the question of the order
concerning what time the children should spend
with each parent, having regard to the matters set out in s 60CC. We agree that
Honour did not consider these provisions, which we have now concluded was
necessary, and that he fell into error in not doing do.
112. We do not agree with the respondent mother’s submission that the
Court is only required to consider equal or substantial
and significant time if
the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility applies. Although his
Honour decided that the presumption
of equal shared parental responsibility did
not apply and thus the provisions of s 61DA were not triggered, the appellant
application sought equal time. Accordingly, his Honour was
obliged to deal with and consider whether such an arrangement would be
best interests of the children, particularly having regard to the objects of the
Act and the primary considerations in s 60CC(2).
113. The uncontested evidence before his Honour was that up until June, the
parties and children had been living as one family and
that the arrangements in
place – essentially weekend and holiday contact – were of recent
duration. In our view his
Honour fell into error in not considering the orders
sought in the appellant father’s application in the light of s 60CC.
agree in addition with the submission of counsel for the appellant father that
no reasons were given about the children’s
best interests on an
application of s 60CC. However, these errors in our view probably stem from the
fact that his Honour seems
to have thought that upon the application of the
principles of
, he did not need to do more than refer to the
current arrangements and find that they were working for the benefit of the
Ground 4: that his Honour erred in
that he made errors of fact.
114. The appellant father submitted that his Honour made errors of fact that
were relevant to the determination of the interim application.
finding that the father had made no specific proposal in respect of the children
on the date of separation
The evidence to which we were directed by the appellant father does not in our
view indicate that his Honour was in error in finding
that no specific proposal
for the care of the children had been made by the appellant father. However
more importantly, in our view,
nothing turned on his Honour’s comment. He
simply inferred from that fact that the appellant father, when he left the
matrimonial home, was not concerned with the care of the children in the
respondent mother’s care. That fact could have been
inferred equally from
the fact that the appellant father had sought a joint living arrangement in his
application.
finding that the father’s work hours were significantly greater than those
of the respondent mother
Again we do not agree from the matters referred to by the appellant father that
his Honour was in error. In general terms it was
clear that the appellant
father was working full-time and the respondent mother worked three days a week.
The fact that the appellant
father worked less time during the school holidays
when he had the children with him, had been finishing earlier on three days a
week, and had some flexibility provided by his employment in the family
business, does not overcome the fact that he was essentially
working full-time
while the respondent mother worked limited part-time hours three days a week.
Certainly the appellant father indicated
that because he worked for the family
business he was able to change work hours in order to care for the children and
from home and that since separation he had already made changes to
his work routine. These are matters of weight to which his Honour
appropriately have had regard if he had specifically considered the matters in
s 60CC(3) but in our view they are not errors of fact.
Ground 5: that his Honour erred in failing to
address the injunctive order sought in relation to religious
upbringing.
115. The appellant father contended that his Honour failed to address the
appellant father’s application and give reasons for
the omission of the
injunction. We do not find any merit in this ground. Whilst it is true that an
injunction was sought in the
interim application, no submissions were directed
to it before his Honour and, in truncated proceedings, we do not think it could
be reasonably left to his Honour to identify the evidence or to even assume that
matters in the application were necessarily being
pursued on an interim hearing,
unless he was specifically directed to this matter by the parties’
solicitors.
Conclusion in relation to the
116. Given the errors that must be found as a result of our consideration of the
legislation, the appeal must succeed.
117. Although we were invited to re-exercise the discretion, a further
consideration of how the case was presented, both before Collier
J and before
us, leads us to conclude that no submissions were directed to the arguments as
to what would be best for these children
and particularly for J in view of his
age. As a result, the matter will be remitted for further hearing.
118. In the event the appeal succeeded, both parties sought cost certificates
which we propose to grant.
I certify that the preceding one
hundred and eighteen (118) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for
judgment of the Honourable
Full Court.
Date: 15 December 2006
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (758 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter