Dymas & Alton [2025] FedCFamC1A 194 (30 October 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1) APPELLATE
Dymas & Alton
[2025] FedCFamC1A 194
Appeal from:
Dymas & Alton
[2024] FedCFamC2F 1769
Appeal number(s):
NAA 18 of 2025
File number(s):
PAC 3125 of 2021
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
Parenting – Where application to relocate child interstate refused by
primary judge – Where denial of procedural
fairness alleged due to delay
by primary judge – Where appellant alleges failure to give sufficient
reasons – Where appellant
alleges errors of fact and law – Where
misconceived grounds of appeal contend errors of weight – Where the
proposals at first instance define the parameters within which
the justiciable controversy between them to be decided – Where
none of the
grounds of appeal have merit – Appeal dismissed – Where costs
ordered in favour of the respondent
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) ss 61DA,
Family Law Amendment Act 2023
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Rules 2021
(Cth) sch 3
Cases cited:
Abramsson & Abramsson (No 2)
FLC 94-253;
[2025] FedCFamC1A 86
Adzic & Adzic
[2024] FedCFamC1A 207
(1998) 197 CLR 172;
[1998] HCA 67
Durham v Durham
(2011) 80 NSWLR 335
[2011] NSWCA 62
Expectation Pty Ltd v PRD Realty Pty Ltd
(2004) 140 FCR 17
Folette & Langley
(2016) FLC 93-738
[2016] FamCAFC
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22
Gillespie & Gillespie
(2024) FLC 94-191; (2024) FLC
Goode & Goode
(2006) FLC 93-286;
[2006] FamCA 1346
Gronow v Gronow
(1979) 144 CLR 513
[1979] HCA 63
Hahn & McGowen
[2024] FedCFamC1A 215
Hand & Bodilly
[2013] FamCAFC 98
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
Housing Commission (NSW) v Tatmar Pastoral Co Pty Ltd
[1983] 3 NSWLR
Lovell v Lovell
(1950) 81 CLR 513
[1950] HCA 52
Macedonian Orthodox Community Church St Petka Inc v His Eminence Petar
the Diocesan Bishop of Macedonian Orthodox Diocese of Australia
(2008) 237 CLR 66
[2008] HCA 42
Mallett v Mallett
(1984) 156 CLR 605
[1984] HCA 21
Manifold & Alderton
(2021) FLC 94-015
[2021] FamCAFC
Milliford & Milliford
[2019] FamCA 128
Moore (a pseudonym) v The King
(2024) 419 ALR 169
Scrymegeour & Scrymegeour
(2014) FLC 93-600
FamCAFC 130
Sofia & Treacy (No 2)
(2025) FLC 94-236;
[2025] FedCFamC1A
Tame v New South Wales
(2002) 211 CLR 317
[2002] HCA 35
Whisprun Pty Ltd v Dixon
(2003) 200 ALR 447
[2003] HCA 48
Aldisert, Ruggero,
Opinion Writing
, (West Publishing, 1990)
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellant
Ms Gillies SC
Solicitor for the Appellant
Branston Neville Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Livingstone
Solicitor for the Respondent:
James & Jaramillo Lawyers
NAA 18 of 2025
PAC 3125 of 2021
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
DIVISION 1 APPELLATE JURISDICTION
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
NAA18/2025 be dismissed.
appellant pay the respondent’s costs of the appeal, fixed in the sum of
$11,052.25, within 90 days.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
is an appeal from final parenting orders made by the primary judge on 11
December 2024 (“Orders”).
appellant mother and the respondent father commenced cohabitation in 2015 and
separated in 2020. There is one child of their relationship,
born in 2019
(“child”). After separation, the child lived with the appellant and
spent time with the respondent, albeit
not without difficulties between the
parties. Parenting proceedings were instituted by the respondent in
mother has since re-partnered and there is one child of that new
relationship.
trial of the proceedings took place in November 2023, prior to the commencement
Family Law Amendment Act 2023
(Cth) and, accordingly, they were
determined in accordance with the provisions of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“Act”) prior to the amendments thereto effected by the
amending legislation.
Relevantly,
the Orders provided,
, for the parties to have equal shared
parental responsibility for the child; for the appellant to be restrained from
relocating the
child’s place of residence from New South Wales to
Queensland; for the child to live with the appellant; and for the child
increasing time with the respondent, ultimately, by the time of the hearing of
the appeal, from Wednesday afternoon until
Monday morning in each alternate
week, for one half of all school term and long summer holidays, and on special
central issue in the case was the appellant’s application to relocate the
child with her to Queensland. Her new partner is
a tradesman, employed by a
company of which his father is the chief executive officer. He received and
accepted a promotion which,
it was contended, required him to transfer his
employment to Queensland.
the reasons herein, the appeal will be dismissed.
Section 36(2)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
(Cth) relevantly
provides that if, in dismissing an appeal, the appellate Court is of the opinion
that the appeal does not raise
any question of general principle, it may give
its decision in short form. This appeal does not raise any such question and,
accordingly,
these reasons for judgment are in short form (notwithstanding the
length thereof), addressing only those issues which I consider
require comment.
APPLICABLE STANDARD OF APPELLATE REVIEW
Moore (a pseudonym) v The King
[2024] HCA 30
(2024) 419 ALR 169
plurality of the High Court said:
[14] Two standards of appellate review of first instance judicial
determinations are of present relevance, namely what has come
to be referred to
as the correctness standard and a “
involving judicial restraint affording latitude to a trial judge. Under the
correctness standard, the appellate court
determines for itself the correct
outcome while making due allowance for such “advantages” as may have
been enjoyed by
the judge who conducted the trial or hearing. With
, appellate intervention is limited to circumstances where the trial
judge: acted upon a wrong principle, or allowed extraneous or
irrelevant matters
to affect the decision; mistook the facts; failed to take into account some
material consideration; or made a
decision that was unreasonable or plainly
unjust. These grounds for intervention contemplate the appellate court accepting
that intervention
is not warranted even though the members of the appellate
court may have decided the matter differently to the judge at first instance,
circumstance that is reflected in the language adopted by the Court of Appeal in
this case when it described the trial judge’s
conclusion as
“open” to his Honour.
[15] The basis for intervention identified in
expressed to be dependent upon the subject matter of the appeal, being the
exercise of a judicial “discretion”.
an appeal against the imposition of a sentence of three months imprisonment for
an offence under the
Bankruptcy Act 1924
(Cth). While what constitutes a
“discretionary decision” in this context can be ambiguous, in
essence it refers to the
circumstance where the decision maker is allowed
“some latitude as to the choice of the decision to be made”. A
determination
of which standard of review is applicable does not depend on
whether the reasoning to be applied is evaluative or in respect of which
reasonable minds may differ. Instead, the determination turns on whether the
legal criterion to be applied “demands a unique
outcome, in which case the
correctness standard applies, or tolerates a range of outcomes, in which case
standard applies”.
(Footnotes omitted) (As per the original)
is an appeal from a discretionary decision. Accordingly, error of the type
identified in
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
at 504–505 must be
established. There, the majority of the High Court said:
It is not enough that the judges composing the appellate court consider that, if
they had been in the position of the primary judge,
they would have taken a
different course. It must appear that some error has been made in exercising the
discretion. If the judge
acts upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or
irrelevant matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he
not take into account some material consideration, then his determination should
be reviewed and the appellate court may exercise
its own discretion in
substitution for his if it has the materials for doing so. It may not appear how
the primary judge has reached
the result embodied in his order, but, if upon the
facts it is unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may infer that
in some way there has been a failure properly to exercise the discretion which
the law reposes in the court of first instance. In
such a case, although the
nature of the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is
reviewed on the ground that
a substantial wrong has in fact occurred. ...
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant’s Notice of Appeal contains 14 grounds of appeal, some with
numerous sub-grounds. In her Summary of Argument,
the appellant abandoned one
ground (Ground 11) and, in the course of the hearing of the appeal, another
ground of appeal was abandoned
(Ground 6). Further, in her Summary of Argument,
in several instances, various related grounds of appeal were addressed together,
possibly because of their repetitious nature, and the hearing of the appeal
proceeded accordingly. Nevertheless, it is apposite to
recall that in
Scrymegeour &
Scrymegeour
[2014] FamCAFC 130
, Ryan and Austin JJ referred to the decision of McHugh
Tame v New South Wales
[2002] HCA 35
(2002) 211 CLR 317
(at [70]), where his
Honour said (citing Ruggero Aldisert,
Opinion Writing
, (West Publishing,
1990) at p.89) that, where there is “an appellant’s brief containing
seven to ten points or more,
a presumption arises that there is no merit to
of them” (emphasis in original). Those observations are salient
in this appeal. In
Scrymegeour
at [25], their Honours also referred to
the decision of Campbell JA in the NSW Court of Appeal in
Durham v Durham
[2011] NSWCA 62
(2011) 80 NSWLR 335
at 353, with whom Tobias and Young JJA both agreed at p.341
and p.353, to similar effect. See also
Sofia & Treacy (No 2)
FLC 94-236 at [11].
remaining grounds of appeal (with manifest typographical and grammatical errors
corrected) are as follows:
(1) The Court erred in making the following findings of fact and did not have
sufficient evidence to do so:
(a) Paragraph [100] – that, should the child relocate to Queensland with
the appellant, the most likely effect would be that
there would be a restriction
in her ability to develop and strengthen her relationship with the
respondent;
(b) Paragraph [117] – that the appellant’s assertions as to family
violence did not occur;
(c) Paragraph [139] – that the appellant’s proposed relocation to
Queensland with the child was an attempt to minimise
the influence of the
respondent in the child’s life;
(d) Paragraphs [104] and [106] – that travel by the child to New South
Wales for time with the respondent would cause financial
(e) Paragraph [109] – that the child’s relocation to Queensland
would restrict her opportunity to develop a relationship
with the respondent and
her extended family below what it would have been had she remained living in New
South Wales;
(f) Paragraph [113] – that the parties would not have the economic means
to effect the appellant’s proposal;
(g) Paragraph [115] – that the appellant considered the child’s
relationship with the paternal grandparents to be secondary
to the relationship
with her new partner’s parents;
(h) Paragraph [117] – that the respondent did not perpetrate family
violence as deposed to by the appellant;
(i) Paragraph [140] – that the appellant would not comply with orders for
the child to spend time with the respondent should
a relocation be ordered and
that such non-compliance was mitigated by the child remaining in New South
(j) Paragraph [140] – that the appellant’s new partner may find
alternative employment in New South Wales.
(2) The Court failed to give sufficient reasons as to the evidentiary basis upon
which the findings of fact outlined in Ground 1
(3) Having determined that it was not relevant to
the exercise of the Court’s discretion as to whether the appellant’s
application for relocation was motivated by an attempt to minimise the influence
of the respondent in the child’s life, the
Court erred in proceeding to
make such a finding.
(4) In making the finding of fact outlined in Grounds 1(c) and 3, the Court
misdirected itself as to the relevant findings that were
to be made when
considering the appellant’s proposal.
(5) As a consequence of a 13 month delay between the final hearing concluding
and judgment being delivered, the appellant was denied
procedural fairness
(a) at the time of the hearing, there was no suggestion there would be such a
significant delay in the delivering of final orders
and therefore each
party’s case was conducted on the basis of a more or less imminent
relocation;
(b) the Court did not have evidence before it that might have informed it of the
child’s current circumstances as at the date
of the final orders being
(c) the Court could not be satisfied that the final orders that were made, 13
months after the conclusion of the final hearing, could
serve the child’s
best interests given that the Court could not have known of the child’s
circumstances at that time;
(d) the delay in delivering reasons meant that the Court did not have any
evidence before it as to how the child’s age, as
at the date of the final
orders, might impact the evidence before it, including the evidence of the
Family Report writer;
(e) had the parties been apprised of the delay that would occur before judgment
was handed down, it was open to them to enter into
an arrangement where the
child spent far more time with the respondent in preparation for a relocation as
envisaged by the Family
Report writer.
(7) The Court failed to exercise its discretion appropriately, by failing to
consider other orders that might appropriately be made
outside of the proposals
put by the parties that would have ameliorated some of the concerns expressed by
(8) The Court failed to give sufficient weight to the impact on the
appellant’s household, and therefore the child, if she
was prevented from
relocating to Queensland, including how that impacted on the child’s best
(9) The Court erred in finding that if it did not make an order for substantial
and significant time then it must consider the parties’
proposals (paragraph [84]).
(10) The Court erred in finding that the only way in which the relationship
between the child and the respondent could be developed
and strengthened was if
the child remained living in New South Wales (paragraph [99] and following)
(12) The Court erred in finding that substantial and significant time could not
take place if the child lived in Queensland.
(13) The Court erred and misdirected itself by finding that, once it had made a
finding that substantial and significant time was
in the child’s best
interests, a relocation should not be ordered.
(14) The Court failed to give adequate consideration to the impact on the child
of having her stepfather live in another state either
directly, or through the
impact on the appellant and the child’s half sibling.
the appellant’s Summary of Argument sensibly addressed various related
and/or repetitive grounds of appeal together,
that document, containing many
broad and general submissions, was of little assistance in the determination of
her appeal. In
Adzic & Adzic
[2024] FedCFamC1A 207
Court said:
is for the appellant to identify error on the part of the primary judge and then
to persuade the appeal court that error has been
made. An appellate court cannot
be expected to fossick through the broadly expressed contentions and assertions
set out in an appellant’s
Summary of Argument, with a view to identifying
a specific and concise ground or grounds of appeal:
Newett & Newett (No
(2021) FLC 94-051 at [34], quoting
Bahonko v Sterjov
[2008] FCAFC 30
Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia said:
Notwithstanding
the obligation of an appeal court, where it is able to do so, to make its own
evaluation of the material at first
instance, it is a fundamental aspect of the
appellate process that appeals are made available for the correction of error
Coal & Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations
(2000) 203 CLR 194
Branir Pty Ltd v Owston
Nominees (No 2) Pty Ltd
(2001) 117 FCR 424
at [22]-[30];
Poulet Frais Pty Ltd v The Silver Fox Company Pty
[2005] FCAFC 131
(2005) 220 ALR 211
). This basic principle imposes an
obligation upon an appellant to identify where error is to be found in a
judgment under appeal,
whether it be an error of fact, law or general principle.
It is not necessary for an appeal court to hunt through all the material
first instance and recanvass every aspect of it unless an occasion arises for
suspecting, on reasonable grounds (generally those
provided by the appellant),
that such an examination may yield a conclusion of appellable
grounds of appeal are considered below in the order and combinations in which
they are addressed in the appellant’s Summary
of Argument.
GROUNDS 1 AND 2
inter-related grounds of appeal contend that the primary judge erred in making a
number of findings of fact; did not have sufficient
evidence to do so; and
failed to give sufficient reasons as to the evidentiary basis upon which such
findings of fact were made.
as the appellant asserts a failure by the primary judge to give sufficient
reasons, that ground of appeal disregards well
established principles in
relation to the adequacy of reasons. It is not necessary that a trial judge
“mention every fact or
argument relied on by the losing party as relevant
to an issue”:
Whisprun Pty Ltd v Dixon
[2003] HCA 48
(2003) 200 ALR 447
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
at [41] and
[2024] FedCFamC1A 215
. Further, it is not “necessary
for a judge who is exercising a discretionary judgment to detail each factor
which he has found
to be relevant or irrelevant ... Nor is a judge required to
make an explicit finding on each disputed piece of evidence”:
Commission (NSW) v Tatmar Pastoral Co Pty Ltd
[1983] 3 NSWLR 378
Mahoney JA.
Folette & Langley
[2016] FamCAFC 191
(2016) FLC 93-738
, the Full Court
said that –
... a trial judge’s reasons are not required to mention every fact or
argument relied upon by the losing party as relevant
to an issue. The duty to
give reasons does not exist in respect of every matter, of fact or of law, which
was or might have been
raised in the proceedings. What is necessary is that the
essential ground or grounds upon which the decision rests should be articulated.
relation to the findings of which the appellant complains, perusal of the
evidence before the primary judge, both in the filed
affidavits and in the
transcript of cross-examination, makes it apparent that such findings were well
open to his Honour and are
not errors of fact.
sub-ground 1(a), the appellant seeks to impugn the primary judge’s finding
at [100] of his reasons for judgment (“reasons”)
that the likely
effect of a change in the child’s circumstances by relocating to
Queensland “would be that the opportunities
for her to spend time with
[the respondent] and so being able to develop and strengthen her relationship
with him would be necessarily
restricted by the tyranny of distance and the
practical realities of how often [she] and [the respondent] would be able to
time together”. Not only was that abundantly clear on the evidence,
it was also a statement of the obvious. As is apparent
from the chronology at
[20] of the primary judge’s reasons, which is not the subject of
challenge, on 14 September 2021, interim
orders were made for the child to spend
time with the respondent,
, each alternate weekend from 9am on
Saturday until 5pm on Sunday and each Wednesday from 9am until 5pm. The
appellant’s proposal,
if granted leave to relocate the child, was that she
spend time with the respondent,
, for one weekend per month,
from 5pm on Friday until 4pm on Sunday. An interstate relocation would, of
necessity, restrict the child’s
relationship with the respondent; the
quantity of time to be spent and the quality of the relationship were
inextricably related.
sub-ground 1(b), the appellant seeks to impugn the rejection of the primary
judge at [117] of the evidence of the appellant in
relation to allegations of
family violence said to have been perpetrated by the respondent. Again, that was
not an error of fact;
rather, it was his Honour preferring the evidence of one
witness over the other, having had the quintessential benefit of a trial
seeing and hearing the witnesses and the testing of their evidence in
cross-examination.
in circumstances where the appellant was not alleging risk or seeking orders for
supervised time, the relevance of those
allegations, in the factual matrix of
this case, was limited, at best. It is difficult to reconcile the time proposed
by the appellant
to be spent between the respondent and the child with her
allegations of family violence. In
Abramsson & Abramsson (No 2)
(2025) FLC 94-253 at [34], the Full Court said:
34. We are cognisant of, and in no way minimise, the principles, set out in s
43(1)(ca), to which a court exercising jurisdiction
under the Act must have
regard; the objects of
, set out in s 60B(a); the matters which the
court must consider in s 60CC(2)(a) and (2A); and the directive to the court in
s 60CG(1)(b).
However, having had regard to, and considered, those prescribed
matters, we are of the opinion that whether there is a need for a
trial judge
then to proceed to make findings about family violence will turn on the facts of
each case. This, necessarily, must be
informed by a consideration of the
circumstances of the case, including the orders advanced by each of the parties.
To that end,
where parties are each promoting time-spending between a child and
both of the parents, without any protective orders aimed at ameliorating
not be necessary for findings regarding family violence
allegations to be made. Conversely, where one or both parties contend that
other parent poses an unacceptable risk of harm, then it is likely, by reason
thereof, that findings (where possible) will be
required to be made regarding
allegations of family violence, because those findings (if capable of being
made) will not only inform
the assessment of risk (per
Isles & Nelissen
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
(2022) FLC 94-092
–[51]), but they will also serve to
assist in determining what orders would best keep the children safe from harm,
what, if any, protective orders could ameliorate risk. In this regard,
we therefore concur with the comments of Austin and Williams
(at [87]–[91]).
(Emphasis in original)
as the appellant contends, by sub-ground 1(c), that the primary judge erred in
fact in finding at [139] that her proposed
relocation to Queensland with the
child was an attempt to minimise the influence of the respondent in the
child’s life, again,
that finding was well open to his Honour on the
evidence. In this regard, the respondent, in his Summary of Argument, correctly
to the evidence of the appellant’s actions to restrict and hamper
his relationship with the child and her breach of interim
parenting orders,
including her failure to comply with orders in relation to which preschool the
child was to attend.
as the appellant contends, by sub-ground 1(d), that the primary judge erred in
fact in finding at [104] and [106] that travel
by the child between Queensland
and New South Wales to spend time with the respondent would cause financial
hardship, that finding
was also open to his Honour on the evidence. At
[104]–[106], his Honour said:
the evidence as to the income available in the mother’s household from the
combined earnings of herself and Mr [Dymas], it
is hard to see how the financial
impost on the mother of travel by [the child], and for some time by the mother
herself, to [New
South Wales], when combined with normal household living
expenses of the family and any additional costs or loan repayments which
arise from the building of a home on the block of land in [Suburb B] (no
evidence available) will not cause some financial hardship
for the family
the cost of travel by the father to Queensland and accommodating himself and
[the child] there for the remaining 8 weekends
of the year and half of the
school holidays (there may or may not be an overlap contemplated in the
mother’s orders) until
[the child] is in year 5 will be a significant cost
burden for the father’s household.
burdens of cost are of minimal significance unless they go on to an effect on
the best interests of [the child]. The relevance
of the cost burden for the
mother’s household is the reduced money pool available to meet the family
expenses for day-to-day
living, with any consequent effect on adequate provision
for [the child] – the evidence does not extend to enabling me to make
specific findings in this regard. The relevance of the cost burden for the
father’s household is any effect on his actual ability,
in a financial
sense, to take advantage of the opportunities to be with [the child] and travel
to Queensland and accommodate himself
and [the child] there for a weekend, for a
week during the Term 2 school holidays and for up to 3 weeks during the Term 4
at [59], his Honour recorded that the appellant’s new partner, in the
course of cross-examination, “indicated
that in consequence of his
promotion he was receiving a pay rise of ‘
getting 80 grand a year
’” (emphasis in original).
as, by sub-ground 1(e), the appellant seeks to impugn the primary judge’s
finding at [109], his Honour there said:
likely effect of a change in [the child]’s circumstances by having her
place of residence relocated to Queensland is to
restrict the opportunity to
develop a relationship with the father below what it would be if she remained
living in [New South Wales],
and similarly restrict the opportunity to develop a
relationship with her step-family, her paternal grandparents and paternal
family, and on the evidence, restrict her opportunity to maintain and
develop a relationship with her maternal grandparents and maternal
family. Other than Mr [Dymas]’s family, there is no reliable evidence that
would suggest that the mother’s family
would move or even intend to move
to Queensland.
the respondent submits, in his Summary of Argument, the corollary of the
appellant’s contention is that an interstate relocation
would have no
impact, or a positive impact, on the child’s relationship with the
respondent. Unsurprisingly, the appellant
could point to no evidence to such
effect. To the contrary, that was not the expert opinion of the Family Report
writer, whose evidence
in her report was summarised (at [79]) by the primary
judge to include:
child] appears quite comfortable in her father's care. The more time she spends
with him the stronger her attachment
to him will be. [The child] was observed to
be quite comfortable and settled with [the father].”
child] were to move to Queensland now, she would not have the same opportunity
to develop her relationship with [the
father]. She's unable to maintain a
relationship by herself (make phone calls / contact via social media) and would
be wholly reliant
on [the mother] to facilitate and support the relationship.
This is of concern to the writer, as, in [the mother’s] words ‘we
can't even agree on a pre-school’.”
[80], the primary judge also referred to similar concerns expressed by the
Family Report writer in the course of cross-examination.
primary judge’s finding at [109] were amply open to his Honour on the
as the appellant asserts, by sub-ground 1(f), that (at [113]) the primary judge
found that “the parties would [not]
have the economic means to affect
[sic] the mother's proposal”, that is not an accurate or fair
representation of his Honour’s
finding in that paragraph. His Honour, in
fact, said:
practical difficulty and expense of [the child] spending time with and
communicating with her father if relocation does occur
has been discussed above.
Patently such difficulty and expense will substantially affect [the
child]’s rights to maintain personal
relations and direct contact with
both parents on a regular basis. On the economic reality of the circumstances of
both households,
so far as is revealed on the evidence, it cannot be otherwise.
It is all very well for the parent who wishes to relocate to propose
of frequent time between the child and the other parent, but whether or not that
schedule can be maintained in practice
can be a whole different thing and in
this matter it is certainly not plain that the economic realities will allow the
schedule as
suggested by the mother to be maintained, even limited as it is
compared to what is suggested by Ms [W] as a preferred regime of
increasing time
between [the child] and the father.
is therefore apparent that the primary judge did not find at [113] that the
parties would not have the economic means to facilitate
time with the frequency
which the appellant proposed if permitted to relocate the child to Queensland;
rather, his Honour gave cogent,
practical reasons for being cautious about the
capacity of each parent to meet the cost of extensive interstate travel.
appellant seeks to impugn, by sub-ground
1(g), the primary judge’s finding at [115] that the appellant considered
that child’s
relationship with her paternal grandparents to be “very
much secondary to and significantly less important” than child’s
relationship with her new partner’s parents, again, that finding was open
to his Honour on the evidence. Properly distilled,
the appellant’s
complaint is not that there was no evidence to underpin that finding; rather,
the appellant is merely dissatisfied
with the finding.
1(h), in relation to the primary judge’s rejection of the
appellant’s allegations of family violence by the
respondent, is merely
duplicative of sub-ground 1(b), which has been addressed above.
appellant contends, by sub-ground 1(i), that the primary judge wrongly found at
[140] that she would not comply with orders for
the child to spend time with the
respondent, should a relocation be ordered, and that such non-compliance was
mitigated by the child
remaining in New South Wales. Again, that contention does
not do justice to what his Honour relevantly said in that paragraph,
The chance of the mother failing to comply with Court Orders, presenting
excuses, reasonable or otherwise to not comply with Court
real by the mothers previous conduct
and her attitude to the father's
relationship with [the child], is far less when the parents live in proximity
then if there is the
tyranny of distance where consequent travel requirements
and costs are involved.
(Emphasis added)
the preceding paragraph (at [139]), his Honour, in considering the disadvantages
of the appellant’s proposed relocation,
recorded that the appellant had
“indicated her willingness to disregard Court Orders”. Earlier, at
[41], his Honour cited
from the transcript where the appellant conceded in
cross-examination that, “as a person who has breached orders of the Court,
that [she is] somebody who other people involved in this matter might regard as
very difficult to trust”.
Accordingly,
the finding of which the appellant complains, when viewed in proper context, was
well open to his Honour and his reasons
therefor are patently apparent.
insofar as the appellant seeks to impugn, by sub-ground 1(j), the primary
judge’s finding at [140] that her new partner
alternative employment in the [New South Wales] area in his chosen
occupation” (emphasis added), that complaint ignores
his evidence, to
which his Honour referred at [60], namely:
[Dymas] confirmed during his cross-examination that he was qualified to obtain a
[trades] licence, however whether or not he was
qualified to obtain a [trades]
licence in New South Wales, Queensland or both was not clarified, though noting
that on the evidence
he has not worked in Queensland as a [tradesman]. He was
asked by Mr Livingstone,
“So you don’t even know whether or not
the offer that has been made by your father to relocate yourself, your wife,
child, your step-daughter to another state is even worth more than the
contract that you would get working under your award with
a company down here in
the state of New South Wales”
, to which he replied
(Emphasis in original) (Footnotes omitted)
the appellant’s new partner gave evidence, in
cross-examination, that he worked as a tradesman in New South Wales and that he
had worked for his father’s company there for 11 years.
the circumstances, the primary judge’s finding that the appellant’s
new partner might find alternative employment in
New South Wales, in his chosen
occupation, was well open to him and his Honour’s reasons for so finding
are readily apparent.
1 and 2 fail.
GROUNDS 3 AND 4
grounds of appeal are inter-related. The appellant’s Summary of Argument
refers to and focuses on [139] of the primary
judge’s reasons and contends
that, having determined that it was not relevant to the exercise of his
discretion whether the
appellant’s application for relocation was
motivated by an attempt to minimise the influence of the respondent in the
life, his Honour erred in proceeding to make such a finding and
misdirected himself as to the relevant findings that were to be made
considering the appellant’s relocation proposal.
[139], the primary judge relevantly said:
There was a
suggestion in the father’s case that the arrangement of the move to
Queensland by Mr [Dymas]’s parents, followed
by Mr [Dymas], the mother
with [the child] and [Y] is in the nature of a plot to move [the child] far away
from the father so as
to eliminate the disruption he presents to their lives.
The orders sought by the mother for time between [the child] and the father
if she does relocate, are against this suggestion, and in any case, once again,
the evaluation of the motives of the parents
is not the point – the best
interests of [the child] is the point and so I give no regard to this concept in
determining what
orders are properly to be made in the best interests of [the
recommendations and opinions expressed in both her Report and the
cross-examination of Ms [W] are against the relocation of [the
child]. The
evidence given by Ms [W] that a period of about 6 months elapse before any such
move occurs, with increased time between
[the child] and the father during those
6 months was an opinion expressed about what should happen in the event that the
Court determines
that the relocation is in [the child]’s best interests,
not a dropping or lessening of Ms [W]’s opinion that such a move
[the child]’s best interests. That said, I do find that, on the
mother’s part, the proposed relocation of [the
child] to Queensland is an
attempt to minimise the influence of the father on [the child]’s life. It
is a continuation of the
mother’s actions in that regard on several
occasions since separation.
properly parsed, it is evident that his Honour rejected the strand of the
respondent’s case that the arrangement of the
move to Queensland was
“in the nature of a plot” to move the child away from the
respondent. The primary judge found
that the orders sought by the appellant for
time to be spent between the respondent and the child, in the event of
relocation, militated
against such a “plot”.
that is not inconsistent with his Honour’s finding, in the subsequent
sub-paragraph, that the appellant’s proposed
relocation of the child to
Queensland was an attempt to minimise the respondent’s influence on the
child’s life, being
merely a continuation of her actions in that regard on
several occasions since separation.
relocation was not a singular plot; the primary judge found that it was
something not as malevolent as that. Rather, it was merely
part of a continuum
of events since separation, the finding of which was clearly open to his Honour
on the evidence. Indeed, in oral
submissions, Senior Counsel for the appellant
conceded that a “plot” involved a higher scope for
insofar as the primary judge correctly held that what is relevant is not an
evaluation of the motives of the parents but,
rather, an evaluation of what is
in the best interests of the child, that does not preclude, in that exercise,
consideration of past
conduct. In this case, the appellant’s actions, on
several occasions since separation, in attempting to minimise the
respondent’s
involvement in, and influence on, the child’s life,
made such a finding perfectly open to his Honour. In oral submissions,
Counsel for the appellant conceded that the attitude of the proposed relocating
parent to the other parent and to the child’s
relationship with that other
parent is “pretty critical”.
3 and 4 fail.
ground of appeal contends that, as a consequence of the 13-month delay between
the conclusion of the trial, on 16 November 2023,
and the delivery of judgment,
on 11 December 2024, the appellant was denied procedural fairness in several
respects. However, as
drawn, the ground of appeal is more a litany of
complaints, rather than a proper ground of appeal.
general principle is that delay, in and of itself, is not a ground of appeal,
nor does it lead to procedural unfairness as a matter
of course; however, it may
lead a court of appeal to scrutinise the trial judgment more carefully.
Expectation Pty Ltd v PRD Realty Pty Ltd
[2004] FCAFC 189
(2004) 140 FCR 17
Full Court of the Federal Court said:
between the taking of evidence and the making of a decision is not, of itself, a
ground of appeal, unless the judge could no
longer produce a proper judgment or
the parties are unable to obtain from the decision the benefit which they should
Boodhoo v Attorney-General of Trinidad and Tobago
[2004] UKPC 17
[2004] 1 WLR 1689
). Nor does such delay of itself indicate that a trial has
miscarried or that a verdict is in any manner unsafe. However, where there
significant delay in giving judgment, it is incumbent upon an appellate court to
look with special care at any finding of fact
challenged on appeal. In ordinary
circumstances, where there is a conflict of evidence, the trial judge who has
seen and heard the
witnesses, has an advantage.
Manifold & Alderton
[2021] FamCAFC 61
(2021) FLC 94-015
, the Full Court
held that “the focus is not on the delay
failure by the primary judge to take relevant matters into account, to engage
with the [appellant’s] case and with
the evidence, and to provide adequate
reasons for [his or] her conclusions”.
Folette & Langley
, an appeal was
unsuccessful after a 16-month delay in judgment because the primary judge
invited the parties to reopen the evidence
prior to delivery of judgment and
neither party took up that invitation. True it is that, in the present case, the
primary judge
did not proffer such an invitation; however, that is not to say
that, with the passage of time, and the increasing delay, the appellant
not have made such an application.
the present case, the complaint of delay, which complaint, of itself, is not
unreasonable, is not directed, for example, to the
alleged errors of fact.
Rather, it is asserted that the delay of nearly 13 months gave rise to a
miscarriage of justice.
complaints in the sub-paragraphs of Ground 5, as partly expanded upon in the
appellant’s Summary of Argument, can be answered
in short compass. The
parties were aware of the passage of time and the delay of the primary judge in
the delivery of judgment. The
appellant could not sit back, await judgment and,
if dissatisfied, appeal on the ground that his Honour’s delay denied her
procedural fairness. In oral submissions, Senior Counsel for the appellant said,
albeit from the Bar table but without objection,
that whilst an approach had
been made to the Chief Judge of the Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia (Division 2), by reason
of the primary judge’s delay in
delivering judgment, no application for leave to re-open the case was made. If
the appellant
was troubled by the matters which she particularises in Ground 5,
she could have made an application to re-open the case; however,
she did not do
so. Had she made such an application, and leave to re-open been refused,
notwithstanding the delay in the delivery
of judgment and the attendant passage
of time, then the appellant may have had a ground of appeal in this regard.
However, that is
not the case. None of this is to say that the primary
judge’s unexplained 13-month delay is to be condoned; it is not.
the circumstances, Ground 5 fails.
ground of appeal (which was originally argued in the appellant’s Summary
of Argument jointly with Ground 6, which was subsequently
abandoned) contends
that the primary judge erred in finding that, if he did not make an order for
substantial and significant time,
then he was required to consider the
parties’ competing proposals (referring to [84]).
his Honour in fact said at [84] was:
I do not make an order for the child to spend substantial and significant time
with each parent, I must consider the parties’
competing proposals and
make such parenting orders as I think proper – s65D.
Honour correctly stated the law, as it then stood. Section 65D(1) of the Act
then relevantly provided:
(1) In proceedings for a parenting order, the court may, subject to
sections 61DA (presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
making parenting orders) and 65DAB (parenting plans) and this Division, make
such parenting order as it thinks proper.
61DA(1) of the Act then relevantly provided:
(1) When making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a
presumption that it is in the best interests of
the child for the child’s
parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
Note: The presumption provided for in this subsection is a presumption that
relates solely to the allocation of parental responsibility
for a child as
defined in section 61B. It does not provide for a presumption about the amount
of time the child spends with each
of the parents (this issue is dealt with in
section 65DAA).
65DAA(1)–(2) of the Act then relevantly provided:
(1) Subject to subsection (6), if a parenting order provides (or is to
provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared
responsibility for the child, the court must:
(a) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents
would be in the best interests of the child; and
(b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is
reasonably practicable; and
(c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in
the order) for the child to spend equal time with
each of the parents.
Note 1: The effect of
section 60CA is that in deciding whether to go on to make a parenting order
for the child to spend equal time
with each of the parents, the court will
regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
Note 2: See subsection (5) for the factors the court takes into account in
determining what is reasonably
practicable.
Substantial and significant time
(2) Subject to subsection (6), if:
(a) a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents
are to have equal shared parental responsibility for
the child; and
(b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for
the child to spend equal time with each of the parents;
the court must:
(c) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with
each of the parents would be in the best interests
of the child; and
(d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with
each of the parents is reasonably practicable; and
(e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in
the order) for the child to spend substantial and
significant time with each of
the parents.
Note 1: The effect of
section 60CA is that in deciding whether to go on to make a parenting order
for the child to spend substantial
time with each of the parents, the court will
regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
Note 2: See subsection (5) for the factors the court takes into
account in determining what is reasonably
practicable.
Honour’s recitation of the law at [84] was entirely orthodox and
unremarkable. As s 65D(1), to which his Honour referred,
provided, in
proceedings for a parenting order (which the proceedings before his Honour
were), he could make such parenting order
as he thought proper, subject to s
61DA and, by reason thereof, s 65DAA.
appellant’s reliance upon
Goode & Goode
(2006) FLC 93-286
is misconceived. At [82(i)]–[(j)], the Full Court said:
(i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to
be in the best interests of the child, then making
such orders in the discretion
of the Court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of
consideration of one or more
of the matters in s 60CC;
(j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as
is in the best interests of the child, as a result
of consideration of one or
more of the matters in s 60CC; ...
is effectively what his Honour said at [84].
any event, his Honour found that it was in the child’s best interests to
spend “substantial and significant time with
both parents” (at
[132]) and that such an arrangement would have a beneficial impact upon her
“in that she could maintain
her excellent meaningful relationship with her
mother, while also having the opportunity to develop, strengthen and deepen a
relationship with her father” (at [135]), rendering the
appellant’s complaint regarding what his Honour said at [84]
ground of appeal contends that the primary judge failed to exercise his
discretion appropriately, by failing to consider other
orders that might
appropriately be made outside of the proposals put by the parties that would
have ameliorated some of the concerns
expressed by his Honour.
appellant correctly submits that, as s 65D(1) then provided, in proceedings for
a parenting order, the Court might (subject to
s 61DA and, by reason thereof, s
65DAA) make such parenting order as it thinks proper, but is not bound by the
proposals of the parties.
although the Court is not bound by those proposals, it could not order, for
example, that a child live with one parent, if
it considers that to be in the
child’s best interests, when such order is not sought by that parent.
Rather, the parties’
proposals define the parameters of the issue, within
which the outcome is not binary. Metaphorically, the parents’ proposals
are the proverbial goal posts at the opposite extremities of the football field
within which the match between them takes place;
where the ball lands within
that field, and whether a goal or a point is scored, is unknown by them, but, to
be considered, the ball
must not land out of bounds. That said, it is not for
the Court, of its own motion, and without orders sought or submissions made
either or both of the parties, to divine a solution itself.
GROUNDS 8 AND 14
inter-related grounds of appeal contend that the primary judge failed to give
sufficient weight to the impact on the appellant’s
household, and
therefore the child and her best interests, if the appellant were prevented from
relocating to Queensland and, related
to that, that his Honour also failed to
give adequate consideration to the impact on the child of having her stepfather
live in another
state, either directly or through the impact on the appellant
and the child’s half sibling.
difficulty of challenging a trial judge’s attribution of weight on appeal
is well established. As Latham CJ said in
[1950] HCA 52
(1950) 81 CLR 513
at 519 (cited with approval by Gibbs CJ
Mallett v Mallett
[1984] HCA 21
(1984) 156 CLR 605
In the absence of exclusion of relevant considerations or the admission of
irrelevant considerations an appellate tribunal should
not set aside an order
made in the exercise of a judicial discretion ... unless the failure to give
adequate weight to relevant considerations
really amounts to a failure to
exercise the discretion actually entrusted to the court.
[1979] HCA 63
(1979) 144 CLR 513
, Stephen J explained, at 519–520
The constant emphasis of the cases is that before reversal an appellate court
must be well satisfied that the primary judge was plainly
wrong, his decision
being no proper exercise of his judicial discretion. While authority teaches
that error in the proper weight
to be given to particular matters may justify
reversal on appeal, it is also well established that it is never enough that an
court, left to itself, would have arrived at a different conclusion.
When no error of law or mistake of fact is present, to arrive
at a different
conclusion which does not of itself justify reversal can be due to little else
but a difference of view as to weight:
it follows that disagreement only on
matters of weight by no means necessarily justifies a reversal of the trial
judge. Because of
this and because the assessment of weight is particularly
liable to be affected by seeing and hearing the parties, which only the
judge can do, an appellate court should be slow to overturn a primary
judge’s discretionary decision on grounds which
only involve conflicting
assessments of matters of weight...
the weight or importance given to evidence is a matter quintessentially for the
primary judge, Kirby J said in
(1998) 197 CLR 172 at
230–231 that an
appellant would have to
show that the primary judge was “plainly wrong”.
Importantly,
as was identified by the High Court in
Macedonian Orthodox Community
Church St Petka Inc v His Eminence Petar the Diocesan Bishop of Macedonian
Orthodox Diocese of Australia
and New Zealand
[2008] HCA 42
(2008) 237 CLR 66:
when a court is invited to make a discretionary decision, to which many factors
may be relevant, it is incumbent on parties who
contend on appeal that attention
was not given to particular matters to demonstrate that the primary
judge’s attention was
drawn to those matters, at least unless they are
fundamental and obvious.
alternative approach would permit a party to run one case before the primary
judge and different cases on however many levels
of appeal were open. Where it
is said on appeal that a primary judge was in error in not taking into account a
particular consideration
“expressly”, even though it was not
explicitly submitted to the primary judge that it should be, a benevolent
construction
of the primary judge’s reasons will often reveal, by a
process of inference and implication, that the relevant consideration
in mind, even though it was not stated in as clear-cut a way as an appellate
court, dealing with a hostile submission by
one party not put nearly as
distinctly, or at all, to the primary judge, might prefer.
[138]–[139] of his reasons, the primary judge considered the advantages
and disadvantages of the appellant’s proposed
relocation to Queensland. At
[140]–[141], his Honour considered the advantages and disadvantages of the
respondent’s
proposal, “taking it is inherent in those orders that
[the child] does not relocate to Queensland with the mother” (at
In particular, in relation to the disadvantages of the respondent’s
proposal, his Honour relevantly said at [141]:
If the mother
does not relocate [the child]’s residence to Queensland, there is a
distinct possibility of unhappiness, frustration
and resentment on the part of
the mother and Mr [Dymas] which may have an effect on the harmony of their
relationship and on their
household, with the possibility of consequent
detrimental effect on the mother’s parenting of [the child]. The
freedom to live where she chooses is inhibited, with flow on
effect to Mr [Dymas].
Mr [Dymas] may
pursue his employment in his father’s company and be absent in Queensland
for periods of time of the working
week or more, and the consequent possible
effect upon the mother and Mr [Dymas]’s relationship.
at [112], the primary judge earlier also said:
the father is successful and [the child]’s place of residence is not
changed to Queensland, and even if she remains in the
mother’s primary
care and spends time with the father, her circumstances will be changed in that
she will in all likelihood
be living in a household where there is unhappiness
and even resentment on the part of the mother and Mr [Dymas] having been
in their aim of moving to Queensland.
is, therefore, readily apparent that the primary judge considered the advantages
and disadvantages of each party’s case.
The appellant is not able to show
that his Honour failed to “properly consider” these matters; rather,
her complaints,
explicitly in Ground 8 and implicitly in Ground 14, are merely
ones of weight, which her Senior Counsel sensibly and correctly conceded,
oral submissions, are not a ground of appeal.
8 and 14 fail.
ground of appeal contends that the primary judge erred in finding that the only
way in which the relationship between the child
and the respondent could be
developed and strengthened was if the child remained living in New South Wales,
referring to [99] “and
following” [sic].
appellant’s Summary of Argument is of little assistance in relation to
this ground of appeal and was not elucidated to any
worthwhile extent in oral
submissions.
couched as an asserted error of fact, it appears to be more a complaint as to
weight. However, as a factual finding, it was
entirely open to his Honour on the
evidence, noting that a relocation was not supported by the Family Report
[79] of his reasons, the primary judge referred to the Family Report and noted,
from the “evaluation” section therein,
If [the child]
spends substantial and significant time in Mr [Alton]’s care, and her
experience is that of a warm, loving and
responsive parent, [the child]’s
attachment to him will grow and she will come to understand the difference
between a biological
and psychological parent. [The child] appears quite
comfortable in her father’s care. The more time she spends with him the
stronger her attachment to him will be. [The child] was observed to be quite
comfortable and settled with [the father].
If [the child]
were to move to Queensland now, she would not have the same opportunity to
develop her relationship with Mr [Alton].
She is unable to maintain a
relationship by herself [make phone calls/ contact via social media] and would
be wholly reliant on [the
mother] to facilitate and support the relationship.
This is of concern to the writer, as, in [the mother’s] words,
we can’t even agree on a pre-school
(Footnotes omitted) (Emphasis in
[80], the primary judge noted,
, the following matters from the
cross-examination of the Family Report writer:
When asked by
Mr Livingstone if her recommendation was that the relocation of [the child] to
Queensland not take place, Ms [W] said
“yes”. Ms [W] confirmed that
amongst her reasons for the recommendation were [the child]’s age, her
to her father and members of the father’s family, and the
importance of those matters to [the child]. Ms [W] also confirmed
recommended that [the child]’s time with the father be increased.
Ms [W] agreed
with Mr Richardson that the fact of the mother being [the child]’s primary
carer bears upon whether the relocation
to Queensland is in [the child]’s
best interests, but then agreed with me that it was only one of the relevant
reasons amongst
Mr Richardson
informed Ms [W] that if the mother remains in [New South Wales] with both
children, the evidence was that Mr [Dymas]
would travel back and forth to
Queensland for work, and asked Ms [W] if such circumstances would impact the
mother’s family
unit. Ms [W] said it would, and when asked how, said,
on many levels. So there would not be the day-to-day interaction
between both of the girls – [the child]and [Y], and Mr [Dymas],
interaction between the mother and her new husband, but it’s manageable
– people do it. And I guess it’s
a choice that they’re making.
I guess the only thing I can say is that the children are the ones that
don’t have a choice
.” When asked if that would be an overall
negative experience for [the child], Ms [W] answered:
I wouldn’t say an overall
negative experience. I mean – and it depends on what the mother’s
circumstances are, should
she remain here. And I don’t know what their
circumstances are right now because the report was written in May and this
was apparently going to happen – it was only just offered
apparently. If the mother is living on her own with the two children,
that’s something that she won’t be used to, and yes, that could
negatively impact her parenting. She may find that more
stressful without having
that support. If she’s living with her family – as she has done in
the past, then that could
alleviate that pressure... the only difficulty that I
can see with the mother staying in [New South Wales] and Mr [Dymas] relocating
is that it’s likely to be stressful on their relationship. It will –
it could also impact the children, obviously, if
their relationship is stressed.
That will have an impact on both of their
Mr Richardson then asked Ms [W] if that stress on the relationship between the
mother and Mr [Dymas] may not be in [the child]’s
best interests, to which
she replied, “
potentially, yes
relation to the issue of relocation, Ms [W] said:
If the parenting relationship
improved and [the child] has the opportunity to spend the sort of time with her
father that would allow
the relationship to continue to strengthen, then a
relocation could be – could be okay for her, but unfortunately what
seen to date is that there has been a resistance, and a resistance
to the amount of time that [the child] spends with her father,
relationship hasn’t been able to develop to the same point that it
obviously has with her mother, and also with the
step-father. So, if there was
an understanding that, you know, [the child] could quite – could more
easily cope, and the relationship
could cope with separation once there was a
firm base. If they had have been told that two years ago, then a relocation
possible, but unfortunately, that’s not what has been happening.
There has been this power struggle. There has been a lessening
of time. There
has been inconsistent time, withholding, and so forth, and so that has disrupted
the attachment process.
expressed the opinion that if a relocation was to be allowed, it ought not be
until there had been six months of consistent
and increasing time between [the
child] and the father, but even in that event Ms [W] expressed her doubts as to
whether the meaningful
father daughter relationship would survive the
relocation. When asked by Richardson,
“Based on your engagement with
these parties and the totality of the matters which have been relayed to you,
that you have reviewed
and what you’ve heard in this court, do you agree
with me that it is possible for [orders for 6 months increased time between
child] and the father followed by a relocation] to be a success for these
, Ms [W] responded, “
I don’t think I could say
that it looks possible. I hope it I s
In relation to
the issue of relocation Ms [W] said
, “... it needs a change of attitude
from [the mother] as well, though, to understand that [the child] needs her
father as well
and that he is just as important as mum is. And I think – I
don’t know that that’s actually accepted”
(Footnotes omitted) (Emphasis in
Accordingly,
his Honour found at [99]–[100]:
relationship between [the child] and the father is a developing relationship
which has been restricted since separation for the
reasons mentioned in the
preceding paragraph, such that it was the principal concern of Ms [W] in her
Report and in her cross-examination
that an expansion of time between [the
child] and her father was needed to enable that relationship to develop and
strengthen.
find that the likely effect of change in [the child]’s circumstances by
relocating with her mother, Mr [Dymas] and [Y] to
reside in Queensland would be
that the opportunities for her to spend time with her father and so being able
to develop and strengthen
her relationship with him would be necessarily
restricted by the tyranny of distance and the practical realities of how often
child] and the father would be able to spend time together.
at [109], his Honour also found:
likely effect of a change in [the child]’s circumstances by having her
place of residence relocated to Queensland is to
restrict the opportunity to
develop a relationship with the father below what it would be if she remained
living in [New South Wales],
and similarly restrict the opportunity to develop a
relationship with her step-family, her paternal grandparents and paternal
family, and on the evidence, restrict her opportunity to maintain and
develop a relationship with her maternal grandparents and maternal
family. Other than Mr [Dymas]’s family, there is no reliable evidence that
would suggest that the mother’s family
would move or even intend to move
to Queensland.
Accordingly,
his Honour concluded at [142]:
considered the advantages and disadvantages of each parents’ proposals, I
find that a relocation of [the child]’s
place of residence from [New South
Wales] to Queensland is not in her best interests, compared to [the child]
remaining in [New South
Wales] in adequate proximity to her father to enable her
to spend substantial and significant time with him while continuing to live
primarily with her mother. ...
Honour’s findings were well open to him on the evidence.
GROUNDS 12 AND 13
inter-related grounds of appeal contend that the primary judge erred in finding
that substantial and significant time could
not take place if the child lived in
Queensland and that, once his Honour had made a finding that substantial and
significant time
was in the child’s best interests, a relocation should
not be ordered.
as the primary judge found that substantial and significant time, which his
Honour found to be in the child’s best interests,
could not take place if
the child lived in Queensland, that was a truism, both in law and in fact.
[85], his Honour said:
Substantial
and significant time includes days that fall on weekends and holidays, days that
do not fall on weekends or holidays,
the child being able to be involved in
occasions and events special to the parents, the parents being able to be
involved in occasions
and events of particular significance to the child, and
the parents being able to be included in the child’s daily
65DAA(3) then provided:
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2), a child will be taken to spend
substantial and significant time
with a parent only if:
(a) the time the child spends with the parent includes both:
(i) days that fall on weekends
and holidays; and
(ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays; and
(b) the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved
(i) the child’s daily routine; and
(ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child; and
(c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in
occasions and events that are of special significance
to the parent.
(Emphasis in original)
mother’s proposal was that, ultimately, upon relocation, the child spend
time with the father for one weekend a month, from
5.00 pm on Friday until 4.00
pm on Sunday, for one half of all Queensland school holidays and on special
occasions. Self-evidently,
neither at law or in fact, did the monthly time she
proposed constitute substantial and significant time.
as the appellant contends that the primary judge erred in holding that, once his
Honour had found that substantial and significant
time was in the child’s
best interests, a relocation should not be ordered, that does an injustice to
his Honour’s extensive
refusing the appellant leave to relocate the child to Queensland and ordering
that the child spend substantial and significant
time with the respondent,
including, ultimately, in each alternate week, from Wednesday afternoon until
Monday morning, the primary
judge took into account a multitude of other
factors, many of which have been referred to above, including the
appellant’s
attitude towards the respondent and his relationship with the
child; her admitted breaches of interim orders; his Honour’s
father’s New South Wales -based business,
to Queensland; and the expert
opinion of the Family Report writer.
it is apparent from [87], and his reference therein to
Gillespie &
(2024) FLC 94-191, that his Honour was cognisant,
, that “[a] parenting case which involves a
‘relocation’ element is just another parenting case and should not
treated as a separate issue to that of determining what parenting order is in
the child’s best interests”, as well as
that “[a]n applicant
seeking to relocate with children need not show compelling reasons for the
proposed move although the
reasons for the proposed move will be one of the
matters to be considered”. His Honour decided the parties’ competing
parenting applications in an orthodox manner, in accordance with the Act and the
relevant jurisprudence.
12 and 13 fail.
to the hearing of the appeal, costs schedules were filed on behalf of each of
the appellant and the respondent.
the conclusion of the hearing of the appeal, as is usual, counsel for the
appellant and the respondent respectively made submissions
in relation to costs,
depending on the outcome of the appeal.
Relevantly,
in the event the appeal was dismissed, as transpires to be the case, counsel for
the respondent sought an order for costs
calculated in accordance with the scale
prescribed in Schedule 3 to the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Cth) in the sum of $11,052.25.
discussed with counsel for the respondent, whilst his costs schedule may be
calculated in accordance with the prescribed scale,
it is readily apparent from
the schedule that the scale costs sought include some costs more in the nature
of solicitor/client costs,
than strictly party/party costs.
Hand & Bodilly
[2013] FamCAFC 98
, the difference between
party/party costs and solicitor/client costs was accepted to be:
... that on a taxation between parties on a solicitor and client basis, the
unsuccessful party has to pay all the costs incurred
by his opponent excepting
in respect of (1) costs and expenses incurred prior to the institution of the
action; (2) journeys and
expenses of which the party liable could have no
knowledge, and which would not ordinarily be performed or incurred; (3) the
of more counsel, or the payment to them of larger fees than the
circumstances of the case warrant, including the giving of special
Full Court in that case then compared solicitor/client costs with indemnity
costs (at [102]).
Milliford & Milliford
[2019] FamCA 128
, after referring to
, Rees J said at [21] that –
distinction between indemnity costs and solicitor/client costs, is that the
former order provides a complete indemnity for
costs actually incurred, with no
enquiry as to the reasonableness of the costs incurred. Whereas an order for
solicitor/client costs
requires an enquiry as to the reasonableness of the
Notwithstanding
that the scale costs sought by the respondent, in the sum of $11,052.25, include
some costs more in the nature of
solicitor/client costs, Senior Counsel for the
appellant did not oppose an order for costs being made against her client in
amount, in the event the appeal was unsuccessful; rather, she sought a
“long period”, in the order of six months, to
make payment.
was not taken to any evidence of the appellant’s financial circumstances
in support of her Senior Counsel’s submission
that a long period to pay
should be ordered. However, this was not strongly resisted by counsel for the
respondent. In the circumstances,
in the absence of such evidence, an order will
be made that the appellant pay the respondent’s costs of the appeal, fixed
the sum of $11,052.25, within 90 days.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
four (104) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
the Honourable
Dated: 30 October 2025
RTF format (565 KB)
Signed PDF/A format