Fox Australia Pty Ltd [2024] ADO 2 (17 July 2024)
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF DESIGNS WITH
Re: Request for examination of design number 202211672 in the name of Fox
Australia Pty Ltd
Nicholas Barbey
REPRESENTATION:
Davies Collison Cave Pty Ltd
Designs Act 2003
(Cth) – request for examination under
considered and applied – design new and distinctive over the
prior art base – certificate of
examination to issue
ox Australia Pty Ltd (‘
’) is the owner of the
following Australian design registration (‘
Design number
: 202211672 (‘
Application
Product name
: Curved real estate advertising board
Filing date
Representation
he Owner requested examination of the Design and an adverse report raising
grounds for revocation issued to it on 13 May 2022. The
report asserted that the
Design was identical or substantially similar in overall impression to several
designs in the prior art
n response, the Owner filed submissions and a declaration by Martin Fox,
founder and director of Whitefox Real Estate Pty Ltd, made
on 26 October 2022
’). The submissions emphasised the significance of
smaller differences between competing designs because the ‘prior art
for signage boards is crowded and well developed’.
III In the Owner’s view, the Design
‘provides a visual impression approximating that of a colonial rounded
arch window’
and this differentiates it from the designs in the prior art
ccording to Fox 1, the Design ‘is associated with Whitefox’s
“Window to your Home” real estate sign board’.
A Mr Fox ‘commissioned a pair of prototype
arch-shaped real estate sign boards to be fabricated’ based on a drawing
Mr Fox ‘uploaded a
photograph of the prototype boards to various social media
platforms’ on 7 February 2022
and confirms this is the photograph
published in the prior art base.
photograph was taken at a private premise and ‘[a]s of the filing date of
23 March 2022, fewer than 50 units’ of
the signage board had been
In this context, the Owner
submitted that the two designs advanced as being identical to the Design should
be excluded from the prior
art base pursuant to
Designs Act 2003
n 11 November 2022, a second adverse report issued to the Owner asserting
of the Act was not enlivened because Fox 1 was insufficiently
particularised and unsupported by evidence. The two allegedly identical
were thus maintained as grounds for revocation of the registration of the
Design. The examiner withdrew the remaining designs
identified in the first
adverse report and raised four additional designs as grounds for revocation
based on a lack of distinctiveness.
‘Response to Examination
Report’ dated 26 October 2022, 2.
Fox 1, [2].
he Owner replied with further submissions and evidence. The submissions
claimed that the absence of ‘feet elements’ in
the prior art designs
was important because these contribute to the ‘function and visual effect
communicated’ by the
signage board.
In the Owner’s opinion, the designs identified in the second adverse
report did not constitute valid grounds for revocation.
Meanwhile, the evidence
filed consisted of a declaration made on 9 December 2022 by Mr Fox with
annexures (‘
’) and a declaration made on 1 December 2022
by James Hallahan, real estate agent, with an annexure (‘
Declaration
ccording to Fox 2, an artwork created by Mr Fox was used as the basis for the
prototype boards shown in the designs identified in
the first adverse report. Mr
Fox sent this artwork to Briner Ads Pty Ltd (‘
December 2021 who subsequently produced the prototype boards.
A Mr Fox declares that the ‘prototype boards
were not used during any marketing campaign’ and the ‘artwork
on the [prototype] boards was based on that used in a sales campaign for
a [Blairgowrie] property that my Real Estate agency was
Fox 2 confirms that, as at 23 March 2022, only two
prototype boards had been produced. The Hallahan Declaration affirms that
[prototype] boards were ordered or used for the marketing
campaign’ of the Blairgowrie property.
third adverse report issued to the Owner on 24 January 2023 which maintained
the following designs as grounds for revocation (collectively
‘Response to Examination
Report’ dated 15 December 2022, 1.
Fox 2, [5].
Hallahan Declaration, [3].
he examiner maintained that Citation 1 was substantially similar in overall
impression to the Design noting the variance in the leg
positioning of each
board did not ‘outweigh the
strong and overwhelming visual similarity between the designs’.
T As regards to Citations 2 and 3, the examiner
was not satisfied that either could be excluded by reason of s 18 of the Act
the relevant artistic work had not been provided. Nor had adequate
particulars been disclosed concerning the number of prototypes
he Owner responded with submissions pointing out that the relevant artistic
work was the ‘render’ of the Whitefox real
estate advertising board.
Namely, the ‘artistic work authored by Mr Fox’ that was supplied to
Briner on 28 December 2021.
T The Owner
maintained that the Design had not been ‘applied industrially’ and
Citations 2 and 3 should be excluded on
this basis. The Owner also disputed that
Citation 1 was substantially similar in overall impression to the Design. A copy
‘render’ is reproduced below
fourth adverse report issued on 17 February 2023 maintaining the Citations
as grounds for revocation. The examiner emphasised the
probable industrial
application of the Design with attention being drawn to the fact that
‘applied industrially’ is not
an exhaustive definition. In the
examiner’s opinion, the public use of the prototype boards
RTF format (1.36 MB)
Signed PDF/A format