Community and Public Sector Union - re Application for leave to be granted for the filing of a late objection - whether discretion exists to grant an extension - applicable legislation - Workplace Relations Act 1996 s.111(7), Schedule 1 ss.6, 158 - Fair Work (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Act 2009 Schedule 2 items 11, 12, Schedule 18 items 7, 11 - Fair Work Act 2009 - Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009 - Workplace Relations (Registered and Accountability of Organisations) Regulations 2003 regulations 122, 124 [2009] AIRC 935; (30 November 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
s 158(1) RAO Schedule - Application for alteration of eligibility rules
Application by the Community and Public Sector Union
(D2009/110)
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
SYDNEY, 30 NOVEMBER 2009
Application for leave to be granted for the filing of a late objection – whether discretion exists to grant an extension –
applicable legislation –
Workplace Relations Act 1996
, Schedule 1
Fair Work (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Act 2009
Schedule 2 items 11, 12, Schedule 18 items 7, 11 –
Fair Work Act 2009
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
– Workplace Relations (Registered and Accountability of Organisations) Regulations 2003 regulations 122, 124.
Introduction
This decision concerns a preliminary issue in relation to an application by the Community and Public Sector Union (CPSU) for consent
to the alteration of the eligibility rules of the organisation pursuant to s 158 of Schedule 1 (the RAO Schedule) of the
Workplace Relations Act
The application was lodged on 18 June 2009. In accordance with Regulation 122 of the
Workplace Relations (Registered and Accountability of Organisations) Regulations 2003
(the RAO Regulations), a notice was published in the Government Gazette on 5 August 2009 stating that the application by the CPSU
had been received and any notice of objection from any interested organisation, association or person was to be lodged no later than
35 days after the notice was published, in accordance with Regulation 124 of the RAO Regulations. The opportunity to file an objection
closed on 9 September 2009 and by this date, no objections had been filed.
On 25 September 2009 the Liquor, Hospitality and Miscellaneous Union (LHMU) lodged a notice of objection to the CPSU application,
some 16 days late. The LHMU served its objection on the CPSU on 30 September 2009.
The matter was listed for hearing on 23 October 2009. Mr Mendelssohn represented the CPSU and Mr Ash represented the LHMU. The CPSU
opposed an extension of time being granted to the LHMU. As the LHMU was not in a position to advance its case for an extension of
time, the parties were directed to file written submissions on whether leave should be granted to the LHMU.
Applicable legislation
The first question which arises is the ascertainment of the appropriate legislation and associated regulations which govern this
application. Item 11(1) of Schedule 2 to the
Fair Work (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Act 2009
(the Transitional Act) provides:
11 Conduct before repeal—WR Act continues to apply
Conduct before repeal
(1) The WR Act continues to apply, on and after the WR Act repeal day, in relation to conduct that occurred before the WR Act repeal
Note: For continuation and cessation of WR Act bodies and offices on and after the WR Act repeal day, see item 7 of Schedule 18.
Processes begun before repeal to vary or terminate WR Act instruments
(a) a process to vary or terminate a WR Act instrument is begun under the WR Act before the WR Act repeal day; and
(b) the WR Act instrument becomes a transitional instrument because of the operation of Part 2 of Schedule 3;
the WR Act continues to apply, on and after the WR Act repeal day, for the purposes of completing the process.
Orders made before repeal
(2) To avoid doubt, the WR Act continues to apply, on and after the WR Act repeal day, in relation to orders made under that Act,
including as it continues to apply under subitem (1).
Item subject to this Act
(3) This item applies subject to this Act.
Note: For the purposes of transition from the WR Act to the FW Act, other provisions of this Act:
(a) modify or exclude the operation of the WR Act as it continues to apply under subitem (1); and
(b) provide for the continued operation of the WR Act (including in modified form) in relation to conduct that occurs on or after
the WR Act repeal day.”
Item 12 of Schedule 2 to the Transitional Act provides as follows:
12 FWA to take over some processes
(1) On and after the WR Act repeal day:
(a) an application, other than an interim application, that could have been made to any of the following because of item 11 may be
made only to FWA:
(i) the Commission;
(ii) the President;
(iii) a member of the Commission;
(iv) a Registrar; and
(b) an appeal to the Commission that could have been instituted because of item 11 may be instituted only as an appeal to FWA; and
(c) a process (however described), other than an interim process, that could have been initiated by the Commission on its own motion
because of item 11 may be initiated only by FWA; and
(d) a matter that could have been referred to the Commission under section 46PW of the
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
because of item 11 is to be referred only to FWA.
(2) For the purposes of subitem (1), a law of the Commonwealth that relates to an application, appeal, process or matter referred
to in that subitem is to be read:
(a) as if a reference to a WR Act body or WR Act office were a reference to FWA, as necessary; and
(b) with any other necessary modifications.
WR Act body
WR Act office
: see subitem 7(1) of Schedule 18.
(3) Subitems (1) and (2) apply subject to this Act.
(4) In this item:
interim application
means an application that relates to a matter that is already before, or being dealt with by, the Commission, the President, a member
of the Commission or a Registrar before the WR Act repeal day.
interim process
means a process (however described) that relates to a matter that is already before, or being dealt with by, the Commission, the
President, a member of the Commission or a Registrar before the WR Act repeal day.”
Schedule 18 to the Transitional Act deals with the continued operation of certain bodies, including the Commission. Item 7 of Schedule
18 provides:
7 Continuation and cessation
(1) Despite the WR Act repeal, a body (the
WR Act body
) or office (the
WR Act office
) set out in an item in the following table continues in existence until the
cessation time
set out in the item.
WR Act bodies and WR Act offices—continuation and cessation
WR Act bodies
WR Act offices
Cessation time
Australian Industrial Relations Commission
Members of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission
Australian Industrial Registry
Industrial Registrar and Deputy Registrars
Australian Fair Pay Commission and AFPC Secretariat
AFPC Chair, AFPC Commissioners and Director of the AFPC Secretariat
Workplace Authority
Workplace Authority Director
Note: FWA will begin to take over the work of WR Act bodies and WR Act offices before their cessation times: see item 12 of Schedule
(2) To avoid doubt, an appointment to a WR Act body or a WR Act office in effect immediately before the WR Act repeal continues in
force on and after the WR Act repeal day:
(a) according to its terms; but
(b) subject to this Act.
Note: As an example of the effect of this Act, at the cessation time for a WR Act body or a WR Act office, related appointments will
(3) Despite subitem (1), the Minister may, by writing, determine that a WR body or a WR Act office ceases to exist at a time that
is different from the cessation time set out for the body or office in the table.
(4) A determination under subitem (3):
(a) has effect accordingly; and
(b) is not a legislative instrument.”
Item 11 of Schedule 18 to the Transitional Act provides:
11 Transfer of functions to FWA at cessation time
(1) After the cessation time for a WR Act body or a WR Act office, the powers, functions and duties of the body or office are to
be exercised and performed by FWA.
WR Act body
cessation time
, see subitem 7(1).
(2) For the purposes of subitem (1), a law of the Commonwealth that relates to the body or office is, for the purposes of its application
after the cessation time, to be read:
(a) as if a reference to the body or office were a reference to FWA, as necessary; and
(b) with any other necessary modifications.
(3) Despite subitem (1), the Minister may, by writing, determine that a power, function or duty of a WR Act body or a WR Act office
is to be exercised or performed, after the cessation time for the body or office, by a body or person other than FWA.
(4) A determination under subitem (3):
(a) has effect accordingly; and
(b) is not a legislative instrument.
(5) If FWA, or another body or person, deals after the cessation time for a WR Act body or a WR Act office with a matter that was
being dealt with by the WR Act body or a person holding the WR Act office, FWA or the other body or person, as the case requires,
must take into account everything done by, or in relation to, the WR Act body or a person holding the WR Act office, in relation
to the matter.”
The explanatory memorandum released with the
Fair Work (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 2009
when before parliament provided the following clarification:
“20. Item 11 continues the WR Act (including all substantive, procedural and jurisdictional provisions and associated instruments
and orders) for pre-repeal conduct which was subject to court enforcement (e.g., breaches of the AFPCS or an industrial instrument
and breaches of the freedom of association, unlawful termination and offence provisions).
21. Item 11 continues the WR Act (including all substantive, procedural and jurisdictional provisions and associated instruments and
orders) for conduct that occurred pre-repeal and which is subject to processes in the AIRC or the Australian Industrial Registry.
For example, it continues the unfair dismissal provisions in relation to a dismissal that occurred before the WR Act repeal day,
and dispute resolution provisions where the dispute arose before the WR Act repeal day. It continues the jurisdiction, powers and
rules of the AIRC to deal with the dismissal or dispute (see also item 5 of this Schedule) and any orders made by the AIRC before
the WR Act repeal day.”
The application in this matter was made on 18 June 2009 under s 158 of the RAO Schedule. In my view, the relevant conduct subject
to the application is the alteration to the CPSU’s eligibility rules in respect of which consent is sought under s 158. The
above provisions make it clear that even if the application was not made until after 1 July, the applicable law in relation to the
application is the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
In my view, these provisions have the effect of permitting the Commission to continue to hear and determine applications made to
it prior to the WR Act Repeal Day, 30 June 2009, until 1 January 2010 when any undetermined matters will be determined by Fair Work
Australia, after taking into account everything done in relation to the matter to that date. There is no basis for concluding that
the provisions of the
Fair Work Act 2009
apply to this application.
Power to extend time
The next issue is whether the Commission has the power to extend the time for filing an objection. Regulation 124 of the RAO Regulations
124 Change of name or alteration of eligibility rules of organisation — objections (RAO Schedule, s 158)
(1) Any interested organisation, association or person (the
) may, no later than 35 days after a notice of the receipt of an application under subregulation 121
original application
) is published in the
, lodge with FWA a notice of objection to the change of name, or the alteration of the eligibility rules, to which the original application
(2) The notice of objection must:
(a) be lodged with FWA; and
(b) comply with the requirements of regulation 14.
(3) FWA may allow an objector to amend a notice of objection if:
(a) a further application is made; and
(b) the objector satisfies FWA that the objector has further grounds for objection arising from the application mentioned in paragraph
(4) Within 7 days after a notice of objection is lodged with FWA, the objector must serve a copy of the notice on the organisation
that lodged the original application.
(5) An organisation:
(a) may, no later than 14 days after service on it under subregulation (4) of a copy of the notice of objection, lodge with FWA, in
answer to the objection, a written statement signed by an officer of the organisation authorised to sign the statement; and
(b) must, no later than 7 days after lodging a written statement under paragraph (a), serve a copy of the statement on the objector.”
The CPSU submits that no power exists to extend the time limit for lodging objections. It submits that Regulation 124 of the RAO
Regulations establishes a mandatory time frame for lodging a notice of objection and absent any power to extend that time frame,
the Commission has no power to grant an extension of time. The CPSU also relies on s 111(7) of the Act which provides:
“(7) If a provision of the Registration and Accountability of Organisations Schedule specifies a time or a period in respect
of any matter or thing, the Commission must not extend the time or the period specified unless the Registration and Accountability
of Organisations Schedule expressly permits the Commission to do so.”
The CPSU further refers to s 6 of the RAO Schedule which defines the Schedule as inclusive of its accompanying Regulations.
The LHMU submits that s 111(7) of the Act has no application. It says that the relevant legislation under which the application must
be considered is the
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
and not the predecessor legislation.
In my view, it follows from the conclusions I have reached concerning the applicable legislation that the limitations on the Commission’s
powers in the Act also apply to the application now before the Commission. It is arguable that the limitation in
is limited to time limits in the RAO Schedule and that the inclusion of the Regulations in the definition of the Schedule is only
for the purposes of interpreting the meaning of the term in the Schedule itself. However, I believe that the better view of the legislation
is that the limitation on the Commission’s power to extend time for an application extends to the time limit contained in the
RAO Regulations made under the RAO Schedule. For this reason, I believe that the Commission lacks the power to grant the application
to extend time.
I should also note that should there have been power to extend time, I would not be satisfied that the LHMU has provided an acceptable
reason for the delay.
For the reasons above, I am of the view that the Commission lacks the power to grant the application for leave to extend the time
for filing the objection. The application for leave is dismissed.
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR991040>
No downloadable files available