CZZL; Secretary, Department of Social Services and (Practice and procedure) [2025] ARTA 2381 (10 November 2025)
CZZL; Secretary, Department of Social Services and (Practice and
procedure) [2025] ARTA 2381 (10 November 2025)
Applicant/s: Secretary, Department of Social
Respondent: CZZL
Tribunal Number: 2025/5144
Tribunal: Senior Member Simon
Place: Sydney
Date: 10 November 2025
The decision made by the Tribunal on 1 September 2025, that
the compensation preclusion period ends on 21 September 2025, is stayed
further order of the Tribunal or finalisation of the review proceedings,
whichever occurs earlier.
Names used in all published decisions are pseudonyms. Any references
appearing in square brackets indicate that information has been
removed from
this decision and replaced with generic information so as not to identify
involved individuals as required by
subsections 201(1A)
(1B) of the
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
SOCIAL SECURITY – practice and procedure – application for
stay of reviewable decision – Tribunal’s power
application – compensation preclusion period – prejudice against
Respondent if stay were granted – relevant
discretions – stay
Legislation
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
Social Security Act 1991
GAP-AAA and GAP-AAB; Child Support Registrar
[2024] ARTA 1
Secretary, Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and
Indigenous Affairs v Mouratidis
Statement of
reasons relate to an application made by the Secretary, Department of Social
Services, seeking a stay on a decision made by
the Tribunal on 1 September 2025
on first review of a decision.
substantive application relates to a decision by Services Australia (Centrelink)
to impose a compensation preclusion period on
the respondent and raise and
recover debts.
respondent subsequently made an application to the Tribunal for first review of
those decisions and on 1 September 2025, the Administrative
Review Tribunal
varied the decisions reducing the compensation report period and waiving one of
21 September 2025, the Secretary made this substantive application for second
review of the decisions and an application to stay
the operation of the Tribunal
decision on first review in relation ending the compensation preclusion period
as of 21 September 2025.
16 October 2025, I made directions for the parties to provide any further
written submissions and documents in relation to the
stay application. The
parties were also informed that the Tribunal proposed to determine the stay
application on the papers. If parties
required an oral hearing, they were to
indicate that in their submissions and the Tribunal would consider such
application in due
course. Neither party sought an oral hearing, and the I am
satisfied that it can proceed to determine the stay application on the
have considered the following relevant documents:
(i) The decision and statement of reasons dated 1 September 2025.
(ii) The application for second review of the decision and the request for a
stay made by the Secretary on 29 September 2025.
(iii) The Secretary’s written submissions.
(iv) Documents provided by the secretary pursuant to
Administrative Review Tribunal Act
(section 25
documents).
(v) Two undated submissions from the respondent responding to correspondence
from the Tribunal on 30 September 2025 and 16 October
(vi) Various extracts from media articles provided by the respondent.
CONSIDERAITON
is generally not in dispute that on 10 September 2017, the respondent sustained
an injury while receiving medical treatment and
made a compensation claim in
that regard. From 10 October 2017, the respondent was in receipt of sickness
allowance and on 17 April
2020, the respondent was transferred to jobseeker
13 February 2025, the respondent settled the compensation claim in the amount of
$1,250,000 inclusive of costs. On 17 February
2025, the lawyers representing the
respondent in the compensation claim informed Centrelink of the
respondent’s compensation
settlement, and as is required, sought clearance
to pay the respondent
a result of the settlement of the compensation claim, on 4 March 2025,
Centrelink decided to impose a compensation preclusion period
from 10 September
2017 to 3 April 2027 pursuant to 1184K of the
Social Security Act
(Cth). In effect, preventing the respondent from accessing social
security payments during the compensation preclusion period. Centrelink
decided to raise and recover the following compensation charges:
(i) a sickness allowance and jobseeker debt of $116,451.84 for the period 10
October 2017 to 3 March 2025.
(ii) a coronavirus supplement debt of $9,250 for the period 4 May 2020 to 29
March 2021.
26 March 2025, Centrelink made a further decision to raise and recover a
jobseeker debt of $153.50 for the advance payment made
on 4 November 2024.
lawyers for the respondent in the compensation claim provided that the details
of disbursement of his settlement of $1,250,000.
After the Centrelink charge was
deducted and various other costs and disbursements, the balance of the sum to be
received by the
respondent in relation to his claim totalled $754,438.87. An
advance of $10,000 was paid to the respondent on 25 March 2025 and $6,583.97
deposited into the respondent’s account on 28 March 2025 (totalling
$16,583.97). As had been directed by the respondent,
$620,000 was deposited into
his former wife’s account on 28 March 2025.
14 May 2025 the respondent confirmed in a statement that while an amount of
$1,250,000 was awarded, he was only left with $16,583.73.
He stated that the
amount of $620,000 was credited to his ex-wife by way of repayment of monies
that she loaned to him for his business
ventures. He states that those amounts
loaned were lost due to bad business management and his bankruptcies. He also
stated that
he had come to an arrangement with his ex-wife that that he would
repay her as soon as his case was settled and that the funds were
not gifted to
her, they were what he owed her.
stated above, on 1 September 2025, the Tribunal on first review, varied the
decisions under review so that the compensation preclusion
period ended on 21
September 2025 and found that there were special circumstances that warranted
the waiving of the jobseeker debt
of $153.50. The Secretary subsequently lodged
a second review application to the Tribunal on 29 September 2025, the
application to
stay the operation of the first review decision in relation to
ending the compensation preclusion period on 21 September 2025.
respondent is not currently on any Centrelink payments. On 12 February 2025, the
respondent had lodged a claim for disability
support pension with Centrelink. On
11 March 2025, Centrelink had decided to reject the respondent’s claim for
disability support
pension on the basis that he was serving a compensation
preclusion period until 3 April 2027. On 9 September 2025, the respondent
a further claim for disability support pension and on 25 September 2025, the
respondent lodged a claim for jobseeker payment.
The Secretary submits that
those claims are presently on hold until the Tribunal makes the decision in
relation to the application
for the stay.
Secretary’s submits that they do not contest the Tribunal’s decision
at first review to waive the jobseeker payment
debt of $153.50 for the advance
payment made on 4 November 2024. They only dispute the decision of the Tribunal
at first review to
end the compensation preclusion period on 21 September 2025.
They submit that the legislative intention of the lump sum preclusion
that individuals who receive compensation payments ought to use that money to
support themselves for a period before relying
on Government assistance.
Administrative Review Tribunal Act
relevantly provides that:
(1) The making of an application to the Tribunal for review of a reviewable
decision does not affect the operation of the decision
or prevent the taking of
action to implement the decision.
Exception--Tribunal may stay operation or implementation
(2) However, on application by a party to a proceeding for review of a
reviewable decision, the Tribunal may make an order staying
or otherwise
affecting the operation or implementation of the decision if the Tribunal
considers that it is desirable to do so for
the purpose of ensuring the
effectiveness of the review.
GAP-AAA and GAP-AAB; Child Support Registrar
[2024] ARTA 1
Kyrou J, the President of the Tribunal, summarised the relevant principles when
considering a stay application in respect
section 127(1)
Administrative Review Tribunal Act
(where a party can seek a stay order in
guidance and appeal panel decisions).
Section 127(1)
largely mirrors the
provisions contained in
section 32(2)
Administrative Review Tribunal Act
These principles are set out at [12] - [15] of the statement of reasons for the
decision as follows:
12. A stay order will not be granted as a matter of course. Section 127(2) of
the ART Act makes it clear that the power to make such
an order is
discretionary. A precondition to the exercise of the discretion to grant a stay
order is the existence of material before
the Tribunal indicating that the
effectiveness of the referral application will be adversely affected in the
absence of a stay. The
effectiveness of the referral application will be
adversely affected if the party seeking the stay would suffer irreversible
if the stay sought were not granted, such as where a successful
outcome before the GAP would be rendered nugatory. The existence
prejudice would militate in favour of granting a stay.
13. The fact that the party seeking a stay is able to point to material
indicating that the effectiveness of the referral application
will be adversely
affected in the absence of a stay does not necessarily mean that the Tribunal is
required to exercise the discretion
in favour of granting a stay order. That is
because any prejudice to the party seeking a stay if the stay sought is not
granted must
be balanced against any prejudice to the party opposing the stay if
the stay sought is granted. Thus, if the party opposing a stay
would suffer
irreversible prejudice if the stay sought is granted, that would militate
against the granting of the stay.
14. It follows that consideration of an application for a stay will involve
an examination of any prejudice to the party seeking a
stay if the stay sought
is not granted and any prejudice to the party opposing a stay if the stay sought
is granted.
15. Ultimately, a decision about whether to grant a stay will depend on a
balancing of all the considerations militating in favour
of a stay with those
militating against granting it, and reaching a decision based on what the
interests of justice require in the
particular circumstances of the case.
Is it desirable to make the order staying the operation of the
first review decision to ensure the effectiveness of the review?
respondent has made submissions about alleged overpayments of Covid-19 jobkeeper
payments. The respondent provides media articles
relating to Covid-19 jobkeeker
payments and alleges that corporations and wealthy individuals failed to pass on
payments to employees
or repay monies back to the government. He submits that
those corporations are making large profits and are not in genuine hardship
are not being required to pay monies back. The respondent submits he feels
victimised and targeted. The circumstances of other
individuals and corporations
as reported to in media outlets is not relevant to determining this stay. The
Tribunal is required to
weigh up the facts and circumstances in this review and
determine whether to impose the stay.
Secretary refers to the decision in
Secretary, Department of Families,
Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs v Mouratidis
which was an appeal from the Administrative Appeals Tribunal to the Federal
Court dealt with a former provision which
was similar in terms to
Administrative Review Tribunal Act
. At [20] of the judgement
Dodds-Streeton J stated that the discretion to order a stay:
... should only be exercised only where special circumstances justify
departure from the rule that a successful litigant is entitled
to the fruits of
judgment pending the appeal, because the appeal, although successful, may
otherwise be rendered nugatory.
second review application is not an appeal. However, the issues have already
been determined on first review of the decision and
it is presumed that as a
starting point the respondent should have the entitlement to benefit of the
decision at first review and
that is a matter that weighs in favour of the
respondent.
having considered the balance of the relevant matters raised by the parties, I
find that it is desirable to make the order
staying the operation of the first
review decision to ensure the effectiveness of the review.
respondent submits that his financial, mental, physical and emotional situations
are worsening. He submits that his blood sugar
levels, and diabetes are out of
control and that he cannot afford to buy the medication that is needed to help
control them. He has
had to borrow money from his son, but his son has his own
responsibilities and bills to pay. The applicant submits that he no longer
healthcare card and so he is having to pay full price for medication. As his
mental and physical health have both deteriorated,
he states that he has require
the services of his GP and specialists more frequently, however, he is not able
to make these appointments
because he cannot pay for them. The respondent states
that his ex-wife does not support him, but that he is allowed to live rent
due to an agreement between them that he would be there for their two children
who are unwell and suffer from mental and physical
the respondent states he is in financial hardship, he has provided no supporting
documents that reveal his complete financial
situation. More importantly, the
documents contain a form which the respondent completed on 31 August
2023 informing Centrelink that he and his former wife were separated
same roof. While the form indicates that the couple do not share finances and
that the former wife does not support him,
it is noted that the respondent does
not pay rent. His wife pays for the phone, internet, electricity and gas. The
respondent pays
for his own food. The respondent completed the same form on 15
May 2024 and similarly, he noted that he does not pay rent, and his
former wife
pays for phone, internet, gas and electricity. The
documents also
contain the respondent application for disability support pension which was made
on 9 September 2025. He records
that he has no assets except a Ute valued at
$1500 and his bank account is in overdraft of $32.
respondent concedes he became aware of the preclusion period from his solicitor
on 6 February 2025, when he had to sign documents
agreeing to settle the
compensation claim. Despite being on notice of the fact he would be subject to
the compensation preclusion
period, the respondent directed that the amount of
$620,000 be disbursed to his wife. Except for the respondent’s statements
and assertions, there has been no supporting evidence regarding the purported
amounts owed to his wife or the arrangement between
them. More importantly the
respondent has not provided any documentation that he was legally obligated to
pay his wife from the settlement
of the compensation claim.
documents also confirm that on 1 April 2025, the respondent
received a Medicare refund of $117,854.90 which was paid to him by electronic
funds transfer. The respondent again transferred those funds to his former wife.
That was despite his first claim for disability
support pension being rejected
on 11 March 2025
the stay is granted, the respondent will continue to be precluded from receiving
social security payments until 3 April 2027. If
the stay is not granted, then
consistent with the decision at first review, there would be no preclusion
period as of 21 September
2025 and the respondent may become entitled to income
support subject to qualification and other payability criteria. The Secretary
submits that in the case that they are successful on review then they would have
to recover in monies paid as overpayments from the
respondent and the potential
quantum of any overpayment may be significant and there may be difficulty in
recovering any overpayments
from the respondent. I accept that the
respondent’s current financial circumstances as he has reported them would
make it difficult
for him to repaying any debt that may become owing to the
Commonwealth.
am mindful that the respondent has stated that he has medical his financial,
mental, physical and emotional situations are worsening.
Accordingly, the matter
will be listed for directions shortly and directions made to progress the matter
to hearing in an expedited
Accordingly,
the application for a stay on the operation of the decision to end the
compensation preclusion period as of 21 September
The decision made by the Tribunal on 1 September 2025, that the compensation
preclusion period ends on 21 September 2025, is stayed
until further order of
the Tribunal or finalisation of the review proceedings, whichever occurs
Date(s) of hearing:
On the papers
Self-represented
Solicitors for the Respondent:
S Nguyen, Government Lawyer
RTF format (12.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format