URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/SSATACSA/2011/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cooper v Gardener [2011] SSATACSA 2 (1 June 2011)
REVIEW NUMBER XXXXXXXX
APPLICANT Sharon Cooper
OTHER PARTIES Daniel Gardener
Child Support Registrar
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
A decision of an Objections Officer on 17 December 2010 to allow Mr
Gardener’s objection to a decision of a Senior Case Officer
September 2010 so that, for the period 1 February 2011 to 31 October 2012, Ms
Cooper’s adjusted taxable income is set
at $58,872.
HEARING BY TRIBUNAL
The application was heard on 20 April 2011.
The members of the Tribunal were: XXXXXXXX Presiding Member
Mr Gardener and Ms Cooper gave sworn evidence to the Tribunal by conference
telephone. The Child Support Registrar was not present.
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
On 1 June 2011 the Tribunal decided to set aside the decision under review
and substitute the decision that, for the period 28 January
2011 to 31 December
2012, Mr Gardener’s annual rate of child support be set at $6,200 per
DATE OF DESPATCH
8 June 2011
REASONS FOR DECISION
Gardener and Ms Cooper separated in 2002. For child support purposes
Mr Gardener is the parent liable to pay child support to
Ms Cooper for
their children Karen (born 1998), Rhys (born 1999) and Christopher (born 2002).
The children are in Ms Cooper’s
primary care.
13 July 2010, Ms Cooper lodged an application with the Child Support Agency
(‘the CSA’) seeking a change of assessment.
At the time, Mr
Gardener’s child support liability was determined under
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
(‘the Act’). This
assessment, for the period 1 October 2010 to 13 September 2011, used an adjusted
taxable income of
$56,973 per annum for Mr Gardener and an adjusted taxable
income of $26,863 per annum for Ms Cooper, based on the 2009/10 tax year.
Cooper sought a change of assessment under ‘Reason 3’ in relation to
the children’s private school fees and ‘Reason
concerns the income and/or financial resources of a parent. Mr Gardener
cross-applied under ‘Reason 1’
in relation to costs incurred in
change of assessment
was warranted and decided that:
for the period 1
February 2011 to 31 October 2012 Ms Cooper’s adjusted taxable income be
set at $59,000 per annum; and
for the periods
1 February 2011 to 31 December 2012 the child support otherwise payable by Mr
Gardener be increased by $959 per annum.
17 December 2010 an Objections Officer allowed Mr Gardener’s objection and
decided that for the period 1 February 2011 to
31 October 2012 Ms Cooper’s
adjusted taxable income is set at $58,872.
Cooper sought review of this decision by the Tribunal on 7 January 2011.
CONSIDERATION
Gardener and Ms Cooper gave sworn evidence to the Tribunal by conference
telephone. The following material was also before the
Tribunal prior to the
papers provided by the CSA comprising 403 pages (Exhibit 1);
pre-hearing
conference directions dated 1 March 2011 (Exhibit 2);
provided by Ms Cooper comprising pages A1 to A12 (Exhibit A); and
provided by Mr Gardener comprising pages B1 to B32 (Exhibit B).
The legislative framework
of the Act enables a liable parent, or carer entitled to child support, who
is of the view that special circumstances exist, to ask
the Registrar to make a
determination departing from the provisions of the Act governing the
administrative assessment of child support
(a departure determination).
empowers the Registrar to make a determination if satisfied that:
(1) one or more grounds for departure referred to in
of the Act exist;
(2) it would be just and equitable as regards the child, the liable parent
and the carer entitled to child support; and
(3) it would be otherwise proper.
Are there grounds for departure?
Cooper applied for a change of assessment on the ground, amongst others, that Mr
Gardener should contribute to the children’s
private schooling costs. Mr
Gardener cross-applied citing the costs incurred in having contact with his
Subparagraph 117(2)(b)(ii) – ‘Reason 3’
children commenced their schooling in the private system after their parents
separated. Karen now attends a private college and
is in her seventh academic
year. The Senior Case Officer calculated that the school fees in relation to
Karen were about $1,920 per
annum and Ms Cooper agreed with that calculation
during the hearing.
Subparagraph
117(2)(b)(ii) provides:
(2) For the purposes of subparagraph
(1)(b)(i), the grounds for departure are as follows:
(b) that, in the special circumstances of the case, the costs of
maintaining the child are significantly affected:
(ii) because the child is being cared for, educated or trained in the
manner that was expected by his or her parents;
term ‘special circumstances’ is not defined in the Act. In
Gyselman v Gyselman
[1991] FamCA 93
(1992) FLC 92-279
the Full Family Court indicated
that for there to be special circumstances, the facts of the case must establish
something which
is special or out of the ordinary.
Cooper confirmed that the parents separated before the eldest child commenced
school. She said that both parents are of the same
religious denomination and
intended that their children would be educated at private schools. She said
that, prior to separation,
no specific enrolment plans had been made.
Gardener told the Tribunal that Ms Cooper makes all the decisions regarding the
children’s schooling and, as such, she should
be responsible for the
consequences of those decisions. He said that he never agreed to send the
children to a private school.
Cooper agreed that she made all the decisions regarding the children’s
schooling. She said that she never asked Mr Gardener
to contribute to school
fees in the past because the child support he provided her was sufficient to
cover them. She said it was
when her child support reduced and Karen’s
school fees increased that she needed extra assistance. Ms Cooper told the
that the CSA informed her she needed Mr Gardener to sign an enrolment
form to prove the parents intended their children to attend
a private school.
She said that when Mr Gardener signed the 2011 enrolment form for Karen she then
had the evidence the CSA required
to prove mutual intention. Mr Gardener agreed
that he signed the 2011 enrolment form for Karen but only on the understanding
he would not be responsible for the school fees. The private college has
since withdrawn that enrolment form upon Mr Gardener’s
request and Ms
Cooper has completed another one without Mr Gardener’s signature.
the hearing the Tribunal asked Mr Gardener what school the children would have
attended if he and Ms Cooper were still together.
Mr Gardener stated that if the
parents were still together then the children would have gone to private
schools. However he said
that the parents are not together, that Ms Cooper makes
all the decisions and that he should not be made responsible for the
consequences
of Ms Cooper’s decision.
on the evidence before it the Tribunal finds that Mr Gardener did not agree to
the children being enrolled in private schools.
Likewise, based on the evidence
before it, the Tribunal finds that when Mr Gardener and Ms Cooper were
cohabitating there was a mutual
expectation that the children would be educated
in private schools. The object of subparagraph 117(2)(b)(ii) is that, if during
course of cohabitation, the parents had future expectations for their
children then a later separation should not, of itself, be
a basis for reducing
those expectations.
Tribunal is satisfied there was a mutual expectation that the children attend
private schools. It is well established that child
support payable under a
assessment does not cover the compulsory costs of private schooling that are
over and above those ordinarily incurred in the public
school system. The
Tribunal considers that the ‘ancillary fees’ payable are of a kind
typically incurred in public schooling.
The remaining fees are significant and
represent a charge not incurred in public schooling. Accordingly, the
Tribunal’s view
is that in the special circumstances of the case there are
grounds for a departure determination under sub-subparagraph 117(2)(b)(ii).
Gardener’s assertion that he is not able to contribute towards the school
fees is a separate matter which will be considered
Tribunal has determined that there is a ground to depart from the administrative
assessment of child support. That being so the
Tribunal will examine the
parents’ financial resources and Mr Gardener’s cross application
related to his costs of contact
under the just and equitable considerations.
Is a change of assessment just and equitable?
provides as follows:
Matters to consider for purposes of
subparagraph (1)(b)(ii)
(4) In determining whether it would be just and equitable as regards the
child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable
parent to make a
particular order under this Division, the court must have regard to:
(a) the nature of the duty of a parent to maintain a child (as stated in
(b) the proper needs of the child; and
(c) the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of
the child; and
(d) the income, property and financial resources of each parent who is a
party to the proceeding; and
(da) the earning capacity of each parent who is a party to the
proceeding; and
(e) the commitments of each parent who is a party to the proceeding that
are necessary to enable the parent to support:
(i) himself or herself; or
(ii) any other child or another person that the person has a duty to
maintain; and
(f) the direct and indirect costs incurred by the carer entitled to
child support in providing care for the child; and
(g) any hardship that would be caused:
(A) the child; or
(B) the carer entitled to child support;
by the making of, or the refusal to make, the order; and
(A) the liable parent; or
(B) any other child or another person that the liable parent has a duty
to support; by the making of, or the refusal to make, the
(iii) to any resident child of the parent (see subsection (10)) by the
making of, or the refusal to make, the order.
section 3(1)
of the Act parents have a primary duty to maintain their children.
Without limiting
section 3(1)
section 3(2)
provides that this duty has priority
over all commitments other than (amongst other things) the commitments necessary
to enable a
parent to support him or herself.
relation to paragraph 117(4)(b),
section 117(6)
requires a decision-maker to
consider the manner in which the children are being cared for, educated or
trained, the parents expectations
in this regard and any special needs of the
children. In relation to paragraph 117(4)(c),
section 117(7)
decision-maker to consider the children’s capacity to earn or derive
income, including a consideration of assets
under the children’s control,
or held for their benefit, which are capable of producing income. In relation
to paragraph 117(4)(f),
section 117(8)
requires a decision-maker to take into
account any income and earning capacity foregone by a carer.
Section 117(7A)
section 117(7B)
set out the matters to be considered in relation to
paragraphs 117(4)(d) and (da).
Cooper has primary care of the children. On the evidence before the Tribunal the
children do not have special needs. Nor is there
any suggestion that they have
any material independent assets, source of income, or capacity to derive income.
The children’s
private school fees have already been discussed. As
indicated, the combined compulsory fees in relation to Karen amounted to about
$1,920 per annum. The compulsory fees in relation to the other two children are
of $3,132 per annum to be
paid in compulsory school fees for all of the children.
Cooper has assets limited to household contents (valued at $25,000) and a car
(valued at $6,000) and, until 28 January 2011, was
reliant upon Centrelink
benefits. On 28 January 2011 Ms Cooper commenced full-time employment earning
means Ms Cooper receives about $871 per week after
tax. On her Statement of Financial Circumstances Form she lists modest expenses
of about $520 per week (not including an amount of $50 for education expenses
and her rent of $380) for her four children and herself.
The expenses are not
broken down but, based on a household of five people, this would mean Ms
Cooper’s necessary expenses,
which includes an amount for her forth child
who is not a child of this assessment, are about $208 per week. If the Tribunal
another $250 for her component of the rent then Ms Cooper’s
necessary personal expenses are about $458 per week. In relation
to the children
of the assessment their costs are about $312 per week not including an amount
for rent (about $130 per week) and
their educational costs (about $58 per week).
If the Tribunal were to add these amounts then the total costs of the children
costs of the children are about $500 per week.
Gardener works full-time earning $64,000 per annum in base salary and loading
allowances. His three most recent payslips indicate
an average income of about
$67,626 not including overtime. In his Statement of Financial Circumstances Mr
Gardener estimated that
his average income was $1250 per week or $65,000 per
annum. He is a 50% owner of a home that is heavily mortgaged. He also has a
debt of about $27,000 and a recent car loan of about $16,500. Mr Gardener told
the Tribunal that his car loan repayments are
appears to the Tribunal that Mr Gardener’s income experiences some slight
fluctuations depending upon shift allowances and
penalties. The Tribunal accepts
Mr Gardener’s estimate that his average income is about $1250 per week or
$65,000 per annum.
On an income of $65,000 per annum Mr Gardener would receive
debt. In his Statement of Financial Circumstances Form Mr Gardener listed
personal expenses of about $763 per week. This included
discretionary items such as holidays, gifts, book/magazines and entertainment.
It also included an amount
of $50 for petrol. It is not in dispute that Mr
Gardener drives about 1200 kilometres every six weeks to facilitate contact with
his children. The objections officer calculated this to cost him about $1,373
per annum driving costs. During the hearing Mr Gardener
told the Tribunal that
he has purchased another car and, on average, he spends an average of about $85
per week on a full tank of
petrol. This equate to an annual cost of $4,420. If
the Tribunal were to allow an amount of $10 for house repairs, exclude Mr
expenses for discretionary items and allow an amount of $85 per
week for petrol, Mr Gardener’s necessary personal expenses
are about $724
per week. Mr Gardener also listed an amount of $95 per week to represent the
costs of caring for his children 21%
of the time. The Tribunal accepts that Mr
Gardener would have additional costs during those times and will allow an
additional $60
for food and minor incidentals. This means Mr Gardener’s
necessary personal expenses are about $784 per week. Given Mr Gardener’s
net income is $907 per week this means his net available resources after
necessary expenditure is about $123 per week. The Tribunal
recognises that this
does not include Mr Gardener’s car loan repayments of $165 per fortnight.
Mr Gardener told the Tribunal
that he needed to replace his aging car. Ms Cooper
disputes that claim and states that Mr Gardener’s previous car is now
driven by his partner’s sister. Regardless of his reasons the
Tribunal is of the view that Mr Gardener’s purchase of
another car worth
$16,500 was discretionary and, as such, cannot be considered when calculating
his necessary personal expenditure.
Tribunal has found that Mr Gardener has $123 per week available after paying his
necessary expenditure. Under the administrative
assessment for the period:
4 September 2009
to 30 September 2010 Mr Gardener was assessed to pay an annual rate of child
support of $6,837 (about $131 per week).
1 October 2010
to 31 January 2011 Mr Gardener was assessed to pay an annual rate of child
support of $7,137 (about $137 per week).
1 February 2011
to 13 September 2011 Mr Gardener is assessed to pay an annual rate of child
support of $5,133 (about $100 per week).
14 September
2011 to 31 December 2011 Mr Gardener’s annual rate of child support will
increase to $5,460 per annum (about $105
Gardener’s child support went down when Ms Cooper commenced working as a
teacher. Prior to that time Mr Gardener had no capacity
to contribute an
additional amount towards school fees. However, since Mr Gardener’s child
support assessment has reduced,
he has a limited capacity to contribute towards
school fees.
Tribunal recognises that Mr Gardener’s current income is greater than the
adjusted taxable income used in the current administrative
assessment. However
the Tribunal has determined that Mr Gardener, at present, can only contribute at
most a further $23 per week
towards child support over and above his current
administrative assessment; which is based on his adjusted taxable income for
That being so the Tribunal will not set Mr Gardener’s income.
However when Mr Gardener lodges his 2010/2011 taxation return
his income will be
higher (the Tribunal calculates it to be around $65,000). The administrative
assessment based on that higher income
will not take into account that Mr
Gardener is repaying a HECS debt and this debt impacts upon his ability to pay
child support and
contribute towards the children’s school fees. That
being so the Tribunal will set an annual rate of child support. The Tribunal
found that Mr Gardener has $123 per week ($6,396 per annum) available for child
support. If the Tribunal set Mr Gardener’s
annual rate of child support at
$6,200 then arrears of about $320 will be created. In the view of the Tribunal
it is therefore appropriate
to set Mr Gardener’s annual rate slightly
below his capacity to pay. This will provide to Mr Gardener some capacity to
those arrears over a period of time.
Is a change of assessment otherwise proper?
provides as follows:
(5) In determining whether it would
be otherwise proper to make a particular order under this Division, the court
must have regard
(a) the nature of the duty of a parent to maintain a child (as stated in
and, in particular, the fact that it is the parents of a child
themselves who have the primary duty to maintain the child; and
(b) the effect that the making of the order would have on:
(i) any entitlement of the child, or the carer entitled to child support,
to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit; or (ii)the
rate of any income
tested pension, allowance or benefit payable to the child or the carer entitled
to child support.
decision will increase Mr Gardener’s child support for present periods and
more than likely reduce it for future periods.
Ms Cooper is in receipt of some
Centrelink payments and, for the future periods that Mr Gardener’s child
support assessment
is likely to be reduced, the decision will increase the
burden on the public purse. However the decision sets Mr Gardener’s
rate of child support at a level commensurate with his capacity to pay it and,
that being so, the Tribunal is satisfied that
it is otherwise proper to depart.
Cooper lodged her change of assessment application in July 2010 and started work
in late January 2011. There are no arrears on
the case. The Tribunal is of the
view that to balance the needs of both parents an appropriate start date would
be when Ms Cooper
commenced her job on 28 January 2011. This is because Ms
Cooper’s income increased significantly from that date. The CSA set
Cooper’s income at $58,872 but her payslips show an income of $56,829. The
Tribunal has decided to set an annual rate and,
because of this, Ms
Cooper’s income does not need to be set.
to Ms Cooper commencing working, Mr Gardener had no capacity to contribute an
additional amount to the children’s school
fees. Since 28 January 2011 Mr
Gardener has some limited capacity over and above his current child support
assessment which is based
on an income lower than his current income. That being
so the Tribunal will commence its departure decision from 28 January 2011.
terms of an end date the Tribunal is of the view that an appropriate end date is
31 December 2012. This provides both parents with
a period of stability.
On 1 June 2011 the Tribunal decided to set aside the decision under review
and substitute the decision that, for the period 28 January
2011 to 31 December
2012, Mr Gardener’s annual rate of child support be set at $6,200 per
Presiding Member
Date: 8 June 2011
The publication of Social Security Appeals Tribunal child support
decisions is authorised under
subsections 16(2AB)
(2AC) of the
Support (Registration and Collection) Act
Personal particulars of parties to an appeal and their children are
removed to protect their privacy. Names used in all published
decisions are
pseudonyms. Reasons for decisions are published in full (with any information
which may identify involved individuals
to a member of the public removed) to
ensure that the full context and basis for the decision can be understood. The
Social Security
Appeal's Tribunal's decisions in relation to child support
matters demonstrate the application of the Child Support legislation to
individual circumstances of the case being decided. Different fact situations
or subsequent changes to legislation may result
in different outcomes.
The CSA reviews all SSAT decisions to identify opportunities to improve
its services and ensure its processes and policies are robust
and accurate. The
CSA publishes further information about SSAT decisions on their website
www.csa.gov.au/publications/1313.aspx#ssat
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (178 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter