Applicant: Robin Rai IRT Reference: N98/02936 #number 13364 [1999] IRTA 13364 (28 January 1999)
IMMIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS FOR DECISION
IRT DECISION: N98/02936 13364.doc
APPLICANT: Robin RAI
TRIBUNAL: Gail RADFORD
Presiding Member
DATE: 28 January 1999
PLACE: Sydney
DECISION: The Tribunal affirms the decision to cancel Mr Robin Rai's Subclass
560 (Student) visa.
INTRODUCTION
This is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs on 16
December 1998 to
cancel Mr Robin Rai's Subclass 560 (Student) visa on the ground that he had not
complied with condition 8105 of
his visa. Condition 8105 imposes work
limitations on the holder of the visa. Mr Rai (the Applicant) applied to the
Tribunal for
a review of this decision on 18 December 1998.
THE RELEVANT LAW
The power to cancel is in subdivision D of the
Migration Act 1958
Act). The relevant provisions of the Act provide as follows:
Power to cancel
116.(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), the Minister may cancel a visa if
he or she is satisfied that;
(a) any circumstances which permitted the grant of the visa no longer exist;
(b) its holder has not complied with a condition of the visa;
(c) another person required to comply with a condition of the visa has not
complied with that condition; or
(d) if its holder has not entered Australia or has so entered but has not
been immigration cleared - it would be liable to be cancelled
under Subdivision
C (incorrect information given by holder) if its holder had so entered and been
immigration cleared; or
(e) the presence of its holder in Australia is, or would be, a risk to the
health, safety or good order of the Australian community;
(f) the visa should not have been granted because the application for it, or
its grant was in contravention of this Act or of another
Commonwealth; or
(g) a prescribed ground for cancelling a visa applies to the holder.
The Minister is not to cancel a visa if there exist prescribed
circumstances in which a visa is not to be cancelled.
If the Minister may cancel a visa under subsection (1), the
Minister must do so if there exist prescribed circumstances in which
must be cancelled.
Subdivision E sets out the procedure for cancelling visas under subdivision D.
Notice of the grounds on which cancellation is being
considered must be given
and the holder invited to show either that the grounds do not exist or that
there are reasons why the visa
should not be cancelled
(section 119).
holder must be given an opportunity to respond. A visa may not be cancelled
before the holder has been given a notice of cancellation
that includes
information relevant to the cancellation.
The primary decision-maker in this case, in arriving at a decision to cancel
the visa, relied on the grounds provided by
section 116
(1)(b) and followed the
procedure set out in subdivision E for the cancelling of visas under
General power to cancel
). From 1 December 1998 a decision maker
must cancel a student visa if the holder does not satisfy course requirements
and, hence,
has not complied with condition 8202. However, in this case
prescribed circumstances in which a visa must be cancelled did not exist,
the visa was cancelled for breach of condition 8105 (see
The power to cancel a visa under
section 116
is a discretionary power, unless a
prescribed circumstance exists. The Department has issued policy guidelines in
the form of Migration
Series Instruction No 203, dated 10 August 1998, which
relate to such a cancellation. This states, so far as is relevant, as
10.2.2 If the delegated officer determines that a ground for cancellation
exists, he or she can consider whether to cancel the non-citizen's
doing so, delegated officers are to have regard to, but not be limited by, the
following matters:
* the purpose of intended travel to or stay in Australia;
* whether evidence suggests that the visa holder intended a temporary or
permanent stay in Australia;
* whether the visa holder has travelled to or spent any time in Australia on
other occasions and the visa holder's conduct on those
* the present circumstances of the visa holder, such as:
- the length of lawful residence in Australia;
- the strength of family, social, business and other ties with Australia;
- the degree of hardship which would be caused to Australian citizens and
permanent residents, if the visa were cancelled and the
person required to
leave Australia;
- any hardship the visa holder would suffer;
- ties with other countries;
* the circumstances in which the ground for cancellation arose;
* the seriousness of the ground for cancellation;
* the visa holder's behaviour in relation to the Department eg cooperation with
the Department, willingness to come forward, timeliness
of responses to the
Department;
* the time elapsed since the ground for cancellation arose and whether the
circumstances which provide the ground(s) for cancellation
continue to
* the effect of the consequential cancellation by operation of law of visas
held by family unit members, in the event that the visa
is cancelled (refer to
11 below for information on consequential cancellations);
* the effect of the cessation of any bridging visa Class A or B held by the
visa holder, in the event that the visa is cancelled
(refer to the MSI
Cancellation - General Guidelines
for further information on the cessation
of bridging visas on cancellation of any substantive visa).
10.2.3 This list is not intended to be comprehensive and it is incumbent on the
decision-maker to take into account all relevant
matters when deciding whether
or not to cancel a visa.
Policy guidelines should be observed where they are not inconsistent with the
legislation and where there are no cogent reasons against
their application.
On the duty to observe policy guidelines, see generally
Re Drake and
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No 2)
[1979] AATA 179
(1979) 2 ALD 634
Ali v Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
[1992] FCA 453
38 FCR 144.
In this matter the Tribunal had before it Tribunal file N98/02936 and
Departmental file 98/313360.
The background information on the files is set out below:
* Mr Robin Rai was born on 5 May 1973 in and is a citizen of that country. He
is the holder of a valid passport from this country.
* Mr Rai first arrived in Australia on 19 June 1996 as the holder of a Subclass
560 (Student) visa which permitted him to remain
in Australia until 23 June
1997. The visa label in his passport set out the following conditions '8517
SCHOOL AGE DEPENDANTS, 8501
HEALTH COVER, 8105 WORK LIMITATION, 8202 MEET
COURSE REQUIREMENTS'.
* On 23 June 1997 he was granted a further Subclass 560 (Student) visa which
permitted him to remain in Australia until 14 August
1999. The visa label in
his passport set out the following conditions '8105 WORK LIMITATION, 8202 MEET
COURSE REQUIREMENTS, 8501
HEALTH COVER, 8517 SCHOOL AGE DEPENDANTS'.
On 16 December 1998 Mr Rai attended an interview with a Departmental officer at
the Rockdale office of the Department. He was notified
that the Department
intended to cancel his visa as he had not abided by condition 8105 and had
'worked for more than 20 hours a week
with Group 4 Securities" He was given 30
minutes to respond. After considering his response the Departmental officer
his visa on the same day under
Section 116(1)(b)
, for working in
excess of 20 hours a week and, hence, not complying with a condition of his
Documentary Evidence
The Departmental file contained the following file note which had been made on
16 December 1998 by a Departmental officer:
I spoke to John CROUCH, Operations manager, Group 4 Securitas, today re:
subject length of employment and hours worked.
Mr Crouch advised that the subject had commenced employment with Group 4 on
31/10/96 and had ceased employment in late October 1998.
He advised that the
subject had most recently worked the following hours. Mr Crouch added that the
subject had worked 'full time'
hours or more for the majority of his service
with Group 4:
Also on the file is a Certificate of Attendance from the Hurstville Business
College, dated 15 December 1998, which states that Mr
Ray's attendance in the
Diploma of Information Technology course (course start 14/07/1997, course end
14/07/1999) was 'satisfactory'.
The Departmental officer who cancelled the visa made the following file note on
16 December 1998 about his conversation with the
I asked Da SILVA if I could personally view the school's attendance records, in
particular, those for the subject. Da SILVA said
that would not be possible
due to 'privacy' concerns. I reminded Da SILVA that one of the main reasons
colleges kept attendance
records was so that DIMA could be advised of
attendance rates as a measure of a student meeting course requirements. Da
that he would not allow DIMA to view his attendance records
Mr Rai provided the Tribunal with documents from his father, Mr Manbahadur Rai.
in Nepal and his uncle, Mr Harka Bahadur Rai, who
lives Amess St, East
Brunswick in Victoria. His father wrote that he was 'very sad' that his son's
visa had been cancelled, he thought
that his son had broken a condition of his
visa unintentionally, he had been supporting his son financially and would
continue to
do so. A portion of a Land Evaluation paper concerning a property
'Mr Rabin Rai' owned with his mother in Nepal was enclosed. His
uncle, who is
an Australian citizen and Mr Robin Rai's legal guardian, wrote that he would
like 'to meet the relevant course fees
and extremities for my nephew's further
studies'. He enclosed a Bank Statement from the Australian and New Zealand
Bank, dated 6
November 1998, which showed that Harka Bahadur Rai had had a
balance in excess of $10,000 at that date.
Mr Robin Rai's migration agent, Mr Chad Zadourian, made a written submission to
the Tribunal on 23 December 1998, in which he drew
the Tribunal's attention to
a number of other Tribunal decisions which had concerned the cancellation of
student visas. Attached
were recent applications Mr Rai had made to the
University of Sydney for the Bachelor of Commerce and Queensland University for
Bachelor of Business course.
Oral Evidence
On 14 January 1999 the Tribunal took oral evidence from Ms Rai. This can be
summarised as follows.
Mr Rai studied for a Bachelor of Commerce in Nepal. This was a two year
course. He failed one subject in the second year and a
'new law' meant that he
would have had to repeat the whole course. He met 'commercial agents' in Nepal
who were explaining to people
that they could study abroad. Mr Rai decided
that it would be preferable to continue his studies in Australia rather than
the two years of his Bachelor of Commerce course in Nepal.
When Mr Rai arrived in June 1996 he commenced studying for the Advanced
Certificate in Office Administration (Computing). He said
that his attendance
was good as he remembers that it was about 97%. However, he did not do very
well in his exams, although he passed
two subjects. He did not pay too much
attention during this course as he was thinking about which University he would
he had finished. Basically, he had thought that he should go to a
college first to get used to the education system in Australia
completely different from that in Nepal. At the end of the twelve months, he
had obtained a new visa to study for the Information
Technology course.
He was really confused about whether he should study business or computing but
decided to try the Information Technology course before
he applied to go to
University. He had been getting on alright with this course, although he had
failed a couple of subjects, his
main problem had been Economics which involved
Computer Statistics.
He had been going to his classes. This had been no trouble because if he
missed a class during the week he could go in and cover
his classes on the
weekends. The college was open on the weekends and holidays. The college used
to give students a sheet with
their percentage attendance but now they simply
mark their attendance as satisfactory or unsatisfactory.
Mr Rai agreed that he had been working more than 20 hours a week during term
time. He said that he had misunderstood the condition
on his visa. He had
thought that if he did not work full time during the semester breaks, he could
work more than 20 hours during
term time to make up the time that he had not
worked during the holidays. He now understood that this was wrong.
He agreed that he had been working with the group for Securitas from the end
October 1996 until late October 1998. When he started
with them he explained
that he was a student and could not work all the time. He was 'on-call'. He
used to work one, two or three
twelve hour shifts a week for the company. He
would start on Friday night and work till Saturday morning and then do a second
till Sunday morning. The shifts were 7 pm to 7 am or midnight to the
afternoon depending on the site. Sometimes he worked at airports
times in high-rise buildings. If he did shifts during week days, he could go
in to the college and make up his work on
the weekends. Basically he worked
two to three shifts a week for two years regardless of whether or not it was
term time or vacation
time. He was therefore averaging 24 to 36 hours work a
The Tribunal asked Mr Rai to explain the hours he worked in September and
October which were either 40 or 48 hours. He said that
when he started working
48 hours a week he had two weeks of holidays. This was one month before the
end of his course. This was
after he gave notice to the company that he could
not work more than 20 hours during term times. However, they asked him if he
Mr Rai first found out that he had misinterpreted the limited work condition on
his visa when he went to talk to Mr Da Silva, a Principal
of the college. The
Principal had called him in to discuss his work.
Mr Rai would like to continue to study the Information Technology course and
considered that he could obtain his Diploma in the next
six months. After that
he would like to study for a Degree at a university. He is not sure whether he
would study Business or Computing
at the University. He considered that both
his subjects would be important for his future. He just exploring options at
the moment.
He has not been accepted by a university.
Mr Rai's father served in the British Army for 25 years in Brunei. This was
where Mr Rai received his basic education. His father
has retired from the
army and now has quite a good investment business. His mother is a housewife.
Mr Rai is an only child.
Mr Rai's father has been sending him about $800 a month via his uncle in
Melbourne. His uncle also has a business in Nepal and his
father would put
money into the business there and his uncle would then send him the money. His
uncle comes up from Melbourne every
three to four months and brings money with
him. He said that his uncle and father would be prepared to give him more
money so that
he did not have to work such long hours in future. As well as an
uncle in Australia, he has a cousin living in Sydney who he sees
Mr Rai said that if his visa was cancelled, his uncle would be very
disappointed as he loved him very much and had been supporting
him. It was his
uncle who encouraged him to come to Australia to study.
Mr Rai would not be able to obtain a university degree which is the reason that
he came here. If his visa was cancelled, he would
be ashamed to go back to
Nepal as all his friends now have Masters Degrees. He would be a failure and
it would 'shatter' his future.
His parents and all his relatives would be very
Further documentary evidence
On 22 January 1999 Richard Da Silva, Director/Principal of the Hurstville
Business College wrote to the Tribunal as follows:
This is to confirm that
is enrolled at this College in
our Diploma of Information Technology Course.
He commenced his studies on 14 July 1997 and is due to complete the program on
14 July 1999.
Although Robin has been unable to demonstrate competence in his subjects he is
a conscientious student.
, in our opinion, that Robin would complete his Course
within the next 6 months. However, he has indicated to us that he is prepared
to do extra work outside his usual requirement and intends to acquire a
computer for home study. If this occurs then it would be
possible for Robin to
complete his program by the end of 1999 as a number of subjects only require
taking another examination.
We understand that Robin was found to be in breach of his visa requirements in
the area of work entitlements. He has told us that
he is very sorry for what
he has done and has given us an assurance that this will not happen again.
The College would be happy to recommend that Robin be given a second chance and
is prepared to accept him back into his Course on
the condition that if he is
found to be in further breach of his visa that we will report him to the
Department of Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs (DIMA).
Mr Da Silva also provided the dates of the College terms. Relevantly to this
case, the last day of Term 3 at the College in 1998
was Friday 25 September
1998 and the first day of Term 4 was Monday 12 October 1998.
FINDINGS AND REASONS
The Tribunal finds from Mr Rai's oral evidence and evidence provided by Group 4
Securitas, that Mr Rai worked for this company from
the end of October 1996 to
the end of October 1998. Mr Rai's oral evidence is that for most of this
period he worked two to three
twelve hour shifts a week, regardless of whether
it was term time or vacation. However, Group 4 Securitas has provided evidence
that Mr Rai worked for seven weeks, for the weeks ending 6 September 1998 to 18
October 1998 inclusive, for either 40 hours or 48
hours. Mr Rai claimed that
he commenced working for 48 hours a week when he had two weeks holidays.
However, the Tribunal notes
that the Group 4 Securitas stated that Mr Rai
worked for 48 hours in the week ending 13 September 1998, whereas Term 3 at his
did not end until Friday 25 September 1998. The first day of Term 4
was Monday 12 October 1998. Group 4 Securitas also stated that
Mr Rai worked
for the company for 48 hours in the week ending 18 October 1998.
Mr Rai was granted a Subclass 560 (Student) visa to study the Diploma of
Information Technology course at the Hurstville Business
College. The course
started on 14 July 1997 and is to conclude on 14 July 1999. This is the visa
which was been cancelled on 16
December 1998. The visa was subject to
condition 8105 of Schedule 8 of the
Migration Regulations 1994
. This condition
states that:
The holder must not engage in work in Australia (other than in relation to the
holder's course of study or training) for more than
20 hours a week during any
week when the institution at which the holder is studying is in session.
The Tribunal finds that from the commencement of Mr Rai's course until the end
of October 1998 he worked in excess of 20 hours a
week during the weeks that
the Hurstville College was in session. For most of this period he worked for
an average of 24 to 36 hours
a week but in September and October 1998 he worked
for 40 or more hours a week for five weeks that the College was in session.
Tribunal finds that Mr Rai has not complied with condition 8105 of his
In deciding whether of not to cancel Mr Rai's visa under
Section 116(1)(b)
Migration Act 1958
, for not complying with a condition of his visa,
the Tribunal sets out further findings having regard to the matters identified
the policy direction Migration Series Instruction 203 as follows:
The purpose of intended travel to or stay in Australia.
came to Australia as student in June 1996. His intention was to study at a
college first to get used to the Australian education
system and then to apply
to study at a university.
Whether evidence suggests that the visa holder intended a temporary or
permanent stay in Australia.
There is no evidence to suggest that he
intended anything other than a temporary stay. However, the hours he has been
working and
his poor academic results casts doubts on the genuineness of his
intention to study seriously in Australia.
Whether the visa holder has travelled to or spent any time in Australia on
other occasions and the visa holder's conduct on those
has not been to Australia on a previous occasion.
The present circumstances of the visa holder, such as:
- The length of lawful residence in Australia.
Mr Rai arrived in Australia on 19 June 1996 and was the holder of student
visas until his latest visa was cancelled on 16 December
- The strength of family, social, business and other ties with Australia.
Mr Rai has an Australian citizen uncle in Melbourne who has written saying
that he would provide Mr Rai with financial support to
continue studying in
Australia. He also has a cousin in Sydney who he sees occasionally.
- The degree of hardship which would be caused to Australian citizens and
permanent residents, if the visa were cancelled and the
person required to
leave Australia.
Mr Rai has said that his uncle would be disappointed if his visa was cancelled
as his uncle had encouraged him to study in Australia.
The Tribunal can
understand that his uncle would be disappointed but considers that Mr Rai's
uncle would not suffer any actual hardship.
Neither would a cousin who only
sees Mr Rai occasionally suffer any hardship if Mr Rai's visa was cancelled.
- Any hardship the visa holder would suffer.
Mr Rai would not be able to continue with his present studies and then study
for a university degree. The Tribunal notes that while
Mr Rai has applied to
enter a university there is no evidence that he has yet been accepted. Mr Rai
has said that he would be ashamed
to go back to Nepal as his friends now had
university degrees. He would consider himself a failure and his family would
- Ties with other countries.
Mr Rai's parents are in Nepal.
The circumstances in which the ground for cancellation arose.
The circumstances in which the ground for cancellation arose are described
above. Mr Rai has told the Tribunal that he worked in
excess of 20 hours a
week in term time as he has misunderstood the work limitation condition of his
visa. He had thought that if
he did not work full time during the semester
breaks, he could work more than 20 hours during term time to make up the time
he had not worked during the holidays. It was not until late in 1998 that
the Principal of his College had explained that he was
not allowed to work more
than 20 hours a week during term time. The Tribunal finds this explanation
quite extraordinary considering
that Mr Rai had been in Australia studying
since June 1996.
Mr Rai said that after his talk with the Principal
he had told Group 4 Securitas that he could not work for more that 20 hours a
week in term time. However, Mr Rai then proceeded to work for 40 or more hours
a week for the company for five weeks during term
- The seriousness of the ground for cancellation.
It is a serious matter for a student to work in excess of 20 hours a week
during term time. In Mr Rai's case this is particularly
serious as he did not
do so on several occasions but consistently from the beginning of his
Information Technology course until the
end of October 1998. Further, he
continued to do so for a number of weeks after he was his talk with his
Mr Rai first arrived in Australia as the holder of a
student visa which expired on 23 June 1997 and which was also subject to
8105. Although this is not the visa which has been cancelled, the
Tribunal notes that he did not comply with condition 8105 on this
visa either.
He commenced working for Group 4 Securitas at the end of October 1996, working
for 24 to 36 hours a week during term
The visa holder's behaviour in relation to the Department, eg.
co-operation with the Department, willingness to come forward, timeliness
responses to the Department.
There is no evidence to suggest that Mr
Rai has not co-operated with the Department.
The time elapsed since the ground for cancellation arose and whether the
circumstances which provided the ground(s) for cancellation
continue to
It is now some 6 weeks since Mr Rai's visa was cancelled in
December 1998. Mr Rai ceased working for Group 4 Securitas at the end
October 1998. There is no evidence that he has worked in excess of 20 hours a
week during term time since.
The effect of the consequential cancellation by operation of law of visas
held by family unit members, in the event that the visa
There is no such effect in this case.
The effect of the cessation of any bridging visa Class A or B held by the
visa holder, in the event that the visa is cancelled.
There is no
such effect in this case.
In deciding whether or not to set aside the cancellation of Mr Rai's visa, the
Tribunal has weighed the factors in his favour against
those which are not in
his favour.
In his favour is the fact that the Principal of Hurstville College is prepared
to accept him back into the Diploma of Information
Technology course at the
College (on the condition that if he is found to be in further breach of his
visa the College would report
him to the Department). The Principal has
described his attendance as 'satisfactory' and has described Mr Rai as
'conscientious
student'. Also his uncle and father have written that they are
prepared to provide him with financial support for him to continue
studying in
Australia. Finally, there is no evidence that he has worked in excess of 20
hours a week during term time since the
end of October 1998 until his visa was
Not in his favour is the seriousness of his breach of the 8105 condition of his
visas as described above and, in particular, its
duration, lasting as it did
during term times from the October 1996 to the end of October 1998. Also not
in his favour are his poor
academic results. The Principal of the Hurstville
College has stated that Mr Rai 'has been unable to demonstrate competence in
subjects' and it would be '
' that he 'would complete his
Course within the next 6 months.' If he does extra work outside his normal
requirement, as Mr Rai has
told the Principal that he will , the Principal
considers that it would be possible for Mr Rai to complete the his program by
end of 1999. Further, while Mr Rai has said that he came to Australia with
the intention of studying for a degree after he had completed
a College course,
he has not yet been admitted to a university.
The Tribunal has decided that the factors which are not in Mr Rai's favour, in
particular the seriousness of the nature of his breach
of condition 8105,
outweigh those which are in his favour. While recognising that it may cause Mr
Rai distress to return to Nepal
without a qualification, the Tribunal has
decided not to use its discretion in this matter to set aside the cancellation
of Mr Rai's
student visa.
The Tribunal affirms the decision to cancel Mr Robin Rai's Subclass 560
(Student) visa.
I certify that this and the 15 preceding pages are a true copy of the decision
and reasons for decision of this Tribunal.
DATED: 28 January 1999 for DEPUTY REGISTRAR
RTF format (58.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format