Maguire v Sydney Organising Committee for the Olympic Games (No 3) [2000] HREOCA 49 (18 November 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION ACT 1992
BRUCE LINDSAY MAGUIRE
Complainant
SYDNEY ORGANISING COMMITTEE FOR THE OLYMPIC GAMES
REASONS FOR DECISION
OF THE HON WILLIAM CARTER
INQUIRY COMMISSIONER
CONCERNING RELIEF
Location of hearing: Sydney
Hearing dates: 6 November 2000
Date of ex tempore decision: 6 November 2000
Date of written reasons: 18 November 2000
Appearances: Ms Pritchard of counsel,
instructed by the Public Interest Advocacy Centre, for the complainant
Mr Moses of counsel, instructed by Barker Gosling, for the respondent
1. Introduction
On 24 August 2000 the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
(“the Commission”) finally determined matters
of complaint
complainant had made to the Commission in a written document dated 7 June
1999. The final disposition
of the complaint
referred to the alleged failure by
the respondent to make its web site accessible to the blind complainant. The
Commission made
its determination that the complainant on that account had been
unlawfully discriminated against in breach of the
Disability Discrimination
(Cth) (“the DDA”).
The facts and circumstances relating to the making of the original complaint
on 7 June 1999 are referred to in the previous determination
Commission. The details of the complaint concerning inaccessibility of the web
site were particularised in the way pointed
out in that decision, and the final
determination of the Commission involved the making of a declaration that the
respondent do all
that was necessary to render its web site accessible to the
complainant by 15 September 2000 by the three means referred to
part of the declaration. That part of the declaration refers to the specific
particulars alleged by the complainant to have
inaccessible.
Since, as I have found, that declaration was only partially complied with, it
has become necessary to entertain an application on
behalf of the complainant to
determine compensation payable in accordance with the provisions of the DDA.
There are, on this occasion,
really two issues; the first being to determine
whether the respondent complied with the declarations and, if so, to what
and that is of course a necessary preliminary to considering the issue
of compensation. The second issue, of course, is to assess,
if needs be, the
quantum of the compensation.
on compliance with the determination of the Commission
respondent’s solicitors, by letter dated 30 August 2000 to the
complainant’s solicitors, subsequent to the making
of the Commission's
determination, responded with its instructions, and it is necessary to refer to
the relevant parts of that letter.
Paragraph 1 of the respondent's letter
refers to the requirement to include ALT text on all images and image map links
site. Paragraph 1 of the respondent's letter raises two matters.
Firstly, it indicates the respondent's intention to include ALT
text on all
images and image map links and, secondly, it inquires of the complainant as to
the identity of any particular images
or image maps which are missing and which
the complainant wished to take advantage of.
Paragraph 2 of the letter is the respondent's response to the second part of
the Commission's declaration, as is the third paragraph
of the letter referable
to the third part of the Commission’s declaration. In respect to the
third matter it is clear that
there has been no compliance with paragraph 3
of the Commission's declaration, and Mr Moses on behalf of the respondent
that on the material it was open to the Commission to so find. I am
satisfied that in that respect the respondent has
not complied
declaration.
Returning to the first matter, that is the matter referable to the matter of
ALT text, the statement of Ms Treviranus is to the
that much of the
missing ALT text has been supplied, although fairly important ALT text for
images is either both missing
or inaccurate.
I am satisfied that in respect of
the first matter there has been partial compliance with the Commission's
declaration,
some additional ALT text has been included. On the other
hand, I accept Ms Treviranus's statement and evidence that
impediments
remain and, to use her phraseology, the complainant would have needed the
capacity to perform "obscure tricks" to have
satisfactory
access. She stated
that it remained "virtually impossible" for the complainant to have obtained the
desired level of
In respect of the missing ALT text she says that, given the level of
inaccessibility, it would not have been reasonably possible for
the complainant
to get to the stage of identifying the missing ALT text which would affect the
complainant's capacity to properly
access the site. The relevance of this lies
in the second part of paragraph 1 of the letter dated 30 August 2000,
has been made, and which refers to the respondent's request
for the complainant to identify the "particular images or image
missing ALT text". In short, the state of the site for him was, in
Ms Treviranus' opinion, such that it would
practically impossible
for him to get to the stage of effectively identifying the missing ALT text.
In respect of the second part of the Commission's declaration and to the
second paragraph of the letter dated 30 August 2000,
having regard to my findings in respect of this issue in the main determination
given on 24 August 2000,
that I should
not deal with this matter further on
that account. Again, taking into account the evidence of Ms Treviranus on
the point, I am satisfied
that the requirement of the second part of the
declaration remains uncomplied with.
I should add at this point that Ms Treviranus noted in her statement
that certain positive changes to the site had been made,
that for the most
am satisfied that the requirements of the declaration have been partially
complied with only. In this respect I accept generally
the evidence of the
complainant, that on that account he continued to be significantly restricted in
his ability to access the site.
He attempted access on the three occasions
mentioned in the statement, but I also accept his statement that until
24 September
he did not visit the site because, as he said, he saw
"little point" because of what he understood to be the respondent's published
response to the orders, particularly that part of the response which referred to
the table of results, the subject matter of the
third part of the Commission's
declaration.
3. Findings on compensation
In the circumstances, therefore, it is necessary for the Commission to
consider the issue of compensation in terms of section 103(1)(b)(iv)
DDA. The submissions for the complainant are that, in considering compensation,
the compensation should be considered under
three headings: firstly, that there
should be a determination of the pecuniary sum payable in respect of injuries
for the complainant's
hurt and humiliation on account of his being discriminated
against; secondly, that an amount for his legal expenses should be included
the assessment; and thirdly, that there should be a provision for aggravated
For the respondent it is submitted that in effect, if an assessment were to
be made, that that assessment should be based, for all
practical purposes,
wholly on the allegation that the complainant had suffered, as alleged, feelings
of hurt and humiliation because
of his having been discriminated against. In
short, so the respondent submits, the case is one for modest compensation only.
Dealing first with the question whether the assessment should include an
amount to compensate the plaintiff for legal expenses, it
seems to me that the
Commission should resolve that point in accordance with the decision of the
Federal Court of Australia in
Australian Medical Council v Wilson and Ors
(1996) 137 ALR 653
at 672. In the judgment of Heerey J, the question is
considered by reference to like provisions in the
Racial Discrimination Act
(Cth) (“the RDA”). His Honour decided in the circumstances
of that case that the proper construction of the relevant
power to make the
declaration in that Act did not include the power to compensate, as part of the
making of that assessment, the
complainant in respect of any disbursements on
account of legal costs.
Having regard to the analogous provision in the DDA it seems to me that there
is no sound basis for distinguishing his Honour's decision
in relation to the
RDA, and accordingly the Commission, in accordance with that decision, is
constrained from including in the assessment,
or including in any assessment, an
amount under that heading.
The DDA therefore requires an assessment of the loss or damage suffered by
the complainant, and there is a requirement for the quantification
of that loss.
The complainant, as the previous determinations make clear, is blind and has
been since birth. It is unnecessary for
me to repeat those matters personal to
him which are recorded in the two earlier decisions of the Commission concerning
his complaint.
Obviously he is a person who has achieved at a remarkable level
in spite of his disability. He has persistently insisted that his
should not be the cause of his having to accept an inferior outcome by reason of
his disability. His competence at reading
braille and his application of that
skill to computer technology is obviously of a high order.
Accordingly, his expectations of being able to access information from the
respondent's web site were, not surprisingly, high; certainly
as high as that
which a sighted person with his skills could expect. I am satisfied that the
respondent from the outset was dismissive
of the complainant's concerns, and in
my view this is well evidenced by his original contact with Mr Reading on
matter is sufficiently dealt with in the Commission's
earlier decisions.
This response, I am satisfied, was very hurtful for him; the suggestion that
he enlist the aid of a sighted person to assist him was
wholly inconsistent with
his own expectations and what he himself, unaided, had been able to achieve,
both at university level and
in business, in spite of his disability. To
dismiss him and to continue to be dismissive of him was not only hurtful, he was
made to feel, I am satisfied, various emotions including those of anger and
rejection by a significant statutory agent within the
community of which he
himself was a part.
In my view this element of dismissiveness in the respondent's original
response was not relieved as the inquiry process under the
DDA proceeded within
the Commission. In respect of this part of the complaint it apparently
persisted and his original pain was
somewhat aggravated by that fact. It is
unnecessary to repeat the sequence of events which impacted on the making of a
final determination
between 25 February 2000 and now. I refer to the
determination made on 24 August 2000 in relation to that matter.
It is hardly necessary to add that the Sydney Olympics engaged the attention
of those who live here and elsewhere in this country
and, indeed, overseas. The
complainant’s expectation of being able to participate as a sighted person
might was unmistakable,
and this is apparent not only because of his pursuance
of this complaint, but from an assessment made of him in the course of his
having given evidence to the Commission on three occasions now.
I am comfortably satisfied that his limited access to the web site caused him
considerable feelings of hurt, humiliation and rejection.
One cannot overstate
the consequential effect upon him of his having to cope with the persistent need
to counter what he saw as
a negative, unhelpful and dismissive attitude on the
part of an organisation charged with the presentation of the most notable
event in the history of this country. This, in my view, was aggravated
by his final inability to obtain the desired access to the
web site in spite of
his having established to the satisfaction of the Commission the fact that he
had been unlawfully discriminated
The public statements of the respondent subsequent to 24 August 2000
were for him the final indignity. He had been discriminated
against by the
respondent, yet it was not prepared to restore the position, and in spite of
positive efforts to improve the site,
he continued to feel the impact which the
respondent's earlier dismissive attitude had had upon him. This was, no doubt,
by the fact that the published statement of the respondent in
justification of its noncompliance included material which had been
specifically
rejected by the Commission in its determination of 24 August 2000.
In the Commission's view his hurt and earlier rejection has persisted, and in
spite of an apparently successful outcome he had been
left with feelings of
ultimate failure. It is obviously difficult for those of us not similarly
disabled to share his feelings and
emotions. As best one can assess, including
from his presentation to the Commission, his hurtful rejection by the respondent
very considerable in his case. It is, of course, extremely difficult to
determine an appropriate monetary sum in a case such as
this. It is clearly a
matter about which individual minds might vary. It is not, in my view, a matter
of punishing an apparently
financially resourceful respondent. It is a matter
of declaring a reasonable amount which will be seen to be appropriate given all
of the circumstances of this particular case.
In my view the appropriate sum to declare in this matter by way of
compensation is the sum of $20,000.
4. Conclusion
Accordingly, in terms of section 103(1)(b)(iv) of the DDA, the
Commission makes the declaration that the respondent should pay
complainant by way of compensation the sum of $20,000.
day of November 2000
------------------------------
William Carter QC
Commissioner
RTF format (71 KB)
Signed PDF/A format