Naisby & Naisby (No. 2) [2021] FamCAFC 157 (24 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Naisby & Naisby (No. 2)
FamCAFC 157
Appeal from:
N/A – Review of Registrar’s decision made 19 July 2021
Appeal number(s):
NOA 45 of 2020
File number(s):
BRC 4847 of 2016
Judgment of:
AINSLIE-WALLACE J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPLICATION IN AN APPEAL
– REVIEW OF DECISION OF THE APPEAL REGISTRAR – Where the applicant
seeks to review the
decision of the Appeal Registrar to refuse to accept for
filing an Application in an Appeal to reinstate an appeal – Where
appeal had been dismissed by the Full Court with the consent of the parties
– Where the appellate jurisdiction of the Full
Court has been exhausted
– Assertions of uninformed consent – Complaints of judicial conduct
– Where the applicant
misunderstands the nature of the appeal process
– Application for review dismissed.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
94AAA(10)(g), 94(2), 94(2D)(g),
Family Law Rules 2004
, rr 18.07, 22.40, 22.41
Cases cited:
Allesch v Maunz
(2000) 203 CLR 172
Bele v Vaughan (No 2)
(2012) 268 FLR 411;
[2012] FamCAFC
(1998) 197 CLR 172;
[1998] HCA 67
Harris v Caladine
(1991) 172 CLR 84
[1991] HCA 9
Wellington & Child Support Registrar
[2012] FamCAFC 34
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
The Applicant:
Litigant in person
The Respondent:
Litigant in person
Independent Children's Lawyer:
Legal Aid Queensland (did not participate)
BRC 4847 of 2016
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
AINSLIE-WALLACE J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. Application to review a decision of a registrar filed on 23 July 2021 is
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Naisby & Naisby
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
AINSLIE-WALLACE J:
INTRODUCTION
1 On 19 July 2021, Mr Naisby (“the
father”) attempted to file an Application in an Appeal seeking to
reinstate his appeal
from parenting orders made by a judge of the Federal
Circuit Court on 5 June 2020 (NOA 45 of 2020). The Appeal Registrar declined
file the application because the appeal sought to be reinstated had been
dismissed by the Full Court on 2 March 2021 with the
consent of the father, Ms
Naisby (“the mother”) and the Independent Children's Lawyer. On 23
July 2021, the father filed
an application to review the Registrar’s
decision refusing to file the application.
2 The application for review was listed for hearing on 12 August 2021, and
for the reasons which follow, it will be dismissed.
3 The father and mother have been engaged in
parenting and property litigation in the Federal Circuit Court since 2016.
in February 2019 and concluding in October 2019 and over eight days
of hearing, the parties’ parenting and property settlement
proceedings
were heard by the primary judge. The primary judge made final parenting orders
on 5 June 2020 and determined the property
settlement proceedings by final
orders made on 1 September 2020. The father lodged appeals in respect of both
the property and parenting
orders. Both appeals were listed for hearing before
the Full Court on 2 March 2021.
4 The final parenting orders provided that the two youngest children of the
parties’ relationship return to live with the mother,
they having
previously lived with the father as a result of interim orders made in April
2018. An older child of the parties had
been living with the father and he was
unaffected by the primary judge’s parenting orders. The parenting orders
further provide
for time to be spent between the children and the father.
5 Since the father placed considerable significance on what happened during
the appeal hearing to support his application, it is necessary
to traverse that
hearing in some detail.
6 At the commencement of the appeal hearing, the presiding judge indicated to
the parties that the Court would consider the property
appeal first, followed by
an adjournment, and then move to consider the parenting appeal. No one objected
to that course.
7 At the commencement of the father’s argument on the property appeal,
the presiding judge observed that there was substance
to the challenge advanced
by him that the primary judge’s order purporting to notify the Trustee of
the relevant superannuation
fund was inoperative. The presiding judge raised
this with counsel for the mother as follows:
RYAN J: You heard me indicate at the opening my thoughts
in relation to order 4. I can’t see how the order as to the operative
is an order as to notice. There is no application to adduce further evidence in
the appeal to prove service on the trustee.
[COUNSEL FOR THE MOTHER]: There is not, your Honour.
RYAN J: It is going to cause you a lot of difficulty. And you will need to
consider – if that ground of appeal is successful,
then what? Is the
adjustment at some 314-odd thousand so substantial that it brings the whole of
the property orders down and require
remittal, or is it an error that, if
we’re satisfied it is an error, that can be dealt with by us by way of
re-exercise, including
giving appropriate notice to the
trustee?...
8 Although counsel for the mother ultimately conceded the identified error,
she sought, in effect that the Full Court re-exercise
the primary judge’s
discretion to rectify the error by giving notice to the Trustee.
9 At the conclusion of the submissions by counsel for the mother on the
balance of the father’s appeal grounds, the presiding
judge said:
RYAN J: All right. Thank you. Thank you for that.
[counsel for the mother], something I raised earlier is what would be the
consequences
of us finding error beyond the scope of the challenge to order 4 in
the superannuation splitting order? It seems to me, for us to
be in a position
to re-exercise, we need to have findings in the judgment to work from and we
don’t have them, and we have
thousands of pages of material. So the
prospect of a re-exercise against the background of few findings is a prospect
seem unavailable in the event that one or other of the grounds
10 Counsel for the mother conceded that in those circumstances, there was no
option but to remit the matter for re-hearing. Turning
then to the father, the
presiding judge indicated that if the parenting appeal was successful, the Full
Court could not re-exercise
the discretion but would have no option but to remit
the parenting issues for re-hearing. The presiding judge exhorted the father
and the mother to consider the effect on the children of a continuation of the
parenting proceedings and suggested they attempt to
resolve the dispute.
11 The Court adjourned at 12.52 pm and resumed at 3.11 pm at which point the
Independent Children's Lawyer told the court that:
...It appears and, I will be corrected if I am wrong,
there is an agreement in principle, between the mother and the father, that
father will not pursue his appeal in relation to the parenting matters. Upon the
agreement – to amendment to the current
orders, namely, in terms of
changeover and school
12 As to how the parenting appeal was to be resolved, counsel for the
Independent Children's Lawyer said:
...Well, I think the intention of the parties, your
Honour, is for it to be by way of order pursuant to rule 22.41, which ...
consent orders on appeal...
13 Later that afternoon the parties returned to Court with a signed minute of
consent orders. The presiding judge said:
... [The father], just for the record, you’re
content that the court makes these orders?
[THE FATHER]: I am, your
14 It was necessary that a judge of the Federal Circuit Court make the
amended parenting orders and they were made later that day.
15 The Full Court reserved its decision on the property appeal and on 11 June
2021 the Court delivered its reasons and made orders
in respect of the property
appeal which saw the appeal being allowed and the proceedings remitted for
rehearing in the Federal Circuit
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
16 As I have said, on 19 July 2021 the father
attempted to file an Application in an Appeal seeking reinstatement of the
appeal against
the parenting orders. The Appeal Registrar’s refusal to
accept the application for filing is the subject of the present review.
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) (“the Rules”)
provides for review of a Regional Appeal Registrar’s order by a judge of
the Appeal Division.
of the Rules deals with review of
decisions made by Registrars, it does not apply to an application to review an
order made by an
Appeal Registrar (r 18.07). Thus, the Rules do not contain any
particular provision about the conduct of the Court in the review
of an order
made by an Appeal Registrar. However, reviews of orders made by Appeal
Registrars by single judges of this Court are
conducted on the basis of a
hearing de novo (see
Bele v Vaughan (No 2)
(2012) 268 FLR 411 at [44] and
Wellington & Child Support Registrar
[2012] FamCAFC 34
18 The rationale for proceeding to hear an application for review of a
Registrar’s exercise of power as a hearing de novo, rather
appeal requiring the establishment of error is a cautionary choice as
illustrated in the reasons of Mason CJ and Deane
Harris v Caladine
[1991] HCA 9
(1991) 172 CLR 84
19 In separate reasons and agreeing with Mason CJ and Dean J, Dawson J
described the nature of a review conducted as a de novo hearing,
compared to an
appeal (at 125–126):
...For where the function of exercising a discretion is
delegated by a court, as it may be delegated to a Registrar, the exercise
delegated discretion cannot confined the exercise of the same discretion by the
person in whom it is primarily reposed:
Evans v Bartlam
Blundell v.
C.M. Van Stillevoldt B.V. v. E.L. Carriers Inc.
hearing by way of review of the decision of a Registrar the court is exercising
its own discretion. There are not the same
restrictions which exist when there
is an appeal from a judge to whom a discretion is confided, rather than
delegated, at first instance.
In that event the appeal court must, before
interfering, be persuaded that the judge was in error in the exercise of the
discretion,
either by acting upon wrong principles, mistaking the facts, or by
taking into account irrelevant considerations or failing to take
into account
relevant considerations:
House v. The King
Norbis v Norbis
(Footnotes omitted)
20 Thus in considering the review, the court is entitled to have regard to
the material before the Registrar together with any further
evidence filed by
the parties and here, I have taken into account the material filed by the father
as well as the affidavit sworn
on 16 July 2021 which was not accepted for filing
but which was attached to the father’s affidavit filed on 23 July 2021.
The mother filed a brief affidavit seeking that the application be
21 In essence, the father argues that he is entitled to seek reinstatement of
the parenting appeal because his appeal was dismissed
pursuant to r 22.41 of the
Rules and as such it is amenable to being reinstated by reference to s
94AAA(10)(g) of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”).
Section 94AAA applies only to appeals to the Family Court of Australia from the
Federal Circuit Court
and Magistrates Court of Western Australia. The relevant
s 94(2D)(g).
22 Section 94(2D) concerns procedural applications which may be heard and
determined by a single judge of the Appeal Division (or
another judge).
Subsection (g) includes in that list:
(g) to reinstate an appeal dismissed under a
provision of the Rules of Court;
23 Seminal to the father’s application is the premise that his appeal
was “dismissed” pursuant to
r 22.41 of the Rules.
24 Rule 22.41 is found under the heading “Consent orders on
appeal” and says:
(1) This rule applies
if the parties to an
appeal agree about the orders the court will be asked to make on appeal.
(2) The parties may file a draft consent order,
setting out the terms of their agreement.
(3) If the parties:
(b) disagree about the order for costs;
the Regional Appeal Registrar
may fix a date for hearing for the argument about costs, without requiring
appeal books to be prepared
or a procedural hearing to be held.
(Emphasis added)
25 This rule neither empowers nor compels the Full Court to act on the
parties’ agreement. It provides a mechanism by which
parties who have
agreed on an outcome in an appeal may put that agreement before the Full Court.
That is what happened here, although
since the parties were before the Full
Court when they agreed as to the outcome of the appeal, reference to the rule
was strictly
unnecessary.
26 The father argued that s 94(2D)(g) must refer to r 22.41 because there is
no other rule which provides for the dismissal of an
27 Parliament has conferred on the judges, or a majority of them, the power
to make rules not inconsistent with the Act. Those powers
are generally found
of the Act and relevantly include matters of practice and procedure
Rule 22.41 is such a rule. However, it does not follow that each
incidence of the rule-making power must, in turn, beget a rule.
matter for the judges and it is uncontroversial that the judges do not always
make rules in relation to every power conferred
28 Section 94(2D)(g) anticipates that in accordance with
might make rules which result in the dismissal of an appeal by operation of the
rule itself. If they did and an appeal
was dismissed by reason of that rule,
the provision enables an application for the appeal to be reinstated to be
determined by a
judge of the Appeal Division or as otherwise provided. It
follows that unless there is a rule which automatically dismisses an appeal
provision has no work to do. Such is the case here. There is no rule which
provides for the dismissal of an appeal which might
engage s 94(2D)(g).
29 But even if there was such a rule, the father’s appeal was dismissed
by an order and not by reason of the operation of a
30 The effect of the Full Court’s order in dismissing the appeal
concluded the proceedings and exhausted the jurisdiction of
the Full Court.
Section 94(2D)(g) cannot be called in aid to reinstate it.
31 That the jurisdiction of the Full Court has been exhausted in respect to
the parenting appeal is sufficient then to dismiss the
application for review
and affirm the decision of the Appeal Registrar.
32 However, the father’s assertion that his withdrawal of the parenting
appeal and his consent to orders that it be dismissed
was not a true consent but
rather, he was pressured into consenting, requires examination.
33 In his affidavits, the father makes a number of complaints about how the
appeal was conducted and about the comments directed to
him from the bench
which, he said, forced his hand in consenting to withdrawing the appeal with the
result that it was dismissed.
34 In his affidavit filed 23 July 2021 at paragraph 9, the father says his
consent was:
...done as a consequence of the strong encouragement of
the Full Court to do so.
35 Further, he said that he was “on the back foot” and
“flustered and befuddled” during the hearing of the
property appeal
because he had expected the proceedings to commence with the hearing of the
parenting appeal and he found it extremely
stressful when it did
While it must be accepted that
he felt flustered and unsettled by the order in which the appeals were
considered, just what weight
this submission bears in considering the
father’s submission that he was pressured into agreeing to withdraw his
appeal is difficult to determine. Certainly recourse to the transcript
of the appeal hearing does not appear to support this. The
transcript shows that
the father spoke to the grounds of appeal in amplification of his filed Summary
of Argument and he demonstrated
an understanding not only of the legal
principles to be applied to the determination of property settlement proceedings
but was aware
of the leading cases on the points. He seemed well able to
respond to and answer questions from the bench about his property appeal.
argued each of the grounds and supported them with extensive reference to the
appeal book and the transcript before the primary
36 The father referred to the comments directed to him by the presiding judge
at the conclusion of the property appeal and to which
I have already referred at
37 Just before taking the lunch adjournment, the presiding judge said to the
RYAN J: So [the father], you would understand that what
we’re discussing now is if there is error over and above the
superannuation
order error. I can see that you invite us to re-exercise. I
can’t see, speaking for myself, that that is a possibility and
something to be thought about over the luncheon adjournment if that eventuality
comes to pass. It is always a possibility.
It’s never too late for people
to think about, well, how do we finalise the proceedings ourselves. We will
resume after lunch
with the parenting appeal but, again, [the father], I would
identify for you, you ask us to re-exercise in the event that you succeed
relation to it without expressing any view at all in relation to the merit of
your appeal.
I cannot see how we could permissibly re-exercise her Honour’s discretion
in the parenting matter. And if that appeal succeeds,
then, assuming the first
is successful and remitted, then it too would have to be remitted for rehearing.
And I want you to think,
both of you, [the mother] and [the father], as parents,
what this will do to [the children], particularly, but the older boys as
If anything leaps through from the pages of this transcript and these
experts’ report, is what a tragedy this parental
dispute is for your
children. The risks to them now and into the future I doubt can be overstated,
arising from being caught up in
this travesty of a piece of litigation. It is
within your power and, I would suggest to you, your parental responsibility to
one final attempt to give them the peace that they deserve. So think about
that and we will resume at 2
38 In his affidavit sworn 16 July 2021, the father said:
23. I did not fully understand what this meant straight
away. During a very emotional lunch break, in addition to attempting to regather
myself after the challenging morning, my current wife and I discussed what we
thought the Full Court meant and what was being suggested
we should consider.
Again, my lay person interpretation of this was that they were strongly
encouraging me to consider withdrawing
39 The father further contends that:
42. ... A “suggestion” made by the Full
Court to an unrepresented party in the highly emotional circumstances of a
decision, with an hour to make that decision without any access to
legal advice... is going to carry far more weight than a simple
suggestion.
40 The father said that he took the opportunity of the discussions to
negotiate some changes to the existing parenting orders and
31. We returned to the Full Court, and I consented to
the withdrawal of the parenting appeal...
41 It is worth noting here that the presiding judge’s remarks were made
very shortly before the Court adjourned for lunch. No
time restraints were
imposed on the parties and, no doubt, had there been no negotiations the Full
Court would have returned and
considered the parenting appeal. However, the
parties did negotiate and throughout the afternoon messages were sent to the
indicating that the parties were continuing in negotiations. The matter
returned to court briefly at 3.11 pm and then the negotiations
culminating in the dismissal of the parenting appeal.
42 However, before concluding whether the father withdrew the parenting
appeal because of a “suggestion” from the bench,
it is necessary to
address the father’s misconception about the nature of the appeal process.
43 It is apparent from the father’s affidavit that he sees the appeal
process not as a mechanism for identifying and correcting
legal error, but a
means, absent any other mechanism, by which complaints may be made about the
conduct of judges, of bringing to
light “deficiencies and the
injustices” delivered in the judgment for the benefit of his “family
and broader society”.
He further contends “[i]t is only through the
appeal process that the possibility of these errors repeating themselves can
minimised”.
44 The father also speaks in his affidavit of not being able to use the
appeal to “defend Mr X” (the older child who lived
with him and who
the primary judge found posed an emotional and physical threat to the younger
two children).
45 Nor was the father’s stated intention in pressing the appeal and now
seeking to reinstate it, to seek different parenting
orders because as he has
said, one of the options he later considered was to press the appeal but
withdraw if the Full Court would
not re-exercise the primary judge’s
discretion.
46 The father’s stated intention of using the appeal process to expose
what he saw as deficiencies in the reasons and to correct
the primary
judge’s conduct frankly misunderstands the purpose of an appeal and to
pursue an appeal for those reasons could
well be seen as an abuse of process.
47 Section 94(2) of the Act articulates the nature of the appellate
or vary the decree
or decision the subject of the appeal" and to "make such decree or decision as,
in the opinion of the court, ought
to have been made in the first instance" or
if it considers it appropriate to "order a re-hearing, on such terms and
conditions,
if any, as it considers appropriate".
48 On this point, in
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
(2000) 203 CLR 172
Allesch v Maunz
”), the High Court said at [30]:
Although, on an appeal by way of rehearing from a
discretionary judgment, an appellate court may, itself, exercise the discretion
in question by reference to circumstances as they then exist, it is not bound to
do so. It may, instead, set aside the order under
appeal and remit the matter
for rehearing or, in terms of s 94(2) of the Act "order a re-hearing, on such
terms and conditions, if
any, as it considers appropriate." And where
circumstances have or are likely to have changed between the original hearing
disposition of the appeal, it is not uncommon for an appellate court to
remit the matter for rehearing rather than, itself, exercise
the discretion in
49 The nature of the jurisdiction of the Full Court of the Family Court was
described in
(1998) 197 CLR 172 at [111] thus:
...Appellate jurisdiction in the strict sense is
evidence and in accordance with the law then applicable. In contrast, the
Full Court of the Family Court must decide the rights of
the parties upon the
facts and in accordance with the law as it exists at the time of hearing the
appeal. Speaking of the similar
Master of the Rolls, Sir George Jessel, said that the appeal is a "trial over
on the evidence used in the Court below; but there is a special power to
receive further evidence."
(Footnotes omitted)
50 Further in
Allesch v Maunz
the Court said at [23]:
... the powers of the appellate court are exercisable
only where the appellant can demonstrate that, having regard to all the evidence
now before the appellate court, the order that is the subject of the appeal is
the result of some legal, factual or discretionary
error and ... on an appeal by
way of rehearing, an appellate court can substitute its own decision based on
the facts and the law
as they then stand.
(Footnotes omitted)
51 Clearly then complaints as to judicial conduct, denunciation of the
hearing process or vindication of parties or witnesses have
no place in an
appeal in the Family Court. The father complains that the Full Court did not
provide him “with information
on the courses of action available to me to
address my concerns and the consequences of each of those decisions to allow me
an informed
This assertion
puts in sharp focus the father’s misunderstanding of the appeal process
and the role of the Full Court. He
had two options open to him – to press
on with the appeal or to withdraw it. He chose to withdraw the appeal and it
was dismissed.
52 Returning then to the father’s complaint that while he consented to
the appeal being withdrawn, it was not fully informed
and was the result of the
suggestion of the bench. It is clear from his evidence that at the point when
the father understood that
if his parenting appeal was successful the Full Court
would not re-exercise the primary judge’s discretion but remit it to
Federal Circuit Court for rehearing, he withdrew it, conduct entirely consistent
with his evidence to which I have earlier referred.
53 The father had ample time to consider whether to proceed, he discussed the
prospect with the Independent Children's Lawyer and,
ultimately conceded.
54 Nothing said by the bench could remotely be seen as pressure but rather a
plea to both the father and the mother to consider their
wellbeing and bring the proceedings to a halt.
55 The Full Court has no jurisdiction to consider the question, no appeal
presently exists and thus, no Application in an Appeal can
be filed. The
decision of the Appeal Registrar was entirely correct and the review application
will be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding fifty-five (55)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Ainslie-Wallace.
Susan Brennan
Dated: 24 August 2021
Transcript 2 March 2021, p.29
lines 28–38
Transcript 2
March 2021, p.47 lines
Transcript 2 March
2021, p.48 lines 26–30
Transcript 2 March 2021, p.50 lines
Transcript 2 March
2021, p.51 lines 15–17
Father’s affidavit sworn 16 July 2021, paragraph
Transcript 2 March 2021,
p.47 line 37 to p.48 line 11
Father’s affidavit sworn 16 July 2021, paragraph
Father’s affidavit
sworn 16 July 2021, paragraphs 35 and
Father’s affidavit
sworn16 July 2021, paragraph 41
RTF format (412 KB)
Signed PDF/A format