Maher v Child Support Agency [2000] HREOCA 45 (9 November 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
SEX DISCRIMINATION ACT 1984
Matter No: H96/96
Russell Maher
Darlene Newhill
Complainants
Commonwealth of Australia (Child Support Agency)
REASONS FOR DECISION OF INQUIRY COMMISSIONER
RICHARD TRACEY QC
Date of decision: 9 November 2000
Dates of hearing: 16 December 1996, 1 May 1997, 9 April 1999
Location of hearing: Sydney
Appearances: Dr Steven Churches of counsel for the complainants.
Sylvia Winters of counsel instructed by the Australian Government Solicitor
for the respondent.
IN THE HUMAN RIGHTS & EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
Complainants
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA (CHILD SUPPORT AGENCY)
REASONS FOR DECISION
7 July 1994 Ms. Darlene Newhill lodged a complaint with the Commission. Ms.
Newhill's complaint related to a decision of a child
support review officer of
the Child Support Agency, given on 9 June 1994, on an application by Ms. Maryann
Maher for an increase
in child support payable by her former husband, Mr.
Russell Leslie Maher. The decision was made under the
Child Support
(Assessment) Act
and related to payments of child support for Mr. and
Ms. Maher's seven year old child. It appears that an earlier administrative
assessment under the Act, based on Mr. Maher's earlier declared income, had led
to him having no obligation to pay for the support
of his child. By the time of
Ms. Maher's application in 1994 he was employed full time and was receiving a
much higher income.
The review officer adjusted his liability to $113.10 per
week on the ground that the administrative decision had become unjust because
the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of Mr. Maher:
see s.117(2)(c)(i) of the Act. In assessing Mr.
Maher's financial position the
review officer disregarded the fact that he was maintaining Ms. Newhill
de facto wife. It
was this aspect of the decision which gave rise to Ms.
Newhill's complaint.
doubt arose, in the course of processing the complaint, as to whether or not Ms.
Newhill had standing to make the complaint and,
in order to remove the scope for
any objection to the Commission dealing with the complaint by reason of her lack
of standing, Mr.
Maher, on 17 December 1996, lodged his own complaint about the
decision with the Sex Discrimination Commissioner: cf.
Abbott Australasia
Pty. Ltd. v. HREOC
[1999] FCA 427
(1999) 88 FCR 132.
Mr. Maher's complaint merely
formalised the position which had earlier emerged under which he was treated as
the effective complainant.
Indeed, the Sex Discrimination Commissioner had
referred the matter to the Commission for inquiry under s.57 of the
Discrimination Act
on 13 May 1996, recording Mr. Maher as being the
complainant.
matter originally came on for hearing before Commissioner John Nader QC.
However, he was unable to continue the hearing and the
parties agreed, at a
directions hearing held on 27 July 1998, that I should proceed to determine the
matter on the basis of written
submissions made by them to Commissioner Nader.
Complainants allege that the Child Support Agency has acted unlawfully by
discriminating against Mr. Maher on the ground of his
marital status, contrary
Sex Discrimination Act
. That sub-section
"26(1) It is unlawful for a person who performs any
function or exercises any power under a Commonwealth law......to discriminate
against any other person on the ground of the other person's marital status in
the performance of that function [or] the exercise
of that power......".
The term "marital status" is defined in
of the Act to refer to de facto
relationships. The Complainants allege that, in declining to take into account
the financial support
provided to Ms. Newhill by Mr. Maher, the Agency treated
Mr. Maher less favourably than it would treat a person in a formal matrimonial
relationship, thereby discriminating against him within the meaning of
the Act. The Complainants further submit that there is no necessary
inconsistency between the
Child Support (Assessment) Act
Discrimination Act
and that, accordingly, officers administering the
Child Support (Assessment) Act
are bound to treat the word "duty" as it
appears in s.117 of that Act in accordance with the requirements of s.6 of the
Sex Discrimination Act
. Put another way, it is submitted that, in
construing the word "duty" in s.117 of the
Child Support (Assessment)
, officers are required to proceed on the basis that a de facto spouse
has the same duty as a legally married spouse to maintain the
other member of
the partnership. Alternatively, the Complainants submit that if there is an
inconsistency between the two Acts,
then the provisions of the
Discrimination Act
must prevail.
Respondent accepts that the review officer was performing a function or
exercising a power under Commonwealth law or was administering
a Commonwealth
law for the purposes of
Sex Discrimination Act
. It maintains
that the exercise of power under s.98B of the
Child Support (Assessment)
involved only two parties, Mr. and Ms. Maher. Whilst
Mr. Maher may have been aggrieved by the decision, Ms. Newhill was not.
Accordingly, so it is contended, she lacks standing to make
a complaint to the
Commission. The Respondent's further submissions were based on the assumption
that Mr. Maher was the person aggrieved
by the review officer's decision. The
Respondent contends that Mr. Maher's circumstances are not the same and are
materially different
from a person who is legally married. The Respondent
further contends that the review officer did not make the decision to disregard
any obligations which Mr. Maher may have had towards Ms. Newhill "by reason of"
his marital status; rather the decision was made
"because of" the review
officer's construction of the applicable legislation. There is also a
suggestion by the Respondent that
no discrimination occurred because the
application of the relevant formula would have produced the same result, whether
Maher owed support obligations to Ms. Newhill. Finally, the
Respondent contends that it has a good defence under s.40(1)(d) of the
Discrimination Act
because the review officer acted in direct compliance
with "an order of a Court". The suggestion is that an earlier decision by
Family Court in the matter of
, which held that
there was no duty on a person to maintain a de facto spouse for the purposes of
s.72 of the
Family Law Act
, compelled a similar construction of s.117(2)
Child Support (Assessment) Act
read the papers and the written submissions of the parties, I considered that it
was necessary to hear further submissions
to clarify certain issues.
Accordingly, a hearing was held on 9 April 1999. At that hearing I sought to
clarify the following matters:
(a) The decision which it was sought to challenge.
(b) Whether, if the decision which was the subject of complaint was the
decision of the Child Support Review Officer dated 9 June
1994, that decision
may be subject to review or appeal for legal error.
(c) Whether any appeal or review had been instituted following the handing
down of the decision.
At the hearing the parties made provisional submissions in response to the
queries which I raised. Both sought and were granted the
opportunity to make
more considered submissions in writing. The Respondent's submissions were
received in January 2000 and the Applicant's
in the following month.
parties confirmed that the decision about which complaint is made to the
Commission is the decision of the Child Support Review
Officer dated 9 June
1994. That decision was purportedly made under Part 6A of the
Child Support
(Assessment) Act
. The application was made by Ms. Maher under s.98B(1) of
the Act. The application sought a variation of an administrative assessment
Mr. Maher's liability to make child support payments.
The variation sought was
an increase to those payments. By s.98C it was
necessary for the Registrar to
be satisfied of certain matters before acceding to the application. Section 98C
"98C(1) Subject to this part, if:
(a) an application is made to the Registrar under s.98B; and
(b) the Registrar is satisfied:
(i) that one, or more than one, of the grounds for departure referred to in
sub-section (2) exists; and
(ii) that it would be:
(A) just and equitable as regards the child, the liable parent, and the
custodian entitled to child support; and
(B) otherwise proper;
to make the particular determination under this part;
the Registrar may make the determination.
(2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1)(b)(i):
(a) the grounds for departure from the provisions of this Act relating to
administrative assessment of child support in relation to
the child are the same
as the grounds for departure set out in sub-section 117(2); and
(b) sub-sub-paragraph 117(2)(b)(i)(A) has effect subject to sub-section
(3) Sub-sections 117(4) to (9) (inclusive) apply to the Registrar in the
exercise of his or her powers under this section as if:
(a) any reference in those sub-sections to the Court were a reference to the
Registrar; and
(b) any reference to an order were a reference to a determination."
Section 117 of the Act makes provision for the variation, by a Court, of the
level of child support payments. Section 117(2) provides
a number of grounds
departure from an existing assessment. The Child Support Review Officer who
was acting as the delegate of the Registrar (see s.149)
found that the ground
provided for in s.117(2)(c)(i) had been made out. Relevantly, s.117(2)
"For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1)(b)(i), the grounds of departure are as
(a) ............
(b) ............
(c) that, in the special circumstances of the case, application in relation
to the child of the provisions of this Act relating to
administrative assessment
of child support would result in an unjust and inequitable determination of the
level of financial support
to be provided by the liable parent for the child
because of:
(i) the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of either
parent or the child; or
(ii) .........."
It was also necessary that the officer be satisfied of the matters referred
to in s.98C(1)(b)(ii). In respect of these matters, s.117(4)
and (5) were
relevant with references to the Registrar being substituted for references to
the Court. Those sub-sections provide:
"117(4) In determining whether it would be just and equitable as regards
the child, the custodian entitled to child support and the liable parent to
make a particular order under this Division, the Court
must have regard to:
(a) the nature of the duty of a parent to maintain a child (as stated in
(b) the proper needs of the child; and
(c) the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the
(d) the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of each
parent who is a party to the proceeding; and
(e) the commitments of each parent who is a party to the proceeding that are
necessary to enable the parent to support:
(i) himself or herself; or
(ii) any other child or another person that the person has a duty to
maintain; and
(f) the direct and indirect costs incurred by the custodian entitled to child
support in providing care for the child; and
(g) any hardship that would be caused:
(A) the child; or
(B) the custodian entitled to child support;
by the making of, or the refusal to make, the order; and
(A) the liable parent; or
(B) any other child or any other person that the liable parent has a duty to
by the making of, or the refusal to make, the order.
(6) In determining whether it would be otherwise proper to make a
particular order under this Division, the Court must have regard
(a) the nature of the duty of a parent to maintain a child (as stated in s.3)
and, in particular, the fact that it is the parents
of a child themselves who
have the primary duty to maintain the child; and
(b) the effect that the making of the order would have on:
(i) any entitlement of the child, or the custodian entitled to child support,
to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit; or
(ii) the rate of any income tested pension, allowance or benefit payable to
the child or the custodian entitled to child support."
In dealing with these statutory requirements the Child Support Review Officer
(in her reasons for decision at 3) said:
"Having determined that grounds are established, I must consider whether it
is just and equitable and otherwise proper to vary the
assessment. In doing so
I have considered the factors referred to in s.117(4) of the Act. These factors
nature of the duty that each parent has to maintain the children;
proper needs of the children;
income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the children and
each parent;
commitments of each parent necessary to support himself or herself and the
direct and indirect costs incurred by Ms. Maher in providing care for the
children; and
hardship that would be caused to Mr. Maher, Ms. Maher and the child by the
making of, or the refusal to make, the order.
Having regard to these
factors I am
satisfied that it is just and equitable to vary the
assessment.
In addition, I have had regard to s.117(5) of the Act. The matters that I
must consider under this section are:
nature of the duty of each parent to maintain the child and particularly the
fact that it is the parents themselves who have the
primary duty to maintain the
effect that the making of the order would have on the rate of any income tested
pension received by Ms. Maher.
Having regard to the factors referred
to above, I consider
just and equitable and otherwise proper to
vary the assessment." (Emphasis added)
The officer then went on to undertake an assessment of Mr. Maher's financial
position, presumably for the purpose of determining the
quantum of any
which should be made. It was in that context that the officer said (Reasons
for Decision at 4) that:
"Mr. Maher lives with his de facto wife and baby son in a house which he says
is owned entirely by his de facto wife. His de facto
wife does not work and is
financially dependent upon Mr. Maher for her support. I am bound by the Family
Court decision in
Alston and Alston
which held that there was no duty to
maintain a de facto spouse unlike the duty under s.72 of the
which creates a duty to maintain a legal spouse. Therefore I must
disregard the fact that Mr. Maher is in fact maintaining his de
facto wife in
determining his capacity to pay child support in respect of his other child. In
respect of his new son he does have
a legal duty to support him."
Having considered Mr. Maher's financial commitments, the officer concluded
that his child support liability should be increased from
9 June 1994 to an
amount of approximately $113.10 per week "after Mr. Maher applies to the Child
Support Agency to have his dependent
son taken into account". Various other
orders were also made in respect of future financial years.
is no part of the duty of the Commission, in dealing with the present complaint,
to conduct a review or appeal from the Child Support
Review Officer's decision.
However, it is necessary to comment on certain aspects of the decision. It is
necessary, firstly, to
refer to the internal contradiction in the passage in
which the officer deals with the application of sub-ss.117(4) and (5). She
first declares herself not satisfied that the "just and equitable" requirement
has been met. She then proceeds to deal with s.117(5)
and states that she
considers that "it
equitable and otherwise proper
to vary the assessment". It may be that a typographical error explains the
inclusion of the word "not"
in relation to the
matters referred to in s.117(4). The omission of that word would render the
quoted passages consistent. Had the officer determined
that she was not
satisfied as
to the "just and equitable" requirement, there would have been no
need for her to proceed to deal with
the matters raised by s.117(5) and it would
not have been appropriate for her to have varied the assessment. Nonetheless, I
that, despite this matter having
been before the Commission for some years,
the Commission has not been notified that the officer
has sought to amend her
for Decision.
is next to be noted that, in paraphrasing the matters which s.117(4) required
her to consider, the officer, at no point, referred
to the commitment of either
parent to support "another person that the
person has a duty to maintain": see
s.117(4)(e)(ii); or,
to the hardship which might be caused to "another person
that the liable parent has a duty to support": see s.117(4)(g)(ii)(B).
even if it be assumed that the officer had intended to make a positive finding
in relation to the "just and equitable" criterion,
it does not appear that she
did so by reference to any duty or lack of duty which Mr. Maher may or may not
have owed to Ms. Newhill.
This issue was only taken into account by the officer
when she turned her attention to the calculation of the amount of support
Mr. Maher should, prospectively, be required to provide. In that context it was
determined that the payments which Mr. Maher
made for the support of Ms. Newhill
ought not to be brought into account.
Child Support Review Officer advised Mr. and Ms. Maher that, if either of them
were dissatisfied with her decision, he or she
had a right to apply to the
Family Court or a local Court for a rehearing. The parties were also advised of
their right to make
a fresh application. Despite having their attention drawn
to this issue, neither party has advised the Commission that any appeal
to a Court or that it was subsequently sought to reopen the issues by means of a
fresh application.
their written submissions the parties joined issue on the question of whether
the Family Court's decision in
Alston v. Alston
had any relevance to the
task being undertaken by the officer and as to whether it could or did have any
bearing on the outcome of
Ms. Maher's application. The Respondent submitted
that the same quantum of liability would have been arrived at, under the
whether or not Mr. Maher's financial commitments
to Ms. Newhill were brought into account. Ms. Newhill provided detailed
calculations
which she contended suggested that the Respondent's assumption was
not correct. The Commission is not in a position, on the evidence,
to determine
which (if either) of these competing submissions is correct. The issue was not
addressed by the Child Support Review
Officer and any attempt at determining
whether or not the officer would have made a different order as to quantum had
she brought
into account Mr. Maher's commitments to Ms. Newhill, can only be
speculative. The proper forum for a resolution of this issue would
have been a
Court on appeal.
order for the complainant to succeed it is necessary that the Commission be
satisfied that discrimination on the ground of marital
status has occurred. It
must appear that a person (the Respondent acting through the Child Support
Review Officer) has discriminated
against another person (Mr. Maher) by reason
of Mr. Maher's marital status. The officer will have so discriminated if she
has treated
Mr. Maher less favourably than, in circumstances that are the same
or are not materially different, she would treat a person of a
different marital
status: see s.6 of the
Sex Discrimination Act
. The only evidence before
the Commission as to the reasons for the orders made by the Child Support Review
Officer on 9 June 1994
are her published reasons for decision. Her reasons
suggest that Mr. Maher's marital status had no bearing on her decision to make
determination under s.98C of the
Child Support (Assessment) Act
as the issue played any part in the decision-making process, it was referred to
when the officer was considering the quantum
of any variation which should be
made. In that context the officer said that she must disregard the fact that
Mr. Maher was maintaining
Ms. Newhill when determining his capacity to pay child
support for Mr. and Ms. Maher's son. Neither the reasons nor any other evidence
before the Commission allows the conclusion to be drawn that, had Mr. Maher's
financial commitments to Ms. Newhill been brought into
account, a different
level of child support would have been determined. In these circumstances it is
not possible for a finding
of less favourable treatment to be made. For this
reason the application must be dismissed.
it is not strictly necessary to do so, I should deal shortly with certain of the
submissions made by the Respondent. It
was contended by the Respondent that no
discrimination had occurred within the meaning of s.6 of the
Discrimination Act
because the circumstances of the parties to a legal
marriage are materially different from those of the parties to a de facto
There can be no doubt that those circumstances, at least from a legal
perspective, are different. Relevantly, as determined in
, no legal duty falls on a partner to a de facto marriage to support
the other partner. Had it been established that Mr. Maher had
been treated less
favourably because of his marital status the application might, therefore, have
been unsuccessful in any event.
I do not, however, consider that
Sex Discrimination Act
would have afforded a defence to the
Respondent. In taking account of the lack of a legal duty of maintenance, the
officer was not
doing anything in direct compliance with an order of a Court.
All that the officer was doing was construing the
Child Support (Assessment)
in the light of the decision in
Alston v. Alston
this 9th day of November 2000.
R.R.S. TRACEY
Hearing Commissioner
RTF format (61.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format