Tadman & Tadman [2025] FedCFamC1F 664 (15 September 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Tadman & Tadman
[2025] FedCFamC1F 664
File number(s):
ADC 873 of 2022
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– abuse of process – attempt to relitigate issue determined by
earlier consent order –
application by beneficiary of deceased estate of
husband to intervene in property proceedings – application for
substitution
of legal personal representative of deceased husband –
discovery sought against non-party – request for leave to issue
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) r 6.15
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules
rr 3.01, 3.04, 3.07, 3.19
Cases cited:
Alister v R
[1984] HCA 85
(1984) 154 CLR 404
Andrew Garrett
Wine Resorts v National Australia Bank Ltd (No 6)
[2005] SASC 292
Associated Dominions Assurance Society Pty Ltd v John Fairfax
& Sons Pty Ltd
(1955) 72 WN (NSW) 250
Attorney General for New
South Wales v Chidgey
[2008] NSWCCA 65
Bailey & Bailey (Executrix
of the Estate of Bailey)
[1989] FamCA 45
(1990) FLC 92-117
Bailey & Bailey
[1987] FamCA 26
Baumann & Ors & Rushbrooke & Anor
Chandrasekaran v Royal Australian and New Zealand College of
Psychiatrists
[2019] FCA 1687
Cullen & Cullen
[2011] FMCAfam
Dale v Western Australia
[2011] FCAFC 46
Doyle & Doyle
[1989] FamCA 7
Erdem & Ozsoy
[2012] FMCAfam 1323
[2012] 272 FLR
Gilmore & Patrick
[2022] FedCFamC1F 1015
[2024] FedCFamC1A 72
Julien & Perrin (No 9)
FedCFamC1F 655
Kelly & Kelly
[2015] FCCA 801
Lambard and Ors (No 3)
[2020] FamCA 879
Laue & Laue (Deceased) by
his Legal Personal Representative Daniel Fellon
[2016] FCWA 91
[2019] FCWA 145
Levy v Victoria ("Duck shooting case")
[1997] HCA 31
(1997) 189 CLR
Martin & Martin (No 2)
[2014] FamCA 232
Mason & Hannaford; Mason-King (Intervener)
[1993] FamCA 150
Mason & Mason c/o Hannaford
[1993] FamCA 128
Midhurst (Deceased) & Midhurst
[2008] FamCA
Murdoch & Brown (No 2)
[2013] FamCA 732
& Anor (Conduct of Counsel)
[2002] FamCA 1155
Palmisano &
[2025] FedCFamC1A 166
Rogers & Rogers
[1988] FamCA 52
(1988) FLC 91-963
Roland & Argento and Anor
[2019] FamCA 550
[2009] FamCA 531
S (deceased) & S
[2002] FamCA 1281
palla v St George
Motor Finance Ltd (No 6)
[2004] FCA 1699
State Bank of New South Wales
v Stenhouse Ltd
(1997) Aust Torts Reports 81-423
Strelys & Strelys
[1987] FamCA 54
TKWJ v The Queen
[2002] HCA 46
(2002) 212 CLR
Tomlinson v Ramsey Food Processing Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 28
(2015) 256 CLR 507
UBS AG v Tyne
[2018] HCA 45
Wickens & Brewer
[2014] FCCA 373
Wynne & Hummel
[2019] FCCA 1412
Yeates (as executor for Mr Yeates) & Yeates
[2013] FCWA 117
Zemin & Kaba
[2024] FedCFamC1F 95
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Randle & Taylor
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Southern Vales Legal
Counsel for the Second Respondent:
Ms Provis with Mr Bulloch
Solicitor for the Second Respondent:
ADC 873 of 2022
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
MS B TADMAN
First Respondent
TADMAN (DECEASED) BY HIS LEGAL PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE MR REMEIKA
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
trial listed on 3 November 2025 is vacated.
mention listed on 21 October 2025 is vacated.
orders made 6 June 2025 are discharged.
proceedings be stayed pending determination of the proceedings in the Supreme
Court of South Australia.
solicitors for the first and second respondents notify the Court forthwith upon
determination of those proceedings.
consent, the applicant, MS B TADMAN, be granted leave to inspect the Court
is granted to the wife to issue a subpoena to Mr C of D Real Estate to produce
copies of any and all records, including notes
and materials, reports, records
of conversations and written and/or visual-audio recording of meeting relating
to the Agency for
the sale of the property at E Street, Suburb F.
is granted to the husband’s legal personal representative to bring an
application for costs in relation to the applications
determined this day.
Application in Proceeding filed 28 August 2025 and Response to an Application in
a Proceeding filed 12 September 2025 are otherwise
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
EX TEMPORE REASONS FOR
INTRODUCTION
reasons were delivered
and have been settled from the
transcript. Grammatical errors have been corrected, citations have been added
and amendments have been
made to make the orally delivered reasons clearer and
easier to read.
application listed before the Court is an Application in a Proceeding filed by a
third party, Ms B Tadman, on 29 August 2025.
Ms B Tadman is the daughter of the
husband, who was the respondent in the substantive proceedings, and who is
deceased. She will
be referred to as ‘the applicant’ for the purpose
of these reasons.
applicant sought, by way of her Application in a Proceeding, the discharge of an
order made on 29 June 2023 substituting the legal
personal representative for
the deceased husband, her own appointment as legal personal representative for
the husband, and in the
alternative, leave to intervene in the proceedings in
her own personal capacity. Counsel appearing on her behalf today abandoned
application with respect to substitution of the legal personal representative,
and pressed only the application to intervene.
wife filed a Response to an Application in a Proceeding on 12 September 2025.
Insofar as it was responsive to the application,
by that response she too sought
the discharge of the order for the appointment of the legal personal
representative. However, she
sought that the Public Trustee be substituted as
legal personal representative. The wife also sought some ancillary orders with
to discovery and leave to issue subpoenas.
it had not been contained within the formal application, counsel for the
applicant made an oral application this day seeking
that the trial in this
matter, which is currently listed to commence on 3 November 2025, be vacated,
and that the proceeding be stayed
pending the outcome of an application made by
her to the Supreme Court of South Australia. Her application in the Supreme
Court seeks
revocation a grant of probate in favour of the present legal
personal representative, and seeking instead that there be a grant of
administration to her or to such other person as determined by that court. The
application for to vacate the trial listing
and stay the proceeding was
reluctantly acceded to by the wife, and was opposed only very faintly by counsel
for the legal personal
representative of the husband.
am satisfied that the circumstances of the pending Supreme Court application and
its potential consequences for the determination
of those proceedings
necessitate the trial date being vacated and the stay being granted, and orders
will be made on those terms.
husband and wife married and commenced cohabitation in 2001 and separated in
December 2021. There is one adult child of their
relationship, who is the
half-brother of the applicant.
wife commenced the present proceedings in the Federal Circuit and Family Court
of Australia (Division 2), seeking orders with
respect to the parties' property
pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (‘the
Act’), on 2 March 2022, prior to the husband’s death. The husband
filed a response on 22 April 2022;
husband passed away in 2023, prior to the conclusion of the proceedings.
proceedings have been, and are being, continued following the husband's death,
pursuant to what is now
That subsection provides
as follows:
79AA Other matters in relation to alterations of property interests
Death of party before property settlement proceedings complete
(8) Where, before property settlement proceedings are completed, a party to the
marriage dies:
(a) the proceedings may be continued by or against, as the case may be, the
legal personal representative of the deceased party and
the applicable Rules of
Court may make provision in relation to the substitution of the legal personal
representative as a party
to the proceedings;
(b) if the court is of the opinion:
(i) that it would have made an order with respect to property if the deceased
party had not died; and
(ii) that it is still appropriate to make an order with respect to property;
the court may make such order as
it considers appropriate with respect to:
(iii) any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them;
(iv) any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to
the marriage; and
(c) an order made by the court pursuant to paragraph (b) may be enforced on
behalf of, or against, as the case may be, the estate
of the deceased party.
his last will, which was dated 3 January 2023, the husband appointed his
brother, Mr Remeika, as executor of his estate. Another
appointed as joint executor, together with an alternate, but both have renounced
probate, leaving Mr Remeika as the sole
nominated executor. The applicant is a
beneficiary under the will.
2 February 2023, an Application in a Proceeding was filed, seeking, inter alia,
the appointment of Mr Remeika as litigation guardian
for the husband. Although
it was filed after his death, that application had been prepared by the husband
himself prior to his death.
3 March 2023, the applicant filed an Application in a Proceeding seeking leave
to intervene and a stay of the proceeding pending
the outcome of Supreme Court
proceedings commenced by her challenging the husband's will. That application
also sought that the applicant
or her legal representative be appointed as a
legal personal representative and substituted for the husband.
3 April 2023, an Application in a Proceeding was filed seeking Mr Remeika as
legal personal representative be substituted for the
9 May 2023, Judge McGinn made an order providing for the dismissal of the
application that had been filed on 2 February 2023.
was granted to Mr Remeika on 19 May 2023. On 29 June 2023, his Honour Judge
McGinn ordered that Mr Remeika, as legal personal
representative, be substituted
for the husband. On the same day, the Application in a Proceeding filed on 3
March 2023 by the applicant
to the present application was dismissed by consent.
proceedings were transferred to this court on 15 April 2025, and were listed for
trial before me commencing on 3 November 2025.
PRIOR APPLICATION IN SAME TERMS
present application effectively replicates the Application in a Proceeding filed
by the applicant on 3 March 2023, which was dismissed
by consent on 29 June
2023. Contrary to the submission of her counsel, I am not of the view that the
applicant's evidence discloses
any significant new development which would
justify a fresh application in the same terms.
is apparent from the material filed by the applicant that she has come to regret
not having pursued her earlier application and
that she wishes to re-enliven it.
applicant also deposes to having formed concerns about the advice given to her
by her former legal representatives. Although she
has waived privilege and has
given evidence of some of the advice given to her, her evidence in this regard,
even if wholly accepted,
does not establish that the advice she was given was
incorrect. Indeed, as will become apparent, at least insofar as the advice with
which she was provided was not to proceed with the application seeking to be
substituted as legal personal representative, that advice
was correct.
do not accept the submission that the applicant was, as submitted by her
with respect to her decision to withdraw
her earlier application. In any event, in all but exceptional circumstances,
parties are
bound by the conduct of their
Certainly, they are bound
by their own decisions and actions, irrespective of whether they later have a
change of mind as to their
correctness. An attempt to re-litigate an application
that has been dismissed by consent or otherwise is an abuse of
itself is a basis for dismissal of the application. It is not, however, the only
INTERVENTION
respect to the applicant’s application to intervene in the proceedings, I
have considered
sections 92(1)
(10)(b) of the Act, which provide as
92 Intervention by other persons
(1) In proceedings (other than divorce or validity of marriage proceedings), any
person may apply for leave to intervene in the proceedings,
and the court may
make an order entitling that person to intervene in the proceedings.
79AA Other matters in relation to alteration of property interests
(10) The following are entitled to become a party to proceedings in which an
application is made for an order under
by a party to a marriage
subject marriage
(b) any other person whose interests would be affected by the making of the
have also had regard to
Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) (‘the
Rules’), which provide as follows:
3.01 Necessary
A person whose rights may be directly affected by an issue in a proceeding, and
whose participation as a party is necessary for the
court to determine all
issues in dispute in the proceeding, must be included as a party to the
proceeding.
Example: If a party seeks an order of a kind referred to in
section 90AE
Family Law Act
, a third party who will be bound
by the order must be joined as a respondent to the proceeding.
3.04 Person may apply to be included
(1) A person may apply to the court to be included as a party to a proceeding by
filing an Application in a Proceeding.
(2) Unless the court otherwise orders, the application must be supported by an
affidavit stating:
(a) the person’s interest in the proceeding or any matter in dispute
between the person and a party to the proceeding; and
(b) the orders (if any) that the person will seek if included as a party.
(3) The person must serve a copy of the application and affidavit on each party
to the proceeding.
(4) An order for inclusion of the party may be on limited terms.
Note: Part IX of the
Family Law Act
deals with intervention in a
proceeding. If a person has, by order or under rule 3.07 of these Rules,
intervened in a proceeding,
the person becomes a party with all the rights and
obligations of a party (see
subsections 91(2)
paragraph 91B(2)(b) and
subsections 92(3)
3.07 Intervention by a person entitled to intervene
(1) This rule applies if either of the following intervenes in a proceeding:
(a) the Attorney‑General;
(b) any other person who is entitled under the
Family Law Act
to intervene in
the proceeding without the court’s permission.
(2) The person intervening must file:
(a) a Notice of Intervention by Person Entitled to Intervene; and
(b) an affidavit:
(i) stating the facts relied on
in support of the intervention; and
(ii) attaching a schedule setting out the orders
Note: The following are examples of when a person is entitled under the
to intervene in a proceeding without the court’s permission:
subsection 79AA(10)
authorises a creditor of a party to a proceeding
who may not be able to recover a debt if an order is made under
and a person whose interests would be affected by an order under
, to become a party to the proceeding;
subsection 90SMA(10)
authorises a creditor of a party to a proceeding
who would not be able to recover a debt if an order is made under
section 90SM
Family Law Act
, a party to
a de facto relationship or marriage with a party to a proceeding,
a party to certain financial agreements and a person
whose interests would be
affected by the making of an order to become parties to the proceeding;
Family Law Act
section 78A
Judiciary Act 1903
authorise the Attorney‑General to
intervene in a proceeding;
section 92A
Family Law Act
authorises the persons referred to in
subsection 92A(2)
of that Act to intervene in a proceeding without the
court’s permission;
(e) section 145 of the Assessment Act authorises the Child Support
Registrar to intervene in a proceeding.
(3) On the filing of a Notice of Intervention by Person Entitled to Intervene,
the Registry Manager must fix a date for a procedural
(4) The person intervening must give each other party written notice of the
procedural hearing.
applicant's Application in a Proceeding, to the extent that it relates to
intervention, would appear to be an application made
pursuant to rule 3.04 of
the Rules. It does not comply with that rule as it is not accompanied by an
affidavit setting out the orders,
if any, that the applicant will seek if
included as a party. Indeed, how the applicant proposes to conduct her case as
intervenor,
and how this would differ from the conduct of the case of the
deceased husband by his legal personal representative, was left entirely
unexplained.
affidavit relied upon by the applicant says no more in relation to the
application to intervene than the vague assertion that
she wishes to be heard in
relation to the form and substance of the orders to be sought by the parties.
it was not asserted by her, I have turned my mind to whether the applicant is,
or could be, a person entitled to intervene
without leave, by operation of
subsection 79AA(10)(b) of the Act. If that be the case, the application is
unnecessary and the process
provided for in rule 3.07 should instead have been
the difficulties with the applicant's application are not merely procedural.
Gun J held in
, intervention under
section 92 is designed to allow third parties who are affected personally by
proceedings to intervene to protect
their interests.
& Hannaford
similar factual situation to the present case. In that matter, the husband had
died following the institution of proceedings
and the executor and trustee of
his will, as his legal personal representative, had been substituted for him as
a party. The husband's
daughter had been joined as an intervenor by consent.
Justice Moss considered whether circumstances pertaining to beneficiaries under
the deceased's will (the sole beneficiary in that case being the husband's
daughter), were relevant to the proceedings.
Honour determined that to take the daughter's interests into account would not
be permissible because his Honour would be required
to go outside the ambit of
section 79 and enter the area covered by the state legislation, being the area
concerned with succession
or relating to the administration of deceased estates.
The judgment in this case was successfully
but not in relation to
that point.
Erdem & Ozsoy
Walters FM, as his Honour then was, considered the factors that are relevant to
determining whether it was still appropriate to
make an order with respect to
property pursuant to what is now subsection 79AA(8)(b)(ii). His Honour held that
in exercising his
discretion with respect to what property order to make under
that subsection, the Court may not take into account the claims or financial
circumstances of the beneficiaries of the deceased spouse's estate.
would appear from the material filed by the applicant, and particularly from the
fact that her application to intervene was originally
framed as being pressed
if and only if
’ she was unsuccessful in being substituted as
legal personal representative, that what she seeks to do is not protect any
of her own separate to the estate of the husband, but effectively to
make submissions on behalf of the estate so as to maximise its
entitlements
pursuant to orders made in these proceedings, with the ultimate result of
maximising her own entitlements as a beneficiary.
Put another way, she seeks to
step in to run the husband's case. That is the role of the legal personal
representative.
is not to the point that, as submitted by the applicant, her interest under the
will, and therefore the size of the estate, exceeds
that of Mr Remeika. As
submitted on behalf of the estate, she has no proprietary interest in any
particular piece of property and
only a residual interest as a beneficiary of
the estate.
Importantly,
the applicant has no interest in these proceedings separate from the interests
of the estate. The only interest she has
is in ensuring that the entitlements of
the estate are properly advocated for and recognised, such that just and
equitable orders
are made pursuant to section 79 of the Act, which do not
involve any undue diminution of the husband's entitlements. This is exactly
same as the interest in the proceedings held by the estate itself.
accept the submission made on behalf of the legal personal representative that
case management principles (and I would add to that
the overarching purpose
provided for in section 95 of the Act) militate against effectively permitting
more than one party to run
the same case. As Brennan CJ held in
if the intervenor's
submission is merely repetitive of the submission of one or other of the
parties, efficiency would require that
intervention be denied.
for the applicant relied heavily on complaints contained within the applicant's
evidence with respect to the conduct of the
current legal personal
representative and concerns as to whether the husband's estate was effectively
being represented. The applicant
sets out in her affidavit complaints about
conduct of, and decisions made by, Mr Remeika in his capacity as executor of the
estate, which she says affect her as a residual beneficiary, and
alleged failures on his behalf to provide her with information about
proceedings. She also deposes to a lack of confidence in him. The supporting
affidavit filed by her mother repeats her complaints,
but takes things no
of the complaints made by the applicant are also echoed by the wife. Both the
applicant and the wife also deposed to suspicions
that Mr Remeika has retained
large sums of cash formerly belonging to the husband which should form part of
the estate.
issue of access to information can be resolved by an order granting the
applicant access to the Court file, which will be made
by consent today. The
applicant’s complaints will otherwise likely be relevant to the Supreme
Court proceedings, and if the
applicant succeeds in those proceedings, there
will be an impact on these proceedings. However, in my view they do not
demonstrate
that the applicant has an interest in these proceedings such as
would warrant a grant of leave to intervene in her own right.
these reasons, although it is conceivable that the applicant's interest as a
beneficiary would be affected by the determination
by this Court of the section
79 proceedings in the practical sense that those proceedings could affect the
quantum of the husband's
estate and therefore the amount she stands to inherit,
I am not satisfied that she is a ‘person affected’ in the sense
referred to in section 79AA(1)(b), nor that leave to intervene under section 92
is warranted. Nor is it apparent that her participation
as a party is necessary
for the Court to determine all issues in dispute in the proceedings in the sense
referred to in rule 3.01.
SUBSTITUTION OF LEGAL PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE
to the wife's application for substitution for the Public Trustee as legal
personal representative, although it was conceded on
her behalf that this
application might be ‘
,’ it was not withdrawn, and I
will therefore deal with it.
3.19 of the Rules provides as follows:
3.19 Death of party
(1) This rule applies to a financial or property proceeding or an application
for the enforcement of a financial obligation.
(2) If a party dies, the other party or the legal personal representative of the
deceased person must ask the court for procedural
orders in relation to the
future conduct of the proceeding.
(3) The court may order that the legal personal representative of the deceased
person be substituted for the deceased person as a
Note 1: The court may make other procedural orders, including that a person has
permission to intervene in the proceeding (see rules
1.31 and 3.04).
Note 2: For the effect of the death of a party in certain proceedings, see
subsections 79AA(1A)
Family Law Act
Importantly,
rule 3.19 provides that a legal personal representative can be substituted for a
deceased party. It does not provide
for another person to be substituted for a
legal personal representative, nor for any person other than the legal personal
representative
to be substituted for the deceased party.
personal representative’ is not defined in the Act or in the Rules. There
was a definition in the explanatory guide
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth), being, ‘the executor or administrator of the party's
estate.’ That definition has not been replicated in the current
however, the current rule 3.19 is, in all material respects, identical to rule
6.15 of the former rules, and there is no indication
of any intention to change
the meaning of that rule upon its incorporation into the present rules. The
explanatory statement to the
current rules provides simply that rule 3.19 is
based on the earlier rule.
is some uncertainty in the authorities as to whether an executor is a legal
personal representative in the relevant sense prior
to a grant of probate, or in
the case of a party who dies intestate, whether the proposed administrator is
the legal personal representative
for the purposes of rule 3.19 prior to a grant
of letters of administration.
is, however, no uncertainty in the relevant authorities as to the fact that it
is the executor or administrator (as applicable)
who is the legal personal
representative and is therefore able to be substituted for the deceased party
pursuant to rule 3.19.
Nygh considered this issue in
and held that
whomever obtains the letters of administration or is the executor of the estate
must be the legal personal representative
for the purposes of the family law
proceedings. So certain of this proposition was his Honour, that in that case
the executor of
the husband's estate was held to be the legal personal
representative of the deceased husband and was substituted for him as a party
the proceedings, notwithstanding that that executor was in fact the wife.
Notwithstanding
what his Honour identified as the apparent absurdity of having the same party
appointed on both sides of the family
law proceedings, his Honour was of the
view that the wife must be appointed because it would be inappropriate and
improper to have
her appointed as the legal personal representative of the
husband's estate in one court, but to have somebody else appointed in the
role in another court. This aspect of his Honour's decision was noted without
criticism of the Full Court in an appeal from
a later order made in the same
proceedings.
The same thing also
occurred in
Lindenmayer J
criticised and discharged an order that had been made by a registrar providing
that a person be ‘appointed’
the legal personal representative of
the deceased wife and replace it with an order providing that they be
substituted
for the wife. His Honour observed that this Court has no
power to ‘appoint’ anyone as the legal personal representative
deceased person and that the appointment flows from a grant of probate or
letters of administration in the Supreme Court of
the relevant state, pursuant
to the applicable state legislation.
S (deceased) &
considered whether the Court could appoint someone other than the executor or
administrator of the estate of the deceased
party to conduct proceedings under
section 79 on behalf of the deceased. His Honour held as follows:.
expression "personal representative" is a legal term and thus as such means, in
relation to a deceased person, the executor of
the Will of the deceased (whether
probate has been granted or not) or a person to whom a grant of Letters of
Administration has been
made for the estate of the deceased (see 17 Halsbury's
Edition para 704; Vol 3, Words and Phrases Legally Defined,
Butterworths 3rd edition; Strouds Judicial Dictionary 5
Sweet and Maxwell Volume 4 at 1930; Butterworths Australian Legal Dictionary
(1997) 873).
79(8) does not give power to this Court to appoint someone as “legal
personal representative” of a deceased
party to be substituted to continue
the proceedings or to be the person against whom the proceedings may be
continued. It does not
appear to contemplate an appointment by the Court of a
representative like a
guardian ad litem
, for example. Indeed, par
79(8)(a) says:
“The applicable Rules of
Court may make provision in relation to the substitution of the legal personal
representative as a
party to the proceedings.”
from the language of the section and the authorities, the person who is to be
substituted must already be the legal personal
representative of the deceased.
This Court has no power to appoint a person as legal personal representative of
the deceased.
the present circumstances, the Applicant could need to obtain from the Supreme
Court, Letters of Administration with the Will annexed,
or Letters of
Administration ad litem making her the legal personal representative of the
deceased wife before the Court can make
an Order under s 79(8) substituting her
for the deceased
number of other authorities also stand for, or support, the proposition that the
Court cannot appoint someone as a legal personal
representative, but rather can
only substitute a person who already stands in that role pursuant to the order
of a state court or
operation of state
precise issue was considered by his Honour Judge McGinn earlier in these
proceedings. In his judgment dated 29 June
, his Honour held at
paragraph [13] that the status of the legal personal representative can only be
recognised by, but not granted
by, a court exercising jurisdiction under the
Honour held that, in other words, a court exercising jurisdiction under section
79(8)(a) (or, as it now is, 79AA(8)(a)), of the
substitutes
legal personal representative for a deceased party and does not
person as a legal personal representative. His Honour noted that in the present
case the appointment has been effected under South
Australian law by the Supreme
Court of that state. I respectfully agree with and adopt his Honour's
Roland & Argento and
in circumstances not
dissimilar to those raised in the present application, the wife made a complaint
who had been substituted for the husband in
their capacity as the legal personal representative of his estate. This did not
the fact that the person in question was the validly appointed legal
personal representative and was therefore the only person who
substituted for the deceased pursuant to the applicable rule.
for the wife did not refer me to any authority standing contrary to those which
I have discussed.
such time, if any, as the status of Mr Remeika as the legal personal
representative for the husband is changed by way of order
of the Supreme Court,
he remains the only person who can be substituted for the husband in these
proceedings pursuant to rule 3.19.
do not accept the submission of counsel for the wife that her application,
,’ should simply be adjourned and
considered at a later date. Until such time, if any, as a new legal personal
representative
may be appointed, there is simply no basis for the application at
all. The application is misconceived, as was the applicant's application
similar terms, which was ultimately not pressed.
is not appropriate for the Court to leave open an improperly brought application
on the basis that the person seeking to press
it hopes that circumstances will
change such that one day it might become appropriate. If, and only if, at some
future time an order
is made in the Supreme Court which changes the identity of
the legal personal representative of the deceased husband, an application
substitution pursuant to rule 3.19 will then become appropriate, and indeed, I
anticipate that an application brought in such
circumstances would not be
SUBPOENAS AND DISCOVERY
wife seeks leave to issue a subpoena to a real estate agent with respect to the
sale of a property previously held by the estate,
which she considers may have
been sold for a sum less than its true value.
Rules do not set out a test for the grant of leave to issue a subpoena. I take
guidance from the relevant
authorities
which set out tests
akin to those regulating the circumstances in which an objection to a subpoena
would likely be upheld, including
but not limited to consideration of whether a
subpoena serves a legitimate forensic purpose, whether the documents sought have
relevance to the proceedings, and whether it is otherwise oppressive.
am satisfied that the circumstances surrounding the sale of the property
formerly held by the estate is an issue that bears apparent
relevance to the
proceedings and that the subpoena therefore serves a legitimate forensic
purpose. The proposed subpoena does not
appear objectionable on its face. Leave
will be granted.
wife otherwise seeks discovery from Mr Remeika in his personal capacity with
respect to his passport and his personal bank accounts,
or in the alternative,
leave to issue subpoenas to obtain those documents.
purpose of this discovery appears to be to investigate the suspicions raised by
the wife and by the applicant that Mr Remeika
has accessed cash previously
belonging to the husband’s estate, which they have extrapolated must have
been the source of funds
used by Mr Remeika for overseas travel they understand
that he has undertaken.
Remeika is not a party to these proceedings in his personal capacity, being the
capacity in which discovery is sought. With the
limited exception of employers,
the rules of this court do not provide for orders for discovery to be made
against persons who are
not parties to the proceedings. I am not satisfied that
there is power to order discovery against Mr Remeika in his personal capacity,
but for the same reasons as those that follow with respect to the request for
leave to issue subpoenas, I would not have been persuaded
to do so even if there
had been power.
proposed subpoenas appear on their face to be a fishing expedition based
entirely on speculation and conjecture. How it is said
that the evidence of
misappropriation of funds in the form of cash could be expected to be found by
way of an examination of bank
statements, much less a passport, was not properly
has been described as a circumstance where ‘
a person who has no
evidence that fish of a particular kind are in a pool, desires to be at liberty
to drag it for the purpose of
finding out whether there are any there or
In my view, this
is an apt description of what the wife seeks to do here.
do not consider that the wife has established that it is ‘on the
terminology in the authorities, that the documents would materially assist her
has been held that it is not enough for a party issuing a subpoena to raise a
speculative possibility that the documents sought
would assist the resolution of
the dispute.
In my view, that is
precisely what has been raised here.
any event, it appears likely that these issues will be ventilated in the Supreme
Court proceedings, and it may well be that the
state of knowledge of, and
evidence available to, each of the parties will be different at some future
these reasons, the orders for discovery and leave to issue subpoenas with
respect to Mr Remeika’s banking records and passport
will not be
I certify that the preceding seventy (70)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 26 September 2025
Formerly subsection
TKWJ v The Queen
[2002] HCA 46
(2002) 212 CLR 124
OP & TP & Anor (Conduct of
[2002] FamCA 1155
Inwood & Brock
[2024] FedCFamC1A 72
Palmisano & Angelov
[2025] FedCFamC1A
See, for example,
Bank of New South Wales v Stenhouse Ltd
(1997) Aust Torts Reports 81-423
Tomlinson v Ramsey Food Processing Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 28
(2015) 256 CLR
palla v St George Motor Finance Ltd (No 6)
[2004] FCA 1699
v Western Australia
[2011] FCAFC 46
UBS AG v Tyne
[2018] HCA 45
265 CLR 77.
[1988] FamCA 52
[1993] FamCA 150
Mason c/o Hannaford
[1993] FamCA 128
[2012] FMCAfam 1323
[2012] 272 FLR
("Duck shooting case")
[1997] HCA 31
189 CLR 579.
See, for example,
Layton & Layton
[2019] FCWA 145
Kelly & Kelly
[2015] FCCA
Murdoch & Brown (No 2)
[2013] FamCA 732
Yeates (as executor
for Mr Yeates) & Yeates
[2013] FCWA 117
Strelys & Strelys
[1987] FamCA 54
Cullen & Cullen
[2011] FMCAfam 375
[2014] FCCA
[1987] FamCA 26
FLC 91-803.
Bailey & Bailey (Executrix of the Estate of Bailey)
[1989] FamCA 45
(1990) FLC 92-117.
[2019] FCCA
[1989] FamCA 7
[2002] FamCA
Laue & Laue
(Deceased) by his Legal Personal Representative Daniel Fellon
[2016] FCWA
Murdoch & Brown (No 2)
[2013] FamCA 732
Midhurst (Deceased)
[2008] FamCA 393
Layton & Layton
[2019] FCWA
[2023] FedCFamC2F
[2019] FamCA
Chandrasekaran v
Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists
[2019] FCA 1687
Lambard & Lambard and Ors (No 3)
[2020] FamCA 879
[2024] FedCFamC1F 95
Julien & Perrin (No 9)
FedCFamC1F 655.
Associated Dominions Assurance Society Pty Ltd v John Fairfax & Sons Pty
(1955) 72 WN (NSW)
See, for example,
Alister v R
[1984] HCA 85
(1984) 154 CLR 404
Attorney General for
New South Wales v Chidgey
[2008] NSWCCA 65
Martin & Martin (No
[2014] FamCA 232
Gilmore & Patrick
[2022] FedCFamC1F
Andrew Garrett Wine
Resorts v National Australia Bank Ltd (No 6)
[2005] SASC 292
(2005) 92 SASR
Ryder & Lee
[2009] FamCA 531
Baumann & Ors &
Rushbrooke & Anor
[2016] FamCA 905.
RTF format (491 KB)
Signed PDF/A format