URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/FCAFC/2003/151.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Medtel Pty Limited v Courtney [2003] FCAFC 151 (7 July 2003)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Medtel Pty Limited v Courtney
[2003] FCAFC 151
TRADE PRACTICES AND CONSUMER PROTECTION
- s 74D of the
Practices Act 1974
(Cth) batch of pacemakers subject to hazard alert
because of higher than usual risk of premature failure - only a small
of the batch actually failed prematurely - whether a particular
pacemaker still functioning at the time of the trial can nonetheless
to be not of merchantable quality - statutory test of merchantable quality -
use to be made of later-acquired information
- relevance of superadded risk of
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth), ss 74B, 74D
Apollo Shower Screens Pty Ltd v Building and Construction Industry Long
Service Payments Corporation
[1985] 1 NSWLR 561
referred to
Australian Knitting Mills Limited v Grant
[1933] HCA 35
(1933) 50 CLR 387
Blatch v Archer
[1774] EngR 2
(1774) 1 Cowp 63
[1774] EngR 2
Cavalier Marketing (Australia) Pty Ltd v Rasell
(1990) 96 ALR 375
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 197 ALR 201
Graham Barclay Oysters Pty Ltd v Ryan
(2000) 102 FCR 307 referred to
Hardwick Game Farm v Suffolk Agricultural Poultry Producers Association
[1968] UKHL 3
[1969] 2 AC 31
Shepherd v Felt and Textiles of Australia Ltd
[1931] HCA 21
(1931) 45 CLR 359
Wardley Australia Ltd v Western Australia
[1992] HCA 55
(1992) 175 CLR 514
MEDTEL PTY LIMITED (ACN 076 530 946) V KEVIN GLYNN COURTNEY
N 661 of 2000
MOORE, BRANSON & JACOBSON JJ
7 JULY 2003
THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL FROM A JUDGE OF THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
PTY LIMITED (ACN 076 530 946)
APPLICANT/APPELLANT
GLYNN COURTNEY
BRANSON & JACOBSON JJ
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. Leave to appeal be granted.
2. The appeal be dismissed with costs
THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
661 of 2000
APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL FROM A JUDGE OF THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
PTY LIMITED (ACN 076 530 946)
APPLICANT/APPELLANT
GLYNN COURTNEY
BRANSON & JACOBSON JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
1 This is an application for leave to appeal against a judgment of a judge of
this Court of 3 March 2003. The primary judge determined
that particular heart
pacemakers sold in Australia were not of merchantable quality nor fit for the
purpose for which they were sold.
The Australian distributor, Medtel Pty Ltd
("the appellant"), challenges that conclusion. It also challenges the primary
order awarding compensation to Mr Kevin Courtney. The proceedings are
representative proceedings brought by Mr Courtney on behalf
of a representative
group comprising individuals (or their estates) who had been fitted with
pacemakers used to restore or maintain
a regular beat in the heart. Mr
Courtney relied on provisions of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
") which entitle consumers to obtain compensation for loss or damage
they suffer if they acquire goods which are not of merchantable
(s 74D of the
) or fit for the purpose for which they were sold
(s 74B of the
). Mr Courtney also challenged aspects of his Honour's
judgment by way of application for leave to cross-appeal, but the application
has not been pursued. An order was made on 26 March 2003 that the hearing of
the application for leave to appeal be expedited.
The matter has been heard
and determined on that basis.
2 The issues considered by his Honour arose this way. In the representative
proceedings (brought under
Federal Court of Australia
(Cth)), Mr Courtney claimed on his behalf and on behalf of members
of the representative group that each of them had been fitted
with a pacemaker
which was not of merchantable quality nor fit for the purpose for which it was
sold. It is unnecessary to consider,
for present purposes, the special
position of group members who represent the estates of individuals who had been
fitted with pacemakers
but who have since died. The claims were made against
both the appellant (the Australian distributor) and the American manufacturer,
Pacesetter Inc (the second respondent in the proceedings below) ("Pacesetter").
The claims followed a "Hazard Alert" issued on 5
June 2000 by an Australian
Government agency, the Therapeutic Goods Administration, concerning four models
of pacemaker distributed
by the appellant. Mr Courtney's claim (on his own
behalf and on behalf of members of the representative group) concerned
that might be any one of those models which had been surgically
implanted into individuals in Australia. The primary judge described
pacemakers implanted into Mr Courtney and group members as the "Hazard Alert
Pacemakers". I will generally use the same description.
The Hazard Alert
warned that in relation to each of the four models, there was an increased risk
of early battery depletion resulting
in a "no output condition". This was
because of a potential short circuit in the pacemaker.
3 It is appropriate to set out, at this point, s 74D of the
a corporation, in trade or commerce, supplies goods manufactured by
the corporation to another person who acquires the goods for re-supply;
a person (whether or not the person who acquired the goods from the
corporation) supplies the goods (otherwise than by way of sale
by auction) to a
the goods are not of merchantable quality; and
the consumer or a person who acquires the goods from, or derives
title to the goods through or under, the consumer suffers loss or
reason that the goods are not of merchantable quality;
the corporation is liable to compensate the consumer or that other person for
the loss or damage and the consumer or that other
person may recover the amount
of the compensation by action against the corporation in a court of competent
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply:
if the goods are not of merchantable quality by reason of:
an act or default of any person (not being the corporation or a
servant or agent of the corporation); or
a cause independent of human control;
occurring after the goods have left the control of the corporation;
as regards defects specifically drawn to the consumer's attention
before the making of the contract for the supply of the goods to
the consumer;
if the consumer examines the goods before that contract is made, as
regards defects that the examination ought to reveal.
(3) Goods of any kind are of merchantable quality within the meaning of this
section if they are as fit for the purpose or purposes
for which goods of that
kind are commonly bought as it is reasonable to expect having regard to:
(a) any description applied to the goods by the corporation;
the price received by the corporation for the goods (if relevant);
(c) all the other relevant circumstances.
It can be seen that subs (3) of s 74D identifies the way
merchantable quality is to be ascertained. Fitness for purpose is the
touchstone.
I turn now to consider in more detail the issues raised in the
Issues before the primary judge and his Honour's reasons
4 Because of the limited number of issues raised in the appeal, it will be
unnecessary to refer to all of the primary judge's comprehensive
reasons for
judgment. The reasons were published on 5 February 2003 ([2003] FCA 36) though
the orders against which the appeal is
sought to be brought were made on 3
March 2003 (when supplementary reasons concerning the orders were published:
[2003] FCA 129).
It is convenient to commence by discussing the procedural
framework in which his Honour gave judgment. By his judgment, he did two
things. First, he answered three questions tried separately under O 29
Federal Court Rules
. Secondly, he awarded Mr Courtney
$9,988.20 in compensation (plus interest) for his claim concerning the
pacemaker he had been fitted
with in July 1999.
5 The questions the primary judge was asked to answer were formulated by the
parties. They concerned the liability of the appellant
and Pacesetter under
s 74B and s 74D. At the time the hearing commenced, the terms of the
questions had been agreed and there was
also agreement that it was appropriate
for him to answer them. The questions were in the following terms:
The claims made in the Eighth Amended Statement of Claim under
sections 74B and 74D of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) raised by paragraphs
1-3, 6-16, 18-43, 69, 70(a)(i) and (ii) and 70(e), and paragraphs 67(a) and
(b), 68, 70(b), (c) and (g)-(i)
insofar as they relate to the injury, loss and
damage allegedly suffered by the Applicant and any other group member called
the hearing, be determined separately and in advance of the
determination of all other issues in these proceedings by resolution
following questions:
Whether the Pacemakers are subject to the Fault as defined in the
Eighth Amended Statement of Claim:
the Pacemakers are not reasonably fit for their purpose within the
meaning of section 74B of the
Trade Practices Act
the Pacemakers are not of merchantable quality within the meaning
of section 74D of the
Trade Practices Act
Whether, as a result of:
the Pacemakers not being reasonably fit for their purpose;
the Pacemakers not being of merchantable quality;
the Applicant has suffered and may continue to suffer injury, loss
and damage.
6 These questions contain one expression which requires explanation. His
Honour proceeded on the basis that "the Pacemakers" should
be treated as a
reference to "each of the Pacemakers" which, in turn, was a reference to any of
the Hazard Alert Pacemakers. Thus
the questions raised for consideration
whether each of the pacemakers which was of a model referred to in the Hazard
Alert and implanted
in Australia, was of merchantable quality or fit for the
purpose for which it was sold. His Honour concluded, with a qualification,
that each was not. This conclusion applied to the pacemaker implanted into Mr
Courtney in July 1999 (and surgically removed in September
2000 by a process
described as explantation) which was why, after concluding that Mr Courtney had
suffered loss and damage by reason
of his pacemaker being defective in these
respects, he awarded Mr Courtney compensation. The answers given by his Honour
the following terms:
(a) Whether the Pacemakers are subject to the Fault as defined
in the Eighth Amended Statement of Claim:
A. Inappropriate to answer.
(i) The Pacemakers are not reasonably fit for their purpose within the meaning
of section 74B of the
Trade Practices Act
[1974 (Cth)];
(ii) The Pacemakers are not of merchantable quality within the meaning of
section 74D of the
Trade Practices Act
[1974 (Cth)];
A. Those Pacemakers manufactured using yellow spool solder (as that
expression is used in [89] of the judgment given on 5 February
expression is used in [89] of the judgment given on 5 February 2003)
(i) not reasonably fit for their purpose within the meaning of s.74B of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(ii) not of merchantable quality within the meaning of s.74D of the
Practices Act 1974
(c) Whether, as a result of:
(i) The Pacemakers not being reasonably fit for their purpose;
(ii) the Pacemakers not being of merchantable quality;
(iii) the Applicant has suffered and may continue to suffer injury, loss and
Unnecessary to answer.
[Emphasis in original]
By the time the hearing before the primary judge concluded, the position of the
appellant concerning whether the question should
be answered had altered. Its
approach at the conclusion of the hearing was that they should not be
7 The order concerning Mr Courtney was in the following terms:
Judgment be entered in respect of the applicant's individual
causes of action under ss 74B and 74D of the
Trade Practices Act
(Cth) for the applicant against the first respondent in the sum of
$9,988.20, plus interest in the sum of $1,304.19.
Plainly enough, this order reflected the primary judge's conclusion that Mr
Courtney had suffered loss and damage and the answer to
question (c)(iii)
("unnecessary to answer") was directed to other members of the representative
8 To understand why the trial judge reached these conclusions and also the
issues raised in this appeal, it is necessary to refer
to aspects of his
reasons for judgment. After setting out the background, discussing the
formulation of the separate question and
setting out the relevant provisions of
(including s 74B and s 74D), his Honour discussed the
pleadings and what was common ground between the parties. It was not in issue
(in relation to the Hazard Alert Pacemakers):
(i) The pacemakers were "goods" as defined in subs 74A(2) of the
being goods of a kind ordinarily acquired for the personal use of the
patients in whom they have been implanted.
(ii) Although the pacemakers were manufactured in Sylmar, California, the
appellant caused or permitted a name by which it carried
on business, namely
"Telectronics" to be applied to the goods (the pacemakers) supplied by it. The
consequence was that subs 74A(3)
deemed the appellant to have manufactured
the goods. In any event, the appellant did not dispute that the terms of
subs 74A(4) of
were satisfied, so that it was also deemed by that
provision to have manufactured the goods.
(iii) The appellant supplied the pacemakers to treating hospitals and doctors
for the purpose of resupply to patients requiring
implants of pacemakers.
(iv) The appellant supplied the pacemakers in the course of its business of
marketing and distributing medical devices. It did
not dispute that it thereby
supplied the pacemakers in trade or commerce.
(v) Each of the treating hospitals and doctors acquired the pacemakers from the
appellant to resupply to other persons including
Mr Courtney and the group
(vi) Since the price for each pacemaker was under $5,000 (that is, lower than
the "prescribed amount" of $40,000 under par 4B(2)(a)
Courtney and the remaining group members did not acquire the goods for the
purpose of resupply or to use them in trade or
commerce, they had acquired the
pacemakers as "consumers" (See also par 4B(2)(d).).
9 The primary judge then identified the various witnesses and set out their
professional and other qualifications. His Honour went
on to describe, in some
detail, how the heart operates and how a pacemaker assists the heart in
functioning. It is sufficient to
note that a pacemaker generates an electrical
impulse and, relevantly for present purposes, contains two components. One
is a battery and the other is electronic circuitry which produces the
electrical impulses. The battery is the power source. He
later noted that in
the pacemaker of Mr Courtney, and the pacemakers of the other group members,
the electronic circuitry was in
a module called a hybrid and the battery in
each of those pacemakers was connected to the hybrid creating an electrical
circuit providing
the hybrid with power. Of central importance in the
proceedings was a possible defect in those pacemakers which could cause a
short-circuiting
of the electrical circuit between the battery and the
10 His Honour described in the following passage ([69] to [77]) what was agreed
by the parties to be the cause of the short circuit
problem, namely
electrochemical dendrites:
The term "dendrite" is derived from the Greek word for tree and
refers to a branch-like structure. The dendritic shape, which is
ubiquitous in nature, tends to be formed by a diffusional process, namely the
random movement of ions in a solution. In the
present context, that means an
aqueous ionic solution. An ion is a charged atom or molecule.
Dendrites can be observed under a microscope, but also can become visible to
the naked eye. Electrochemical dendrites are usually
thin and delicate because
of the manner in which they are formed. Professor Hibbert explained the
conditions necessary for electrochemical
dendrites to form as follows:
"1. Two electrodes with a sufficient potential difference between them to
effect the reaction (about at least 1 V).
2. A conducting solution between the electrodes, containing ions of the metal
to be plated. (An ion is a charged form of a species,
for example
is the ion of lead which has two positive charges.) The
solution is made conducting by any ions dissolved in water. These ions
impurities such as chloride or sodium."
If these conditions are fulfilled, dendrites will start growing immediately,
although the rate of growth depends on the circumstances.
If any one condition
is absent, dendrites do not form.
The conditions referred to by Professor Hibbert were summarised and simplified
by all the experts to three components, namely:
electrical bias;
moisture; and
ionic contamination.
Of the three essential conditions for dendritic growth, there was no real
dispute that the first two were present in the case of
the [pacemakers of the
same type as the Hazard Alert Pacemakers].
First, electrical bias or voltage must exist in electronic circuitry. The
bias, or difference in electrical potential, is between
the opposite (positive
and negative) terminals of the battery.
Secondly, so far as moisture is concerned, it must be borne in mind that, as
Professor Hibbert explained, only a minuscule volume
of water is required to
provide the medium within which the ions can move. Dr Morris acknowledged
that, although Pacesetter took
careful steps to remove as much moisture as
possible before sealing the can (including subjecting the devices to a "bake
to sealing and filling the cans with inert gas), it is not possible
to remove all moisture. Professor Hibbert was sceptical about
whether any
moisture could survive these processes, but neither party invited me to reject
Dr Morris' opinion based, as it was, on
the practical experience of
manufacturing the [pacemakers of the same type as the Hazard Alert Pacemakers].
Indeed, the fact that
dendritic growth appeared in the [pacemakers of the same
Pacesetter tends to supports Dr Morris' view.
The third condition is ionic contamination. It is here that there was some
measure of disagreement as to the source or sources
of ionic contamination. I
shall return to this question later.
The dendritic growth observed in the [pacemakers of the same type as the Hazard
Alert Pacemakers] occurred between one of the points
of connection of the
hybrid (the module bearing electronic circuitry that generates pulses and
controls the device) to the battery
and another point of connection. An
electrical current flows around a circuit from the battery to the hybrid and
back again. A
conductive path constituted by the very small amount of moisture
containing ionic contaminants (the aqueous ionic solution) extends
between the
two lines of the battery circuit. (In this connection, it must be remembered
that the distances are very small. I was
told that the gap between the
conductive lines on a [pacemaker of the same type as the Hazard Alert
Pacemakers] is 1.27 mm.) According
to Professor Hibbert, the lead in the
solder at the positive anode loses two electrons, which dissolve in the
moisture and migrate
as positive lead ions along the moisture path to the
negative cathode. At this point they are converted back to metal and start
add to (as the case may be) the dendrite. Ultimately, unless interrupted, the
build up will create a continuous path that completes
the short circuit.
Because the lead is conductive, electrical current from the battery circuit is
diverted along the short circuit...
The conductivity of a circuit reflects resistance to the passage of current.
The more current that can flow, the more quickly the
circuit will deplete the
battery. The conductivity of a dendrite is determined by the size and length
of the path, bearing in mind
that the path will not be constituted by a
straight line. The thinner the dendrite and the longer the path, the lower the
conductivity
of the circuit that is thereby produced. Professor Hibbert,
however, expressed the view that conductivity was not necessarily of
significance in determining the rate of battery depletion because a metal
dendrite would have sufficient conductivity to create
a circuit that would
reduce the life of the battery.
After the dendrite has formed a bridge, thereby establishing a partial short
circuit, it is not necessary for the three conditions
required for dendritic
growth to continue. So long as the battery runs, the short circuit will
continue to operate, unless the bridge
is fractured. Fracture may occur, for
example, in consequence of a mechanical shock.
11 While the parties had agreed that the fundamental short circuit problem
in the Hazard Alert Pacemakers was due to electrochemical
dendrites, they did
not agree what caused the dendrites. The primary judge addressed this issue.
He first described the investigations
that had been undertaken by the
manufacturer, Pacesetter, to identify the cause of the problem when it first
became evident in about
April 1998. One matter investigated was the solders
used in manufacturing the pacemakers. One type of solder used had been
manufactured
and supplied by a Belgian business ("yellow spool solder") and
another type supplied by a company in the United States ("blue spool
He noted that the question of whether or not yellow spool solder might be
significant in determining the claim that the
Hazard Alert Pacemakers were not
of merchantable quality or were unfit for the particular purpose. He found, as
a matter of fact,
that Mr Courtney's pacemaker had been manufactured using
yellow spool solder.
12 The primary judge then addressed the question of what caused the premature
depletion of the batteries. He noted substantial
agreement between the parties
(i) The Hazard Alert Pacemakers were at greater risk of failing by reason of
accelerated battery depletion than pacemakers manufactured
by Pacesetter
outside the period covered by the Hazard Alert.
(ii) The accelerated battery depletion was the consequence of partial short
circuits forming between the solder pads or terminals
where the flex circuit
was soldered to the battery terminals.
(iii) The short circuits were created by the formation of electrochemical
(iv) The problem of increased risk of failure by reason of premature battery
depletion was confined to pacemakers manufactured by
Pacesetter that were
manufactured using the yellow spool solder. That solder produced a white
crystalline residue after soldering
by a process that one witness, Mr Bruneel
(an executive associated with both the Belgian business which had supplied the
yellow spool
solder and the US company which had supplied the blue spool
solder), described as a "form of condensation" resulting from differences
temperatures around the solder joint. The residue had the capacity to trap
ionic contaminants and, as Mr Bruneel said, could
be extremely difficult to
(v) For dendritic growth to occur, three factors must be present, namely
electrical bias, moisture and ionic contamination. When
those three conditions
are present, dendritic growth must occur.
(vi) In relation to the Hazard Alert Pacemakers, the condition of electrical
bias was satisfied, since electrical bias inevitably
exists in electronic
circuitry. The second condition, moisture, was also satisfied since the
appellant (and Pacesetter) accepted
that, despite the measures taken by
Pacesetter to remove moisture from the flex circuit, it was inevitable that
some moisture would
(vii) The remaining question was therefore the source of ionic contamination
that allowed the dendritic growth to occur.
13 It was to this last question that the primary judge then turned. He was
satisfied that the use of the yellow spool solder in
the manufacturing process
sine qua non
of the phenomenon of premature battery depletion
resulting from partial short circuits that affected some of the Hazard Alert
Pacemakers.
14 His Honour then considered the background risk of failure of pacemakers and
what he described as the superadded risk in relation
to Hazard Alert
Pacemakers. In discussing the latter matter, his Honour noted that evidence
given by Dr Fain (Senior Vice President,
Development and Clinical/Regulatory
Affairs at Pacesetter) to the effect that 5.5% (58) of the Hazard Alert
Pacemakers (1048) exhibited
dendritic growth. That 5.5% resulted from an
analysis of the number of pacemakers returned in Australia (581) and not an
of the entire number in Australia (1048) the subject of the Hazard
Alert. He then said (at [138]):
It follows that Dr Fain's figures must be taken as minimum
estimates of the proportion of Tempo Pacemakers exhibiting dendritic growth.
The likelihood is that the actual proportions are higher, although the evidence
does not permit a finding to be made of the "true"
Viewed in context, his Honour was concluding that the evidence did not
permit a finding about the true rate of Hazard Alert Pacemakers
dendritic growth, though the likelihood was it would be more than 5.5% of
15 Later in his reasons when discussing the application of s 74D, his
Honour referred to the significance of the conceded existence
of the white
residue in the Hazard Alert Pacemakers. He said (at [212]):
In my view, the critical point is that, with the possible
exception of some devices manufactured very late in 1998, all Hazard Alert
Pacemakers were manufactured using yellow spool solder. All were therefore
affected by the white residue which had a tendency to
attract or "trap" ionic
contaminants. The use of the yellow spool solder in the manufacturing process
created conditions in which
dendritic growth and associated short circuits and
premature battery depletion were much more likely to occur than had the yellow
spool solder not been used. As it happens, the risk was further increased by
the (unrecorded) use in some cases of de-soldering
wicks containing
conventional flux.
16 Earlier in his reasons the primary judge addressed the condition of Mr
Courtney's pacemaker, and concluded (at [164]):
On the basis of this history I infer, on the balance of
probabilities, that
[Mr Courtney's]
Pacemaker has at all times
functioned normally and that had it remained
it would not have
ceased to function prematurely by reason of battery depletion. In other words,
it is one of 90 per cent or more
of Hazard Alert Pacemakers that, despite the
use of yellow spool solder in the manufacturing process, did not suffer from a
circuit problem in consequence of dendritic growth.
17 Nonetheless, in relation to Mr Courtney's pacemaker (and the pacemakers
of other group members where the pacemaker had not failed
Honour concluded it was not of merchantable quality. His reasons, in summary,
were (at [224]):
the purpose for which pacemakers are commonly bought is to
enable them to be implanted, on the advice of doctors, into patients
experiencing
electrical heart related problems in order to restore regular
heart beat by means of electrical impulses to the heart;
* [Mr Courtney's]
Pacemaker was manufactured using yellow spool solder and
was therefore affected by white residue which acted as a trap or attraction
ionic contaminants;
the Pacemaker was therefore subject at the time of implantation to a risk
of premature failure over and above the background or random
risk affecting all
pacemakers;
this superadded risk related to premature battery depletion caused by
dendritic growth which, in turn, was the product of ionic contamination
attracted or trapped by the white residue interacting with ever present
electrical bias and moisture;
a reasonable person in the position of
[Mr Courtney]
remaining group members similarly placed) would not expect his or her Pacemaker
to have been manufactured in such a way
as to be subject to a superadded risk
of premature failure (that is, a superadded risk that it will be unable to
fulfil the purpose
of restoring and maintaining the heart rate of patients
experiencing electrical heart-related problems);
accordingly,
[Mr Courtney's]
Pacemaker was not of merchantable
quality for the purposes of s 74D(1)(c) of the
18 Of the Hazard Alert Pacemakers which had failed
failure, did not itself demonstrate, in his Honour's opinion, that the
particular device was not of merchantable quality.
He identified (when
discussing the position of those that had failed
necessary to establish they were not of merchantable quality (at [209]):
...a remaining group member cannot establish that his or her
Hazard Alert Pacemaker was not of merchantable quality at the time of
implantation simply by proving that the device had in fact failed prematurely.
That group member must also show, on the balance of
probabilities, that
* the failed Pacemaker was manufactured using yellow spool solder; and
* the failure that occurred was not attributable to a cause unconnected with
the use of the yellow spool solder and an associated
partial short circuit.
Assuming that the group member satisfies these evidentiary requirements, I
think it correct to say that the particular Pacemaker
was not as fit for the
purpose of restoring and maintaining heart beat as it is reasonable to expect.
However, I do think that this
is because of some physical characteristic of the
Pacemaker that sets it apart from other Hazard Alert Pacemakers that have not
prematurely. Like the Pacemakers that failed in situ, those that did
not fail, leaving aside the small number that may have been
manufactured using
the blue spool solder, were manufactured using the yellow spool solder.
19 When considering the Hazard Alert Pacemakers which had failed
, the primary judge discussed what he concluded had been demonstrated
by the evidence, namely a superadded risk of failure. He said
(at [213]):
It is important to appreciate that the additional risk of
failure (as is now known) was of a particular kind: that is, premature battery
depletion caused by dendritic growth which, in turn, was the product of ionic
contamination attracted or trapped by the white residue
interacting with
ever-present electrical bias and moisture. Although the evidence as to the
background or random rate of failure
was meagre, it is clear that the risk of
failure of each Hazard Alert Pacemaker manufactured with yellow spool solder
was substantially
greater than the risk applicable to other available
pacemakers, including other
[pacemakers manufactured by
Pacesetter]
The primary judge (at [223]) indicated that the other remaining group
members whose pacemaker's had been explanted were in the same
or very similar
position to Mr Courtney. In context, this led to what can be viewed as a
finding that their pacemakers also were
not of merchantable quality.
20 In the following passage (at [229]) his Honour explained his approach in
concluding that Mr Courtney's pacemaker and the pacemakers
of other group
members which had been manufactured with yellow spool solder were not of
merchantable quality:
The applicant has succeeded in his claim that his Pacemaker was
not of merchantable quality because of a particular element introduced
manufacturing process by the manufacturer, albeit unwittingly, that materially
increased the risk that the product would
fail prematurely. The "batch" of
Pacemakers implanted in Australia affected by what I think can be fairly
described as a physical
anomaly in the manufacturing process (that is, the
yellow spool solder) is not in fact co-extensive with the batch covered by the
Hazard Alert. (The expression "physical anomaly" is intended to convey that
the use of the yellow spool solder in the manufacture
of Pacemakers is
recognised by Pacesetter itself, with the knowledge it now has, as
unacceptable. The expression is not intended
to imply that Pacesetter was
negligent in using the yellow spool solder or in any other way.) Some Hazard
Alert Pacemakers, as I
have found, may not have been manufactured with yellow
spool solder. Further, it appears that some Pacemakers manufactured outside
the time limits implicit in the Hazard Alert were manufactured with yellow
spool solder. In short, the fact that a Pacemaker was
included in the Hazard
Alert does not of itself establish want of merchantability.
21 The reason for rejecting the suggestion that an approach based on "risk"
was (at [231-232]) an inappropriate one:
Mr Walker's main objection to the conclusion I have reached was
that it is inappropriate to apply to a single item (a particular Pacemaker)
concept of risk which, so he argued, is properly applicable only to generic
products (Hazard Alert Pacemakers or yellow spool
solder Pacemakers). It is
true that the "rate" of failure of a product can be ascertained only by
reference to past experience of
a group of items and that the concept of a
failure rate in that sense cannot be applied to an individual item. But that
mean that a risk of future failure based on physical anomalies in a
product is not a concept that can be meaningfully applied to
an individual
item, such as the applicant's Pacemaker. Indeed the evidence in this case
indicates that decisions are necessarily
made in relation to individual items
by reference to the risk that the item will fail to perform correctly. For
example, I infer
that Professor Black
[the doctor advising Mr Courtney]
took into account the risk (so far as it could be assessed at the time) that
the applicant's Pacemaker would fail, as well as other
considerations, when
recommending explantation of the device.
The application of s 74D to the circumstances of a particular case does
not call for an exercise in mathematical theory. The question
posed by the
legislation is whether the particular goods are as fit for the purpose for
which goods of that kind are commonly bought
as it is reasonable to expect. If
it is reasonable to expect that products of a certain kind will not have a
physical anomaly that
materially increases the risk that they will not fulfil
the relevant purpose, it seems to me consistent with the statutory language
hold that each item with that physical anomaly is not of merchantable quality.
To so hold is also consistent with the "remedial
character" of the legislation
Rasell v Cavalier Marketing,
at 348, per
Issues in the appeal and cross-appeal and the submissions
22 The issues raised in these appeal proceedings have been conveniently
summarised in the written submissions of the parties. Counsel
appellant identified the issues in its application for leave to appeal as
(a) Are goods not of "merchantable quality", pursuant to
sub-section 74D(3) of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
("the TPA"), if there
is only evidence that the goods have a possibility (or risk) of failure, as
opposed to evidence that the goods
have in fact failed?
(b) Is a manufacturer strictly liable pursuant to section 74D of the TPA by
reason of actions, such as a product recall, designed
to prevent injury from a
possibly, as distinct from an actually, defective product?
(c) In circumstances where there is no product failure and only the risk of a
failure, is the appropriate remedy under section 74D
of the TPA, a refund or
replacement or must the manufacturer also pay damages?
(d) Where it is alleged that a manufacturer is strictly liable pursuant to
section 74D of the TPA in
proceedings, is it necessary to prove the
cause of the failure or is it sufficient to prove only the fact of failure?
Does it make
any difference if the defect is the risk of a failure?
23 Counsel for Mr Courtney identified the issues in his application for
leave to cross-appeal as follows:
His Honour erred in failing to find that all of the Pacemakers
were not reasonably fit for their purpose and not of merchantable quality
the basis that:
(a) the Pacemakers were part of a group of pacemakers about which it was not
possible to ascertain that any individual was not manufactured
using yellow
spool solder; or
(b) alternatively, the Pacemakers that were part of a group of pacemakers about
which it was not possible to ascertain that any
individual pacemaker was not
manufactured using a conventional flux from a de-soldering wick used in
reworking of solder; or
(c) alternatively, the Pacemakers were all manufactured using yellow spool
24 Mr Courtney also sought to support the judgment below with a notice of
contention on grounds summarised in counsels' written submissions:
In the alternative to the primary submission that the trial
judge came to the correct conclusion for the reasons stated in the judgment
least in the individual case of Mr Courtney)
[It is contended that]
judgment...should be affirmed on the grounds that
[Mr Courtney's]
pacemaker was not reasonably fit for its purpose and was not of merchantable
quality because it was one of a group of pacemakers
which included pacemakers
with a superadded risk or propensity for failure (through premature battery
depletion) and given that:
a. [Mr Courtney's] Pacemaker was part of a group of pacemakers about which it
was not possible to ascertain that any individual
pacemaker was not
manufactured using yellow spool solder; or
alternatively, [Mr Courtney's] Pacemaker was part of a group of
pacemakers about which it was not possible to ascertain that any individual
pacemaker was not manufactured using a conventional flux from a de-soldering
wick used in reworking of solder.
25 However during the hearing of the appeal, counsel for Mr Courtney
indicated that neither the cross-appeal nor the notice of contention
pursued and accepted leave to appeal should be granted in the appellant's
26 The appellant commenced its submissions by arguing that the primary judge
erred in concluding that Mr Courtney's pacemaker was
not of merchantable
quality given that it continues to function as it should (this is because of
the finding set out at [15] above).
It cannot be characterised as not being of
merchantable quality simply because it is a member of a class of pacemaker
manufactured
in a way different to other pacemakers. It should not be treated,
to use the language of the appellant's counsel, as having "the
mark of Cain"
simply because it was one of a number of pacemakers the subject of a Hazard
27 Reference was made to certain facts agreed between the parties, namely that
Mr Courtney's pacemaker was tested on 10 occasions,
the first during the course
of its manufacture and the most recent on 27 September 2002, and on every
occasion on which it was tested,
the test indicated that the pacemaker was
functioning normally with an estimated longevity of in excess of 60 months. It
is erroneous
to assess merchantability by reference to a risk that a product
may fail to perform or operate in a particular way in the face of
fact that the product has performed and operated as it should. The finding of
the primary judge at [164] (set out at [15]
above) supports the conclusion that
Mr Courtney's pacemaker was of merchantable quality and that the appellant was
not liable under
s 74D. It was conceded that if Mr Courtney's pacemaker
was not of merchantable quality then the loss and damage (arising from its
explantation) was caused by its unmerchantability. It was also accepted, for
present purposes, that merchantability was to be assessed
at the time of supply
and acquisition.
28 The appellant accepted that merchantability at the time of supply and
acquisition could be determined by reference to facts now
known. However it
put in issue the approach of the primary judge that although Mr Courtney's
pacemaker would probably not have failed
prematurely had it remained
, that fact did not bear on the question of whether the pacemaker was
or was not of merchantable quality. Unmerchantability was not
demonstrated by
showing Mr Courtney's pacemaker was one in a class of pacemakers which had a
background risk of failure or even a
super added risk of failure by short
circuiting as a result of dendritic growth. This argument was also advanced in
relation to
the other pacemakers manufactured using yellow spool solder to
which the answer to question (b) applied. It was submitted that Mr
did not seek to establish, and could not, that his pacemaker suffered from
ionic contamination which would lead to premature
failure. Unmerchantability
of a particular pacemaker was not demonstrated by establishing that it was a
member of a class in which
some pacemakers had a physical characteristic which
might lead to premature failure. It was only on this basis that it could be
said that there was a superadded risk Mr Courtney's pacemaker would fail
prematurely. But risk described in these terms is risk
only in a statistical
sense. It does not address the physical condition of Mr Courtney's pacemaker
at the time of sale and acquisition.
29 The appellant submitted that an inference could be drawn from the known
facts that there was no dendritic growth in Mr Courtney's
pacemaker at the time
of its supply and acquisition, nor had the conditions existed for such growth
then or earlier. If there was
no initial dendritic growth then there would be
no later dendritic growth and no short circuiting and consequential premature
for that reason. At the very least, Mr Courtney had failed to
demonstrate his pacemaker had ever had the physical attributes which
rise to dendritic growth. While the appellant's position appeared to shift
during the hearing of the appeal, ultimately
it did not challenge the primary
judge's finding that yellow spool solder had been used in the manufacture of Mr
Courtney's pacemaker.
It should be noted that in the proceedings below, the
thrust of the submissions of the appellant appeared to be that there had been
no dendritic growth in Mr Courtney's pacemaker because it had been manufactured
using blue spool solder. No concession was made
by the appellant in this
appeal that any other particular pacemaker acquired by any other individual
member of the representative
group had been manufactured using yellow spool
solder. The appellant's position was that this was an issue that would need to
determined in relation to each of individual pacemaker.
30 The appellant contended that this inference (that there had been no
dendritic growth in Mr Courtney's pacemaker and the conditions
for its growth
had never been present) could be drawn on essentially two bases, though they
appeared to be linked. The first was
that it was highly unlikely Mr Courtney's
pacemaker suffered from dendritic growth, having regard to evidence accepted by
his Honour,
concerning the demonstrated incidence of dendritic growth in
pacemakers (the subject of the Hazard Alert) returned to Pacesetter.
1048 pacemakers the subject of the Hazard Alert, 581 were returned to
Pacesetter. An analysis was undertaken of those returned
pacemakers which had
failed (no finding was made by the primary judge about the number of pacemakers
in this class nor was it submitted
by the appellant that a finding (of a
particular number) should have been made). The analysis of the returned failed
revealed that only 58 exhibited dendritic growth. It was submitted
that on the assumption (and as found by his Honour) that the
vast majority of
the pacemakers the subject of the Hazard Alert were manufactured using yellow
spool solder, only a very small number
(58 which is 5.5% of the 1048) exhibited
dendritic growth. Thus it was more probable than not that Mr Courtney's
pacemaker did not
suffer from dendritic growth notwithstanding that it had been
manufactured using yellow spool solder. As dendritic growth must occur
conditions for growth are present, those conditions had never been present in
Mr Courtney's pacemaker.
31 The second basis on which the appellant submitted the inference could be
drawn concerning the state of Mr Courtney's pacemaker
was the scientific
evidence. First, reference was made to his Honour's acceptance of the evidence
of Professor Hibbert concerning
the three conditions which, if fulfilled, will
result in the immediate growth of dendrites. However, it was submitted, it is
to accept that the third condition, ionic contamination, flowed from
the use of yellow spool solder (and nothing more) given the
low incidence of
detected dendritic growth in the returned failed pacemakers (referred to in the
previous paragraph). Those figures
were more consistent with the appellant's
hypothesised mechanism for the introduction of ionic contamination
(de-soldering and re-soldering).
That was particularly so given that once
dendritic growth commences it will continue until a conductive path is made.
Once the path
is established, battery depletion will occur even if the dendrite
is of low conductivity (as arises with a thin dendrite). Reference
made to the evidence of Dr Morris (apparently accepted by his Honour) that the
two other conditions (electrical bias and
moisture) were present in all
pacemakers.
32 Counsel for the appellant appeared to accept that its hypothesised cause of
the ionic contamination (de-soldering and re-soldering)
could not explain all
instances of dendritic growth, given that only 1 to 2 per cent of all
pacemakers were re-soldered. But, it
was submitted, the scientific evidence
did not support a finding that the use of yellow spool solder, of itself, made
dendritic growth
and associated premature battery depletion more likely to
occur. In addition, this conclusion was based on the erroneous assumption
all pacemakers manufactured using yellow spool solder contained the white
residue which could trap ironic contamination. However
in reply the appellant
appeared to accept that the matter might be approached on the footing that, on
the balance of probabilities,
each pacemaker covered by the Hazard Alert
contained the white residue, at least when yellow spool solder had been used in
its manufacture.
If so, however, regard must be had to the limited incidence
of observed dendritic growth and the fact that a high proportion of
in this general class had not failed.
33 Several matters the appellant did not put in issue should be noted. The
first was the primary judge's approach to the construction
of s 74B and
s 74D. The appellant accepted his Honour's approach. The second was that
the appellant appeared ultimately to accept
that any pacemaker which failed
prematurely (even if only one of a group which, numerically, conformed to the
background or random
failure rate) was not of merchantable quality, though
added that liability based only on failure was not raised in this matter by
pleadings. This was so notwithstanding that the appellant appeared initially
to adopt as correct the conclusion of the primary
judge that the fact that a
pacemaker had failed in situ (and having regard to the context in which the
conclusion was expressed,
failed prematurely)
did not establish that it
was not of merchantable quality. Part of the context in which the proceedings
were conducted below included
a concession by counsel for Mr Courtney that a
random risk of failure did not render a pacemaker unfit for the purpose for
it was acquired nor did it render it of unmerchantable quality. It
should also be noted that the appellant did not seriously press
a submission
that Div 2A of the
did not apply to the pacemakers to which the
proceedings related.
34 The third matter concerned a contention that the primary judge did not deal
with the defence under subs (2) of s 74B concerning
its liability
under that section in relation to Mr Courtney. That point was not pursued in
the appeal.
35 Counsel for Mr Courtney sought to answer each of the points raised by the
appellant by the same process of reasoning adopted
by the primary judge. A
submission made to the primary judge was repeated in the appeal concerning why
the Hazard Alert Pacemakers
were not of merchantable quality. Reference was
made to the following evidence as supporting that conclusion:
(a) Dr Fain agreed that it would not have been "wise, sensible or
practical" to sell any pacemakers that were known to have a failure
rate higher
than the typical pacemaker for a specific reason where it was not possible to
identify the particular unit;
(b) Professor Chard (an Australian expert in the clinical management of
patients requiring pacemaker implantation and explantation)
would not have
implanted the pacemakers the subject of the Hazard Alert in patients had he
known the information set out in the Hazard
Alert at the time of implantation,
regardless of pacemaker dependency. It also follows that he would have ceased
using the device.
He would not have regarded the pacemaker as an appropriate
pacemaker for its purpose;
(c) Professor Chard did not expect pacemakers to be manufactured in such a way
as to increase the likelihood of a short circuit
occurring. Manufacture with a
white residue ionic contaminant trap which is practically impossible to clean
increases the likelihood
of a short circuit occurring.
(d) The failure rate of the models of pacemakers the subject of the Hazard
Alert had, by March 2000, "reached an unacceptable level"
and representatives
of the appellant required "an assurance that the units we are selling now are
not prone to this failure modality";
(e) The appellant and the Australian distributor decided to "withhold shipping
any further Tempo based product" at about 5 April
(f) The Therapeutic Goods Authority recommended that supply of the models of
pacemakers the subject of the Hazard Alert in Australia
be halted "until the
cause of these device failures is determined and device safety can be
(g) the appellant halted supply by 12 April 2000 and resolved not to
"recommence supply until the issue has been resolved";
(h) the company of which Pacesetter was a subsidiary, was not prepared to
resume shipment of the models of pacemakers the subject
of the Hazard Alert
until it had made a changes to the inspection procedures in the manufacturing
(i) Doctors consulting with the Therapeutic Goods Authority "agreed that the
reported failure rate...was unacceptable";
(j) the models of pacemakers the subject of the Hazard Alert were withdrawn
from the market;
(k) Pacesetter halted distribution of the models of pacemakers the subject of
the Hazard Alert on 27 March 2000 once they determined
the basis for failure of
the devices;
(l) the appellant appears to have removed pacemakers on consignment to
hospitals from the shelves;
(m) Some Australian doctors stated they would suspend implants of all
pacemakers supplied or manufactured by the company of which
Pacesetter was a
subsidiary, until they received assurances that other pacemakers do not share
the same soldering process and hence
risk of suffering the same failure
(n) Supply of the models of pacemakers the subject of the Hazard Alert only
resumed after testing to ensure the then current batch
were not subject to the
Consideration
36 Central to this appeal is the apparent paradox arising from a conclusion
that Mr Courtney's pacemaker was not fit for the purpose
for which pacemakers
are acquired (and therefore not of merchantable quality) yet it served that
purpose prior to explantation and
would, on the findings of the primary judge,
have continued to serve that purpose into the foreseeable future had it
remained implanted.
Both elements of the paradox are sustained by facts now
known but not known (or at least the significance of which was not known)
the time Mr Courtney acquired his pacemaker. It was common ground both before
the primary judge and on appeal that facts now
known can be relied on in
determining whether Mr Courtney's pacemaker was of merchantable quality.
37 It is not entirely clear from the terms of s 74D, when the assessment
is made of whether goods are of merchantable quality.
That is, the time at
which goods must be of unmerchantable quality for liability to arise under the
section. Paragraphs (a) to (d)
of subs 74D(1) identify four conditions
which, if satisfied, create liability in a corporation to pay compensation (if
loss or damage
has been suffered). The condition in par (c) is that the
goods "are not" of merchantable quality. The use of the present tense,
context, suggests that the question of whether the goods were of merchantable
quality is to be assessed at the time the goods
are supplied to, and acquired
by, the consumer at least where the claim for compensation is by the
38 Subsection 74D(2) identifies three circumstances in which
subs 74D(1) does not apply. One (identified in par (a) of
subs 74D(2))
is that the goods "are not" of merchantable quality by reason
, specified events occurring after the goods had left the
control of the corporation which might otherwise be liable to pay compensation.
That is, the goods may have been of merchantable quality when supplied, but not
when acquired. This qualification allows for the
possibility that between
supply and acquisition the goods ceased to be of merchantable quality for
reasons for which the corporation
should not be held responsible. As this is
an exception to subs 74D(1), this provision reinforces the notion that
merchantability
is otherwise to be assessed for the purposes of that subsection
at the time of acquisition and supply.
39 While subs 74D(3) also contains the present tense ("are"), that tense
is used because the subsection points to a quality in the
goods (fitness for
purpose) to be assessed (and therefore existing) at the time an assessment is
made about merchantable quality.
The use of the present tense probably says
nothing about when the underlying assessment of merchantability is made.
However it is
unnecessary to express a concluded view about the time or times,
as a matter of construction, merchantability is to be assessed.
because it was common ground in the appeal that the assessment of whether Mr
Courtney's pacemaker was fit for the purpose
for which pacemakers are commonly
bought, and thus whether it was of merchantable quality, is to be made at the
time it was acquired
by Mr Courtney.
40 If it was not then in that condition, the appellant is liable to pay the
compensation ordered by the primary judge (having regard
to a concession made
by the appellant about loss and damage flowing from proven unmerchantability).
The finding of the primary judge
that Mr Courtney's pacemaker has at all times
functioned normally and would not have ceased functioning prematurely by reason
battery depletion, is a finding about the condition of the pacemaker at
points between the time of its supply and acquisition and
the present and its
likely condition into the future. Its condition after supply and acquisition
is relevant to the extent that
might enable an inference to be drawn about its
condition at the time of its supply and acquisition. However the fact that it
operated and will operate in a way which is consistent with the purpose for
which it was (and other pacemakers might be) acquired
does not compel the
conclusion that at the time of supply and acquisition it was of merchantable
quality. That conclusion is reached
by considering the condition it was then
in, though informed by what is now known about its subsequent condition
thereafter.
41 That question can, in the first instance, be addressed by reference to the
facts as found by the primary judge. The condition
of Mr Courtney's pacemaker
at the time of supply and acquisition had several features. It had been
manufactured using yellow spool
solder. It had been manufactured approximately
nine months earlier. Because it had been manufactured using yellow spool
it contained a white residue which might have trapped (or possibly been
a source of) ionic contamination. It contained moisture
and an electrical
bias. While no finding was made that it then had dendritic growth, the
conditions existed for such growth to have
by then commenced. If dendritic
growth had by then commenced, premature failure by battery depletion would be
likely to occur.
Was a pacemaker in that condition fit for the purpose for
which pacemakers were bought? In my opinion it was not, essentially for
reasons given by the primary judge. Because of its physical condition having
regard to how it was manufactured, there was a
real prospect it would fail
prematurely, and the risk of it doing so was greater than might otherwise have
been expected. That being
so it was not fit for the purpose or purposes for
which goods of that kind are commonly bought.
42 The next question is whether a different conclusion about the
merchantability of Mr Courtney's pacemaker is warranted having
regard to the
submissions of the appellant critical of some of the findings or conclusions of
the primary judge. At the forefront
of those submissions was that an inference
should be drawn that at the time of supply and acquisition, Mr Courtney's
pacemaker was
not experiencing, and therefore would never experience, dendritic
growth. This submission raises two issues. The first is whether
the inference
should be drawn and the second is whether, if drawn, it is determinative of the
liability of the appellant to pay compensation
to Mr Courtney.
43 On one approach, the liability of the appellant could depend on whether this
inference can be drawn. Liability under s 74D arises
when goods are not
of merchantable quality. That is determined by considering whether the goods
are fit for the purpose or purposes
for which goods of that kind are commonly
bought having regard to the matters referred to in subs 74D(3). While the
Court must consider,
when making that determination, the reasonable
expectations of a reasonable consumer placed in the position of, in this case,
Courtney: see
Graham Barclay Oysters Pty Ltd v Ryan
(2000) 102 FCR
307 the assessment of the state or condition of the goods at (for present
purposes) the time of supply and acquisition
of the goods is nonetheless one to
be made objectively: see
Cavalier Marketing (Australia) Pty Ltd v Rasell
(1990) 96 ALR 375
at 400 (per Cooper J with Kneipp and Shepherdson JJ
44 The parties agreed that facts now known about the state or condition of the
goods at that time can be considered in making that
assessment. I take this to
be a shorthand description of facts now known and revealed in proceedings for
compensation, but not known
at the time of supply and acquisition (for example,
a latent physical defect) or what were then unknown or unforeseen consequences
(for example, the likely physical or chemical degradation of the goods
resulting from the use of known components, parts or ingredients
manufacture) of things that were known. I will refer to known facts on the
same basis.
45 Even accepting s 74D is a remedial provision intended to protect
consumers, its terms do not suggest that, as a broad statement
of principle, it
is to be applied by selectively drawing on facts now known when assessing the
state or condition of the goods in
question. Situations can arise where some
facts now known would tend to indicate that the goods were not of merchantable
but other facts now known would clearly dispel that initial impression.
In such cases there is no rational basis, nor any basis evident
for suggesting the Court should do anything other than consider all the facts
and conclude the goods were not of merchantable quality.
Notwithstanding the
apparent division of opinion in the House of Lords in
Hardwick Game Farm v
Suffolk Agricultural Poultry Producers Association
[1968] UKHL 3
[1969] 2 AC 31
whether all after acquired knowledge is relevant to assessing fitness for the
purpose, all their Lordships appeared to accept
that facts known at the time of
trial about the physical condition of the goods in question could be called in
aid in making that
assessment. The concerns of Lord Pearce (at 118-119) appear
to relate to after acquired knowledge (exemplified by knowledge that
discovered antidote could be formulated rendering otherwise poisonous goods,
harmless) which did not bear, at least directly,
on the condition of the goods
at the time of sale. The establishment of rights by reference to facts later
revealed but not known
when the right was said to arise or asserted is neither
recent nor novel: see
Shepherd v Felt and Textiles of Australia Ltd
[1931] HCA 21
(1931) 45 CLR 359
particularly per Dixon J at 377-378.
46 A claim for compensation under Div 2A is a statutory cause of action:
see, by analogy, the observations concerning
Australia Ltd v Western Australia
[1992] HCA 55
(1992) 175 CLR 514
at 525, accruing when
loss or damage is suffered. There is no reason to doubt that findings of fact
of the goods at the time of supply and acquisition
would be made by applying the normal civil standard: see
Evidence Act
(Cth). However as that section makes clear,
the level of assurance about the existence of a fact when applying the civil
can be influenced by the nature of the cause of action and the subject
matter of the proceedings. In the present case, the cause
of action is
intended to afford protection to consumers who have suffered loss or damage and
the subject matter of the proceedings
are highly sophisticated goods upon which
the consumer's life may depend. There is no issue that Mr Courtney suffered
loss or damage.
In these circumstances it would be appropriate, in my opinion,
for the Court to approach the question of whether his pacemaker ever
experienced dendritic growth on the basis that a high level of assurance would
be necessary to find, as a matter of fact, that it
47 No finding was made by the primary judge that Mr Courtney's pacemaker never
experienced dendritic growth. His Honour had the
benefit of listening to all
the expert evidence (much or all of which was given orally) and lengthy
submissions analysing that evidence.
His Honour was particularly well placed
to form a view about what the evidence revealed: see the observations of
Gleeson CJ and
Gummow and Kirby JJ in
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 197 ALR 201
207. As counsel for Mr Courtney pointed out, no expert evidence was given
expressing the conclusion that dendritic growth had
commenced in Mr Courtney's
pacemaker at the time of its acquisition. Though it could have been, no
physical examination of Mr Courtney's
pacemaker has been undertaken by the
appellant or Pacesetter to ascertain whether dendritic growth is present even
allowing for limitations
inherent in that process of examination.
48 The case advanced by the appellant that an inference should be drawn that
dendritic growth had never occurred (and consequential
premature battery
depletion would not follow) was substantially based on the finding of the
primary judge concerning the continued
operation of the pacemaker (together
with the science concerning the commencement and continuation of dendritic
growth and its consequences)
and the statistics concerning the number of
pacemakers examined which have exhibited dendritic growth. However, the
continued operation
of the pacemaker (and the finding of the primary judge that
it would not have ceased to function prematurely by reason of battery
depletion) is not inconsistent with the existence of dendritic growth. No
finding was made that dendritic growth inevitably leads
to short circuiting and
consequential premature battery depletion. His Honour discusses at [77] the
fracturing by mechanical shock
of a bridge (directly causing the short
circuiting) brought about by the dendritic growth. Thus, whether the pacemaker
to function does not depend on whether dendritic growth has occurred.
Extraneous factors can avoid that result. The appellant has
not established
that an inference should be drawn that Mr Courtney's pacemaker had not
experienced dendritic growth at the time he
acquired it. Consequently the
appellant has not established the judgment in Mr Courtney's favour should be
set aside on the basis
it advanced.
49 However even if that inference was drawn that would not result, in my
opinion, in the order awarding Mr Courtney compensation
being set aside. It
cannot be doubted that Mr Courtney suffered loss and damage. He underwent the
painful and traumatic experience
of having his pacemaker surgically explanted.
He did so on medical advice which the appellant has not challenged. The basis
that advice was the uncertainty attending the future operation of his
pacemaker arising from the Hazard Alert which, in turn, was
a result of a
number of pacemakers failing prematurely and the investigations undertaken to
ascertain the cause of those failures.
At the time the loss and damage was
suffered, Mr Courtney, his medical advisers, the appellant and Pacesetter could
not predict
whether his pacemaker would or would not fail prematurely. Testing
which predicted longevity did not conclusively establish there
would be no
premature failure. Why, in these circumstances, ought not Mr Courtney be
entitled to compensation for that loss and
damage on the basis that his
pacemaker was not of merchantable quality because of the doubts about its
reliability? Additionally
why should compensation be denied because all facts
now known (and only fully exposed in the proceedings for compensation) indicate
in a condition that would ensure continued operation at the
time of acquisition?
50 The answer, on the approach of the primary judge, lies in the nature of the
right conferred on consumers by the
. It could be expected that in many
cases in which compensation is sought, the loss and damage was a direct and
immediate result
of the defective condition of the goods at the time of
acquisition, rendering them unmerchantable. A simple example would be loss
damage caused by a car crashing as the result of a latent defect in the braking
system arising from incorrect assembly of the
brake components. Mr Courtney
did not suffer loss and damage because his pacemaker failed prematurely. This
case is different at
least in the sense that it was the prospect that Mr
Courtney's pacemaker was in a defective physical condition (because of a
used in its manufacture which remained present in it) which would
lead to premature failure, and the prospect it had been at the
acquisition, that led to the loss and damage. But that is no less, in my
opinion, a physical condition of a pacemaker than
the condition of a pacemaker
which, in fact, will (because of its physical condition) certainly fail
prematurely. Section 74D affords
consumers a remedy to obtain compensation for
loss and damage resulting from goods in a particular condition (not of
merchantable
quality) at the time of acquisition (it is unnecessary in these
proceedings to consider a situation where unmerchantability might
arise after
acquisition). If they are in an unmerchantable condition and loss and damage
results, the
contemplates a remedy. In my opinion, this is, as the primary
judge determined, an approach to the facts of this case consistent
statutory protection Div 2A is intended to afford and it is an approach with
which I agree. Mr Courtney is entitled to
compensation and the primary judge
did not err in ordering it.
51 In the submissions of the appellant in this appeal, no clear distinction was
consistently drawn between the position of Mr Courtney
and the other members of
the representative group. The focus of those submissions was often on Mr
Courtney though understandably
so, given that the primary judge made an express
finding about the state of his pacemaker in the passage at [164] but made no
finding about the condition of the pacemakers of other members of the
group. As I understood the approach of the appellant, its
success in impugning
the finding of unmerchantability in relation to Mr Courtney's pacemaker, was to
determine its success in relation
to other members of the group to whom the
answers to the questions applied.
52 I would grant leave to appeal but dismiss the appeal with costs.
certify that the preceding fifty-two (52) paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Judgment herein of the Honourable Justice
Date: 7 July 2003
THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
PTY LIMITED (ACN 076 530 946)
APPLICANT/APPELLANT
GLYNN COURTNEY
BRANSON & JACOBSON JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
53 I have had the benefit of reading in draft the reasons for judgment of
Moore J. I agree with his Honour that the applicant should
leave to appeal. The respondent did not contend to the contrary. The
applicant will hereafter be referred to as the
appellant. I gratefully adopt
his Honour's outline of the background to the appeal and the issues to be
determined on the appeal.
54 The principal issue to be determined on the appeal, as it seems to me, is
whether a product which, at the time of trial, can
be demonstrated to have
performed, and to be continuing to perform, satisfactorily can nonetheless be
found to be
`not of merchantable quality'
within the meaning of
s 74D(1) of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) (`the TPA').
55 Section 74D of the TPA provides:
Action in respect of goods of unmerchantable
a corporation, in trade or commerce, supplies goods manufactured by
the corporation to another person who acquires the goods for re-supply;
a person (whether or not the person who acquired the goods from the
corporation) supplies the goods (otherwise than by way of sale
by auction) to a
the goods are not of merchantable quality; and
the consumer or a person who acquires the goods from, or derives
title to the goods through or under, the consumer suffers loss or
reason that the goods are not of merchantable quality;
the corporation is liable to compensate the consumer or that
other person for the loss or damage and the consumer or that other person
recover the amount of the compensation by action against the corporation in a
court of competent jurisdiction.
Subsection (1) does not apply:
if the goods are not of merchantable quality by reason of:
an act or default of any person (not being the corporation or a
servant or agent of the corporation); or
a cause independent of human control;
occurring after the goods have left the control of the corporation;
as regards defects specifically drawn to the consumer's attention
before the making of the contract for the supply of the goods to
the consumer;
if the consumer examines the goods before that contract is made, as
regards defects that the examination ought to reveal.
Goods of any kind are of merchantable quality within the meaning of
this section if they are as fit for the purpose or purposes for
which goods of
that kind are commonly bought as it is reasonable to expect having regard to:
any description applied to the goods by the corporation;
the price received by the corporation for the goods (if relevant);
all the other relevant circumstances.'
56 Section 74D of the TPA creates a statutory cause of action. The
circumstances which must exist before a corporation is liable
to compensate,
relevantly, a consumer who suffers loss or damage by reason that the goods are
not of merchantable quality are those
identified in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c)
of s 74D(1). Whether or not the circumstance in paragraph (c) exists is
to be determined
by reference to s 74D(3) which gives meaning to the
element of the statutory cause of action that
`the goods are not of
merchantable quality'.
57 It was accepted on this appeal, as it was before the learned primary judge,
Sackville J, that the time at which it is to be determined
whether the
goods are of merchantable quality is the time of the supply of the goods to the
consumer. However, although the determination
to be made is whether the goods
supplied to the consumer were of merchantable quality when so supplied, it is
accepted that at least
some information not available at that time may be taken
into account at trial for the purpose of making that determination. A critical
question on this appeal, as it seems to me, is how much later-acquired
information may be taken into account.
58 Before turning to that question, it is important to note that the parties
accept that s 74D(1) is concerned with the quality
of the particular
goods, or product, supplied to the consumer who seeks to recover compensation
under the section. That is, so far
as Mr Courtney's individual claim is
concerned, the quality of the particular pacemaker supplied to
Mr Courtney. It follows, in
my view, that for the purposes of the
subsection, it is not appropriate to attribute to Mr Courtney's pacemaker
any qualities derived
by statistical analysis of the total population, or pool,
of pacemakers from which Mr Courtney's pacemaker came. So, for example,
while statistical analysis of the total population of pacemakers from which
Mr Courtney's pacemaker came might show that pacemakers
of that type have
a 2 per cent chance of premature failure, that analysis would reveal nothing
particular pacemaker.
59 So far as Mr Courtney's pacemaker is concerned it is not suggested that
it was known, or could have been known, at the time that
it was supplied to him
that it was unmerchantable. On the information then available there was no
reason for either the appellant
or Mr Courtney to suspect that it was
other than fit for its intended purpose, which was the purpose for which
pacemakers are commonly
bought. That purpose, as the primary judge found at
[202], was the purpose of being implanted into a patient on the advice of a
medical practitioner so as to restore and maintain a normal heart beat by
providing an electrical impulse carried through leads to
60 Sackville J at [213]-[214] concluded that Mr Courtney's pacemaker
was not of merchantable quality within the meaning of s 74D
because it was manufactured with yellow spool solder and thus was subject to a
`superadded risk of premature failure'
by reason of partial short
circuit. At [213] his Honour observed:
`Although the evidence as to the background or random rate of
failure was meagre, it is clear that the risk of failure of each Hazard
Pacemaker manufactured with yellow spool solder was substantially greater than
the risk applicable to other available pacemakers,
including other Tempo
Pacemakers.'
Sackville J at [214]-[217] concluded that because of the
`superadded
risk of premature failure'
, Mr Courtney's pacemaker was not as fit for
the purpose for which pacemakers are commonly bought as it is reasonable to
expect having
regard to all relevant circumstances. His Honour noted that the
appellant, the Therapeutic Goods Administration and specialist medical
practitioners all regarded the additional risk of premature failure as
unacceptable to consumers.
61 Nonetheless, his Honour found at [164] that Mr Courtney's pacemaker has
at all times functioned normally and, had it remained
in situ, it would not
have ceased to function prematurely by reason of battery depletion. The
appellant contends that the primary
judge erred in not bringing into account,
in determining whether Mr Courtney's pacemaker was of merchantable quality
within the meaning
of s 74D of the TPA, the after-acquired knowledge that
Mr Courtney's pacemaker did not suffer from premature battery depletion.
62 The appellant, in arguing that the primary judge erred in not bringing to
account all of the information available at trial,
placed reliance on
Grimsdale & Sons Ltd v Suffolk Agricultural Poultry Producers
Association
[1968] UKHL 3
[1969] 2 AC 31
`Hardwick Game Farm
That case involved consideration of, amongst other things, the operation of
s 14(2) of the
Sale of Goods Act 1893
(UK) which is concerned with
an implied contractual condition when goods are bought by description that the
goods should be of merchantable
63 The primary judge at [189]-[190] noted the need, when construing the
provisions of Division 2A of Part V of the TPA, to be cautious
too readily to authorities which illuminate the common law approach to
merchantable quality. The definition of
`merchantable quality'
s 74D(3) is significantly different from the concept of merchantable
quality at common law. The common law concept of
`merchantable quality'
was clarified by Dixon J in
Australian Knitting Mills Limited v
[1933] HCA 35
(1933) 50 CLR 387
at 418 where his Honour said:
`The condition that goods are of merchantable quality requires
that they should be in such an actual state that a buyer fully acquainted
the facts and, therefore, knowing what hidden defects exist and not being
limited to their apparent condition would buy them
without abatement of the
price obtainable for such goods if in reasonably sound order and condition and
without special terms.'
64 Section 74D is intended to provide a remedy to consumers in respect
of goods of a kind ordinarily acquired for personal, domestic
or household use
or consumption (see s 74A(2)(a)). The requirement of merchantable
quality, which is given meaning by s 74D(3),
is a requirement defined by
reference to what
`it is reasonable to expect'
; that is, in my view,
with what it is objectively reasonable to expect at the time of supply to the
consumer. The test contained
in s 74D(3) is a test that requires the
making of a comparison. It calls for the fitness for purpose of the goods in
question to
be measured against what it was objectively reasonable to expect,
in terms of fitness for purpose, in all the relevant circumstances.
circumstances include the description applied to the goods by the manufacturer
and the price received by the manufacturer
for the goods. What it is
objectively reasonable to expect in terms of fitness for purpose of goods of
one description may be quite
different from what it would be reasonable to
expect of goods of another description. What it would be reasonable to expect
of fitness for purpose of an inexpensive product might be quite
different from what it would be reasonable to expect of an expensive
the same kind.
65 However, to the extent that s 74D(3) has an application to goods with
defects of which the consumer did not know, and could not
by actual examination
have learned, I accept that some assistance may be gained from consideration of
common law authorities concerning
latent defects in goods bought by
description.
Hardwick Game Farm
case the House of Lords was concerned with
a compounded meal that had been bought and subsequently fed, with ill-effects,
to pheasants
and partridges. The compounded meal was found to contain a
proportion of a Brazilian groundnut extraction which was contaminated
toxic substance. Lord Reid at 75-76 observed:
`It is quite clear that some later knowledge must be brought in
for otherwise it would never be possible to hold that goods were unmerchantable
by reason of a latent defect. By definition a latent defect is something that
could not have been discovered at the time by any
examination which in light of
then existing knowledge it was reasonable to make. But there is a question as
to how much later knowledge
ought to be brought in. ...
I think it would be very artificial to bring in some part of the later
knowledge and exclude other parts. ...
There is clear evidence that before the date of the trial Indian groundnut
extractions so contaminated were sold under the ordinary
description and were
not rejected by the buyers when the contamination was discovered; ... So I
think that it sufficiently appears
that groundnut extractions contaminated to
an extent not said to be different from the contamination of the Brazilian
product were
regarded as of merchantable quality under the ordinary description
at the date of the trial.'
67 Lord Guest took a similar view. His Lordship at 108-109 said:
`It is clear that the quality of the goods has to be assessed at
the time of the trial when the latent defect has become known. But
you must not, in ascertaining the condition of the goods and their
merchantability, attribute the knowledge that they
would not be harmful if
compounded at a low rate of inclusion. This is, in my view, to approach the
true situation with blinkers.
The defect as ultimately discovered must be
taken with its qualifications. It is not possible to stop halfway and say "We
there is a defect" without proceeding to say "Although there is a defect
we know it can be cured by a limited rate of inclusion".
The defect was thus
of only a limited character and did not in that state detract from the
merchantability of the goods. I would,
therefore, hold that the judge was
entitled to view the matter in the state of knowledge at the date of the trial,
namely, that the
goods were saleable for a limited purpose at a limited rate of
inclusion.'
68 It appears that Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest at 92 also took the view that
all after-acquired knowledge was relevant to the determination
of merchantable
69 Lord Pearce, with whom in this regard Lord Wilberforce agreed, took a
different approach from that adopted by Lord Reid, Lord
Guest and, it seems,
Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest. His Lordship at 118-119 observed:
`Logic might seem to indicate that the court should bring to the
[of estimating merchantability]
all the after-acquired knowledge
which it possesses at the date of trial. But I do not think that this is
always so. For one is
trying to find what market the goods would have if their
subsequent ascertained condition had been known. As it is a hypothetical
exercise, one must create a hypothetical market. Nevertheless the hypothetical
market should be one that could have existed, not
one that could
have existed at the date of delivery. Suppose goods contained a hidden
deadly poison to which there was discovered by scientists
two years after
delivery a simple, easy, inexpensive antidote which could render the goods
harmless. They would be unmarketable
at the date of delivery if the existence
of the poison was brought to light, since no purchaser could then have known
the antidote
to the poison. Hypothesis is no reason for complete departure
from possibility. One must keep the hypothesis in touch with the
facts as far
as possible.'
(emphasis in original)
70 In my view, in the context of s 74D of the TPA, the approach of Lord
Pearce to the use of after-acquired knowledge in the
Hardwick Game Farm
case is compelling. Section 74D, as is mentioned above, calls for the quality,
or fitness for purpose, of the goods to be measured
against what it was
reasonable to expect in that regard at the time of the supply of the goods to
the consumer. That measurement
must be undertaken, in my view, in the light of
information concerning the goods available at the time of trial. However, the
remains whether the goods were as fit for the relevant purpose as it was
reasonable to expect at the time of their supply to the
71 It seems to me that the above conclusion is strengthened, not weakened, by
consideration of a hypothetical situation to which
considerable attention was
paid during the hearing of this appeal. The hypothetical situation concerned a
grocer who buys a case
of 100 cartons of yoghurt in which three cartons, which
cannot be distinguished from the other ninety-seven, have had arsenic
into them. Mr Walker SC, who appeared with Mr Loveday and
Mr Clark for the appellant, accepted that the case of 100 cartons of
was unmerchantable as a case because the grocer could not know which
cartons had arsenic in them. However, in respect of a purchaser
who bought and
ate without ill-effect an individual carton of yoghurt, Mr Walker
`The suggestion that it
[i.e. the carton of yoghurt]
not merchantable because it belonged to a class in which the rate of arsenic
contamination was 3 per cent ... would be absurd.'
72 The test of merchantability in the above context involves consideration
of whether the carton of yoghurt was as fit for human consumption
at the time
of its sale to the consumer as it is objectively reasonable to expect in all of
the circumstances. It seems to me to
be instructive to consider the
application of that test in different hypothetical situations. These
situations might include:
(1) a sale to a purchaser who learned of the risk of poisoning before eating
the yoghurt;
(2) a sale to a purchaser who only learned of the risk of poisoning well after
eating the yoghurt; and
(3) a sale to a purchaser who learned of the risk of poisoning after eating the
yoghurt but before any poison might be expected
to have taken effect.
A purchaser in the first class could reasonably be expected to return the
carton of yoghurt or discard it. Surely it could not
be said at trial, even if
at that time all three poisoned cartons had been identified in the hands of
other purchasers, that the
carton of yoghurt was at the time of its sale as fit
for human consumption as it is objectively reasonable to expect so as to deny
the purchaser relief under s 74D. A purchaser in the second class could
reasonably be expected to feel relieved to have survived
but angry that he or
she had been placed at risk of poisoning. Again, in my view, it would be
unrealistic to say of the carton of
yoghurt that it was at the time of its sale
as fit for human consumption as it was objectively reasonable to expect. A
in the third class could reasonably be expected to feel the most
keenly of the three that the yoghurt was not fit for human consumption
time of purchase. The anxiety experienced by that purchaser, in my view, would
flow directly from the carton of yoghurt not
being, at the time of its sale, as
fit for human consumption as it is objectively reasonable to expect. In short,
I am not persuaded
that it would be absurd to characterise a food product as
not merchantable in the relevant sense where the product carries a slight
appreciable risk of contamination by a deadly poison.
73 It seems to me that to deny that all, or any, of the purchasers in the above
classes purchased goods of a kind that were not
as fit for human consumption as
it is reasonable to expect is to read into the test of merchantable quality a
requirement concerning
loss or damage. Section 74D(1)(c) is not concerned with
loss or damage. It is s 74D(1)(d) that imports into the statutory cause
of action created by s 74D the requirement that the consumer suffers loss
and damage by reason that the goods are not of merchantable
74 I reject the argument that the mere fact that it was known at the time of
trial that Mr Courtney's pacemaker had not failed prematurely
it could not be demonstrated that Mr Courtney's pacemaker was not of
merchantable quality within the meaning of s 74D
at the time of its supply
to Mr Courtney.
75 The characteristic of Mr Courtney's pacemaker which the trial judge
found rendered it unmerchantable at the time of its supply
to Mr Courtney
was that it had been manufactured with yellow spool solder. His Honour found
that the evidence established that the
population of pacemakers that were
manufactured with yellow spool solder had a higher rate, or as the primary
judge described it
`superadded risk'
, of premature failure when
compared with the normal population of pacemakers manufactured by the
appellant. The reason for this
superadded risk, as his Honour found at [212],
was that the pacemakers manufactured with yellow spool solder were
by the white residue which had a tendency to attract or "trap" ionic
contaminants'.
76 The appellant challenged his Honour's conclusion that Mr Courtney's
pacemaker was affected by white residue. In my view, it
is immaterial in this
regard whether the primary judge concluded that all of the pacemakers
manufactured with yellow spool solder
were affected by white residue (see [212]
of his Honour's judgment) or that white residue frequently resulted from the
use of yellow
spool solder (see [130] of his Honour's judgment). His Honour
plainly concluded that it was more likely than not that the use of
yellow spool
solder would result in a white residue and that, for that reason, it could be
inferred that Mr Courtney's pacemaker
was affected by yellow spool solder.
Section 140
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) is concerned with the
standard of proof in civil proceedings. It is to be understood as
incorporating the common law rule
that evidence is to be weighed according to
the proof which it was in the power of one party to produce and in the power of
to contradict (see
Apollo Shower Screens Pty Ltd v Building and
Construction Industry Long Service Payments Corporation
[1985] 1 NSWLR 561
at 565 citing
Blatch v Archer
[1774] EngR 2
(1774) 1 Cowp 63
[1774] EngR 2
and other authorities). It was within the power of the appellant who was in
possession of Mr Courtney's pacemaker, but not
the respondent, to
establish whether or not Mr Courtney's pacemaker was in fact affected by
white residue. I do not suggest that
the appellant is to be criticised for
deciding to preserve Mr Courtney's pacemaker in working order rather than
to open it to check
for white residue. However, having chosen that course, it
is in no position to attack his Honour's finding that the pacemaker is
by white residue.
77 Sackville J did not conclude that Mr Courtney's pacemaker was
unmerchantable within the meaning of s 74D because it came from
population of pacemakers that statistically had an unacceptable rate of
premature failure. Rather his Honour concluded that Mr
pacemaker was unmerchantable in the relevant sense because it had the physical
characteristic of having been manufactured
with yellow spool solder. As a
consequence of its method of manufacture it was itself at added risk because of
the white residue,
when compared with pacemakers not so manufactured, of
premature battery depletion caused by dendritic growth. That is, his Honour
concluded that, because it had been manufactured with yellow spool solder,
Mr Courtney's pacemaker was not as fit for the purpose
pacemakers are commonly bought as it was reasonable to expect for the reason
that its method of manufacture gave it the
quality of carrying a risk of
premature failure which was higher than it was objectively reasonable to expect
in a pacemaker.
78 In my view, having regard to the evidence before the primary judge (see [59]
above), no error can be shown to have been involved
in his Honour's conclusion
that a pacemaker that has only the ordinary or usual risk of premature failure
is more fit for the purpose
of being used as a pacemaker than a pacemaker that
has, by reason of the method of its manufacture, an appreciably higher risk of
premature failure. In this case it was reasonable to expect, at the time of
the supply to Mr Courtney of his pacemaker, that Mr
pacemaker had been manufactured in a way which gave rise to only the ordinary
or usual risk of premature failure. However,
the use of yellow spool solder in
the manufacture of Mr Courtney's pacemaker meant that Mr Courtney's
pacemaker had an appreciably
higher risk of premature failure than the ordinary
or usual risk of premature failure to be expected in pacemakers.
79 The above analysis has deliberately been undertaken without reference to the
existence or otherwise of dendritic growth in Mr
Courtney's pacemaker.
What, in my view, made Mr Courtney's pacemaker, at the time that it was
supplied to him, less fit for use as
a pacemaker than it was reasonable in the
circumstances to expect was its method of manufacture (i.e. that it was
manufactured with
yellow spool solder). It was that method of manufacture
which created, because of the white residue, the
`superadded'
dendritic growth. While proof of actual dendritic growth in Mr Courtney's
pacemaker at the time of its supply to him would
have constituted proof that
the pacemaker was not of merchantable quality within the meaning of s 74D,
absence of proof of actual
dendritic growth at that time did not logically lead
to the contrary finding.
80 I would dismiss the appeal with costs.
certify that the preceding twenty-eight (28) paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Judgment herein of the Honourable Justice
Date: 7 July 2003
THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
661 of 2000
PTY LIMITED (ACN 076 530 946)
APPLICANT/APPELLANT
KEVIN GLYNN COURTNEY
BRANSON & JACOBSON JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JACOBSON J:
81 I agree with the reasons for judgment of Branson J.
certify that the preceding paragraph is a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment
herein of the Honourable Justice Jacobson.
Date: 7 July 2003
for the Applicant/Appellant:
Mr Walker SC with Mr Loveday and Mr Clark
for the Applicant/Appellant:
Clayton Utz
for the Respondent:
SC with Mr Clarke and Mr Cashman
for the Respondent:
Blackburn Cashman
of Hearing:
of Judgment:
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (242 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter