D20-21\103 [2020] SCTA 213 (11 December 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\103
FILE NUMBER : 17-1253
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
JOINED PARTY
The Insurer
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
The Previous Insurer
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(the Complaints Act) and held on 11 August 2020
Jane Abbott,
DECISIONS UNDER REVIEW
decisions under review are as follows:
That of the
Insurer to reject the Complainant’s claim for her Total and Permanent
Disablement (TPD) benefit to be based on a
Professional occupation rating.
That of the
Trustee to also reject the Complainant’s claim for her TPD benefit to be
based on a Professional occupation rating.
Insurer notified the Tribunal by email dated 12 April 2019 of its decision to
reject the Complainant’s claim.
Trustee notified the Complainant by letter dated 25 August 2017 of its decision
to reject the Complainant’s claim.
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal affirms the decisions of the Trustee and the Insurer.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
to s32 of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal requested submissions from the
submission was received from the Complainant.
Trustee and the Insurer declined to provide a submission, choosing instead to
rely on information previously submitted to the
submissions were exchanged and responses were invited. No party responded.
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
papers provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant made a complaint that the decisions of the Trustee and the Insurer
were unfair or unreasonable for the reasons summarised
determination.
Complainant is currently 53 years of age.
Fund changed its insurer to the Previous Insurer on 29 March 2003 and introduced
an occupational classification scale. Members
were classified as General unless
they applied for increased cover at which time they could be approved to be
Professional.
31 March 2006, the Fund changed insurer to the Insurer. A Significant Event
Notice (SEN) was issued to the Complainant on 30 May
2006 advising of enhanced
changes in insurance cover to be effective 1 July 2006. The changes included an
extension of occupational
classifications to include Office. All existing
members, including the Complainant, were defaulted to the Office scale of
and insurance cover unless they had previously applied for and been
accepted to the Professional scale.
SEN advised the occupational classifications and the associated premiums and
insured amounts. Included in the enhancements was
a new Income Protection (IP)
option for existing members of the Fund. To take advantage of the offer, the
Complainant was required
to complete and return a form by 30 July 2006. It
appears that the Complainant did not return this form.
Complainant said the SEN did not sufficiently provide details of the
classifications and she was not informed of requirements
for her to ensure she
was on the Professional scale.
to a medical condition, the Complainant last worked on 10 June 2010. She lodged
a TPD claim in February 2017. On 29 March 2017,
the Trustee notified her that
her claim had been approved and she would be paid an insured amount of $306,760
and her account balance
of $80,402.46.
27 April 2017, the Complainant lodged an objection to the decision to pay an
insured amount of $306,760 as she claimed she was
classified as Office when she
should have been Professional. She sought to be paid the Professional level of
cover and to have all
premiums paid since 10 June 2010 reimbursed on the grounds
that she ceased to be covered from that date.
Trustee has no record of receiving an application from the Complainant to be
considered for the Professional classification
The Trustee stated the
insured amount was included on all the Complainant’s annual statements.
and she had the opportunity to
apply for increased cover.
resolution sought by the Complainant is to be paid the Professional scale cover
amount plus to have all premiums paid since 10
June 2010 reimbursed.
Benefit in dispute
to the Complainant, the amount of the benefit in dispute is $30,720, being the
additional insurance payable for her TPD
claim had she been classified as
Professional. The Complainant is also seeking interest from 27 March 2017.
Events not in dispute:
− The Complainant’s date of birth.
− The Complainant joined the Fund.
− The Fund changed insurer to the Previous Insurer
and an occupational classification scale was introduced with current members
having to apply for increased cover and be approved for the Professional
− The Fund changed insurer to the Insurer and
occupations were extended to include General, Office and Professional. Existing
members were given Office rates unless they had already been approved for the
Professional scale.
− The date of a SEN advising of the new occupational
scales and an IP offer.
− The Complainant last physically worked.
− The Complainant lodged a disability claim
with the Fund.
− The Trustee advised the Complainant her TPD
claim had been accepted and insurance of $306,760 was payable in addition to
account balance.
− The Complainant complained to the Trustee.
− The Complainant was advised of the
Trustee’s decision.
− The Complainant lodged a complaint to the
Tribunal considers that the trust deed of the Fund relevant to this complaint is
that in effect on the date when the Complainant
ceased active work (i.e. 10 June
2010), being the trust deed as amended up to and including the amendment dated 3
March 2009 (the
Trust Deed).
Trust Deed provisions relevant to the complaint are:
(a) Specific Powers
Without prejudice to the powers vested in the Trustee by this
Deed or otherwise the Trustee shall have the following powers:
(iii) to institute, conduct, defend, compound or abandon any legal
proceedings by or against the Fund or its Officers or otherwise
concerning the
affairs of the Fund and also to compound and allow time for payments or
satisfaction of any debts due and of any claims
or demands by or against the
(ix) to insure or reinsure any risks, contingencies or liabilities of the
Fund with any Insurer, mortgage insurance company, reinsurance
Complying Superannuation Fund;
3.2 Insurer
The Trustee may effect a Policy or Policies of insurance or reinsurance with
an Insurer for the provision of Benefits, including income
protection, payable
on the death, disablement or sickness or illness of a Member by means of an
individual Policy or a group Policy
upon such terms and conditions as the
Trustee in its absolute discretion may determine and the Trustee will pay the
premiums and
other outgoings in respect of any Policy so effected.
INSURANCE POLICY
Tribunal considers that the insurance policy relevant to the complaint is that
in force on the date when the Complainant ceased
active work, being that
executed by the Trustee and the Insurer, commencing on 31 March 2006 and as
endorsed to 15 March 2010 (the
Policy relevantly provides:
2.8 Changeover Cover
A person who was insured under the
former conditions
on the day before
changeover date wil
changeover cover.
4.1 Amount of Cover for an Insured Member
The amount of cover for an
insured member
is either the
insured cover
fixed cover
in respect of them, having regard to
their age and the occupation scale applicable to the insured member, the amount
insured cover
will not exceed the
maximum cover limit
subject to this condition 4 and any changes to the amount of cover under any
other condition of this policy or to which
otherwise agree in writing.
4.3 Amount of Changeover Cover
A person who was insured under the
former conditions
on the day before
changeover date
will receive on the
changeover date
accordance with Schedule 4.
DEFINITIONS
Words or expressions in italics throughout the policy document have
meanings set out below:
occupation scale
Means the professional, office or general
occupation scale by which the value of a unit of
insured cover
determined under Table 1. The occupation scale applicable to an
is determined by the questionnaire in Schedule 2.
SCHEDULE 2 – Occupation Scales
The amount of
unitised insured cover
will be determined by the
occupation scale applicable to an insured member. The default occupation scale
will be the General occupation
scale. The occupation scale applicable to an
insured member
is determined by the responses to the following
the duties of the insured member's occupation limited to professional,
managerial, administrative, clerical, secretarial or similar
'white collar'
nature tasks which do not involve manual work and are undertaken entirely within
an office environment (excluding
travel time from one office environment to
the insured member earning in excess of $80,000 from their profession?
the insured member hold a tertiary qualification or is the insured member a
member of a professional institute or registered
by a government body?
(b) Is the insured member in a management role?
Yes to at least question 1 will qualify the member for the
Office scale.
Yes to question 1 and question 2 and either question 3 (a) or 3 (b) will
qualify the member for the Professional scale.
All other scenarios fall under the General scale.
Tribunal noted the insurance policy held by the Trustee with Previous Insurer 2,
effective 29 March 2003, included the following
A member’s occupation classification will be determined upon
application for additional cover.
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
main points made by the Complainant are as follows:
▪ She was paid an insured benefit of $306,760 due to her Office classification but believes she should have been paid $337,480
as a Professional.
▪ She was always under the impression she was covered under the Professional scale and says she fulfilled the requirements to
qualify for that scale by 1 July 2006 at the latest. This was the date she was assigned to the Office scale.
Trustee’s 2006 SEN, advising of enhanced insurance cover effective 1 July
inadequate disclosure to members. It stated:
The new scales have been extended to three categories -
General, Office and Professional - to reflect the different risks involved
different occupations. If you are currently covered by the General scale, you
will move automatically to the new Office scale,
with the new enhanced benefits.
If you are on the Professional scale you will receive the enhanced benefits of
this category with
the new scales.
never disclosed her occupational scale to her.
The Complainant
believes she is entitled to the TPD benefit being paid at the higher
occupational
scale, because she clearly met the criteria for the
Professional scale throughout her Fund membership.
− was likely to mislead any member employed in a professional
occupation to believe they were already covered under the Professional
− failed to disclose the occupational scale to which the member was
actually allocated;
− failed to disclose the definitions and eligibility requirements of
each of the scales; at no time were these communicated
to members so that
members could discern whether or not they had been correctly classified;
− failed to disclose what the process was for members to apply to be
classified under a different scale;
− was incorrect as it failed to advise members they could in fact
change their occupational scale and gave the impression a
occupational scale was fixed; and
− required prior knowledge of the 2003 change in insurance arrangements.
At the time of
joining the Fund in 2001 the Complainant was employed as a General Manager. At
the time of the notification of the
new insurance arrangement in May 2006 she
was employed as a Chief Executive Officer.
No form was in
existence for members to apply to change their occupational scale until after 10
April 2013.
To the date of
her disablement on 10 June 2010, no communications from the Trustee, including
annual or mid-year contribution statements,
advised her
occupational
scale. Only the amount of the insured benefit was
This figure was meaningless to members when they had received no
information from the Fund to enable them compare [sic] the dollar
insured benefit against. The Complainant simply lacked any information that
would have alerted her the dollar figure on
the member statements was for the
lower “Office” occupational scale. In the absence of any other
communication and information
from the Trustee, it was reasonable for the
Complainant to believe that she was entitled to receive the level of cover as
for under the “Professional” scale.
The occupational
scale was not disclosed until the Annual Statement as at 30 June
She was neither
provided with a Product Disclosure Statement (PDS) at the time of joining the
sent one at any time after joining the Fund to the date
of disablement. As she did not complete a New Member Application to join
Fund, she missed being provided with a PDS.
However, the
dated 20 June 1999, applicable when she joined the Fund, was
out of date with respect to the later insurance arrangements.
She received no
notification in relation to the changes in insurance arrangements in March 2003
and the introduction of occupational
scales. The Complainant only became aware
were changes to the insurance arrangement in 2003 on
receiving the Trustee’s reply of 23 August 2017 to her complaint and on
reading the exchange of information material forwarded by the Tribunal.
It is likely
notification of the 2003 changes was only sent to members that had active
at the time. The Complainant’s insurance
cover lapsed on 18 October 2002 and did not recommence until 30 June 2003,
to April 2003.
In July 2006,
the Trustee updated its New Member Application Form to specifically ask new
members to nominate their correct occupational
scale. However, the Trustee did
not take any reasonable steps to ensure existing members were likewise allocated
to the correct occupational
letter dated 2 February 2017 enclosing the TPD
claim forms stated:
Under [the Trustee’s] insurance policy, to qualify for a
Total and Permanent Disablement benefit you must meet the definition
applicable to your employment circumstances at the date you first ceased work or
when your first became disabled. These definitions
are as follows:
For Employed or Self-employed Persons:
As insured member is totally and permanently disabled if the insured member:
As a result of
sickness or injury, has been absent from all employment for 3 consecutive months
from the date of disablement, and
the insurer is satisfied on the basis of
medical and other evidence that the insured member is unlikely ever to be able
in any occupation, whether or not for reward.
'Occupation'
For professional
or manager, the person's occupation based on the general area of expertise of
For all other
staff, an occupation that the person can perform, on a full time or part time
basis, based on the skills and knowledge
the person has acquired through
previous education, training or expertise.
'Professional'
means a person who:
Has a tertiary
qualification or is eligible to belong to a professional body
Earns a salary
greater than $80,000 per annum, and
Only works in an
office environment and in a sedentary capacity.
means a person who:
Is part of the
management of the employer
Earns a salary
greater than $80,000 per annum, and
Only works in an
office building and in a sedentary capacity.
The wording of
the letter led the Complainant to believe that, as she fell under the
Professional
/Manager’ definition and as her claim
would be assessed according to that definition, her benefit would be paid at the
Professional
Additionally, in
her supporting documentation for her TPD claim, she specifically addressed the
‘Professional’ TPD definition,
as advised in the 2 February 2017
The Trustee
main points made by the Trustee are as follows:
On 29 March 2003
the Professional scale was introduced to the Fund when they changed insurers to
the Previous Insurer. Under the arrangement
occupational
classification was determined upon application
meaning members needed to apply and be approved for the Professional
occupational
2006 the Trustee’s insurer changed to the Insurer. At
this time the Office scale was introduced. All existing members of the
automatically given the higher Office classification unless they had previously
applied and been accepted into the Professional
Members are
issued with annual Member Statements. Although the occupational classification
was not shown on Statements until 30 June
2015, the insured value was provided
and members could apply for additional cover if the cover held was
insufficient.
The Complainant
has not at any stage made an application to be considered under the Professional
scale and, when her TPD claim was
accepted, she was paid the benefit applicable
the Office scale having been eligible for the automatic
upgrade from 31 March 2006.
The Insurer
main points made by the Insurer are as follows:
Complainant
considers she should have been classified under the
Professional scale and would therefore being entitled to a higher TPD benefit.
To qualify for
the Professional classification, members needed to apply. Although the material
reviewed in the context of the claim
indicates the Complainant may have
eligible to apply for higher cover, no such request was ever
received or accepted, therefore the Insurer assessed the Complainant
under the Office scale in line with the Policy terms and conditions.
Complainant
paid premiums for cover under the Office scale.
The Insurer does
not provide information to Fund members and therefore is unable to
on any documents issued or information provided to the
Complainant by the Trustee about the introduction of the occupational scales
how to apply.
the duty of the Insurer to ensure members are adequately
insured, or to review the level of cover at the time of assessing a
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
s37(2)(a) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must review the decisions of both
the Trustee and Insurer.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must determine whether the decisions
of the Trustee and the Insurer to reject the
Complainant’s claim for her
TPD benefit to be based on a Professional occupation rating were fair and
reasonable in their operation
in relation to the Complainant in the
circumstances.
issue is not what decision the Tribunal would have made on the material before
the Trustee and the Insurer but whether the decisions
were fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal has taken into account all the material
provided by the Parties, the provisions of the
Trust Deed and the Policy and the
relevant law. The Tribunal is satisfied that the material it has relied on has
been provided to
all Parties.
Complainant was paid an insured TPD benefit of $306,760 from the Fund in 2017.
She last worked on 10 June 2010. The insurance
amount was the benefit payable
under the Policy for the Complainant based on an Office occupational scale.
Complainant is seeking payment of the additional insurance amount payable on the
Professional scale. She maintains she has fulfilled
the requirements for this
classification since its introduction but has neither been advised she was on
the Office scale nor how
to apply for the Professional scale.
Tribunal considered the relevant issues were the provisions of the Trust Deed
and the insurance policies and the disclosure material
available to the
Complainant.
Tribunal noted the relevant Trust Deed provided the Trustee with the power to
enter into a policy of insurance with an insurer.
Tribunal considered the relevant insurance policies for the Fund.
2003 insurance policy
Occupational
scales were introduced to the Fund on 20 March 2003 when the Fund changed
insurers to the Previous Insurer.
policy introduced two occupational scales, General and Professional. All
existing members were placed on the General scale.
the provisions of this policy, a member’s occupational scale could only be
changed to Professional if they applied for
additional insurance cover.
members were not entitled to the Professional scale solely because of their
occupation.
is no dispute that the Complainant never applied for additional insurance cover.
Therefore, under the 2003 policy, she was not
entitled to be on the Professional
31 March 2006, the Fund changed insurer to the Insurer. The occupational scales
were extended, effective 1 July 2006, to include
an Office scale. All existing
members were placed on the Office scale unless they had already been approved
for the Professional
Complainant’s insurance was therefore provided on the Office scale.
appeared to the Tribunal that the conditions for inclusion on the Professional
scale transferred from the 2003 policy to the Policy.
Therefore, an application
for increased cover needed to be made before consideration for the Professional
scale would be made by
the Insurer.
Policy included questions which were to be asked of a member who applied for
additional insurance cover. The answers to these
questions determined the
member’s occupational scale.
Complainant submitted she would have met the requirements for classification on
the Professional scale due to her occupation.
The Tribunal considered it was
likely her answers to the relevant questions would have placed her on the
Professional scale. However,
there was also a requirement to actually apply for
increased cover. This requirement was not met by the Complainant.
Complainant may also have been able to simply apply for a change in occupational
scale at some stage prior to her date of disablement.
Neither the Trustee nor
the Insurer advised whether this was possible prior to 2010. However, the
Tribunal noted the Complainant
submitted there was no form in existence for this
purpose prior to 2013.
such an application were possible or not, the Complainant made no application
and therefore was never asked the relevant questions
to allow the Insurer to
assess her occupational scale.
Tribunal is satisfied the Insurer administered the Complainant’s insurance
cover in accordance with the Policy and it reasonably
determined her TPD claim
should be paid based on the Office scale.
Trustee disclosure material
Complainant submitted she did not receive a PDS from the Fund when she joined in
2001. The Tribunal noted occupational scales
were not in existence for the Fund
at that time and, therefore, the PDS would not have assisted her with regard to
this issue.
Complainant also submitted she did not receive any notification from the Trustee
concerning the introduction of the occupational
scales in March 2003. The
Tribunal considered this was possible given the Complainant advised her
insurance cover had lapsed from
18 October 2002 to April 2003.
Trustee advised it no longer has a copy of the 2003 material due to age.
However, as noted above, classification to the Professional
scale, at the time,
only occurred when an application was made for increased cover. As such, the
2003 disclosure material would not
have included a process simply to be
reclassified.
Complainant received the SEN issued in 2006 concerning the new arrangements
following the transfer of insurers from the Previous
Insurer to the Insurer. She
submitted it did not provide information which enabled members to discern if
they had been classified
on the correct occupational scale.
Tribunal considered the 2006 SEN. While it was of the opinion some of the
Complainant’s points were valid, it noted the
SEN should be read in the
context of the requirements which existed when it was produced. Trustee
responsibilities with respect to
communication material have become more
regulated since 2006. A similar SEN, produced now, would require more detail,
but it is not
reasonable to place today’s standards on the Trustee in
said that, the purpose of the SEN was not to advise members they could apply for
a different occupational classification.
SEN advised all existing Fund members would be classified as Office unless they
were previously on the Professional scale. The
Complainant submitted she assumed
she had been classified as Professional. However, the Tribunal considered her
assumption was not
based on any disclosure material from the Trustee advising
her of this. The Complainant had never applied for increased insurance
therefore never met the requirements to be on the Professional scale under the
2003 policy. The Tribunal did not consider
it reasonable for the Complainant to
assume from the SEN that the Professional scale applied to her.
Complainant received annual Member Statements. The Tribunal noted the
occupational scale was not shown on the Statements until
the 2015 Statement.
However, the TPD insurance amount was shown on all her Statements throughout her
membership. If the amount of
insurance was insufficient for her needs, she could
have queried whether she could increase the amount. She would then have been
assessed for acceptance on to the Professional scale.
Trustee and the Insurer are entitled to establish the terms and conditions for
the provision of the Fund’s insurance cover.
They determined members would
only be assessed for acceptance on to the Professional scale if an application
was made for increased
cover. It appeared to the Tribunal this arrangement
existed up to the Complainant’s date of disablement in 2010.
Insurer and the Trustee were also entitled to provide new members with the
opportunity to be classified when joining the Fund
after 1 July 2006 via the
Fund application form. While this does not appear consistent with the treatment
for existing members, the
Tribunal considered the Insurer was entitled to offer
the enhanced insurance arrangements to the Trustee on the terms it did in 2006
and the Trustee was entitled to accept those terms.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decisions under review
if it is satisfied that the decisions, in their
operation in relation to the
Complainant, were fair and reasonable in the circumstances. For the reasons
stated above the Tribunal
is so satisfied.
Tribunal affirms the decisions of the Trustee and the Insurer.
FURTHER OBSERVATIONS
Complainant has requested a refund of the insurance premiums she has paid since
10 June 2010, her date of disablement. Neither
the Trustee nor the Insurer has
addressed this request from the Complainant with the Tribunal, and therefore,
the Tribunal is unaware
if a refund has been made.
Tribunal considered that, given the Insurer was not on risk for a TPD benefit
after 10 June 2010, the TPD premiums from that date
should be refunded to the
Complainant unless a payment has already been made.
Jane Abbott, Member
Date of Tribunal signature: 11 December 2020
RTF format (369 KB)
Signed PDF/A format