Reference by APRA AMCOS (Summons) [2023] ACopyT 3 (7 September 2023)
Reference by APRA AMCOS (Summons)
File number:
CT 1 of 2021
The Tribunal:
PERRAM J (PRESIDENT)
Date of decision:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– application
to issue summons – where summons objected to
Legislation:
Cases cited:
Reference by APRA AMCOS (Summonses)
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submissions:
Counsel for the Applicants:
Mr M Hall SC, Ms R De Stoop and Ms M Evetts
Solicitor for the Applicants:
Banki Haddock Fiora
Counsel for Stan Entertainment Pty Ltd:
Ms A Campbell
Solicitor for Stan Entertainment Pty Ltd:
MinterEllison
Counsel for Netflix, Inc:
Mr B Cameron
Solicitor for Netflix, Inc:
Simpsons Solicitors
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 1 of 2021
REFERENCE BY:
AUSTRALASIAN PERFORMING RIGHT ASSOCIATION
LIMITED ABN 42 000 016 099
AUSTRALASIAN MECHANICAL COPYRIGHT
OWNERS’ SOCIETY LIMITED ABN 78 001 678 851
PERRAM J (PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
application to issue a summons in the amended form provided to the Tribunal on 3
August 2023 is refused.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
PERRAM J (PRESIDENT):
and Netflix ask the Tribunal to issue to APRA AMCOS a summons under
(Cth) (‘the Act’) requiring it to
produce documents in its possession. The parties have resolved most of the
between them consensually and summonses in an agreed form have already
been issued. They remain in dispute about certain classes
of documents the
subject of these reasons. The relevant principles governing the issue of a
summons seeking the production of documents
are set out in
Reference by APRA
AMCOS (Summonses)
[2022] ACopyT 4
reference is concerned with the appropriate fee to be charged to the providers
of subscription video on demand services (‘SVOD
services’) in return
for the licence of APRA AMCOS to communicate and/or reproduce musical works
within their repertoire which,
in practical terms, includes the vast bulk of
commercially available music. Although some of the content streamed by SVOD
has been acquired by them pursuant to arrangements which licence the
communication and/or reproduction of the music contained within
that content,
there is no practical way that an SVOD provider can check whether this has in
all cases been done. In practical terms,
therefore, they need a blanket licence
from APRA AMCOS to avoid inadvertent infringements of copyright.
of the SVOD providers before the Tribunal already have in place consensual
arrangements with APRA AMCOS licensing their use of
the repertoire.
Historically, the fee charged for these arrangements was
their gross revenues. APRA AMCOS has sought to change the basis on which
licence fees are calculated and the Respondents including
Netflix and Stan have
not agreed to this proposed change. The Tribunal exists to resolve disputes of
this kind which cannot be resolved
by ordinary commercial dealings since neither
set of parties has any choice about dealing with the other.
the evidence for the hearing currently stands, one of the ways in which APRA
AMCOS’s proposed licence fee is to be calculated
is as 2.5% of an SVOD
provider’s gross revenue,
. APRA AMCOS has prepared
evidence from an expert, Mr Martin Hall, that ‘Australian SVOD agreements
are consistent with the
market rate for licence fees as a percentage of gross
revenue being the 2.5% proposed by APRA AMCOS’. APRA AMCOS has served
the Respondents all of the material with which Mr Hall was provided and upon
which his opinion was formed.
AMCOS has previously licensed the use of its repertoire by other video on demand
(‘VOD’) services apart from SVOD
services. For example, it has in
place arrangements with the commercial television broadcasters in relation to
their VOD services.
In relation to the public broadcasters, it provides a
licence which covers all of their offerings (including their VOD offerings).
appears that APRA AMCOS began licensing VOD services from around 2010. Since
2010 it would appear that APRA AMCOS has licensed
more than 72 VOD services
including SVOD services. Not all of these necessarily commenced operations.
The evidence suggests that
there may exist VOD services who do not presently
hold a licence. Although streaming services of the present kind are now called
VOD services this has not always been so and at one point they were known as
‘online TV’. In addition to the more than
72 VOD services which
have been licensed, it appears likely that APRA AMCOS has at various junctures
also dealt with parties about
VOD services but where no licence arrangement ever
and Netflix wish to explore the fees that have historically been charged to VOD
services and also to know more about the negotiations
that APRA AMCOS has had
and the thinking it has done about the provision of licences for VOD services.
I accept in principle that
the current VOD licences may constitute comparable
bargains from which a price for SVOD services may be determined. I also accept
that any historical VOD licences may be used for a similar purpose.
AMCOS’s negotiations for those arrangements or its internal thinking about
the price it desired or was willing to charge
for current or historical VOD
licences or its reasons for charging that price would not establish a comparable
bargain. There is
a considerable inconvenience to APRA AMCOS in disinterring
material of this kind from its records. I do not think that the materials
sought by Stan and Netflix are of sufficient relevance to the function to be
performed by the Tribunal to justify the corresponding
burden that would be
imposed on APRA AMCOS, particularly given the way the categories are currently
Stan argues that its SVOD service is different to the international SVOD
services (such as Netflix) and is instead more comparable
to Australian
audio-visual services. It also notes that the commercial, national and
subscription broadcasters are all licensed
on different terms. It submits that
the reasons for these differences are relevant to a consideration of how Stan
should be licensed.
I do not accept that this submission requires for its
advancement an examination of the internal ruminations of APRA AMCOS. The
question for the Tribunal will be the extent to which the VOD licences provide
comparable bargains for a licence for Stan. Stan
is capable of advancing its
case about the differences between its offering and those of other Australian or
international SVOD services
by reference to the differences between its
situation and that of those providers. The question will be what the Tribunal
of that argument. I do not think it would be useful for the Tribunal to
be tilling the soil of what APRA AMCOS thought about these
matters and, indeed,
I suspect this may turn out to be wasteful at any hearing.
said, I do not see any reason why the licences for the 72 identified VOD
services entered into since 2010 should not be produced.
APRA AMCOS knows
enough about these licences to know that there are at least 72 of them and to
the extent that it still has possession
of them I would be willing to order
their production. However, the summons seeks much more than this and is too
broad. In formal
terms, I reject categories 3(d), 3(e) and 10.
I certify that the preceding nine (9) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination of the Tribunal
constituted
by the Honourable Justice Perram
(President)
Dated: 7 September 2023
RTF format (290 KB)
Signed PDF/A format