1412592 [2015] RRTA 291 (21 May 2015)
[2015] RRTA 291
(21 May 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Rodger Shanahan
DATE: 21 May 2015
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant
a Protection visa.
Statement made on 21 May 2015 at 11:36am
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to
section 431(2)
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration to refuse to grant the applicant
a Protection visa under
Migration Act 1958
applicant who claims to be a
, applied for the
visa [in] July 2013 and the delegate refused to grant the visa [in] June 2014.
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 28 April 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments. The Tribunal hearing was conducted
with the assistance of an
interpreter in the Arabic and English languages.
CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
Protection Visa Application
applicant claimed that if she returned to Lebanon she would be raped, murdered
and have their things stolen. The applicant and
her husband worked in a
clothing stall in [City 1] for 20 years that necessitated their travel to buy
stock; they lived in [Town
2]. They feared being targeted by a Salafist group
that had targeted other members of their family.
applicant claimed to fear that her life would be in danger from a man named [Mr
A] if she were to return to Lebanon. She then
claimed that this person wanted
her to leave her husband and go with him, and that she would be killed if she
didn’t. She
had no other claims.
and her husband worked in the clothing industry, bought stock from other places
and then sold them in [City 1]. Her husband decided
one day to pick up goods
from [Mr A]. They bought goods in Beirut and it was getting late when her
husband decided to buy goods
from [Mr A], who was in [Camp 3]. The applicant
didn’t like entering the refugee camp at night and urged caution. Her
decided to call [Mr A] first to see if he was present.
A] answered and told them he was still in the shop. The applicant’s
husband said that they would come to see him and would
be bringing his wife.
Her husband would choose the male clothes and the applicant chose the
women’s clothes, which were downstairs.
She went downstairs while her
husband was looking at the men’s clothes on the upper level.
A] came downstairs to help the applicant. He had always looked at her strangely
and she had always tried to avoid being in the
same room as him or talking to
him. [Mr A] would point out new items to her and would
‘accidentally’ touch her hand,
apologise but later do the same
thing. She complained and he then held her hand and pushed her into the corner
and tried to kiss
her. She hit him and told him that she wasn’t
tripped on a box of goods that were on the floor and fell. He tried to lay on
top of her and she hit him in the groin. As she
got up [Mr A] grabbed her hand
and threatened to kill her and her husband if she told her husband about what
had occurred. She went
to the bathroom for 15 minutes to recover and when she
came out she found [Mr A] and her husband sitting together at [Mr A]’s
husband went to get the car and while he was away [Ms A] again threatened to
kill the applicant and her husband if she said anything.
Two or three weeks
passed and she always found an excuse not to go back to [Mr A]’s shop
whenever her husband wanted to go.
In the clothing trade wholesalers may
sometimes come to the shopowners instead, and [Mr A] began to come to them
regularly on Mondays
with his goods and receive his payment.
day they had a customer that her husband attended to at the same time [Mr A] was
there showing them the new clothing range. While
her husband was away [Mr A]
asked her why she never came over any more and that he would find them wherever
they went. There was
a period of time after this and an opportunity for the
applicant to come to Australia to help her [offspring]’s pregnancy.
called her husband to tell him about the birth. He had a bad habit whenever she
called him of passing the phone to whoever he
was talking to so she could speak
to them. He was with [Mr A] and she was forced to speak to him. She had to
for Ramadan in June but her husband told her not to come
because the roads were closed due to clashes with Salafists; this was sometime
before [the end of] June 2013.
issues with [Mr A] began around May 2013. They would visit [Mr A] every two to
three weeks to get new stock. The only time she
had had contact with [Mr A] was
the time she spoke to him [in] June after her [offspring] gave birth. [Mr A]
and her husband retained
their business relationship. Her husband knew nothing
she had been here her husband had been kidnapped and assaulted in March 2014.
He had gone to buy goods and two men in police
uniform stopped him, they fought
and he had a bag put over his head and was taken away. After he was kidnapped
he was hit and asked
questions about the applicant such as where she was and
when she was coming back to the market. He was found later in the area he
taken by a bystander who then took him to hospital.
was taken for 15-20 days. She was asked why he was only asked two questions,
and she said that this was all she was told by him.
There was no ransom
request. She believed the kidnbap was related to the [Mr A] issue because of
the death threat [Mr A] made against
her husband and family. She said that
nothing had happened since then, but then said that during the night someone had
shot at the
house but then run away. This was a few months ago.
kidnapping was not reported to the police because the kidnappers threatened to
kill his son if he reported the incident. His
son had subsequently been pulled
out of school. It was put to her that the medical centre note said that they
had informed the appropriate
authorities about the incident which would indicate
that the police had been informed. She claimed she was unaware of this.
was put to her that she had made no mention of this in her protection visa and
that the Tribunal needed to determine her credibility,
and this made it
difficult to do so. She said it was a scandal so she didn’t tell anyone.
It was put to her that she had
said she had concerns about [Mr A] and had always
tried to avoid being with him, yet she went to [Mr A]’s shop at night that
could have been picked up the next morning and allowed herself to be left alone
in the bottom of the shop with [Mr A]. She could
have elected to stay in the
car by saying she didn’t trust [Mr A], or asked her husband to accompany
her in the shop. The
concern she claimed to have had about [Mr A] appeared
inconsistent with the actions she carried out.
claimed that she had asked her husband to call [Mr A] before they went hoping he
wouldn’t be there; in Lebanon a wife couldn’t
refuse to go. She
also didn’t think [Mr A] would follow her down into the basement.
was put to her that it appeared coincidental that her husband only saw [Mr A]
every two to three weeks, he had this annoying habit
of passing the handset
across to people and she called her husband at the exact time he was with [Mr A]
and was therefore made to
speak to him. This all appeared to be extremely
coincidental timing.
was told that the incident occurred in May 2013 and, despite [Mr A] having
threatened her and her family, her husband was kidnapped
ten months later for
15-20 days and asked where the applicant was even though [Mr A] would have
known. More time had subsequently
passed without any further incident which
didn’t indicate much interest on the part of [Mr A].
was asked if she had any other concerns and said she didn’t. It was put
to her that she had previously spoken about Salafist
groups and the psychologist
report spoke of sectarian tensions and threats. She claimed there were
conflicts between the Salafists
and [Mr A] could have been a Salafist or with
Hamas. She was asked if the original fears she claimed were still relevant and
said they did. She was asked why she had then claimed that she had said she
had no claims other than the [Mr A] fear. She claimed
she thought she would be
asked questions.
was again asked if she had any claims other than fear of harm from [Mr A]. She
then said [Mr A] had to be a Salafist or from
Hamas because he had a long beard,
but she never spoke to him about politics. She was asked, and confirmed, that
her fear of Salafists
only related to [Mr A]’s possible membership of
was asked why [Mr A] was interested in marrying a Shi’a from [Town 2] when
he was a Sunni Salafist from [Camp 3]. There
appeared to be an ideological
contradiction in a Salafist being attracted to a Shi’a; she claimed that
she didn’t know
and that only [Mr A] knew why.
was also asked why she was doing business with a Salafist in [Camp 3] when there
would have been other choices. She claimed his
prices were reasonable and they
didn’t care who they bought from.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS
AND EVIDENCE
applicant is a [married] Lebanese female. The Tribunal has sighted her passport
and accepts that she is a Lebanese citizen.
She arrived in Australia [in] March
2013 on a visitor’s visa, and lodged an application for a protection visa
[in] July 2013.
She claimed that she would be killed by someone named [Mr A] if
she didn’t leave her husband for him. She had no other claims.
considering an applicant’s account, undue weight should not be placed on
some degree of confusion or omission to conclude
that a person is not telling
the truth. Nor can significant inconsistencies or embellishments be lightly
dismissed. The Tribunal
is not required to accept uncritically any and all
claims made by an applicant.
found the applicant’s evidence regarding her claims to generally lack
credibility. For reasons set out below I did not find
the applicant to be a
reliable, credible or truthful witness, and find that she fabricated her claim
in order to be granted a protection
Tribunal has taken into account the letters provided by her [medical providers]
that have diagnosed her with [a condition] (folios
91-3) and a poor memory that
results from [that condition] (folio 89). The [medical provider 1] also claimed
that her condition
had further deteriorated because of the incident in which her
husband had been kidnapped and tortured for 20 days (folio 106).
lend little weight to these reports however, given that they are based on an
uncritical acceptance of events that the applicant
claimed to have experienced.
I have found her account of these events to have been fabricated. The [medical
provider 1] when asked
advised (folio 54) that he never sought to verify her
claims as this was not his job and that his observation that ‘innocent
bystanders walking passed (sic) could be killed; due to which denomination they
belong too (sic)’ was not based on any independent
country information or
personal experience but rather on reports recounted to him by others. I note
the GPs assessment post-dates
that of [medical provider 1] and, given they work
in the same medical centre it is reasonable to assume that it is based on
provider 1]’s assessment.
Interest from another
do not accept that the applicant was ever the target of a man with a romantic
interest in her, who threatened to kill her husband
and family unless the
applicant left her husband. She made no mention of this person or of any
incident involving him in her initial
protection visa application. Indeed, her
original application was vague, claiming that the people she felt would cause
her serious
harm were ‘a major community/group and organisation which
operates under a type of cultural and religious belief but also under
racist judgment against our type of community and religion.’ (folio 28)
This is inconsistent with her claim during
the hearing that she feared harm from
a man named [Mr A] who wanted her to leave her husband and that she had no other
are other aspects of her claim which reinforce my finding that she was never a
target of romantic interest from someone of the
name [Mr A] or that he is a
Salafist. Indeed, given that he was never mentioned in her original protection
visa application I am
not satisfied that such a person as described by the
applicant even existed.
applicant is a Shi’a from [Town 2] while [Mr A] is, according to the
applicant, a Sunni who is either a Salafist or a member
of Hamas because he has
a long beard. It lacks credibility that a conservative Sunni would be attracted
to a married Shi’a
woman if for no other reason than the ideological
incompatibility of the branches of the Muslim faith that hard-line Sunni
are other aspects of the applicant’s account that cause me to find that it
has been fabricated. Despite claiming that
she had always tried to avoid being
in the same room as [Mr A] or talking to him, she not only agreed to enter [Camp
3] at night,
to get out of the car and to enter the basement of the shop to look
at clothes only in the presence of [Mr A].
she claimed that in Lebanon women couldn’t tell their husbands not to go
where they wished, it is reasonable to believe
that if she felt threatened by
[Mr A] she could have confided in her husband and they could have made some
arrangement so that he
could have allowed her to remain in the car or, if she
had to enter the shop make sure that she was never left alone with [Mr A].
convergence of events; entering [Camp 3] at night and then being left alone in
the basement with [Mr A] appear so coincidental
as to be implausible.
Subsequent Events
do not accept that the applicant’s husband was ever kidnapped by men in
police uniforms and then released 15-20 days later,
having been beaten. To
begin she never mentioned this in her protection visa application and, given the
seriousness of the event
it is reasonable to expect that it would have been
mentioned... There also appears to have been no real purpose to the kidnapping.
No ransom was asked for, nor was the husband connected to any political party.
The applicant claimed it was connected to [Mr A]
because they specifically asked
her husband where the applicant was and when she was due to return.
applicant’s husband saw [Mr A] every two or three weeks for business and,
given he had allegedly talked to her after the
birth of the applicant’s
grandchild he obviously knew she was in Australia and could have asked the
husband during their meetings
when she was due back. The kidnapping and
questioning appeared to serve no purpose and, if it was connected to [Mr
A]’s alleged
threats to hurt her family it appears strange that he would
do this some 10 months after he made the threat.
place little weight on the letter allegedly from the Health Medical Centre in
[City 1]. The line for the name and age of the patient
(not filled out) appear
to be out of alignment with the paper letterhead (folio 98) raising concerns
itself is handwritten and despite the applicant
claiming that the incident was not reported to the police because the kidnappers
had threatened to kill their son if it was reported, the note says that
‘we informed the concerned authorities about the incident’
is reasonable to believe that there would have been a police report filed if
someone had been kidnapped for over two weeks and
beaten, and the absence of it
further calls into question the veracity of the claim. I also place little
weight on the note from
the school as proof that the husband withdrew the son
from school for his safety. The note simply states that the son
‘interrupted
his school attendance [in] March 2014’ without saying
the reason for it nor for how long it was interrupted (folio 100).
also do not accept that a shot was fired at the house sometime in early 2015 but
that the person ran away. I have already raised
questions about the
applicant’s credibility, and it appears implausible that someone would
simply come to the house nearly
a year after an alleged kidnapping, fire a shot
and run away. It appears not to have served any apparent purpose, and there
not been any subsequent incidents, nor was any police report provided that
may have supported such a claim.
Religious Targeting
do not accept that the applicant is being targeted by conservative Sunni groups
because of her religion. She was vague regarding
this claim. Initially in her
protection visa claim she alluded to Salafist groups targeting Shi’a based
on their religious
identity, however during the hearing she specifically stated
that her claim regarding Salafist targeting related to her fear that
one. Given I am not satisfied that [Mr A] exists, is a Salafist or had any
interest in her or that he had targeted her
family in Lebanon, it follows that
the applicant was never and will not be targeted by someone called [Mr A] or by
Salafists because
of her religious belief.
there has been a clash between an anti-Hizbullah Salafist cleric in 2013 in
that led to
deaths from militia loyal to him as well as Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF)
soldiers, there is no indication that he was
targeting Shi’a who were not
members of Hizbullah. I also note that the cleric ([name]) is no longer in
[City 1], and that
the applicant lives in the overwhelming Shi’a-majority
considered the applicant’s evidence both individually and cumulatively,
for the reasons set out above the Tribunal finds
that the applicant does not
have a well-founded fear of persecution for any Convention reason either now or
in the reasonably foreseeable
Complementary
I do not accept that the applicant has or will be targeted by someone called [Mr
A] or by Salafists, that her husband was
ever kidnapped and beaten or that their
house has been shot at, I am not satisfied that there are any substantial
grounds for believing
that there is a real risk of significant harm on the basis
of these claims as outlined in the complementary protection criterion
s.36(2)(aa).
I do not accept that there are substantial grounds for believing that, as a
necessary and foreseeable consequence of the
applicant being removed from
Australia to Lebanon, there is a real risk that she will suffer significant
CONCLUDING PARAGRAPHS
the reasons given above, the Tribunal
satisfied that the applicant
is a person in respect of whom Australia has protection obligations under the
Refugees Convention. Therefore
the applicant
does not satisfy
criterion set out in
s.36(2)(a).
concluded that the applicant does not meet the refugee criterion in
the Tribunal has considered the alternative criterion in
s.36(2)(aa).
satisfied that the applicant is a person in respect of
whom Australia has protection obligations under
s.36(2)(aa).
is no suggestion that the applicant satisfies
on the basis of being a
member of the same family unit as a person who satisfies
or (aa) and
who holds a protection visa. Accordingly, the applicant does not satisfy the
criterion in
Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant a Protection visa.
Rodger Shanahan
ATTACHMENT A – RELEVANT LAW
1. The criteria for a protection visa are set out in
of the Act and
of Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). An
applicant for the visa must meet one of the alternative criteria in s.36(2)(a),
(aa), (b), or (c). That is,
the applicant is either a person in respect of whom
Australia has protection obligations under the ‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other ‘complementary protection’ grounds, or is a member of
the same family unit as such a person and that person
holds a protection
2. Section 36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that
the applicant for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the
Minister is satisfied Australia has protection obligations under the 1951
Convention Relating to the Status
of Refugees as amended by the 1967 Protocol
relating to the Status of Refugees (together, the Refugees Convention, or the
Convention).
3. If a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s.36(2)(a), he
or she may nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant
of a protection visa if
he or she is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is
satisfied Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has
substantial grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable
consequence of the applicant
being removed from Australia to a receiving
country, there is a real risk that he or she will suffer significant harm:
s.36(2)(aa)
(‘the complementary protection criterion’).
4. In accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the
Act, the Tribunal is required to take account of policy
guidelines prepared by
the Department of Immigration – PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian -
Complementary Protection Guidelines
and PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian - Refugee
Law Guidelines – to the extent that they are relevant to the decision
under consideration.
http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2015/02/salafist-sunnis-shiites-enemy-jews.html#
[Information deleted]
RTF format (155 KB)
Signed PDF/A format