Thaworn v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs [2021] FCCA 2133 (27 August 2021)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Thaworn v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs [2021] FCCA 2133
File number:
DNG 28 of 2020
Judgment of:
JUDGE YOUNG
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
–application for judicial
review of a decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal to affirm a decision
of the Minister’s
delegate to refuse to grant a Partner (Temporary) (Class
UK) (Subclass 820) / Partner (Residence) (Class BS) (Subclass 801) –
non-judicially determined claim of family violence – whether the Tribunal
erred in concluding the evidence failed to satisfy
the legislative requirements
– jurisdictional error made out – application allowed.
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) regs 1.23, 1.24
IMMI 12/116 - Specification of Evidentiary Requirements
Cases cited:
Dang v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2016] FCCA 1426
Pham v the Minister
[2018] FCA 1946
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Hunter Flood Lawyers
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Ms Anderson of Clayton Utz
DNG 28 of 2020
SUPAPORN THAWORN
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP, MIGRANT
SERVICES AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
JUDGE YOUNG
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The time for making the application filed on 18 September 2020 be extended
pursuant to
section 477
Migration Act 1958
2. A writ of certiorari issue directed to the Second Respondent quashing the
decision of the Second Respondent dated 7 August 2020.
3. A writ of mandamus issue directed to the Second Respondent requiring it to
determine the application made to it for review of the
decision of a delegate of
the First Respondent dated 8 November 2019.
4. The First Respondent is to pay the Applicant’s costs in the fixed
sum of $7,467.
REASONS FOR
JUDGE YOUNG:
1 This is an application for judicial review of a decision of the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (
the Tribunal
made on 7 August
2020 to affirm a decision of the Minister’s delegate (
the delegate
to refuse to grant the applicant a Partner (Temporary) (Class UK) (Subclass 820)
/ Partner (Residence) (Class BS) (Subclass 801)
2 The applicant alleged she had been the victim of family violence by her
former partner and had subsequently separated from him.
The Tribunal determined
that the applicant had not made a “
non-judicially determined claim of
family violence
regulation 1.23(9)
Regulations 1994
the Regulations
). The Tribunal concluded that
the applicant did not satisfy the requirements in subregulation 1.23(9)(c) that
she present evidence
in accordance with
regulation 1.24.
Regulation 1.24
provides that:
The evidence mentioned in paragraph 1.23(9)(c) is:
(a) a statutory declaration under
regulation 1.25
(which deals with statutory
declarations by or behalf of alleged victims); and
(b) the type and number of items of evidence specified by the Minister by
instrument in writing for this paragraph.
3 The relevant instrument in writing is
IMMI 12/116 - Specification of
Evidentiary Requirements
IMMI 12/116
) dated 22 November 2012
which provides:
CHRIS BOWEN
, Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship, acting under paragraph 1.24(b) of the
Migration Regulations 1994
(‘the Regulations’):
1. SPECIFY for the purpose of paragraph 1.24(b) the types of evidence as
acceptable evidence at Schedule 1.
2. SPECIFY that a minimum of two items of evidence from the list in Schedule 1
and no more than one of each type of evidence may
be presented for the purposes
of paragraph 1.24(b).
This instrument, IMMI 12/116, commences on 24 November 2012, immediately after
the commencement of
Migration Legislation Amendment Regulation 2012
4 Schedule 1 of
IMMI 12/116
includes the following
Medical report, hospital report, discharge summary or statutory declaration
that is made by either a person who is:
registered as a
medical practitioner and is performing the duties of a medical practitioner,
registered as a
nurse within the meaning of
Health Insurance Act 1973
performing the duties of a registered nurse.
Identifies the
alleged victim, and
Details the
physical injuries or treatment for mental health that is consistent with the
claimed family violence.
Either a report, record of assault, witness statement or statutory
declaration that is made by:
a police officer
of a State or Territory
a police officer
of the Australian Federal Police
A witness statement that is
made by someone other than the alleged victim to a police officer during the
course of a police investigation.
Identifies the
alleged victim, and
Identifies the
alleged perpetrator, and
incident/s of family violence.
Report or statutory declaration made by an officer of:
a child welfare
authority, or
protection authority of a State or Territory.
Details fears
for the dependent child’s safety due to family violence within the
household, and
Identifies the
alleged perpetrator.
Letter or assessment report made by:
family/domestic
violence crisis centre
on the organisation’s
letterhead.
States that the
alleged victim has made a claim of family violence, and
States whether
the alleged victim was subject to family violence, and
Identifies the
alleged perpetrator, and details any evidence used to form the
Statutory declaration made by:
a member of the
Australian Association of Social Workers, or
a person who is
eligible to be a member of that Association
who has provided
counselling or assistance to the alleged
victim while performing the duties of a social
States in their
opinion the alleged victim was subject to family violence, and
Details the
reasons for the opinion, and
Identifies the
alleged perpetrator.
Statutory declaration made by a registered psychologist in a State or
Territory who has treated the alleged victim while performing
the duties of a
psychologist.
States in their
opinion the alleged victim was subject to family violence, and
Details the
reasons for the opinion, and
Identifies the
alleged perpetrator.
Statutory declaration made by a family consultant appointed under the
Family Law Act 1975
or a family relationship counsellor who works at a
Family Relationship Centre listed on the Australian Government Family
Relationships
States that the
alleged victim has been treated or counselled, by the family consultant or
family relationship counsellor, and
States that in
their opinion the alleged victim was subject to family violence, and
Details the
reasons for the opinion, and
Identifies the
alleged perpetrator.
Statutory declaration or a letter on the school’s letterhead made by
a school counsellor or school principal in their
professional capacity.
States that they
have made, or been made aware of, observations that are consistent with the
alleged victim’s claims that they
were subject to family violence,
Identifies the
alleged perpetrator, and
Provides details
of those observations.
5 The applicant relied on a number of statutory declarations. However, the
only ones that could arguably, in my view, comply with
the requirements in
IMMI 12/116
are those in relation to social workers, psychologists and a
women’s refuge or domestic/family violence crisis centre. The
was not satisfied that the statutory declaration from Mr Goodluck, a social
worker and member of the Australian Association
of Social Workers, complied with
the requirements
IMMI 12/116.
At paragraph 40 of the Tribunal’s
reasons the member said:
There is no suggestion that Mr Goodluck provided
counselling or assistance to the applicant whilst performing the duties of a
worker. For these reasons the Tribunal does not accept that Mr
Goodluck’s statement meets the evidentiary requirements.
6 The Tribunal was also not satisfied that Ms Helen Stathis, who is a
registered psychologist in the Northern Territory and provided
a statutory
declaration, was performing a therapeutic or treating role or performing the
duties of a psychologist when she met with
the applicant. At paragraph 38 of the
Tribunal’s decision the member said:
It appears to the Tribunal that her [Ms Stathis] opinion
was made solely and specifically for the purpose of providing it to the
The Tribunal was not satisfied that the statutory declaration satisfied the
requirements in
IMMI 12/116
7 In relation to the
category of women’s refuge or family/domestic violence crisis centre, the
applicant relied on a letter
from a domestic violence legal service operating in
Darwin. The letter warned the applicant’s former partner to desist from
certain behaviour which was alleged to have occurred. It is in form a
lawyer’s letter threatening proceedings. The Tribunal
was prepared to
treat this as emanating from a relevant category, however, I note that, in my
view, a domestic violence legal service
is not such a relevant category. In any
event, the Tribunal rejected the letter from the domestic violence legal service
December 2018 on the basis that it did not express an opinion. I agree
with the member’s conclusion about that. It appears
to me that the other
ground not relied on by the member was open to the member as a basis of
rejecting it – that is, it was
not from a relevant category of
organisation.
8 The background to this matter is as follows. The applicant is a Thai
citizen with relatives in Australia. She appears to have visited
Australia a
number of times from Thailand. In 2015 or thereabouts she met her former partner
through relatives. In approximately
2017 she appears to have commenced a
relationship with her former partner and in February 2018 they were married.
She applied for
a partner visa in March 2018. The Tribunal appeared to accept
that at that time the relationship was a genuine one.
9 In November 2018 the applicant notified the Department of a change in
circumstances and alleged she was the victim of family violence.
On 19 December
2018 a domestic violence legal service, the one already mentioned, wrote to the
applicant’s former partner
threatening to commence domestic violence order
proceedings unless he desisted from certain behaviour detailed in the
10 On 8 November 2019 the delegate refused the application for the visa. The
delegate was satisfied that the relationship was genuine
but was not satisfied
that evidence of family violence had been provided.
11 On 27 November 2019 there was an application for review to the Tribunal.
On 15 April 2020 there was an invitation by the Tribunal
to provide evidence of
family violence. On 29 April 2020 the applicant’s migration agent advised
that she could not provide
the specified evidence. On 22 May 2020 the Tribunal
invited the applicant to attend a hearing on 10 June 2020.
12 On 1 June 2020 the applicant’s migration agent sought an adjournment
on the ground that the material from the social worker
and the psychologist who
the applicant had consulted would not be ready in time. On 2 June 2020 that
application for an adjournment
was refused. On 5 June 2020 there was a further
request for an adjournment and in addition the migration agent submitted that if
there were issues about the applicant’s credibility then a telephone
hearing was not appropriate. The migration agent made
arguments that in the
circumstances a telephone hearing would not comply with the requirements of the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) which states that the applicant must be invited
to appear before the Tribunal if it was satisfied that her application would
succeed. That application was refused and the Tribunal’s response to the
application (p. 219 of the Court Book) states:
The Member notes that in the present case the Tribunal
will largely be dealing with matters of fact, specifically types and forms
evidentiary requirements. As such, the Member determines that it is appropriate
for the applicant to appear by telephone for
the hearing in this matter.
By implication, at least, the member suggests that the credibility of the
applicant is unlikely to be an issue.
13 On 10 June 2020 the
hearing was conducted by telephone and the applicant appeared with an
interpreter present, along with the applicant’s
representative. A
transcript of that telephone hearing has been tendered in evidence. It appears
that the applicant and the member
sometimes conversed in English and sometimes
through the interpreter. It is unclear from the transcript when each of those
was followed. The transcript is of some significance because the member
questioned the applicant about the circumstances of the
applicant consulting Mr
Goodluck, the social worker, and Ms Stathis, the psychologist.
14 In relation to Mr Goodluck, the relevant passage begins on p. 9 of the
transcript:
SENIOR MEMBER: And the other form that I have in front
of me is a Form 1040 signed by Mr Gregory Goodluck. Could you tell me about
him, Ms Thaworn?
APPLICANT: He’s the one the one advised me to go to Ms
I interpolate that that would appear to be a reference to the psychologist, Ms
Stathis. To continue:
SENIOR MEMBER: And, who is he?
APPLICANT: He’s a social worker.
SENIOR MEMBER: And, how did you come to meet him?
APPLICANT: Yes, so, my aunty knew him.
SENIOR MEMBER: And so when he - - -
INTERPRETER: And then he – he – he advised her to meet Helen.
SENIOR MEMBER: And so when you met – and, did you meet with Mr
APPLICANT: Yes, I did. Yeah.
SENIOR MEMBER: And, how many times?
APPLICANT: Three times.
SENIOR MEMBER: And, for what purpose?
APPLICANT: We’re just going to talk together, like, a counsel –
counsel. The – because of my bad mental state,
not knowing what to do, or
how to continue with my life. I needed to first go and talk to somebody for
SENIOR MEMBER: All right. Thank you for that.
There is no further discussion about Mr Goodluck other than the member reminding
the applicant or her representative that there needed
to be some evidence that
he was a member of the Australian Association of Social Workers. I understand
that this has since been provided.
15 In relation to the
psychologist, Ms Helen Stathis, the discussion begins on p. 7 of the transcript:
SENIOR MEMBER: Okay? So, now we come to a form signed
by Ms Helen Stathis, a psychologist. Ms Thaworn, can you tell me about your
relationship with Ms Stathis, when you first met her, how many times you saw
her, why you went to see her, as much detail as you
INTERPRETER: She would like me to repeat that surname. It’s Stathis, is
it, Member?
SENIOR MEMBER: Stathis. Ms Helen Stathis, a psychologist.
INTERPRETER: Helen Stathis.
SENIOR MEMBER: Mm hm.
INTERPRETER: Okay.
APPLICANT: So, I was very stressed. I was, kind of, being – I was meeting
various people, and I didn’t know this person
personally, she’s a
social worker...
I interpolate to add that it is not in dispute that Ms Stathis is a
psychologist. That was corrected later in the hearing according
transcript:
...I met her. So, I did have an appointment with her,
but then during the – during the COVID pandemic I haven’t been
to continue those appointments.
SENIOR MEMBER: So, when did you see her?
APPLICANT: I can’t remember the day that – I met her twice – I
met her twice last week. I only just received the
appointment from her.
SENIOR MEMBER: And – and – and, why did you go to see her?
APPLICANT: I was stressed, unsettled in my mental state. I was not sleeping
well, not eating well, my weight reduced seven kilos,
so I went to - - -
SENIOR MEMBER: Just recently?
APPLICANT: - - - the counsellor.
SENIOR MEMBER: Is that recently?
APPLICANT: It started ever since things started happening between myself and my
ex-husband.
SENIOR MEMBER: And, so, what did you tell – what did you tell Ms Stathis
when you went to see her, what – why did you
tell her that you were going
to see her?
APPLICANT: I told her that, you know, I was thinking, thinking so much, I
couldn’t sleep, and I was afraid that my ex-husband
would come and harm
SENIOR MEMBER: And when was the last time you heard from your ex-husband?
APPLICANT: Last December, and he has also tried sending me messages and to
SENIOR MEMBER: That was in relation to the divorce or for some other reason?
APPLICANT: No, we’ve already divorced, but he comes to try to bother me
all the time.
16 That is the end of the discussion in relation to Ms Stathis, the
psychologist, apart from, again, the Senior Member reminding the
applicant there
needed to be some evidence that Ms Stathis was a registered psychologist. I
understand that is not in dispute.
17 There is no indication in the transcript of the hearing that the member
did not believe what the applicant said. There was no
challenge to what the
applicant said in the hearing. Further, there was prior correspondence between
the member and the applicant’s
representative where it was, at least
implied, that credibility was not an issue. There does not appear to be any
basis in the material
that I have seen for questioning the credibility or
reliability of the applicant’s statements she made to the member.
18 After the hearing on 10 June 2020 the member wrote to the applicant
raising some concerns about the evidence. On 21 July 2020 the
member again wrote
a letter to the applicant. The member said in relation to Ms Stathis:
It appears to the Tribunal that her opinion was made
solely and specifically for the purpose of providing it to the
That is, of course, word-for-word the finding made at paragraph 38 of the
Tribunal’s reasons for decision.
19 In relation to Mr
Goodluck the letter said:
There is no suggestion that Mr Goodluck provided
counselling or assistance [to] you whilst performing the duties of a social
That is word-for-word the finding made at paragraph 40 of the Tribunal’s
reasons of decision.
20 The applicant was invited to comment on
those matters along with a variety of other matters. The migration agent
responding on
behalf of the applicant said that she would obtain further
material from Ms Stathis and Mr Goodluck, however that was not forthcoming.
reason for that is not before me.
21 Nowhere in the member’s reasons does she discuss the
applicant’s oral evidence or express any statement to the effect
should be disbelieved. The starting point for consideration of the evidentiary
requirements is the instrument to which I
have referred,
IMMI 12/116
Schedule 1 of
IMMI 12/116
which is featured at paragraph 4 above. I do
not propose to deal specifically with the women’s refuge or
family/domestic violence
crisis centre issue because I am satisfied, for the
reasons I have already given, that the member has not made any error in respect
22 In relation to a social worker column 1 of Schedule 1 of
says that the evidence that is acceptable in conformity with
regulation 1.24(b)
of the Regulations is a:
Statutory declaration made by:
a member of the
Australian Association of Social Workers, or
a person who is
eligible to be a member of that Association
who has provided counselling or assistance to the
alleged victim while performing the duties of a social worker.
Column 2 of Schedule 1 of
IMMI 12/116
outlines what must be included in
the evidence and that is:
States that the
alleged victim has made a claim of family violence, and
States whether
the alleged victim was subject to family violence, and
Identifies the
alleged perpetrator, and details any evidence used to form the
In my view the statutory declaration from Mr Goodluck satisfies each of those
three criteria in column 2. I note that this was not
disputed by the Minister.
23 In relation to the statutory declaration of Ms Stathis, the
acceptable evidence is a:
Statutory declaration made by a registered psychologist
in a State or Territory who has treated the alleged victim while performing
duties of a psychologist.
Column 2 reproduces much the same criteria as for social work,
States in their
opinion the alleged victim was subject to family violence, and
Details the
reasons for the opinion, and
Identifies the
alleged perpetrator.
It is not suggested that any of the detail required by column 2 of Schedule 1 of
IMMI 12/116
was not provided in the statutory declaration of Ms Stathis.
24 The Tribunal member was not, however, satisfied that there
was evidence that the social worker provided “
counselling or
” to the applicant in the course of performing the duties of
a social worker. I note that there is no statement in the statutory
declaration
from Mr Goodluck saying that he provided “
counselling or
” or if so, the kind of assistance he provided to the
applicant. However, in my view, it is not necessary for the statutory
declaration to necessarily state expressly that the social worker provided
counselling or assistance
” to the alleged victim while
performing the duties of a social worker. The necessary detail that must appear
in the statutory
declaration is set out in column 2.
25 In my view, the matters referred to in column 1 can be provided in some
other way, for example by acceptable or appropriate evidence
from the applicant
herself. In this case the evidence of the applicant was that she attended on Mr
Goodluck, essentially because
of anxiety about her position, anxiety about her
former partner and difficulties in sleeping and the like. It is also clear that
Mr Goodluck referred the applicant to Ms Stathis, as is apparent from page 9 of
the transcript of the Tribunal hearing where the
applicant said:
He’s the one who advised me to go to Ms
It would appear that that is evidence that Mr Goodluck provided, not only
counselling, but also assistance. He provided, it would
appear, a referral to a
psychologist. The member concluded that:
There is no suggestion that Mr Goodluck provided
counselling or assistance to the applicant whilst performing the duties of a
This entirely overlooks the evidence of the applicant herself, in my view.
There is no explanation in the body of the member’s
reasons why that
evidence should be rejected in that way. There is no analysis or consideration
of her evidence and no conclusion
that she is not to be believed. It appears to
me that the two possible explanations for this are that:
(1) the member simply overlooked crucial evidence that
was germane and potentially determinative of the central issue; or
(2) the member misdirected herself as to the requirements of
IMMI 12/116
The second possibility arises as there are some indications that she thought
that the evidence of those matters must appear in the
statutory declaration of
the social worker. In my view, in either case the member has made an error, and
one of significance.
26 In relation to the consideration of the
evidence of the psychologist, Ms Stathis, the Tribunal member found that the
evidence did
not comply with the requirements of
IMMI 12/116
. The member
found that Ms Stathis’s expression of opinion through the statutory
declaration was:
...made solely and specifically for the purpose of
providing it to the Tribunal.
This flies in the face of the statement made by the applicant that she had seen
the psychologist on two occasions, albeit very recently
and that her attendance
on the psychologist was stopped because of the COVID-19 pandemic. She gave
evidence that she went to see
a psychologist about matters which were related to
her psychological condition. It was not put to the applicant or even suggested
that she had been simply sent along to obtain an opinion in the nature of a
medico-legal opinion that could be relied upon in proceedings.
Similarly, there
is nothing in the instrument to suggest that oral evidence of those matters
cannot be provided by the applicant
27 I acknowledge
that the applicant did not give evidence that she was receiving treatment or
therapy from the psychologist and the
psychologist’s statutory declaration
does not specifically refer to any treatment that was provided to the applicant.
is authority, which I refer to below, that that is a necessary matter for
the applicant to demonstrate. However, the psychologist’s
declaration refers to the psychologist administering a psychological test on the
applicant to measure her degree of stress
and/or anxiety. In my view, the
inference is open that if the applicant had seen the psychologist on two
occasions (albeit one day
apart) and had intended to continue to see the
psychologist then the overall objective was for treatment. I am satisfied that
was evidence that was overlooked by the Tribunal which was highly relevant
to the question of whether the evidence put forward satisfied
the requirements
regulation 1.24
of the Regulations.
28 The parties both relied on two cases, a Federal Circuit Court of Australia
decision of
Dang v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
) and a later Federal Court of Australia decision
Pham v the Minister
[2018] FCA 1946
. I do not propose to discuss those cases in detail.
However, the discussion in
by Judge McNab made it clear that the
purpose of the requirements outlined in
IMMI 12/116
in the case of a
psychologist wasthat the psychologist, by extensive involvement or at least
involvement on multiple occasions in
treating a person, be in a position by
virtue of their involvement to make an assessment and provide an opinion of the
genuineness
or otherwise of the claims of family violence. In other words, the
instrument and the requirements of the instrument are designed
to avoid people
simply opportunistically making appointments with experts to provide superficial
assessments. I certainly acknowledge
that the lateness of the involvement with
the psychologist, Ms Stathis, may give rise to a suspicion of that kind.
29 However, in
it is clear enough from the recitation of the
facts, particularly at paragraph 31 of the judgment, that the applicant in that
had simply attended upon a psychologist on one occasion at the behest of
his lawyers. In other words, it was a straightforward request
from lawyers to
provide a medico-legal report. This, in substance, is something that
is designed to avoid. Judge McNab was not satisfied that such a
report met the requirements. Of course, by analogy, involvement with
worker that was superficial or without any repeated engagement in a way that
would permit a social worker to provide a genuine
opinion or assessment about
whether the person suffered family violence is likewise something
aims to avoid.
30 That is to be contrasted with both the social worker and the psychologist
in this case. There is evidence, essentially unchallenged,
that the applicant
visited the social worker on multiple occasions, three I believe the applicant
said. There is also evidence the
social worker gave a referral for the applicant
to see a psychologist, Ms Stathis. I note I used the word
”, however, the applicant used the words
”. In substance, it is a referral to a
psychologist from the social worker that in my view would constitute assistance
kind referred to in
IMMI 12/116
. That was approved by Middleton J
31 The Tribunal member, in considering whether or not the requirements of
IMMI 12/116
were satisfied, concluded that the psychologist’s
report was created merely for provision to the Tribunal and that the social
worker’s report did not involve counselling or assistance. These
conclusions appear to ignore the evidence of the applicant
that she was
consulting both the social worker and psychologist because of her mental state
and the applicant’s evidence that
the social worker referred her to the
psychologist. That, in my view, is indicative of a social worker engaged in
counselling or
assistance and a psychologist engaged in a therapeutic approach
to the applicant. This is notwithstanding that the psychologist’s
does not detail the form of therapy given, though that is not required in
IMMI 12/116
32 I am satisfied that the Tribunal member has overlooked crucial and
potentially determinative evidence or has misdirected herself
requirements of
IMMI 12/116
. I am unable to say which. In any event, I
am satisfied that the result is jurisdictional error.
33 There are other grounds of review made by the applicant. As I said to
counsel at the outset, however, it appeared that, if the
Tribunal member was
correct in her conclusion that there was not evidence in an acceptable form,
then the application must fail at
the threshold and the other grounds advanced
by the applicant were therefore not relevant. In other words, they could not
in the decision being set aside if it was futile to do so. On the other
hand, if there has been jurisdictional error, as I have found,
then the decision
must be set aside in any event.
34 Counsel for the Minister said that if I were satisfied there had been
then there was no
basis for opposing the extension of time sought by the applicant. The delay of
the applicant is relatively short
in this case. There is no prejudice suffered
by the Minister so I extend time to the time she made the application.
I certify that the preceding thirty-four (34)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 7 September 2021
RTF format (459 KB)
Signed PDF/A format