D20-21\104 [2020] SCTA 211 (9 December 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\104
FILE NUMBER : 18-1846
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
The Employer
The Complainant’s Representative
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(Cth) (the Complaints Act) and held on 22 September 2020 before:
MacDonald, Member.
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
decision under review is that of the Trustee not to refund insurance premiums
charged from when the Complainant joined the Fund
on 1 December 1997 to when he
exited it on 2 August 2017.
Trustee notified the Complainant of its decision by letter dated 12 September
2017 and, following review, by letter dated 31 January
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal determines to set aside the decision under review and substitute its
own decision that the Trustee is to refund the equivalent
of the insurance
premiums deducted from when the Complainant joined the Fund on 1 December 1997
until 1 July 2003 when he was informed
that he could cancel his insurance
Tribunal considers that interest is payable by the Trustee as the Complainant
has not had the benefit of the money.
Trustee is to calculate the interest at the rate that was declared by the Fund
for the investment plan in which the Complainant’s
monies were invested
for the period commencing on the day from which the Trustee deducted premiums
from the Complainant’s fund
account, being 1 December 1997 until 1 July
2003 (Amount).
Trustee is to pay interest on the Amount, in accordance with the
Complainant’s investment strategy, until the date the Trustee
payment to the Complainant.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
Complainant sought to be represented and the Tribunal granted the request in
accordance with its discretion under s23 of the Complaints
to s32 of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal requested submissions from the
Submissions
were received from each Party.
submissions were exchanged, and responses were invited. A response was received
from each Party. The Tribunal forwarded a copy
of the submissions to the other
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
papers provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant made a complaint that the decision of the Trustee was
or unreasonable for the reasons summarised in this determination.
complaint is brought on behalf of the Complainant by the Complainant’s
Representative who was granted General Power of Attorney
and Enduring
Guardianship of the Complainant on 17 April 2009.
Complainant was diagnosed with Korsakoff Type Dementia in 1996 which causes
severe short-term memory problems. The Complainant
also suffers from
poliomyelitis of the right leg, hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia and rotator
cuff disease in the right shoulder.
Complainant became a member of the Fund on 1 December 1997 upon commencing
employment with the Employer. The Complainant was provided
with default
insurance under the Fund rules and the Fund’s insurance policy applicable
at the time.
Complainant ceased employment with the Employer on 1 June 2013 as he was unable
to work any longer due to his illness.
July 2017 the Complainant’s Representative organised the full withdrawal
of the Complainant’s account and found that
the Complainant had been
charged insurance premiums.
6 September 2017, the Complainant’s Representative questioned the
deduction of insurance premiums from the Complainant’s
12 September 2017, the Trustee stated that insurance premiums had been correctly
deducted from the Complainant’s account
and that he had been advised that
he could cancel his premiums.
26 October 2017 the Complainant’s Representative lodged a complaint with
the Trustee on the Complainant’s behalf seeking
a refund of the insurance
premiums deducted from the Complainant’s account.
its response on 31 January 2018, the Trustee noted that it considered that the
Complainant had been fully informed of the terms
and conditions of the insurance
cover on the account and refused the request for reimbursement of the insurance
premiums deducted.
Complainant’s Representative lodged a complaint with the Tribunal on 1
October 2018. The resolution sought by the Complainant
is to be paid $3,154.44
as compensation for the insurance premiums paid from his account plus interest
equivalent to the Reserve
Bank cash rate plus 1%.
Events not in dispute:
− The Complainant’s
date of birth.
Complainant was diagnosed with Korsakoff Type Dementia.
Complainant commenced employment with the Employer and joined the Fund.
− The date the Complainant’s Representative
was granted General Power of Attorney and Enduring Guardianship of the
Complainant.
The date the Complainant ceased employment
because of his illness.
The date the Trustee paid a retirement
payment to the Complainant.
The date the Complainant’s
Representative questioned the deduction of insurance premiums from the
Complainant’s account.
− The date the Trustee confirmed to the
Complainant’s Representative that insurance premiums were being deducted
the Complainant’s account.
The date the Complainant’s
Representative complained to the Trustee.
The date the Trustee responded to the
Complainant’s complaint.
The date the Complainant’s
Representative lodged a complaint with the Tribunal.
Tribunal considers that the trust deed of the Fund relevant to this complaint is
that in effect on the date when the Complainant
joined the Fund (i.e. 1 December
, being the trust deed as amended up to and including the amendment
dated 28 July 1997 (the Trust Deed).
Trust Deed provisions relevant to the complaint are:
Definitions
In the Deed and in the Rules and in the Schedule the
following words and
expressions shall unless the context requires otherwise have the following
insured Benefit
means the benefit (if any) secured by contributions
applied pursuant
to sub-rule (2) of Rule 22A and described in the table of Insured Benefits
put forward
by the insurer from time to time.
means any Insurance Company or Assurance Company with which
Trustee effects a policy or policies of insurance or assurance in accordance
sub-rule (5) of Rule 5 of the Deed.
Appointment,
Removal and Meetings of Trustee
Powers of Trustee
(8) The Trustee shall have power generally to do all acts matters and things
as the Trustee may consider necessary or expedient or
desirable for the
administration maintenance and preservation of the Fund in its performance of
its obligations under the Deed,
(9) The Trustee in the exercise of the authorities powers and discretions
conferred upon it by the Deed shall have an absolute and
uncontrolled discretion
and may exercise or enforce all or any of its authorities powers and discretions
from time to time and at
any time or may refrain from exercising all or any of
the same from time to time or at all.
(10) The Trustee may act on the advice or opinion of any professional person
or expert retained by the Trustee and shall not be responsible
for any loss
occasioned by so acting in good faith PROVIDED THAT the Trustee has satisfied
itself before acting on such advice that
the advice is relevant to the
circumstances of the Fund.
(11) The Trustee may enter into and execute all contracts deeds and documents
and do all acts matters and things which it may deem
expedient for the purpose
of securing the benefits to be provided by or from the Fund and for otherwise
effectuating and carrying
out the trusts authorities powers and discretions
conferred upon the Trustee by the Deed.
(12) The Trustee may open and operate such bank accounts as it thinks
desirable and all cheques and other negotiable or transferable
instruments and
all receipts for money paid to the Fund shall be signed drawn accepted endorsed
or otherwise executed in such manner
as the Trustee may from time to time
Trustee Accounts
22A. (1) The Trustee shall establish and maintain in the Fund the Accounts
set forth in sub-rules (2), (3), (4) and (5) of this Rule
2 2A and shall
maintain a record of the amount standing to the credit of each Account.
(2) (a) Pursuant to sub-rule (1) of this Rule 22A the Trustee shall establish
an "Insurance Account",
(b) To the Insurance Account there shall be credited the sum of one dollar
($1) per week (which sum shall be increased as the Trustee
may decide taking
account of rises in the Index) in order to provide the Insured Benefit pursuant
to Regulation 4 PROVIDED THAT no
contribution shall be credited to the Insurance
(i) after the Member's Normal Retirement Date, or
(ii) in the case of any Employee for" whom it has been decided that no
Insured Benefit is to be provided.
(c) Any rebate received by the Trustee under any policy of insurance or
assurance shall be credited to the Insurance Account.
(d) In the event of any balance remaining in the Insurance Account, which in
the opinion of the Trustee is not required for the provision
of payments of
premium of any policy of insurance or assurance pursuant to the Deed, the
Trustee shall apply such balance to the
Superannuation Award Account of such
Member or Members in such proportions as shall be equitable or may in such
circumstances as
it may think fit transfer any such balance to the
Administration Account or to the Investment Fluctuation Reserve Account.
(3) (a) Pursuant to sub-rule (1) of this Rule 22A the Trustee shall establish
an "Administration Account".
(b) To the Administration Account there shall be credited the sum of one
dollar ($1) per week (which sum shall be increased on each
Balance Date in
accordance with rises in the Index).
(c) The Trustee may in its absolute discretion pay from the Administration
Account any sums to provide for the proper and efficient
administration of the
(d) The Trustee having made any payment pursuant to paragraph (c) of this sub
rule, any surplus remaining on the Balance Date shall
be divided equally between
the Members and the share of each Member shall be credited to the Superannuation
Award Account of that
Member PROVIDED THAT in any case where the Trustee is
satisfied that the circumstances warrant such action it may in its absolute
discretion transfer such surplus or any part thereof to the Investment
Fluctuation Reserve Account,
(4) (a) Pursuant to sub-rule (1) of this Rule 22A the Trustee shall establish
an "Investment Fluctuation Reserve Account".
(b) The Investment Fluctuation Reserve Account shall be established and
maintained in the manner set forth in Rule 25 hereof.
(5) (a) Pursuant to sub-rule (1) of this Rule 2'2A the Trustee shall
establish a "Forfeited Benefits Account",
(b) The Forfeited Benefits Account shall be established and maintained in the
manner set forth in Rule 26 hereof.
Member Accounts
When a Member becomes a Member pursuant to Regulation 1 of
Schedule One the Trustee shall establish and maintain in the Fund in respect
each Member the Accounts set forth in sub-rules (2) and (where applicable) (3)
and (4) of this Rule 225 and shall maintain a record
of the amount standing to
the credit of each Account in respect of each Member from time to time for the
purpose of determining the
portion of the assets of the Fund the benefits to
which a Member may become entitled under the Deed PROVIDED THAT nothing in this
Rule shall entitle any Member to any specific assets of the Fund and the Trustee
shall have absolute discretion in determining which
of such assets shall be
applied to provide funds for any amount which becomes payable from any of the
Accounts in respect of a Member
pursuant to the Deed PROVIDED FURTHER THAT any
amounts required by the Trustee for the purposes of sub-rules (2) and/or (3) of
22A or such other amounts as may in the opinion of the Trustee properly be
debited therefrom shall be payable from any of the Accounts
set forth in this
(2) (a) Pursuant to sub-rule (1) of this Rule 22B the Trustee shall establish
a "Superannuation Award Account",
(b) To the Superannuation Award Account there shall be credited:
(i) contributions by Employers paid to the Fund in respect of that Member
pursuant to Regulation 2(1) of Schedule One net of any amounts
paid in respect
of such Member to the Insurance Account or to the Administration Account,
(ii) sums received on trust and allocated pursuant to Rule 18,
(iii) sums allocated pursuant to Rule 27,
(iv) allocations of Interest,
(v) sums allocated pursuant to paragraph (d) of sub-rule (2) of Rule 22A and
paragraph (d) of sub-rule (3). of Rule 22A.
(vi) such other amounts as may in the opinion of the Trustee properly be
credited to the Member's Superannuation Award Account,
(3) (a) Pursuant to sub-rule (1) of this Rule 223 the Trustee shall establish
an "Employer Contribution Account",
(b) To the Employer Contribution Account there shall be credited:-
(i) contributions by Employers paid to the Fund in respect of that Member
pursuant to Regulation 2(2) of Schedule One,
(ii) sums received on trust and allocated pursuant to Rule 18,
(iii) allocations of Interest,
(iv) such other amounts as may in the opinion of the Trustee properly be
credited to the Member's Employer Contribution Account,
(4) (a) Pursuant to sub-rule (1) of this Rule 223 the Trustee shall establish
a "Member Contribution Account".
(b) To the Member Contribution Account there shall be credited:-
(i) contributions by the Member (if any) to the Fund pursuant to Regulation
2(3) of Schedule One,
(ii) sums received on trust and held pursuant to Rule 18,
(iii) allocations of Interest,
(iv) such other amounts as may in the opinion of the Trustee properly be
credited to the Member Contribution Account of the Member.
Trustee may effect or acquire in respect of a Member such policy or policies of
insurance or assurance as it may determine
and may likewise increase, reduce or
otherwise vary or adjust or deal with any policy so effected or acquired.
(2) The Trustee shall pay the premiums under any policy effected or
acquired in respect of a Member as provided in sub-rule (1) of
this Rule by
applying such part of the contributions paid to the Fund by the Employer and
credited to the Insurance Account pursuant
to sub-rule (2) of Rule 22A.
(3) Nothing in this Rule shall prevent the Trustee from effecting or
acquiring a policy which relates to more than one Member and
in this event
references to a premium or benefit payable under a policy effected or acquired
in respect of a Member shall be construed
as references to that part of the
premium or benefit payable under the policy which in the opinion of the Trustee
relates to that
Member. Valuation of Fund and Allocation of Profit or Loss
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
main points made by the Complainant’s Representative on behalf of the
Complainant are as follows:
The Complainant
didn’t know anything about the insurance premiums prior to the
Complainant’s Representative making him
aware of it in 2017.
The Complainant
has little understanding of superannuation and insurance so he asked the
Complainant’s Representative to find
out about them.
Complainant’s Representative states that he had no involvement in the
Complainant’s superannuation account until 2013.
Complainant’s Representative states that he spoke to someone at the Fund
who advised that the Complainant had insurance
attached to his account and
suggested he put in a claim. The Complainant’s Representative advised that
the Complainant’s
pre-existing medical conditions would prevent him
receiving insurance so there was no point in putting in a claim.
Complainant’s Representative states that he was not advised that the
insurance cover could be cancelled and therefore premiums
continued to be
deducted for another 4 years.
Complainant’s Representative notes the Trustee’s recurring argument
that because he is the Complainant’s guardian,
all the Trustee’s
responsibilities to the Complainant including explaining to him all aspects of
his insurance, were transferred
to him (the Complainant’s Representative)
and therefore it is his fault that the Complainant did not know about his
Complainant’s Representative explains that he only became the
Complainant’s guardian in 2009 and that this office
is not retrospective.
Furthermore, being the Complainant’s guardian does not transfer the legal
responsibilities of the Trustee
to the Complainant’s Representative,
including explaining insurance to the Complainant.
Complainant’s Representative notes that while he has been the
Complainant’s guardian since 2009, he has not been his
The Complainant
is ‘severely intellectually disabled’ and the Trustee had a
responsibility to advise him of his ability
to cancel the insurance cover. He
[The Complainant] was diagnosed with a Korsakoff type
dementia on 30/5/1996 ... a symptom being a major short term memory problem,
resulting in a significant difficulty in absorbing and analysing new information
and learning new tasks. He has significant difficulties
in following and
understanding documents, especially long ones, as he can't remember the points
made as he progresses in the document.
He also can't learn many more complex
tasks such as using the internet.
The suggestion in the email dated 1711/2017, by [Name of Trustee
representative], "the same information has always been available
[Fund’s] website and customer service centre" is not helpful. [The
Complainant] cannot use or learn to use the internet.
Also, most people when not
aware there is an opt-out arrangement for the insurance premiums would assume
they are compulsory, so
he would see no purpose in contacting the customer
service centre about this. Even if [the Complainant] did contact the customer
service centre he would not be able to understand the explanations being given
to him due to his disability.
In a letter of 31/1/2018 from [Name] (Resolutions Manager [Fund]), he
provided a number of annual member superannuation statements
Complainant] would have received, where there is a brief mention that he could
cancel this insurance. (the earliest such
statement was for the year ending 30
June 2003, a 21 page document, where at page 6 states "
You can opt out
employee members can choose to cancel the automatic unit of insurance provided
to them by writing to us.”)
In general, [the Complainant’s] disability would clearly prevent him
from following and understanding these statements. For
[the Complainant], an
opt-out arrangement explained in just some brief comments in annual member
statements, were not adequate for
him to follow and understand. This is
unconscionable conduct.
For someone with [the Complainant’s] disabilities an opt-out
arrangement is clearly not in his interests as a member of the
superannuation
fund. The trustee should act in the interest of members, but in [the
Complainant’s] situation his best interests
weren't considered. The
trustee during [the Complainant’s] membership had no adequate processes
and procedures to cater for
his needs as a member who had a severe
disability.
Complainant’s Representative refers to the Trustee’s submission that
the Welcome Letter and PDS provided to the Complainant
included information
regarding the Complainant’s insurance arrangement. However, he notes that
the Trustee has produced no
evidence that these documents were sent to the
Complainant.
Complainant’s Representative states that there was no legislative
requirement to provide the Complainant with insurance
when he commenced
membership in 1997.
The Complainant
The [Fund] Superannuation Fund Amending Deed of 28/7/1997 states
"Admission of Members":
(6) The Trustee shall ensure that each person who becomes
is notified in writing at or prior to his date of acceptance of his rights
to receive benefits from the Fund.
At present, [the Trustee] is exceptionally poor in advising members of their
to the point that some rights are not explained at all.
[The Complainant] is severely intellectually disabled, suffers from Wernicke
Syndrome ... a severe type of dementia, totally incapable of understanding a
superannuation statement or similar document.
In addition to [the Trustee] putting brief comments about Death and TPD
insurance in the larger documents like the Product Disclosure
Statement and
annual superannuation statement, a short, concise letter, highlighting the
important points to know, could help explain
to members (including [the
Complainant]), of their rights and what they need to know about Death and TPD
However, firstly, the letter should explain to members what is default or an
opt-out insurance arrangement and that they can cancel
their Death or TPD
insurance, or both.
The Complainant
had very significant pre-existing medical conditions including Wernicke
Korsakoff Syndrome, the continuing effects
of polio and rotator cuff disease.
The Complainant’s Representative submits that the letter mentioned above
could have explained
that a pre-existing medical condition would be excluded
from eligibility to TPD.
Complainant’s Representative states that as the Complainant ceased work on
1 June 2013 due to the worsening of his pre-existing
conditions, he did not
attempt to claim a TPD benefit for him.
Complainant’s Representative states that the TPD insurance levy for full
time employees, while people working less than
20 hours per week had a different
insurance entitlement at the time the Complainant commenced work in December
The "Member Leaflet and Application, valid from 1 August 1998",
states under
the heading of
Your Account:
An insurance Levy to meet the cost of the basic insurance cover. This levy
is $1. 00 per week for full time employees. Death only
part-time/casuals is $0. 70 per week. Full time employees (employees who work at
least 20 hours per week on
regular basis) may buy additional insurance
levy of $2. 00 or $3. 00 per week.
[The Complainant] worked 15 hours per week, so therefore was not a full time
In the "Member Leaflet and Application" under the heading "Total and
Permanent Disablement Benefit" it states "(full-time employees
only)." Clearly,
[the Complainant] had no entitlement to TPD as he was not a full time employee,
but was paying the insurance levy
I asked [the Trustee] the reason they charged [the Complainant] the full
amount for TPD and was advised it was because they didn't
know his employment
status. It was implied that there was no arrangement with the employer to advise
[the Trustee] of the member's
employment status, at the time the employer
advised them of the member's other details such as name, address, date of birth
They didn't ask the member for this information either.
The fund should have advised the member in the letter mentioned in 2, that if
they didn't work full time (provide the definition)
then they should advise [the
Trustee] of their employment status. This would prevent members paying insurance
premiums for TPD to
which they were not entitled.
Complainant’s Representative further submits:
[The Complainant] ceased work on 1/6/2013 as he was Totally
Permanently Disabled but not eligible for a TPD insurance payment, due
pre-existing medical conditions and also due to the ADL test in the previous
There would have been other members of [Fund] also totally permanently
disabled, but also couldn't pass the ADL test under the previous
policy. There
was an obligation for [the Trustee] to advise [the Complainant]and other members
of the ADL test in the new policy;
so that they could advise [the Trustee] they
didn't want to be covered for TPD insurance under this policy. This was not
The Complainant
did not need death insurance as he had no dependents.
The Trustee
could have asked the Complainant if he had any dependents and if not, the
Trustee could have explained that the Complainant
might not need death insurance
and then facilitated the removal of this insurance if he so wished.
The Complainant
should be compensated for not being adequately advised of his rights including
his right to opt-out of insurance as
well as other important matters effecting
his insurance premiums.
The Complainant
should have been advised of the need to inform the Trustee of his employment
status when commencing work in December
Complainant’s Representative notes that the Trustee states on its website
that it intends to adopt the Insurance in Superannuation
Voluntary Code of
Practice for superannuation trustees which will commence from 1 July 2018 with
funds having until 30 June 2021
to fully implement it:
The Code at section 6 acknowledges that vulnerable consumers such
as people with mental health conditions, people with a disability,
have unique
needs requiring internal policies to support them in accessing services. Also,
section 12.2 states "Specific training
regarding engaging appropriately with
members who have mental health conditions will be provided." However, this is
too late to be
of assistance to [the Complainant].
The Trustee
main points made by the Trustee are as follows:
The Trustee
maintains that it has met all legislative disclosure requirements in relation to
the insurance cover provided to the Complainant
under his Fund membership.
The Trustee
states that it issued ‘numerous communications’ to the Complainant
throughout his membership confirming the
details of his insurance cover and how
the cover could be cancelled.
The Trustee does
not dispute that due to his medical condition the Complainant may not have been
able to read or understand the documentation
it provided to him.
However, the
Trustee notes that that the Complainant’s Representative confirmed in his
complaint submission to the Tribunal
that he has had a General Power of Attorney
and an appointment as an Enduring Guardian of the Complainant’s affairs
April 2009 and considers that he could have acted on his behalf from
this date to cancel the Complainant’s insurance cover.
Furthermore, the
Trustee noted that the Complainant’s Representative had confirmed that the
Complainant had been continuously
living at his place of residence since
The Trustee
Therefore, as [the Complainant] was living with [the
Complainant’s Representative] and [the Complainant’s Representative]
was [the Complainant’s] Power of Attorney, it is reasonable for the
Trustee to expect that [the Complainant’s Representative]
would read all
the [Fund’s] communication [the Complainant] received. It is also
reasonable to expect that as [the Complainant’s]
Power of Attorney he
would discuss the [Complainant’s] need of the insurance cover provided by
his [Fund] membership. If the
cover was not required [the Complainant’s
Representative] has had ample opportunity to cancel the insurance cover on
of [the Complainant].
The Trustee
notes that the Complainant has been provided with insurance cover during his
Fund membership and if a claim had been admitted
the relevant sum insured would
have been paid.
As the Trustee
informed the Complainant that he could cancel his insurance cover, he is not
entitled to any refund of the insurance
The Trustee
submits that it has met all the Fund’s disclosure responsibilities under
the Trust Deed and superannuation legislation.
In terms of the
Complainant’s ability to make an insurance claim, the Trustee submits
...Pre-existing medical conditions do not prevent new members
receiving the [Fund] default insurance cover provided the new member
actively at work on the date they joined [the Fund]. If [the Complainant] ceased
work on 1 June 2013 due to his medical condition
the Trustee is not sure why
[the Complainant’s Representative] did not lodge a TPD claim. [The
Complainant’s Representative]
states this was because of [the
Complainant’s] pre-existing medical condition. But [the
Complainant’s Representative]
state [sic] earlier that “The letter
mentioned in 2 above could have explained the pre-existing medical conditions
excluded from eligibility to TPD”. This indicates that at the
time [the Complainant]/[the Complainant’s Representative]
was not aware
that [the Complainant] was not eligible for TPD cover due to his pre-existing
medical condition. Therefore, why is
[the Complainant’s Representative]
stating that this is the reason he did not lodge a TPD claim for [the
Complainant].
The Trustee
maintains that no compensation is payable because the Complainant or his
Representative could have cancelled the insurance
cover at any stage. The
Complainant had paid insurance premiums throughout his membership and had he
passed away the insured amount
would have been paid to his estate. Similarly, if
a claim had been lodged for a TPD benefit and if after completing an assessment
of the claim the insurer found that the Complainant satisfied the TPD definition
again the insured sum would have been paid.
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must initially determine whether the
decision of the Trustee to not refund insurance
premiums charged from when the
Complainant joined the Fund on 1 December 1997 to when he exited it on 2 August
2017 was fair and
reasonable in its operation in relation to the Complainant in
the circumstances.
issue is not what decision the Tribunal would have made on the evidence before
the Trustee but whether the decision was fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal took the whole of the evidence and
submissions into account. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the material it has
relied on has been provided to both Parties
Did the Trustee have power to deduct the insurance premiums from the
Complainant’s account?
3(8)-(12) and 21A provide the Trustee with the authority to deduct from a
member’s account, the cost of insurance premiums.
As the Complainant did
not cancel his insurance, the Trustee had authority to continue to deduct the
cost of the insurance premiums
from his account from when he joined the Fund on
1 December 1997 to when he exited it on 2 August 2017.
Should the Trustee compromise the Complainant’s
authorised to deduct the insurance premiums from the Complainant’s account
does not relieve the Trustee from its duty
to consider all aspects of the
Complainant’s claim. In doing so, it may become apparent that the Trustee
has an obligation
to compromise the claim. (
Retail Employees Superannuation
Pty Ltd v Crocker
(‘Crocker’)
[2001] FCA 1330
Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme Board v Dexter
[2004] FCA 1434.
Trust Deed empowers the Trustee to compromise claims, as does the relevant state
legislation.
Tribunal, standing in the shoes of the Trustee, can decide that the
Trustee’s power to compromise the claim should be exercised
particular way – as per the judicial reasoning
Crocker and Dexter. The Tribunal may do so if it finds the Trustee’s
failure to compromise the Complainant’s claim
to have been unfair or
unreasonable in the circumstances.
Did the Trustee tell the Complainant (and subsequently his Enduring Power of
Attorney) that he had insurance cover, that insurance
premiums were being
deducted from his account, that he could cancel his insurance cover and the
information the Complainant needed
to cancel it?
Complainant’s Representative has submitted that the Complainant did not,
and because of his medical condition, could not
have known that he had insurance
cover or that the Trustee was deducting insurance premiums from when he joined
the Fund on 1 December
Trustee stated in its letter dated 31 January 2018 to the Complainant’s
Representative that copies of Annual Reports were
issued to the Complainant with
his Member Statements and that copies of the Fund’s Insurance Guides were
available. The Trustee
stated that the Annual Reports ‘confirm that
insurance can be cancelled or provide reference to where additional information
Guides ‘confirm that cover can be cancelled or
provide details of where
further information can be obtained regarding the [Fund] insurance
arrangements’. The Trustee went
on to state:
It is clear from the above documentation that [the Complainant] was
provided with information on numerous occasions regarding how
he could cancel
his insurance cover if he did not require it.
As [the Complainant] was fully informed regarding his option to cancel his
insurance cover, [Trustee] maintains the decision that
[the Complainant] is not
entitled to any refund of insurance premiums.
Tribunal notes that the Trustee has provided copies of the Complainant’s
Member Statements from 1998 (when the Employer
contributions appear to have
commenced) to 2006, as well as many of the Annual Reports from 2002-2005,
Insurance Guides from 1 July
2003-29 June 2009 and other relevant documents.
Although the Trustee has stated that the Annual Reports and the Insurance Guides
‘confirm that insurance can be cancelled’, it has not specifically
quoted where this information can be found in these
a result, the Tribunal examined each of these documents in detail together with
other documents that the Trustee previously made
available. The Tribunal notes
the following:
Member Statements
The 1998 and
1999 Member Statements detail a deduction for ‘Insurance Premiums’
and ‘Insurance Cover Costs’.
However, there is
no information in
these statements about what the insurance cover is, how to cancel it, or how to
find out more information about
The 2000 Member
Statement details the ‘Insurance Cover Costs’ deducted but
. It also gives details about the insurance
cover but gives
no details about how to cancel it
, although it does give
the option of cutting out and posting in a request for a booklet ‘For
information about [Fund] great
insurance options’.
The 2001 Member
Statement details the ‘Insurance Cover Costs’ deducted but
insurance premiums
. It also gives details about the insurance cover and
although again it gives
no details about how to cancel it
, it does give
the option of cutting out and posting in a request for ‘more information
on: ... Insurance to suit me ...’.
The 2002 and
2005 Member Statements detail the ‘Insurance Cover Costs’ deducted
but do not give details on insurance premiums.
While they give details about the
insurance cover, they
do not give any information about how to cancel it or
any option for getting further information about it
The 2003, 2004
and 2006 Member Statements provided by the Trustee detail the ‘Insurance
Premiums’ deducted
but give no other information about the insurance
cover, how to cancel it or any option for getting further information about
Annual Reports
Report dated 30 June 1997 and 30 June 1998 have some brief information about
insurance but
do not discuss that cancellation of insurance cover is possible
or how to do it
report dated 30 June 2000 and for the financial year 2001-02 discuss insurance
options but they
do not give details to members about how to cancel their
insurance cover
. They provide the phone number or email address to use to
find out more about insurance or to get a copy of the ‘Insurance
Report for the financial year ended 30 June 2003 stated:
You can opt out
– employee members can choose to
cancel the automatic unit of insurance provided to them by writing to us.
Report for the financial year ended 30 June 2004 indicates that the default
insurance cover could be cancelled. Under the
heading ‘Cost-effective
insurance cover’, the document stated that ‘a key benefit of being a
[Fund] member is access
to low cost insurance’ and that a member
‘can cancel ... it at any time’.
Report for the financial year ended 30 June 2005
does not give any details
but it does provide a number to call to
‘discuss your insurance needs’ or to ‘download an Insurance
from the website.
Insurance Guides
The Insurance
Booklet printed November 2000 provides details about insurance, in particular
how to apply for increased cover. It
stated that one of the ways
‘insurance expires’ is when ‘you request this in
writing’. However, it
does not give any information about how to cancel
insurance cover
The Insurance
Guide dated 1 July 2003 stated that the default insurance cover could be
cancelled. It stated at page 5:
If you are an employee member and you don’t wish to keep the
one unit of automatic insurance cover, you are able to cancel this
advising [the Trustee] of your decision in writing.
The Insurance
Guide dated 15 August 2006 stated that the default insurance cover could be
cancelled. At page 6, the document refers
to the cancellation option in the
Insurance application form and states:
If you’re an employee member and don’t wish to keep
your one unit of automatic insurance cover, you can cancel it by writing
The Insurance
Guide dated 23 March 2007 and 24 October 2007 stated that the default insurance
cover could be cancelled. At page 1,
the documents refer to the cancellation
option in the Insurance application form and state:
If you’re an employee member and don’t wish to keep
your one unit of automatic insurance cover, you can cancel it by writing
The Insurance
Guide dated 1 May 2008 stated that the default insurance cover could be
cancelled. It stated at page 6:
Insurance premiums are paid from your super account and your cover
continues as long as there are sufficient funds in your account
premiums. Naturally if you prefer not to have this insurance cover, you are free
to cancel it by writing to: ...
The Insurance
Guide dated 1 October 2008 repeated the statement in the Insurance Guide dated 1
The Insurance
Guide dated 29 June 2009 under the heading ‘To cancel cover’ stated
‘If you prefer not to have insurance
cover, you’re free to cancel it
by writing to ...’.
Product Disclosure Statements (PDS)
the ‘Welcome to [Fund]’ booklet as at July 1998 discusses insurance
and stated that ‘Cover is only provided if
contributions are received from
your employer to cover on time’. It refers members to an Insurance Booklet
does not tell Members that they can cancel their insurance
, or how to go about it.
In the Summary
of Benefits and Conditions and Member Application Form dated 1 July 1998,
discusses insurance and states ‘Cover
is only provided subject to
contributions being received from your employer ... If contributions cease ...
your insurance cover will
cease ...’. Similar wording appears in the
Member Information Booklet dated 1 July 1999. However, they
tell Members that they can cancel their insurance
, or how to go
The PDS dated 14
August 2003, 28 October 2004, 1 March 2005, 19 April 2006, 28 February 2007, 1
October 2008 and 29 June 2009 stated
that insurance cover ceased on ‘the
date we receive your written request to cancel your insurance ...’. This
sufficiently clear indication to members that insurance cover could be
The PDS dated 1
December 2010, 1 June 2011 under the heading ‘To cancel cover’
stated ‘If you prefer not to have
insurance cover, you can elect to cancel
your cover on the
Membership application form,
or you can cancel
it any time by writing to ...’. The PDS dated 1 December 2013 and 1
December 2014 had similar wording.
The PDS dated 1
November 2012 and 16 September 2013 stated, ‘Unless you cancel your
automatic insurance, the premiums will continue
to be deducted ...’.
The PDS dated 9
September 2016 under the heading ‘How to Cancel your Insurance
Cover’ stated ‘If you prefer not
to have insurance cover, you can
elect to ... cancel [your cover] at any time
sending us an email ... or by writing to us...’.
Other Documents
Half Yearly Edition 2008’ discusses insurance information but appears
not to mention anything about being able to cancel the insurance cover
how this might be done.
The September
2010 document advising of changes to insurance options commencing 1 December
2010 stated at page 3 that ‘You can
cancel or reduce your insurance at any
time by writing to us at ...’.
The document
advising of changes to insurance options commencing 1 December 2010 stated at
page 3 that ‘You can cancel or reduce
your insurance at any time by
writing to us at ...’.
The document
advising of changes to insurance options commencing 1 December 2013 stated at
page 2 that ‘If you don’t think
your insurance with [Fund] is right
for you, you can apply to ... cancel your insurance cover at anytime, either
online or by phone’.
examined these documents, the Tribunal is of the view that the Trustee had
advised the Complainant by way of his Member Statements
that insurance costs
were being deducted from his account but it is not until the 2001 Member
Statement that information is included
cover. Further, the Tribunal notes that none of these Member Statements tell the
Complainant
that he could cancel his insurance cover. It is only the 2001 Member
Statement that gives the Complainant the option of getting ‘more
information on: ... Insurance to suit me ...’ but as noted below, even if
the Complainant had opted to get this further information,
it would not have
told him that he could cancel his insurance cover.
noted, the Trustee has submitted that Annual Reports were issued to the
Complainant with his Member Statements and that these ‘documents
that insurance can be cancelled or provide references to where additional
information about the [Fund] insurance arrangement
can be obtained’. The
Trustee also submitted that the Insurance Guides were available and that this
also ‘confirm that
cover can be cancelled or provide details of where
further information can be obtained’. However, as noted, the Trustee did
not explain to the Complainant in these documents where this information could
be found. While accepting that the Annual Reports
were issued to the
Complainant with his Member Statements and that the Insurance Guides were
available to him, in the Tribunal’s
view, it was not until 1 July 2003
that the Trustee provided clear information to members in these products that
insurance cover
could be cancelled and how to go about doing so.
the Tribunal’s view, it is not until the Annual Report for the financial
year ended 30 June 2003 and the Insurance Guide
dated 1 July 2003 that the
Trustee told its members, including the Complainant, that they could choose to
cancel their insurance
cover by writing to the Trustee. The PDS dated 14 August
2003 also provides this information. The Tribunal is satisfied that it was
until these documents were made available to the Complainant in 2003 that he
could have reasonably known he could cancel his
insurance cover.
Tribunal notes that from 1 July 2003 the Trustee routinely provided its
members, including the Complainant, with information
cover. From this date, the Complainant, and from 2009, the Enduring Power of
Attorney (the Complainant’s
Representative), must accept some
responsibility for failing to review and cancel the insurance cover if it was
not needed, including
when the Complainant ceased work in 2013 due to his
disability. As noted by the Trustee, the Complainant could have made a claim
his insurance at this time.
Tribunal further notes that before 2009, while the Complainant may not have had
the capacity to understand and act on the content
of these documents, he could
have sought more information and advice. The Tribunal notes the submissions from
the Complainant’s
Representative about his understanding of his
responsibilities as the Complainant’s Enduring Power of Attorney. However,
Tribunal notes that managing financial affairs is one of the
responsibilities of an Enduring Power of Attorney. The Complainant’s
Representative could have sought more information, financial advice or he could
have cancelled the Complainant’s insurance
cover, which would have stopped
the insurance premiums being deducted.
Tribunal considers that a refund of the equivalent of the insurance premiums
deducted from when the Complainant joined the Fund
on 1 December 1997 until 1
July 2003 when he was on notice that he could cancel his insurance cover is fair
and reasonable. The Tribunal
considers that interest is payable until this
payment is made. The Tribunal accepts the Trustee’s submission that any
payable ‘should be in accordance with the member’s
investment strategy’.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decision under review
if it is satisfied that the decision, in its
operation in relation to the
Complainant, was fair and reasonable in the circumstances.
the reasons stated above the Tribunal is not satisfied that the decision under
review was fair and reasonable in its operation
in relation to the Complainant
in the circumstances. Under s37(3) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must make
a determination and
it can set aside the decision of the Trustee and substitute
another decision.
s37(1)(a) of the Complaints Act, in reviewing a decision of a Trustee, the
Tribunal has all the powers, obligations and discretions
that are conferred on
the Trustee.
making its decision, s37(5) of the Complaints Act requires that the Tribunal
must not do anything that would be contrary to law
or to the governing rules of
s37(4) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal may only exercise its
determination-making power for the purpose of placing the Complainant
as practicable in the position that he would have been in but for the unfairness
or unreasonableness, or both, that the
Tribunal has determined to exist in
relation to the Trustee’s decision.
accordance with these provisions, the Tribunal sets aside the decision under
review and substitutes its own decision that the Trustee
is to refund the
equivalent of the insurance premiums deducted from when the Complainant joined
the Fund on 1 December 1997 until
1 July 2003 when he was on notice that he
could cancel his insurance cover.
Tribunal considers that interest is payable by the Trustee as the Complainant
has not had the benefit of the money.
Trustee is to calculate the interest at the rate that was declared by the Fund
for the investment plan in which the Complainant’s
monies were invested
for the period commencing on the day from which the Trustee deducted premiums
from the Complainant’s fund
account, being 1 December 1997 until 1 July
2003 (Amount).
Trustee is to pay interest on the Amount, in accordance with the
Complainant’s investment strategy, until the date the Trustee
payment to the Complainant.
Amanda MacDonald, Member
Tribunal signature: 9 December 2020
RTF format (365 KB)
Signed PDF/A format