The King v McGregor [2025] HCATrans 65 (7 October 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 065
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Sydney No S45 of 2025
B e t w e e n
ANDREW STUART McGREGOR
BEECH‑JONES
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT CANBERRA ON TUESDAY,
7 OCTOBER 2025, AT 10.00 AM
MR J.T. GLEESON, SC
May it please the Court, I
appear with
MR C.J. TRAN
for the appellant (instructed
by the Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth))
MR R.J. WILSON,
May it please the Court, I appear with
MR T. QUILTER, SC
MS C.E. O’NEILL
for the respondent (instructed by
Legal Aid NSW)
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, thank you, Mr Wilson. Mr
MR GLEESON:
Your Honours, the background of the appeal
is common ground between the parties, which is the respondent was charged on
with four Commonwealth child sex offences, one of which attracted the
mandatory minimum sentence under the regime in
sections 16AAA
Crimes Act 1914
The District Court of New South Wales
was invested with federal jurisdiction in the matter under section 68(2)(c)
Judiciary Act
. Following a plea of guilty, the respondent was
sentenced in the District Court to an aggregate sentence under section 53A
New South Wales Act, the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
purportedly picked up by section 68(1)(c) of the
Judiciary Act
initial sentence was 11 years and six months
imprisonment.
There was an appeal against sentence to the Court of
Criminal Appeal in which we conceded, and the Court found error in the
application
of section 16AAC. Following that, the Court of Appeal
resentenced to an aggregate period of 10 years nine months, again, in
reliance on section 53A picked up by section 68. The
order ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
What was the like jurisdiction that the Court of Criminal Appeal was
exercising under section 68(2) – Mr Gleeson, we will take
short adjournment.
MR GLEESON:
May it please the
AT 10.02 AM SHORT
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 10.02
GAGELER CJ:
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Gleeson, was it a like jurisdiction
to section 6 of the
Criminal Appeal Act
, which deals with
MR GLEESON:
Mr Tran says yes,
your Honour. So, within the trial and conviction on indictment, which is
referred to in 68(2)(c), the sentencing
aspect is part of that matter. That was
the investiture of jurisdiction. What the Court of Criminal Appeal has found is
that, under
section 68(1)(c), the provision of section 53A for
aggregate sentences can be picked up as part of the procedure for the trial on
conviction and indictment in which the District Court has been invested with
Your Honours, the order of the Court of Criminal
Appeal is found in the core appeal book at page 85. It indicates there
counts. The first count was the one attracting the mandatory minimum.
The only sentence which the court has pronounced is the aggregate
of 11 years and six months. The indicative sentences are not
sentences as such – that is agreed between the parties.
indicative sentence for ground 1 of six years and 10 months
imprisonment, while it exceeds the mandatory minimum, is a not a
sentence of
that amount. It is simply one of the factors which has been taken into account
as a step towards the only sentence which
has been imposed, which is the
aggregate sentence.
Under ground 1, the issue is whether
section 68(1)(c) is capable of picking up the provision of the State law.
The parties are common
ground upon the nature of an aggregate sentence under New
South Wales law. That is, that it does not constitute a sentence for any
offences within the group, and that is consistent with well‑established
New South Wales law. The only issue on ground
1 is the construction of the
federal law; whether the federal command for the mandatory minimum requires a
sentence to be imposed
for that offence – that is, specifically for
that offence – which exceeds the mandatory minimum.
is the correct command, then it is not met by the application of the State
provision. In those circumstances, section 68(1)(c)
will not pick up the
State provision by reason of the first of the three qualifications which
your Honours Chief Justice Kiefel and
Justice Gleeson recognised
, which is in volume 5, tab 23, page 1138, in
particular at page 1152 and following, commencing at
paragraph [57].
Your Honours there stated in
paragraph [57] the general principle that where section 68(1) picks up
the text of a State law, it does
so so far as applicable and without change to
meaning, but subject to:
three important qualifications –
The first, paragraph [58]:
recognised in
Putland v The Queen
, is that s 68(1) does not apply
the text of a State or Territory law to the extent that in so applying as a
Commonwealth law it would
be inconsistent with the
Constitution
another Commonwealth law.
To similar effect, your Honours
Justices Gordon and Steward stated the same proposition or qualification at
paragraph [149], and it
is consistent with the other judgments. So, for
ground 1, it comes down to a narrow question of the proper construction of
the Commonwealth
law. If it has the construction we contend for, then the State
provision is inconsistent with it and cannot be picked up.
separately come back to these passages when I deal with ground 2, because
for ground 2 it is going to be necessary to deal
with the three
qualifications here recognised, not just the inconsistency but also the question
of how far translation is available,
and finally: what happens when a
substantial part of the State scheme must, on any view, be left behind? They
are topics which
are also dealt with in the other judgments. On ground 1,
if your Honours could go to the federal Act, which is in volume 1,
1, at page 67.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Gleeson, we are
working from separate prints.
MR GLEESON:
Yes. Thank you,
your Honours. So,
section 16AAA
Crimes Act 1914
text is relatively clear:
section 16AAC
and those issues do not
arise in this appeal:
if a person is convicted of an offence described in column 1 of an item
in the following table, the court must impose a sentence of
imprisonment of at
least the period specified in column 2 of that item.
In the present
case it is item 3. On a plain meaning, the command is to impose a sentence
of imprisonment of at least five years
offence against subsection 272.9(1) of the
which is in issue. That requires the sentence to
be applied to that offence, and it cannot be met by applying a sentence which
to be more than five years for a group of offences, including this
particular offence.
The notion that it is applying it for that offence,
which comes out of the text of 16AAA when it is read together with the table
below it, is repeated in 16AAB. That deals with a slightly different situation
where there is a relevant prior conviction, and the
subsection (2) is – again, leaving aside the reference to
section 16AAC:
if the person is convicted of a current offence described in column 1 of
an item in the following table, the court must impose for
the current offence a
sentence of imprisonment of at least the period specified in column 2 of
And so, the words “for the current offence”
grammatically have been included there because one is dealing with the context
of the previous offence plus the current offence.
Your submission, essentially, is “for the current offence” carries
with it only for the current offence.
MR GLEESON:
Yes. Yes, and
the Parliament’s command is that what the court does is it looks at the
offence – in the case of AAB,
it is the current offence, in the case
of AAA it is the offence specified in the table – and for that
offence, the court must
impose at least, in the present case, five years. It
then intersects with the issue the Court considered in
, because what
the court does is to say: for that offence, the yardstick, as the mandatory
minimum, is the five years; I then take
into account the other relevant factors
in the instinctive synthesis and I come up with a sentence greater than five
years for that
What the court then does is, if there are any
other offences – federal offences, that is – if we are
correct on ground
2, the court then must continue the process of the
sentence for each of those offences, and then it will have a series of
sentences. Then it will do the perhaps complicated but necessary
exercise of working out start dates and end dates. If we are wrong
ground 2 but right on ground 1, the court will still impose the
separate sentence of at least five years for the relevant offence
specified, and it will then proceed to do what it may with respect to the other
offences, picking up the aggregate from the
There was an
argument in the court below – this was against us – that a
distinction could be drawn between the language
of AAA and AAB. That argument
is not pressed by the respondent. It is accepted that both provisions work the
same way; we are either
right or wrong in respect to both provisions. Now, that
is the textual argument.
The matter upon which I said the parties were
common ground is that the imposition of an aggregate offence does not constitute
sentence for any of the individual offences. I will simply refer to what is
in our written submissions at paragraph 24, where we
have cited a series of
cases in New South Wales to the effect that the only operative sentence is the
aggregate sentence under the
statutory scheme.
GAGELER CJ:
is all you mean by saying it is not a sentence for the offence.
GAGELER CJ:
It depends on how you use
the word “for”, really. It is a sentence in respect of that offence
and others, is it not?
MR GLEESON:
It is a sentence in
respect of a group. The answer is yes: a group of offences, a group including
that offence and other offences.
I was referring only to our paragraph 24
for the proposition simply under State law that when a court does impose an
aggregate sentence,
the only operative sentence is the aggregate and the
indicative sentences are not sentences per se.
BEECH‑JONES
This Court said that in
MR GLEESON:
Yes, your Honour. That is
common ground.
GAGELER CJ:
Accepting the only
operative sentence to be the aggregate sentence, is it not admissible as a
matter of language to describe that
as a sentence for the 16AAC offence and for
other offences?
MR GLEESON:
This is the point at which
constructional choices arise; that may be regarded as a possible construction.
The alternative construction,
which we are propounding, is perhaps the simpler
one that what the Parliament has required is, if they have said at least five
for offence X, the person shall receive a sentence which
transparently identifies to the offender, to the community – to
offenders – the person has suffered a sentence of at least
five years for X. That is an available construction, that is the
propounding.
The alternative construction is to say, as long as it is a
sentence for a group which happens to include X, and as long as the sentence
the group, whether it would be two, five, ten, fifteen – of whatever
character – could be federal offences of quite
characters – as long as the number exceeds that which the Parliament
specified here, then you have satisfied the
command. They are the available
What the Crown puts in favour of its argument is that it is a
very straightforward and natural reading of the text, even if it may
only possible reading of the text. Secondly – this is our
proposition 2 – if one comes to consider purpose
which construction best achieves the Parliament’s purpose –
then we say that supports reading in the straightforward
As to Parliament’s purpose, your Honour the
Chief Justice and Justice Jagot recited the various material in
Hurt v The King
, which is volume 5, tab 25, at
page 1260, at paragraphs [42] to [43]. Your Honours recited from
Attorney‑General Porter’s
speech – it is in the
materials, I will not reread it today, the extracts there are
sufficient – that there was a central
concern expressed to Parliament
to increase the number and length of sentences of imprisonment for Commonwealth
child sex offences
in order to better deter would‑be offenders and to
protect victims.
We say as a matter of purpose, to say that an
offender has received a separate sentence for the offence – which is
of the identified
period greater than Parliament’s mandatory imminent
command – better achieves that purpose than simply to have a number
which applies to, as I have indicated, a whole group of offences which may be
variegated in character.
BEECH-JONES J:
Why is that so? Could
you just expand that. Is that nothing more than saying it is likely to lead to
longer sentences, and that
is what they wanted?
MR GLEESON:
No. In terms of the deterrent effect for the community and the potential
offender to be able to say: looking at what occurred
there, that person
committed crime X, one that Parliament has regarded as particularly serious
because it has a mandatory minimum,
whereas others do not. That
person – for that serious crime – has been sentenced for
seven years, which is in satisfaction
of Parliament’s
Whatever that person may also have done and also have been
sentenced for, that will be reflected appropriately in its separate sentences,
but at least I know – for that offence regarded of that degree of
seriousness – that is what the consequence is. That
is opposed to:
if one allows aggregates and if you have indicatives, as you do in New South
Wales – but, for example, you
do not have in Victoria, there is no
requirement for indicatives in Victoria – it is far less transparent
to know what the
person has actually suffered or the process by which that has
happened to that person.
BEECH-JONES J:
Just dealing with New
South Wales, with indicatives, the notional loss of transparency concerns
concurrency and accumulation, not
individuals.
MR GLEESON:
I missed Your Honour’s
last question.
BEECH-JONES J:
The supposed lack of
transparency concerns application of, effectively, totality on concurrency and
degrees of accumulation, not length.
Do you accept
MR GLEESON:
In New South Wales, it is broadly
correct, but one of the essential reasons for permitting
indicatives – and this is in the
cases we have set out at
paragraphs 28 to 30 of our submissions in chief – is that
the whole purpose is to produce a regime
which, as Justice Leeming said in
, is unavoidably less transparent than the imposition of
individual sentences. Now, it is true he goes on to mention the matter
Honour says, that is where perhaps the real rub is, I agree with
Because the statutory minimum operates as a
yardstick, it does not just have a single function of being a floor on the
MR GLEESON:
that purpose is not defeated, is it?
MR GLEESON:
defeated, your Honour?
That purpose is not
defeated by the aggregate sentencing provisions in New South
MR GLEESON:
So, in New South Wales, your Honour
is correct, it remains as a yardstick because of this Court’s decision.
So, the offence
is there, one has to start with five years for a case at the
bottom or the lower bottom of the range, and then one has to do the
reasoning at
the indicative level of what is going to be the instinctive synthesis for the
offence. Now, we have provided your Honours’
associates ‑ ‑ ‑
Before you leave that, not only that, it also, because of the regime in New
South Wales – I think you said this earlier –
that the aggregate sentence is not lower than the
MR GLEESON:
Yes, that is correct your Honour.
We provided an aide‑mémoire which reproduces the provisions around
the country. If
I could ask your Honours to look at that. For the purpose
of ground 1, New South Wales deals with the indicatives in
section 53A(2)(b).
The Northern Territory does the same in
section 52(4)(b), noting the footnote that that only came into the
Territory in 2023. In
South Australia, under section 26(2a), indicatives
are required only in particular circumstances, but not otherwise. That
came in in 2021. In Tasmania – like South
Australia – under section 11(3), they are required only in
particular circumstances,
by reason of a 2019 amendment. Then in Victoria,
which represents the other end of the spectrum, section 9(4) says:
(b) is not required to announce—
(i) the sentences that would have –
otherwise been imposed, or how they would have been imposed. So, you
have the construction of a Commonwealth provision against a
background of a
range of aggregate sentencing schemes across the country.
propositions are that in none of those schemes does the aggregate sentence
provide the degree of transparency that comes
from doing a separate sentence for
the mandatory minimum offence. That is number 1. Number 2, given the
variation in transparency,
particularly recognising the position in Victoria,
the parliamentary purpose will be significantly better achieved through our
construction
than one where there is no information at all as to how the
aggregate has been built up.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Gleeson, it
seems to me that the argument you are presenting, focused on the mandatory
minimum offence, would apply to any Commonwealth
offence – the
argument based on the deterrent message, the transparency. One could say that
any penalty prescribed by a Commonwealth
law for an offence is in respect of
that offence only and serves those two purposes.
MR GLEESON:
think it is a little further than that, your Honour. We are saying when
Parliament has taken the unusual step of imposing mandatory
minimums, yes, it is
now more prevalent than it originally was, but it still remains the unusual
step. It is a step which, as a
matter of policy, many people criticise, but it
is a step which the Parliament has taken in respect to certain very serious
It has severely curtailed the ability of the court to do what
would otherwise be a full sentencing discretion. In doing that, it
double function – as per
Hurt v The King
it is doing all of that for a reason that deterrence calls for these extra
measures, as it were. Now, that is the
particular context in which I say it is
not just deterrence in general, but it is making that particular choice and then
using language
– perfectly open to the construction – that
it is to be for that offence. It is the better interpretation, in those
circumstances.
I have covered propositions 1 to 3. Can I move to
proposition 4, which is our response to the respondent’s arguments,
I am dealing here in particular with our reply at paragraphs 2
to 10. At this point, I am dealing in particular with the Court of
Appeal’s reasoning. So, paragraph 97 of the Court of Appeal
identifies the alternative construction to the one we have put.
On our view of
it, the paragraph really should read this way:
if an aggregate sentence of at least the minimum term is imposed
a group of offences, including one or more offence listed in the
then the requirement that at least such a term has been imposed
each such offence:
has been satisfied.
That is the argument against us, that is the way it really should be
understood, because it not only captures the idea that the aggregate
the group but not to the individuals per se, but in a case where a person has
committed two or three of the mandatory
minimum offences – as we
would argue it – each of them must have its separate sentence
attached to it in order to meet
the Parliament’s command.
than, for example, an aggregate being applied to five offences where two or
three Parliament had said should have had their
individualised sentences,
particularly in a State such as Victoria, where there will be no requirement for
indicatives. So, 97 really
captures the competing arguments, but we would
reframe the consequence of the competing argument, as I have
you really challenge the last sentence?
MR GLEESON:
That is the question: does it do
MR GLEESON:
Does it do that? Yes.
That is the issue in the case.
MR GLEESON:
It is, in a
context where – if the Court of Appeal’s construction is
correct – the group can have anything and everything
else included in
it, including potentially further mandatory minimum offences or it could have
unrelated federal offences –
as per Victoria – there may
be no transparency as to how the aggregate has been reached. Does that satisfy
Parliament’s
command of imposing at least X years in punishment of the
listed offence? We say no.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Mr Gleeson, where someone is convicted of two or more of these offences
that carry the minimum term, the sentences do not have
imposed – on your argument, they have a get a separate sentence for
MR GLEESON:
BEECH‑JONES
The sentences do not have to be wholly cumulative on each
other, do they?
MR GLEESON:
That is correct, but you
have to have one for each. You have to have said – and that is the
exercise you go through; that
is the discipline, but that builds on top of: the
community knows you did commit the first serious child sex offence, which
said had to have at least six years, and for that you got eight
years. You committed the second one for which Parliament said you
had to have
at least five years, and for that you got seven years.
You then may or
may not have committed other offences, there may have been other child sex
offences that did not have mandatory minimums,
there may have been different
offences altogether. With all that information there, there will then be the
explicit exposure of
how accumulation and totality have been applied to work out
the total period of your series of sentences.
BEECH‑JONES
So, Parliament’s purpose is so specific that it is
saying we have to not only know you have a minimum – a separate
sentence for each – we need to know if and to what extent a
particular period in custody is referrable to this offence.
Yes, that is the consequence of satisfying the command
that you must also do that to respect the different principles of
BEECH‑JONES J:
And that is true even
though they may be both concurrent.
MR GLEESON:
though, but there will then have to be the exposure via adequate reasons of why
it is that it is thought appropriate –
assuming they were wholly
concurrent and assuming they were both the same period of, let us say, six
years – why it is that
even though the command for the offence is
satisfied by nothing less than six years, the two can be served together. That
achieves Parliament’s purpose, because the community and the
potential offenders know with that degree of precision why it
is that this
person is only in fact serving six years when they committed two mandatory
minimum offences.
Is it really a question
of whether it better achieves Parliament’s purpose, or does your
submission need to be that that
is the only way to achieve Parliament’s
purpose? Because one might think of it as Parliament’s purpose as being
by reference to a spectrum. It can be achieved with the maximum amount
of transparency by the approach you are advocating, less
transparency by the
New South Wales provisions, even less transparency by the Victorian
provisions, but that does not mean that the
purpose is not achieved at
MR GLEESON:
It is the former,
your Honour.
So, when you say the former, you
mean that this is the only way it can be done.
MR GLEESON:
No, it better achieves the purpose.
Thank you. The
reason why – another way of putting it is that in
other cases, Part IB has been said to be not a code, recognising that there
are other provisions elsewhere that are relevant
to the actual inquiry. I know
you are coming to it, but there are other provisions, which, in this contextual
analysis, may impact
upon that view, are there
MR GLEESON:
Well, they are the ones I am coming to
now, your Honour.
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Gleeson, your
argument that this approach better achieves the purpose of transparency
presupposes that you will invariably get
better or more detailed reasons for why
a sentencing judge fixed a start date of X, and staggered the next one for 12
months, than
you would with an aggregate sentence, does it
MR GLEESON:
You are likely to.
BEECH-JONES
MR GLEESON:
BEECH-JONES
And that is borne out by what? With these staggered sentences, you get
sometimes 15, 20 sentences, and we do not impose a massive
burden on sentencing
judges to start saying why one starts nine months later than the other and then
another starts three months
after that.
MR GLEESON:
“likely to”, because I am trying to cover that vast range of
possibilities. That is going to impose a greater
burden on the judge, but take
my example –which is not an unusual one – of a person who
has committed two offences.
Each has a mandatory minimum attached to them, each
requires, let us say, at least, six years.
On the Crown’s
approach, the sentence will be exposed for mandatory minimum
number 1 – which might be seven years, and
it will be exposed
for number 2 – which might be 10 years, because of its greater
gravity – and then the judge will do
the thinking and say: to what
degree should they be served together, having regard to the overall purposes of
Part IB? The reasons
will expose why that is done. The community will
know the person has suffered for each, not less than the minimum specified by
Parliament.
The community and the offenders will also know the way in which the
total period served in custody has been exposed.
BEECH-JONES J:
But the only difference then in that particular case, at 2, will be that
the aggregate sentence will not tell you which one started
first, but we will
know what degree of overlap there was, and what was it, because there will only
be two, and you will know what
the final one was. The sentencing judge will
have to say what justified that degree of overlap and what justified that degree
difference. Other than saying which one starts first, I do not
see – I am just speaking for myself – a lot of
difference.
MR GLEESON:
Well, I have given you the example in
Victoria, the sentencing judge will not have to do the exercise your Honour
has said, and
there is the spectrum there between them.
I am sure you are going to come to it, Mr Gleeson, but in
section 19(5) it deals with cumulative and concurrent sentences for child
sex offences, and it recognises that, notwithstanding that there is this sort of
analysis or part of the analysis you are identifying:
if the court is satisfied that imposing the sentence in a different manner
would still result in sentences that are of a severity
appropriate in all the
circumstances.
Then they do not have to do it, recognising that there is,
at least to that extent, some flexibility. I raise that because at the
the approach that is being propounded by the Crown is rigid, or appears at least
at first blush to be rigid. Now, you say
that is compelled by the
MR GLEESON:
So, at that stage of the exercise, it could be
called rigid, if you like, but it also could be viewed as a simple application
Parliament’s command. That is done, and then it sits within a scheme
where, yes, there are various other provisions around
it, because
what 19(5) says is:
An order must not have the effect that a term of imprisonment imposed on a
person for a Commonwealth child sex offence be served partly
cumulatively, or
concurrently, with an uncompleted term of imprisonment that is, or has been,
imposed on the person for –
And then it identifies two
categories:
(a) another Commonwealth child sex offence; or
(b) a State or Territory registrable child sex offence.
So, what ‑ ‑ ‑
And then (6) gives you the flexibility.
MR GLEESON:
And then (6) gives you the flexibility. So, treating this as a sequence of
steps, if the Crown is correct, we know what happens
at the first
stage – you identify the separate sentence for the offence. You then
do your other sentences.
You then move to the next stage of the
exercise – the one your Honour Justice Beech‑Jones
has asked me about –
and said: well, we know what the sentences are,
we are now looking at what will be the period that will be served in custody in
respect to those sentences. Then that starts with section 19(1), which is
there to avoid there being any gap, first of all, between
the different
sentences, and then 19(2) requires the Court to indicate:
when each sentence commences –
So, this is a task the court is dealing
And it is using the same language that you are seizing on in
section 16AAB(2). That is, a sentence to a term of imprisonment for
offence – for more than one offence.
Exactly, your Honour.
That would seem to apply to all Commonwealth offences,
MR GLEESON:
I will just pause on this. It
does use the same language in 19(2)(b). You have a conviction:
of 2 or more federal offences –
You have a sentence
Imprisonment for more than one of the offences –
read that as meaning you have separate sentences referrable to an offence. When
you have separate sentences referrable to
each offence, the court must
order – must direct when each sentence commences. So, we have
separate sentences, we have separate
offences, and then you have the
qualification that no sentence can commence:
later than the end of the sentences the commencement of which has already
been fixed or of the last to the end of those sentences.
So, it is a
provision which is operating in the same manner than I am suggesting 16AAA
operates. Here, we have the court being required
to do the exercise of working
out the start date and the end dates because we have a series of
Your Honour Justice Gordon, we see this as this is
the next stage in a logical process where you have identified what are your
for however many offences you have. You are now doing the cumulation
or the concurrency exercise, and then within that universe,
subsection (5) restricts the ability of the court to allow cumulative or
concurrent serving of the offence in particular cases,
and then there is a let
out if the court is satisfied something different would work.
in, as the respondent points out, as part of the same scheme we are dealing
with. That is, 19(5) came in at the same time.
So, that has its own controls,
as you see from 19(7), that if the court is to depart from 19(5), its reasons
for that must be exposed.
This appears to be a scheme where, as you move
through from the sentences to the question of what will actually be served, we
these extra provisions coming in. None of that detracts from –
in fact it supports the idea that at the earlier stage you
are dealing with
sentences for separate offences.
BEECH-JONES J:
Could I ask,
just to be clear – in
, Justice Kirby relied on
section 19(2) in dissent, reasoning that it presupposed separate sentences.
You are not putting that argument?
You are not saying this provision
effectively supports ground 2 of your argument.
MR GLEESON:
we are not putting that.
BEECH-JONES J:
I am dealing with 19 responsively to say that nothing in the fact
that the Parliament has chosen to regulate the question of how long
serve in custody and done it in this nuanced manner detracts from the
construction that at the earlier stage the Parliament
for this narrow category
of case is requiring the person to face a sentence for the offence. So,
your Honour Justice Gordon raised
the contextual matters, that is what I
wanted to put on section 19.
Mr Gleeson, in
section 19(5) what does word “uncompleted” add?
Section 19(5) is capturing two types of cases. One is where
the person is already imprisoned for one of a category of offences and
uncompleted part of that term as in unserved part. I think it is also covering
the case where the second sentence is being
imposed as part of the same process,
and in that case it is looking forward prospectively, as it were, to whether you
can have overlap
for a part of the term which is yet to be served in each
Does that not make the word
MR GLEESON:
Mr Tran says it may be unnecessary, but
that is best explanation I can give, your Honour, for – it is
attempting to cover two
different types of cases which have different temporal
frames attached to them. So, if your Honours return to the Court of
judgment ‑ ‑ ‑
So, before you leave the contextual matters, do you want to deal with
MR GLEESON:
Yes. Thank you,
your Honour.
You may not want to, Mr Gleeson
but it ‑ ‑ ‑
MR GLEESON:
No, I do. As best as I can. The way we would approach 19AB is it is
another aspect of the structured or ordered process that the
Parliament is
laying down. The first aspect of the process, as I have identified, is imposing
the sentences which I have made a
submission on how 16AAA works.
further aspect is what period the person will serve of imprisonment, having
regard of the fact that there are more than one sentences
for more than one
offence, and that is the topic dealt with by section 19. A yet further and
third stage of the process is section
19AB, which is: to what extent is
the court to be involved in a non-parole period?
As your Honours
know from the history of these types of provisions around the States and the
Territory and the Commonwealth, different
approaches have been taken to
non‑parole from time to time. One approach is to say the decision to
grant parole, which is
an executive decision, will be left wholly unregulated by
the statute, and certainly will be left wholly untouched by the sentencing
court. That is one approach.
Another approach might be for the
Parliament to fix strict non-parole periods for offences, which give the court
no discretion.
A further approach, and 19AB falls into this category, is to
give the sentencing court a role – indeed, a mandatory
in fixing a:
non‑parole period in respect of –
as it says:
a federal sentence or federal sentences –
In this regard,
Parliament’s decision is that, under the mandatory duty, the court must
fix a single non-parole period. So,
the result would be, on our argument, that
for an offence in the table in 16AAA, the sentence will tell the offender in the
that a person has been sentenced to at least the mandatory minimum for
that offence, whatever other sentences may be imposed at the
Secondly, the court will make the relevant orders under
section 19, which will explain what is the effective period of custody that
will be served. Thirdly, under 19AB the court at this stage will bring them
together and say it is a single non-parole period of,
say, 10 years. Now, it is true at that stage, because the
Parliament’s command is unmistakably clear, it will be:
a single non‑parole period in respect of –
either the single federal sentence or the group of federal sentences,
which may or may not have had mandatory minimum sentences in
them in the first
Mr Gleeson, do I take it that you rely
upon (1)(c)(ii), the references to:
the sentences, in the aggregate –
presupposes
individualised sentences, at your stage 1?
MR GLEESON:
It at least contemplates individualised sentences at stage 1. Whether it
requires only individualised sentences at stage 1 is really
an issue under
ground 2 that I will come to, but the whole of this provision:
in respect of a federal sentence or federal sentences –
and then, as your Honour points out, 19AB(1)(c), and then (d) also
talks about:
the sentence or sentences.
So, Parliament came up with a single
command recognising the possibility or likelihood that there will be, in some
cases, more than
one federal sentence for separate offences which are being
dealt with by the court in the one set of orders.
For reasons which were
thought good, the command is: you set a single at that stage for the whole
group, and there is no inconsistency
or disconformity between doing that at the
stage of non‑parole and whatever has happened at the first stage, in terms
are the sentence or sentences.
BEECH-JONES J:
also in Justice Kirby’s dissent in
Mr Putland received a sentence that exceeded three years. So, we will come
to ground 2, but that is what I was asking about
it. Are we nibbling away
at an argument that was relied on in dissent in
MR GLEESON:
I have answered
Your Honour, I am not, but what I am doing is responding to – if
I may – arguments that say this:
what happens at the cumulation
stage, or the non‑parole stage, informs the proper construction at
stage 1. The Crown’s
short submission is that it does not, because
they are stages that build on each other in the
Your Honours, the next contextual matter I was going to
was the Court of Appeal at 98 to 99. Our short submission
as put in reply
is that these paragraphs are, with respect, a red herring.
Nothing in the approach we are suggesting, at what I am calling the sentencing
or stage 1 stage, in any way prevents the application of the principles of
totality, concurrency, and accumulation when one is at
the second stage of the
GAGELER CJ:
And vice versa, really.
And vice versa, yes.
GAGELER CJ:
say – really, for the purpose of your argument –
section 19 and section 19AB can be put to one side, because
equally on either answer to the construction?
MR GLEESON:
Then at paragraph 100 of the Court of Criminal Appeal, there is what
appears to be in part a purposive argument that aggregate
sentencing under the
State provision is there to “simplify the process” of the judge.
Therefore, it is said:
there is no clash between the purpose and effect of –
mandatory minimum:
provisions and the possibility of aggregate sentencing.
purported to give my answer, that the purpose is
better achieved by adopting the
construction which is clearly available on the text. The last sentence of
paragraph 100 deals with
a particular point about section 49(2) of the
New South Wales Act, which we submit does not add to the analysis.
your Honours have that provision, this ensures that the term of the
aggregate sentence under New South Wales law never goes below
the term required
for one mandatory minimum offence, but it does not resolve the other ways in
which an aggregate sentence is unlike
a separate sentence of imprisonment, as I
have developed. Even if the New South Wales Parliament may have thought
aggregate sentences
were not incompatible with mandatory minimum sentences if
they were imposed under State law, that does not answer the question of
section 53A is compatible with federal law, in which event it is simply not
If your Honours have the respondent’s submissions,
paragraph 11 refers to this Court’s decision in
have explained in our reply at paragraph 3 why the different context of
and the statement made there does not bear upon the present
issue. Paragraph 13 refers to
which permits aggregate sentencing for offences which are being prosecuted on a
summary basis.
That does not answer the present question, it really only
presents it in a different form. Namely, if the command in
section 16AAA
bears the meaning we say it does, then as the leading provision, it will trump
the provision of
section 4K.
In any event, we are in an indictable offence
in the present case, not a summary case.
Respondent at 15
to 16 is your Honour Justice Gordon’s question that I
have sought to answer. Respondent at 17 to 19, this
legislative
history adds little to solve the problem, because in none of the cases where the
Commonwealth has progressively introduced
mandatory minimums was the
intersection between those provisions and aggregate provisions in State or
Territory law brought to the
attention of Parliament, or in any event,
considered. Your Honours, those are our submissions on
With ground 2, can I start with some principles
which will narrow down the question. The first principle is that where a State
a Territory court is exercising jurisdiction under section 68(2) for the
trial and conviction on indictment of a federal offender,
the court at the
sentencing stage must apply
Crimes Act 1914
section 16A
contains a mandatory command to the court exercising
federal jurisdiction, that it:
must impose a sentence . . . that is of a severity appropriate
in all the circumstances . . .
(2) In addition to any other matters, the court must take into
Then there is a whole list of matters, and there are certain other
mandatory parts of the command. So, that is proposition 1: the
section 16A.
Proposition 2 is that the provisions of the
State Act, the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
, do not, on their
proper construction, purport to regulate this exercise of federal jurisdiction,
nor could they lawfully do so.
They do not apply of their own force to the
court exercising federal jurisdiction.
Again, that might seem trite, but
it is important, because if you open the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
, as would be expected of a State law, its subject matter is
the exercise of State jurisdiction in respect to New South Wales offences.
does not purport to direct the New South Wales court how it is to exercise
federal jurisdiction for federal offences, correctly
so, because if it purported
to do that, it would be beyond power.
Now, the effect of that point,
which has been missed by the Court of Criminal Appeal, because it had a narrow
focus on whether 53A
could be picked up, the anterior question was: could
the general scheme of the New South Wales statute be picked up, being a scheme
which in terms applied to New South Wales offences, but which was sought to be,
by argument, picked up under
section 68?
So, before deciding whether it
could be picked up under 68, the starting point is it did not apply of its
own force and effect,
and it could not apply of its own force and
Now, just as a couple of footnotes of that proposition, in the
definitions in section 3(1) of the State Act, “court”
relevantly, the District Court:
means a person whom a court has found guilty of an
That would be read, under section 12 of the
Interpretation Act
(NSW), as an offence under a New South Wales
law – the “matter or thing in and of New South Wales” is
under a New South Wales law. In section 3A, with the purposes
of sentencing, “the offender” that the court is dealing
offender under a New South Wales law. In section 4, the penalties:
to be imposed for an offence –
that is, a New South Wales
offence, is:
the penalty provided by or under this or any other
that is, a New South Wales Act:
That is, common law binding in New South Wales. Then,
importantly, section 4(3) says:
of this Act:
applies to the imposition of all penalties imposed by a court, whether under
this Act or otherwise.
So, the primary command of the Parliament, quite
understandably so, is when you are dealing with an offender in respect to a New
Wales offence and you come to sentencing, you are to comply with
Part 3. Part 3 commences with section 21, and it reveals the
particularly
New South Wales approach to the sentencing of offenders under New
South Wales law. Under section 21A the court must take into
the aggravating factors referred to in subsection (2) that are relevant and
known to the court –
and it must take into account:
the mitigating factors referred to in subsection (3) that are relevant and
known to the court –
any other objective or subjective factor that affects . . .
seriousness –
and this is:
in addition to any other matters that are required or permitted to be taken
into account by the court under any Act –
that is, a New South Wales Act:
or rule of law.
That is, a rule of common law binding the New South Wales court. I will
come later to show – and I do not think this is in
dispute – that there are substantial inconsistencies between the
approach in this statute that is required for the sentencing
of New South Wales
offenders under New South Wales law to that required by the
for federal offenders. The particularly local character of the provision is
illustrated, for example, in
section 21B
, the command about
Sentencings patterns and practices at the time of
sentencing.
GAGELER CJ:
So, Mr Gleeson, what you are saying is
that Part 3 of the State Act applies only to State offenders.
GAGELER CJ:
As a matter of
construction?
MR GLEESON:
GAGELER CJ:
not understand that to be in issue. You are next saying that the application of
Part 3 through section 68(1) would be inconsistent
with Part IB
of the Commonwealth Act?
MR GLEESON:
GAGELER CJ:
I do not understand that to be contentious, and it was assumed in your
favour by the Court of Appeal in its reasoning; paragraph 70,
MR GLEESON:
I am stepping through a series of
propositions, because if it be accepted that Part 3 applies on its terms
only to New South Wales
offences, Part 3 can only apply if it is picked up
under section 68. It cannot be picked up if it is inconsistent, the first
the qualifications in
. So, the point I have reached in this
laborious process is to say that we have not yet got to 53A, which is the
offender, that everything
else in this provision is not picked up by the New
South Wales court when it is exercising federal jurisdiction in this
What that practically means, which is the way we understand it is
done in New South Wales – and lawfully done – is the
sentencing in federal jurisdiction does not open the State statute. What the
judge does is look at the Part IB factors and
work through them. The judge
does not engage in an exercise of saying: are there any factors that I could
and should apply from
the State Act and can I somehow meld them into the
Commonwealth Act to create a hybrid? That is not what is done.
that then leads you to say is, when you come to the disputed
provision – which is 53A – it cannot apply in its own
terms, of its own force, to federal jurisdiction for all of the same
GAGELER CJ:
Do the bracketed words actually
have force, or are they simply explanatory?
Can your Honour just bear with me, because I am
one step short of answering that question.
BEECH‑JONES
Can I put the same question for you to take on notice,
Mr Gleeson.
MR GLEESON:
I have a very limited
mind span today, your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES
All right, I will not tax
MR GLEESON:
I will certainly forget the Chief Justice’s question if
BEECH‑JONES
I understand.
MR GLEESON:
Section 53A does not apply of its own force. Next proposition,
section 53A on its proper construction speaks only to State
– what a New South Wales court does when
sentencing a New South Wales offender – the same as the rest of the
53A is saying is you may impose a sentence on a New South Wales
offender for more than one offence, being an aggregate sentence:
with respect to all or any 2 or more of those offences instead of imposing a
separate sentence . . . for each.
Pausing there, that being a command only to the New South Wales court
section 68(1) is whether that provision can be picked up in federal
it is picked up, how
is that done without altering its meaning, subject to the three qualifications
Where we get to the rub is that this
Court of Appeal has construed section 53A(2) as saying this: when a
New South Wales court is
carrying out sentencing and considering an aggregate
sentence, it is to indicate and make a record of the sentence that would have
been imposed in the manner it would have done it had it been doing it
individually. If that means it is doing it as a State offence,
it will do it by
reference to State factors, but if it is doing it by reference to a federal
offence it will do it by reference to
federal factors. That is the construction
which the Court of Criminal Appeal has placed on the section.
that construction, they then say there is no problem under section 68(1) in
picking that up. There is no inconsistency,
because you have already, at the
State level, laid down a bifurcated norm that where the State court is doing
federal jurisdiction
you apply the federal factors. They then say there is no
translation of any substance going on here, because the State law has already
anticipated the situation.
They then say, well, the words in parentheses
do not add much, if anything at all, because all they are really doing is
illustrating
what would happen if you were in the first limb, which is a
New South Wales court applying New South Wales State
the problem with that entire analysis is it is a
construction which assumes, contrary to the text and contrary to basic questions
of power, that the New South Wales Parliament has any ability to
regulate what is happening in federal jurisdiction.
Mr Gleeson, can I ask you a question about your case. Do you put it that
on the topic of sentencing for federal offences that,
really, Part IB
covers the field, so that there is nothing that needs to be picked up, under
New South Wales law to facilitate or
complete the task of the Court in
sentencing for a federal offence?
MR GLEESON:
what I have to put to Justice Beech‑Jones about
– the short answer is, effectively, yes. Part IB
has said this is how you do it; there is nothing that needs picking up.
Do you have
to overrule
MR GLEESON:
‑ ‑ ‑ because
says, in a number of places, that it is not a
MR GLEESON:
No, we do not have to overrule
– I will come to that a bit later, but shortly for
these reasons. Firstly,
is under a different statute; the
Northern Territory statute at the time ended at subsection (3) and
contained nothing about indicatives.
Secondly, most of the argument I will be
going on to put was not ‑ ‑ ‑
Sorry, I am talking about Part IB being a code.
MR GLEESON:
Your Honours, the second
answer – which I think addresses Your Honour’s
question – is in the passages I have
been to, in
plurality said there are three steps to consider which might lead to negativing
68: the first is inconsistency, the second
is whether the translation is
abridged too far, and the third is whether when you look at what has been left
behind by taking part
of it up, you have changed the meaning of the State law.
It is the third issue where the court split in
was a case about the first of those three
, the argument was that either section 4K or
Part IB evinced either a negative intention or an intention to cover the
field such that
you could never have an aggregate sentence provision.
never got to – because no one argued it –
the second and the third stages, which is to look at what form of translation
would have been required if and when the Territory law was being picked up as
Commonwealth law – that is stage 2 – and
it never got
to stage 3, which – given what was going to be left
behind – was picking up a little part of the Territory
law something
which impermissibly altered the scheme of the Territory law itself. So, those
two issues were not considered, and
was on a different
So, the point I am trying to get to the argument, just before
the adjournment, is the primary reason the Crown has lost below is
Court of Appeal has placed a construction on section 53A which cannot be
supported by the text and is designed to get around
all the 68 problems by
construing the New South Wales Parliament as if it has commanded that, in
federal jurisdiction, the New South
Wales court is to do what it would otherwise
do under Part IB when it is doing an aggregate sentence.
get that reading out of the text of 53A, which is why I laboriously went through
the statute, to show that the whole of
this statute is quite correctly not
talking about what happens in federal jurisdiction. So, the place where you see
the error in
this construction point, it really commences around
paragraph 74, where the court tries to dismiss the words in parentheses by
The matters raised in Pt 3 are only required to be taken into account if
and to the extent they are relevant. They are not required
invariably to be
taken into account. Insofar as any of those matters are inconsistent
Part IB for a federal sentence, then they:
would not be relevant. There is, thus, no conflict . . . of
Then in 75, they say: well, here is the
purpose which the Parliament expressed, which is that the indicatives and the
aggregate would
be done in the same way as the individual sentences would have
been done. That is true, but the Minister was clearly speaking about
for New South Wales offences. The Minister never said: what we are purporting
to do is to regulate how our court will
sentence for federal offences. Then you
see in 76, where it all comes together, the so‑called clear
manifest in the text –
the court is to indicate the sentence that would otherwise have been
It should have said for the New South Wales offence, but it leaves that
Undertaking that task necessarily involves taking account of whatever
sentencing factors are applicable with respect to sentencing
for the offence in
And then the court goes into a bifurcation. They are still construing
the New South Wales statute. We are not yet at 68. They are
saying if it is a
State offence you apply Part 3. Then they say: but if it is a federal
offence, you apply Part IB.
So, this is supposedly the New South
Wales law stating this command. Then there is a possibility that
section 68 might pick up particular
aspects of Part 3, even though it
is in a federal jurisdiction. That is wrong, but for separate reasons. There
is no scope for
that to occur, but that leads to 77. Therefore:
the words in parentheses do little to affect the
construction –
of the provision. So, the initial point on
ground 2 is whether that construction of the New South Wales
statute – which we
submit is atextual and driven to achieve a
result – is one that is open on the face of it, and whether, as a
matter of power,
the New South Wales Parliament can purport to say what is
happening in federal jurisdiction. It cannot.
What that means is that
ground 2 really gets down to the questions of translation and severance.
You cannot defend the Court of
Criminal Appeal by construction, and as to
translation, it is a bridge too far, because the New South Wales law commanding
New South Wales court build the aggregate sentence through indicatives,
having regard to the entire scheme of Part 3, would be completely
if you turned that into a scheme saying you do the same exercise by reference to
the provisions of the federal Act, and
equally severance does not solve the
problem. Is that a convenient time, your Honours?
GAGELER CJ:
It is, thank you. We will take the morning
adjournment.
AT 11.18 AM SHORT
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 11.31
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Gleeson.
Your Honours, some further submissions on the construction
of section 53A, if I may, and in answer to your Honour the
Chief Justice’s
question about what is added by the words in
parentheses. If the provision had ended after subsection (1), the text
would have been
silent on the process by which the aggregate sentence was to be
constructed.
One would, however, fairly readily have read in, in the
context of the Act, that one would, in some fashion – perhaps
– have regard to the considerations in Part 3, but
precisely how that was to be done would be left undefined by the Act and
would be a measure of discretion there. What subsection (2)(b) is
indicating is that you must identify:
the sentence that would have been imposed for each –
say, New South Wales:
offence (after taking into account such matters as are relevant under
Part 3 or other provision of this Act) had separate sentences
What that means is you do not just have to go to the
Part 3 factors, but you have to apply them as if you had been doing
sentences for separate offences. One of the reasons that is critical
under this provision is that if you look at how the New South
Wales statute
requires the guilty plea to be dealt with in section 25D, it is a
structured process to the discounts, which operates
on a mathematical basis, and
so the command in the parentheses says that if you have a series of New South
Wales offences, you must
go through the process of working out what would have
been the mathematical discount for the guilty plea on an
offence‑by‑offence
basis, then you have your indicatives, and from
those indicatives you build the aggregate.
What I have just put to
your Honours as a textual matter is the position that has been adopted in
the New South Wales Court of Appeal
by majority in the decision of
, which is in volume 5, tab
32. Page 1441
the case commences, and the relevant passage is paragraphs 78 to 82 in
the majority. Justice Basten in minority took a
different position, which
is you apply the same mathematical discount but you do it to the aggregate
sentence. He explains that
at paragraphs 50 and following. He gets that
out of certain other provisions to the Act.
What all that tells us is
the words in parentheses do have significant work to do as a matter of New South
Wales law, contrary to
what the Court of Appeal said at
paragraph 77. They not only require the New South Wales court to apply
Part 3 to the New South
Wales offence, they require it to be done in the
identified fashion I have just tried to explain. The construction of the
of Appeal which I have sought to critique between
paragraphs 73 and 79, your Honours should reject for the various
reasons I have
just identified.
It is then a question of where the case
goes from there. Where the case goes from there is that the question under
section 68 is
whether it is possible to pick up 53A(2), and therefore
(1) – because they are a composite whole, you cannot pick up part
the other – the Court of Appeal correctly said you
cannot pick up part without the other – that is
paragraph 71 –
can section 68 pick up the provision without
an impermissible change in meaning?
That takes us to the second question
, which is what is the meaning that is contended for after the
postulated translation, and does that travel beyond what section 68
permits? We would submit that the meaning which is sought to be given to it
after the translation is that under (2)(b) the court
indicates to the
offender and makes a written record of the sentence that would have been imposed
for each now federal offence.
That is the first part of the
translation.
Then it has to be after taking into account such matters as
are relevant under Part IB of the
, had separate sentences
been imposed instead of an aggregate sentence. So, that is the form of
translation that would be necessary,
which the Court of Appeal at
paragraph 81 said there would be no difficulty in doing because, as they
perceived it, it is similar
to the translation in
and involves less a translation than in
the Crown submits that that degree of translation and departure from the text
that the New South Wales Parliament had adopted
exceeds anything that has been
recognised in any of the cases, and it goes beyond the purposes of
section 68. The Court of Appeal
correctly and without novelty identified
the purpose of section 68 in paragraph 59 which is to ensure:
that federal criminal law is administered in each State upon the same footing
as State law and avoids the establishment of two independent
What is contemplated by the translation is that if I am a State offender
before the New South Wales court, my aggregate sentence will
be built up through
indicatives where the
factors are applied to each of the individual
offences, which will give one result. Whereas if I am a federal offender, the
factors are irrelevant, and instead it is the
factors which
will be used to build up the indicatives and then to create the aggregate
At this point, the significant differences between the
factors and the
factors become relevant. We have
handed your Honours’ associates, if I may rely upon it, an
aide-mémoire which compares
the two schemes, with Mr Wilson’s
consent, as we have only provided it recently. The respondent should have an
opportunity
to consider that aide-mémoire in between us. By the end of
the week, we can give you a final version of it which is
This is the document in the two
MR GLEESON:
Yes. So, the purpose of it is where the
matters are not shaded, they are matters where the factors are either the same
or so close
as to be the same under New South Wales and Commonwealth schemes.
Where the factors are in the middle degree of grey shading, there
is different
expression but, as the factors have been interpreted by the respective courts,
the differences are probably not material.
The ones that are in the dark
shading, which are the ones important for this argument, are where there is a
fundamentally different
approach to sentencing under the federal scheme to the
State scheme.
So, just to highlight them. Accountability, which is a
mandatory purpose of the State scheme, has no equivalent in the federal scheme.
The State scheme has a mandatory aggravating factor based on the identity of the
victim; there is no equivalent factor in the Commonwealth
scheme. The State
scheme has a particular mandatory approach or permissive approach to penalties
for facilitating the administration
of justice, a topic that is dealt with
rather differently in the federal scheme. The State scheme deals with
intoxication in a manner
the federal scheme deals with differently.
you come to the second‑last page, the impact on family or dependents, that
is a factor where it is a mandatory factor under
the federal scheme, no express
provision under the State scheme. Then – the big one –
the approach to the guilty plea,
the radical difference between what is in the
Commonwealth and the State schemes, that is the penultimate one. The final one,
provision for loss of parliamentary pension in the State scheme and
not the Commonwealth scheme.
So, when one is assessing the degree of
translation, what is sought to be achieved by the translation, as we would
submit, is a radical
change in the court’s function. The function given
to the court by the State Parliament is to apply the factors in the first
column, faithful to the text of
and of the interpretation of that
through the cases. The function that is given through the translation is that
the State court
is now applying the factors in the second column, which are
likely to produce different results between State and federal
GAGELER CJ:
But it is all for the purpose of working out the sentence that would have been
imposed for the respective offences, considered individually.
Yes, for each of them, the function of the court –
that might be regarded as its ultimate function, but the manner in which
commanded to perform the function has changed from having regard to one set of
factors to a different and inconsistent set
of factors, and – this is
where it links back to the long run‑up this morning – the New
South Wales factors, as
a set, are inconsistent with the
So, if one is simply doing a sentencing for one offence, or if
you were doing multiple offences individually – as I have
– you are not opening the State statute book. But what is here
said is, through this translation, that while you are told
to open the State
statute book, in fact you do not. You open the federal statute book to have
regard to those different factors.
GAGELER CJ:
The entirety of
your ground 2 is focused on the bracketed words, as I understand it, in
paragraph (b) of subsection (2)?
MR GLEESON:
GAGELER CJ:
Without those words, the section would have
the same meaning as a matter of State law, would it not?
MR GLEESON:
No, it would not, that is why it was indicating the divide between Justice
Basten and the majority in the decision I went to. What
the bracketed words are
doing, it is a double function. They are saying firstly you must have regard to
the factors in the statute.
That may be taken as making explicit what would be
implicit. Secondly, it is saying you must for each individual offence identify
the sentence that would have been imposed. So, you must apply the factors to
each offence individually.
The difference, for instance –
take Victoria as an extreme example, where there is no such command, in Victoria
you can identify
an aggregate. You do not have to in any way say how the
sentencing factors in the Victorian Act have led to particular indicative
sentences. Northern Territory in other provisions in their current form lie
somewhere in the middle, but they do not have the very
precision of this New
South Wales command. So, my answer to your Honour’s question is yes,
those words are the centre piece
of the argument, but yes, they are in fact
adding a mandatory constraint upon how the process is to be
Does that mean, Mr Gleeson, that in the
case of Victoria, aggregate sentencing can be validly picked up for federal
MR GLEESON:
The Crown’s primary
answer – and we have thought about this carefully, and I have
instructions – is yes.
Yes, I see. Your
second answer might be that you do not care.
MR GLEESON:
MR GLEESON:
The Crown does not – the Crown is
not as caring as I am.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Does that reflect
there is no distinction between those and the provisions in
MR GLEESON:
I am sorry, your Honour, I
missed the question.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Does that concession
reflect the fact there is no difference in substance between those provisions
and the provisions considered
MR GLEESON:
Again, the answer is yes, your Honour. The precise provision in
is reproduced in book 2 of the joint book, at page 540,
where section 52 ended after subsection (3).
This argument was not considered in
MR GLEESON:
None of this was considered in
because, firstly, the text was
different – you did not have this provision, and that is why the
Crown submits that you can
decide our argument without having to overrule
. Secondly, as I have said, the whole of
whether there was an inconsistency between 4K and IB and a
generally‑expressed aggregate sentencing provision –
is what it stands for, as a matter of ratio.
What was not addressed in
– not argued and not addressed – was when
we move to the next stage of looking at exactly how does the State or Territory
command the aggregate sentencing to be done as a matter of the construction of
its statute and exactly what degree of translation
is required for that to
happen at the federal level, have we gone beyond the permissible limits
of 68, and/or – which is the
final step – can the
problem be solved by severance? So, those issues just were not reached in
I should say, going back to your Honour
Justice Steward’s question and your Honour
Justice Gordon’s question to me about
et cetera – so the Crown’s position is clear –
as I have indicated, the Crown is not challenging
. Therefore, to
has said Part IB is not a code which necessarily
excludes the form of aggregate sentencing which was in issue in the Northern
at the time, to that extent it is not a code. However, Part IB,
subject to that qualification, is about as close to a code as you
can get, if
one thinks of four factors that a sentencing regime must deal with.
first is: what are the factors that are going to govern the sentencing process?
section 16A
, and those factors evince a
scheme which allow no room for the New South Wales scheme in
the reasons I have identified. The second aspect of a sentencing process is
what are the forms of disposition available at
the end of the process? That is
dealt with the
, for example – without exhaustively
going through it –
deals with sentence, but an
important provision,
section 20AB
, creates a series of alternative federal
dispositions.
Section 20AB
, to be clear, is not a section 68
provision. These are federal sentencing provisions of a wide variety of
Your Honours may wish to note in the
Court of Appeal’s judgment, at paragraph 54, where there
was some mild chiding of the
Director for what was said to be inconsistent
positions being put about these provisions – 20AB – there
is a reference
to a then reserved appeal in
Vamadevan v The
(2024) 116 NSWLR 195.
That case has now been decided. It
has overturned the previous decision, and it is held that when the court is
exercising power
section 20AB
, it applies the federal factors in
, consistently with the position that we are putting.
that is the second aspect of sentencing. The third aspect is how one deals with
accumulation and totality. That is dealt with
comprehensively by
, leaving no room for a State
scheme. The fourth aspect is how one deals with non‑parole. That is
dealt with comprehensively
section 19AB
, as we have
Mr Gleeson, is this a proposition that
addresses the words “so far as they are applicable” in 68(1)?
MR GLEESON:
BEECH-JONES J:
So, by your concession about
Victoria, that does not extend to the minimum sentence provisions in 16AAA, does
it? You are only
saying ‑ ‑ ‑
MR GLEESON:
That is correct.
Is your submission really confined
to 53A(2)? If one did not even have 53A(2) in the statute, would the same types
of issues not
arise in relation to section 53A(1) in terms of calculating
the sentence?
MR GLEESON:
They could arise
your Honour. They arise with, as we put it, greater specificity, because
of the way 53(2)(b) is worded. If that
is the case we are running today, I am
trying to present an argument that says if the construction argument does not
work at the
Court of Criminal Appeal, if we are in translation, what we have to
do is work out how does this operate as a piece of State law,
then how is that
supposed to operate as a piece of federal law, is that a bridge too far, or is
there some form of impermissible
severance going on?
It is true that,
with that strand of our argument, one would be tempted to say why does that
argument not have some purchase in respect
to 53A(1), because what you might say
is, if we have nothing in subsection (2), we have just got
subsection (1). How is this provision
meant to work as a matter of New
South Wales law? It does not tell us expressly, but implicitly it is the New
South Wales factors
that are to be considered in some fashion. The fashion is
not defined, but if, for example, the court sentencing for a State offence
opened the Commonwealth book, that would be an error of law.
So, we know
that in some way, you are to do it through the
factors. The form of
translation which underpins
but is not spelt out in any of the
judgments, because the issue was not addressed, must implicitly be, for a
generally‑worded
aggregate provision, you can read it as if your general
guidance is now to come from the Commonwealth factors, in some way that has
been precisely defined and confined.
That raises the real question of
translation. It is a question not addressed in
. Then there is a
final question of severance, which is: if I am correct that the scheme of
factors in the New South Wales Act and
the Victorian Act – and every
other Act – is inconsistent with the scheme in the Commonwealth Act
and is not picked up
per se under 68, what we are left arguing about is
whether this little bit of the State scheme – the aggregate sentence
– can be picked up, leaving behind the whole world in which it
At that point, the issue is perilously close to the type of issue
the court split upon in
. It is a different way in which it arises
One had a paragraph A and a paragraph B, and each of
them had historical routes, and the majority said you can sever, as it
you can leave behind the one that cannot be picked up, you can
keep the second route.
But here what is going on on the severance
argument, which the notice of contention is trying to revive, raises problems
profound than
, because what it is saying is that the State
scheme as a whole cannot be picked up by section 68, but you can leave all
of that behind,
and then you can pick up a little bit of it, and they are the
issues that
did not have to deal with.
So, I said to
Your Honour Justice Steward, the short answer is the Crown is not
challenging
. That is my position on instructions, but I think I
am permitted to say
does not contain ratio or consider dicta,
which grapples with the precise issue before you today.
So, accepting that, and accepting the point, I think, that you rightly make that
this is not an argument that is necessarily confined
to 53A(2), what I
cannot understand is why this argument would not then also apply to the
Victorian provisions. Ultimately, translation
is a question of judicial power,
it is – at some point, whatever we call translation, it is the court
legislating effectively.
MR GLEESON:
your Honour, it may. So, the entry point that I am trying to reach is that
we are putting the argument on a New South
Wales provision that is far more
specific than any other one in the Federation. It is an argument which, we
submit, is not foreclosed
, because this language is not
before the Court and the argument was not there.
Your Honours
should primarily decide this case on its own merits, and if this is abridged too
far for translation, and we submit
it is, because you are – through
translation, the court is giving a different function in a material way to the
exercise of
judicial power. That is why, if I can just complete that point, the
Court of Criminal Appeal says this is no different to the cases
, and the like.
It is radically
different, because in those cases you have a right – such as an
appeal right – you have a judicial process
which is conferred by the
State or Territory law where section 68 is saying that judicial process can
now be carried out at federal
level in respect of federal offence. It is
dealing with a problem of efficacy, as Your Honour the Chief Justice
If the appeal process is to be efficacious at
federal level as well as State level, there needs to be the person that
initiates it.
Simply to read the Attorney‑General of the State as the
Attorney‑General of the Commonwealth, or as the DPP of the Commonwealth,
does not interfere with the judicial process or function that is the subject of
the alleged translation.
Here, as I have put, it is a fundamentally
different judicial function which has been given. It might have been a very
wise function
to be given, but the point is a technical but important one, that
section 68 does not reach into this New South Wales provision and
to be read as if it said something wholly different.
Can I ask a question which I think you have already answered,
but I just want to make sure I understand your answer to it. If
subsection (2) did not exist, there would be no challenge to (1), is that
MR GLEESON:
If subsection (2) did not
exist, the Crown would have to challenge
. The Crown would have
to challenge
if it was trying to negative aggregate sentencing.
The challenge to
would, as I have sought to indicate, say that it
only went so far. It looked at inconsistency, but it never went to the next
of what is the form of translation occurring? Is it an impermissible
interference of the judicial function? Does this work as a
matter of severance?
Those issues, we submit, are not before you today.
It would not be a challenge in terms of
MR GLEESON:
It would be a challenge in saying there would be a different
result reached had these issues being considered.
A different result reached, (a), had these issues been
considered and, (b), bearing in mind that the Northern Territory statute
changed post‑
. So, it would be on the current Northern
Territory statute. We think the Court of Appeal correctly, at
paragraph 56, when it was
dealing with the
issue – we think it there correctly has stated the law that:
If ‘a point is not in dispute in a case, the decision lays down no
legal rule concerning that issue’ –
citing familiar cases
Coleman v Power
and so on. My answer to your Honour
Justice Gordon is
to one side, just as a matter of principle, is it the
Crown’s case that it opposes or objects to, consistent with the principles
you have been putting to us, 53A(1)?
MR GLEESON:
The consequence then becomes: I am happy to have
an aggregate sentencing regime so long as I do not have an indicative system.
mean, it seems to me to be an odd result that we can have one – this
is why the concession you make, and I accept that the
terms of the concession
are specific, in relation to Victoria.
MR GLEESON:
Sorry, Mr Gleeson, I interrupted.
MR GLEESON:
No, no. The
consequence is not that you can have aggregate but you cannot have indicatives.
The consequence of the narrow argument
is you cannot have this combination of
provisions. We are still with the indicatives, as I have explained, in a way
let me take the guilty plea, which illustrates
What I have tried to explain is that the specific work
of 53A(2)(b) is, as per the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, you
have to apply the mathematical discounts to the individual offences in building
the indicatives. So, that is part of the command
to the court when exercising
State jurisdiction. If you are to translate this provision and say you no
longer look at the Part 3
factors, you look at the Part IB factors,
you actually have to go a further step and say: how are the Part IB
factors to apply to
the indicatives, e.g. on the plea of guilty? Because the
Part IB scheme does not use mathematical discounts for the plea of guilty.
It requires the court to take it into account, but it could take it into account
at an aggregate level, it could take it into account
at an indicative
Justice Basten’s view was that you might take it into
account at both levels. So, that question there, just on the guilty
plea – and this is what the Court of Criminal Appeal has not
confronted, and the respondent has not – if you try and
identify what
the form of translation is, at least for this provision, you are, as the court,
being asked to rewrite the statute,
because New South Wales never turned their
mind to this question – quite properly – and we cannot get
any answer out
of the statute as to how, when the translation occurs, the guilty
plea is to be dealt with. Is it mathematical or not? Is it done
indicatives or to the aggregate, or both? You just cannot find an answer to
So, that is why I say this case goes well beyond the difficulties
the Court grappled with in
. It is not as simple as saying: I can
see two paths, one might be able to survive, one does not. This is rewriting of
a very dramatic
function, and therefore the caution which all Judges expressed
, but most significantly in the minority, about rewriting really
come home in this case. We would ask the Court to resolve this issue
the consequences it may have for provisions which only have
subsection (1).
They can be confronted in an appropriate case if a
statute takes that form. If the Victorian one is challenged, that is where it
can be confronted. Where that is the issue, then one can more squarely confront
and whether anything in
precludes the argument.
That is the best I can
put it, your Honours. I realise it is an
important question; I have tried to get instructions on it. That is the
position I am told
the Crown wishes to adopt.
answer is where the statutes provide a specificity by way of indicative
sentences for the reason you have identified,
MR GLEESON:
At least in that case there is a problem with translation. Then just
finally to complete why there is a problem with severance, there
is a problem
with severance because if you were to take out the words in the parentheses, you
are leaving behind that specificity
which New South Wales has imposed on its
courts for New South Wales offences, and you are opening up some different
open-ended approach
to how the indicatives are to be built and how the
aggregates are to be built, and
may be that there is nothing more that can be said about it, but the point that
I still really struggle with is, if you are right
that this clash between the
Part 3 factors and Part IB factors in terms of what is called
“translation” means that it
could not fall within section 68
and if it did fall within section 68 it would be beyond it would be the
court legislating –
if that is right, I just cannot see why it would
only apply to indicative sentences; why it would not apply in exactly the same
to sentencing under the aggregate sentencing approach.
MR GLEESON:
Well, that is my reserve answer to your Honour Justice Steward.
If that is the consequence of it, then that is the consequence of
it and so is
the question of where does the Court start. We submit the Court starts with
whether what we are putting on the specific
textual provision is correct and why
it is correct. If it is correct and if it carries further consequences, then
the consequences
If your Honours please, they are the
submissions.
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Gleeson.
Mr Wilson. You are dealing with ground 2 first, are you?
Yes, please. Your Honours, in relation to
ground 2, this ground, although there seems to have been some sidestepping
in oral submissions
this morning, but as I understand ground 2, it hinges
entirely on the words in parentheses in section 53A(2)(b) of the
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Gleeson has made that clear.
although the arguments in the last 20 minutes or so seemed to extend to
section 53A(2)(b) whether or not it had the words
parentheses.
GAGELER CJ:
Well, that is not the way I understood
the argument being put.
your Honour. The appellant does not seem to suggest that if those words
were not there – the parenthetical words
section 53A could not be picked up and applied. That is not what is being
submitted. So, this ground is about those
specific parenthetical words. I
might go very quickly now to what the appellant submits the Court of Criminal
Appeal was doing at
paragraphs 70 and following, core appeal book
page 69 and following.
In argument, the appellant said that, at
paragraph 74, what the Court of Criminal Appeal was doing, was construing
the State Act
as a State Act in its State context and said they
were – the Court of Criminal Appeal – were there
for attributing to
the State Parliament and intention to deal with a federal
question. In my submission, that is a misconstruction of what the Court
Criminal Appeal was doing in those passages. It is clear from
paragraph 69 onwards, and 70, that this is about the process.
provision is picked up, and potentially applied to,
as federal law –
There is an issue, of course, with translation and change of
meaning, but that involves a comparison between the meaning of the text
State level and the meaning of the text if it were picked up and applied as
federal law. It is the second exercise which is
being undertaken here. At
paragraph 74, in my submission, what the Court of Criminal Appeal is doing
is picking up the words as
they are, as it finds them – the text of
the State law – and explaining what a sentencing court would do with
federal law.
The sentencing court, if those words are picked up
and applied as federal law, takes those words as it finds them, and there,
there is a reference in the words in parentheses to Part 3,
Part 3 is inconsistent with federal law – I withdraw
Part 3 is inconsistent with federal law and therefore
could not be relevant. Those matters – the provisions in Part 3
not be relevant.
Well, they say – I
think it is narrower, is it not? I think what the Court of Criminal Appeal is
saying is Part 3 is only
required to be taken into account to the extent
that it is relevant, and if it is inconsistent then they are put to one
Yes, that is right, and the position which is
common ground is that that Part effectively is inconsistent, and it is a
that the appellant makes, that almost none of that Part could be
picked up and applied. So, the matters in – as it reads,
the text of
that, the text of the parenthetical words, because they are qualified by insofar
as they are relevant:
to the extent they are relevant.
If there is inconsistency with
Part IB, they would not and could not be relevant. That is the way that
the Court of Criminal Appeal
dealt with the issue of how these words would
operate as federal law, if picked up and applied in terms. They resolved the
of any inconsistency by the use of the word
“relevant”.
In my submission, they were not seeking
to – and they were therefore saying that the process is the same.
When you go back
to the State purpose, then many matters will be relevant under
Part 3. So, the same words have a different – the same words
apply, but with a different result, just because of the fact that one is a State
offender and one is a federal offender. So, the
words apply. They are not
inconsistent, because the way that they apply does not result in any
inconsistency.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, is that just saying, determine
what the indicative sentence would have been, had you not imposed an aggregate
Yes, and I will come to that, but I
started with that because that was something that had been recently discussed.
In my submission,
it is an incorrect characterisation of what the court was
doing. Going back to the basic principle, construction of the text of
section 53A – and that is in joint book of authorities at
page 247 – subparagraph (2)(b), in my submission, has
words, and then words in parentheses. If we just look at what the
operative words say:
A court that imposes an aggregate sentence of imprisonment under this section
on an offender must indicate to the offender . . .
(b) the sentence that would have been imposed for each
offence . . . had separate sentences been imposed instead of an
Now, if there were no words in parentheses, those operative words are
abundantly clear. It is a command to the court to indicate
the sentence, the
separate sentence for each offence which would have been imposed, had separate
sentences been imposed instead of
an aggregate sentence.
necessarily means that all sentencing considerations must be taken into account,
otherwise that task cannot be undertaken.
How could a court indicate the
sentence that they would have imposed, without going through the procedure of
applying all relevant
provisions and taking into account all relevant matters,
to arrive at the sentence that they would have imposed?
The operative
words have a natural meaning, and that is the only meaning that they can have,
in my submission. The parenthetical
words are inclusive. It is not a command
that these are the only things that can be taken into account, and that other
things cannot
be taken into account. A particular attention is drawn to
Part 3, but the words say:
(after taking into account such matters as are relevant under Part 3 or
any other provision of this Act) –
It helps to very quickly
remind a sentencing court the fact that the sentencing procedures –
most of the sentencing procedures
in this New South Wales Act are found
Part 3 – will be taken into account, but in my submission, that
is the inevitable meaning
even without words. It is just explicatory. Those
words, do they require the court to take into account
I do not quite understand that it could just be explicatory in that sense,
because without the operation of section 53A(2)(b),
for example, there is
no requirement to calculate – or at least to explicate – a
separate sentence; to go through the
process for each particular separate
That is right.
So, 53A(2) has to be creating that intellectual process of
going through each individual sentence.
If it is doing that, it has to be, in
effect, to use the phrase “picking up” – but it is within
the State provision
– it is picking up the operation of
Part 3 ‑ ‑ ‑
‑ ‑ ‑ for that process.
Which means that for translation of it, it has to also then pick up the
operation of
the federal equivalent.
your Honour saying even if those words were not – even if the
parenthetical words were not there?
“had separate sentences been imposed”, in order to
impose – to do the intellectual exercise of imposing a
sentence, you have to look to Part IA of the federal Act.
You do. That is why, in my submission, what I am doing
here is seeking to explore what actually is the essential meaning of
53A(2)(b). In my submission the essential meaning of that
subsection is found in the operative words. They are
inescapable.
Can I ask you a question on that
respect, Mr Wilson?
For the purpose of sentencing a federal offender, are there any
sentencing principles in Part 3 that you would need to apply in
addition to
those found in Part IB?
No, unless there is a
provision that is picked up and applied itself under
section 68(1).
I should say, apart from the
aggregate sentencing provision itself, which is in Part 4.
I do not believe so.
But is there
anything – perhaps you might like
take that on notice, but I do not believe that there are any that would
All right. Thank
BEECH‑JONES J:
Mr Wilson, you used the phrase, I
think, “operative provision sum”.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Do you mean by that, in the reference
to the brackets, it is not itself – that is recording an assumption,
after taking into
account – sort of saying, well, you are doing this,
of course, after you have done this, because we are always talking about
Yes. So, if the words in parentheses do
not preclude a court from taking something into account, they do not say certain
do not apply, they are only inclusive. They are not exclusive, they
do not set out every single matter that can be taken into account
and, contrary
to what, perhaps, the appellant appeared to be submitting, section 21A of
the State Act is not the source of common
law, it simply applies in addition to
common law. If we go to section 21A(1), which is at joint book of
authorities page 208 going
The matters referred to in this subsection are in addition to any other
matters that are required or permitted to be taken into account
by the court
under any Act or rule of law.
So, it is not – this is not a
reenactment of the common law, it is just saying it does not affect the common
law of sentencing
such that it applies in New South Wales, and it does, and in
the written submissions, we give a list of the types of factors that
the Act but which must come under common law. It is not the source of the
common law, it just leaves the common law untouched
except where it legislates
over the top of it.
So, your submission really is
that what 53A(2) is doing is just saying: expose an intellectual
Whether your
intellectual process is federal or whether it is State – federal
picked up by section 68 – it just says
in either case: expose
that process.
Whereas, on another view, it says no, it is not just exposing the process, it is
requiring you to positively engage in an intellectual
process; to positively go
through particular factors and then expose them. If your submission is right,
where is the requirement
for a federal offence to engage in that intellectual
process independently of section 53A?
BEECH‑JONES J:
Do you say that process comes from
, the fact that you have a court
determining a sentence?
Yes. Any court sentencing
for an individual federal offence will need to apply Part IB. That is in
the – and if it is a
State court it is, by analogy, applying that in
its like jurisdiction, so that a State court sentencing a federal offender in
federal jurisdiction is undertaking an entirely different intellectual
exercise in sentencing than when they are sentencing, the
Court – in the same manner that the appellant submitted, State
factors only for the State court, federal factors only
for the federal offender.
submission ‑ ‑ ‑
What happens if they are both?
What happens if they are both?
If they are exercising
if they are both a State and a federal offender.
federal – you mean in general, in terms of individual sentences? A
court exercising State jurisdiction and federal
provisions to the State offender and federal provisions to the federal offender
or, if it is the same
offender, to the State offence and the federal offence.
It is something that happens every day around Australia.
Is that what you say the Court of Criminal Appeal was doing at 76, on
core appeal book page 71?
Yes, in the sense
that – at 76, the court is interpreting the section – the
essential meaning of section 53A in the
manner that I am submitting is
correct, that the purpose of the section is manifest in the text. Namely, that
the court is to indicate
the sentence that would otherwise have been imposed.
That is what I meant to say, Mr Wilson, but what
you are saying is the argument you are putting about the way in which it
in respect of Commonwealth offences and State offences is, in a sense,
the way it is being set out in paragraph 76:
taking account of whatever sentencing factors are applicable –
Yes, because
why I ask is the argument that is put against you by Mr Gleeson was that
the court had misunderstood the process.
comes down to interpreting section 53A, and what it is actually doing and
what the significance or otherwise is of the words
in parentheses. If they have
work to do and do more than just explain that there is an intellectual exercise,
where what you have
to do is indicate the sentence that – what a
court has to do is indicate the sentence that would have been imposed, had
sentences not been utilised.
In my submission, just taking a
step back, looking at what the words in parentheses actually do: they are not a
source, they do
not preclude things from being taken into account, they do not
require a New South Wales court in the New South Wales context to
account anything they would not have had to have taken into account in order to
comply with the command to indicate the
sentence that they would otherwise have
The words in parentheses do not exempt the court from doing
anything. They are not the source of the lack of necessity to indicate
non‑parole period, for example, if there is a matter that does not have a
standard non‑parole period. That comes from
section 44(2C), which is
actually in Part 4. So, in my submission, undergoing the exercise in
working out what this section means
without those provisions, it is a useful
exercise in working out whether they actually add or change anything to the
meaning of the
In my submission, the Court of Criminal Appeal
was correct that, in substance – it was correct that they do not have
any additional
work to do. They do not change the meaning of
section 53A(2)(b). The strongest example that the Crown has given is in
to sentencing discounts, and of course the Court of Criminal Appeal was
never called upon to consider that section without those
words because those
words are there. So, those words are in aid in interpreting the section, but
when one looks at the reasons given
by the Court in
, the first reason
is that the words are there explicitly but there are seven others, and they are
compelling.
In my submission, to indicate an undiscounted sentence would
be not to follow the command of the operative words of that section.
not to be indicating to the offender the sentence that would have been imposed,
had separate sentences been imposed. In
my submission, it is not possible to
interpret that section other than that it requires any discounts and so on to be
applied, or
factors to be taken into account, or objective and subjective
factors to be taken into account, because how else can a court indicate
sentence that they would have imposed without going through those
So, in my submission, the essential meaning of that subsection is
that the court must indicate the sentences that it would have imposed.
the words in parentheses are doing is to assist by way of explanation. It does
not change the meaning. In my submission,
the words can be picked up and
applied in terms, adopting the reasoning of the Court of Criminal Appeal, that
the words “so
far as they relevant” means that there is no
inconsistency when those words are applied in their terms with the words in
parentheses
there, because of the qualifier:
such matters as are relevant –
and because matters which are inconsistent could not be relevant, then
there is actual inconsistency in the operation of the section.
submission, the Court of Criminal Appeal was correct to determine that they can
be applied in their terms.
In terms of the operation of the section, it
does not alter the meaning of the section. If the words are there and
interpreted in
the way that the Court of Criminal Appeal has found –
that it is qualified by those words “such matters as are relevant”,
so that it does not pick up matters that are inconsistent with
section 16A – the sentencing exercise – it applies in
the same way. It is a command to a State court sentencing a State offender to
indicate the sentence that would have been imposed,
had aggregate sentence not
been used. With regard to – and in doing so, taking into account
State factors and, in my submission,
then the same command to a Federal
taking into account such matters as are relevant –
none of those factors, because it is an inclusive provision. Now,
if – in my submission, if we come to translation, which
alternative that the Court of Criminal Appeal engaged in – so, to
translate by analogy, and section 68 always must involve
some translation
by analogy – the analogy that is involved here is what the appellant
It is the words – those words would be substituted, but
let us look at what that actually means, because it is not –
translation exercise was undertaken in
, it was not just that we
substitute one Attorney‑General for another. The level of generality was:
there is a right of appeal
which is vested in the State – where the
Crown’s right of appeal is vested in the State Attorney‑General in
to State matters. By the translation, it is: let us identify the
person who is the representative of the Crown in Commonwealth
matters, and that
is the Commonwealth Attorney‑General.
So, even though
there – so, there was a specific person named. It was not expressed
in general terms that the representative
of the Crown may appeal, or the Crown
may appeal, it was vested in a particular person. In my submission, in this
case, in a federal
context where a federal offender is being sentenced, the
principal statute governing sentencing in the federal arena is Part IB of
The principal statute governing sentencing in New
South Wales is the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
(NSW). So, if one
translates the words in parentheses, it does not change the essential meaning of
the section. The essential meaning
of the section is that if a court
is – instead of imposing individual sentences, they are imposing one
single sentence for
those, subsection (2) has two purposes. Firstly, it
requires the court to tell the offender the sentences they actually would have
got. It is the inescapable meaning of subsection (2)(b).
has to tell them that they are getting an aggregate sentence, not individual
sentences. That is subsection 53(2)(a).
Section 53(2)(b), they have
to tell them: this is what you would have got; if I was not giving you an
aggregate sentence, you would
have got this, this and this. Very clear, in my
submission, and that is the exercise, that is the essential meaning, that is the
substantive legal operation of this section, that it requires a court which is
not imposing individual sentences, but which is using
an aggregate to do
In order to tell the offender what they would have got, they have
to go through the exercise of arriving at the sentences that they
would actually
have imposed, which is why the case law in New South Wales has correctly said
that the exercise is exactly the same.
There is no change in the sentencing
process under section 53A until you get to the point of working out, before
imposing the individual
sentences, when the starting dates would be and when the
non‑parole periods might be.
So, that is what this commands, with
or without the words in parentheses. The words in parentheses, in a State
context, it is not
surprising that, with or without those words, a State court
would be required to apply State law in sentencing a State offender.
submission, to translate that to federal law for a federal offender is not to
change the essential meaning of the section
at all. It is to give full effect
to the meaning of that section, so that a person knows exactly what they would
have got if they
were being sentenced to individual sentences.
relation to severance, the same argument applies, in my submission, that if the
essential meaning is to tell an offender what
they would have got if they were
not getting an aggregate sentence – actually what they would have
got – and therefore
that involves going through the process of
determining what those individual sentences would have been, then severance does
the meaning of the law either.
It makes no difference to the
essential meaning of section 53A. So, if section 53A is picked up and
applied without the words in
parentheses, it does not change the substantive
legal meaning of that text at all. It applies in exactly the same way as a
law as it did to a State law.
That argument
construction. In other
Yes. Well, it all turns on what is the essential meaning, what is the
substantive legal meaning of the section. So, in my submission,
appellant’s argument recognises that the only criticism, the only
roadblock that the appellant is identifying to the picking
section 53A is those words in parentheses in
section 53A(2)(b).
If those words were not there, there would be no
ground 2. Those words do not prevent this provision from being picked and
as federal law. In my submission, they can be picked up and applied in
their terms as interpreted by the Court of Criminal Appeal
with translation, as
the Court of Criminal Appeal found as an alternative, or leaving them behind
altogether without changing the
essential meaning of the section.
picking them up and making them work, in my submission, without changing that
essential meaning – if that is what the
court accepts that the
essential meaning of section 53A is to do what I, on behalf of the
respondent, submitted is to do –
then in my submission, that is well
and truly within the purposes of section 68(1), which is designed as far as
possible to pick
up and apply State law and apply it to federal offenders within
a State. Those are my submissions on ground 2.
strictly speaking, does not require consideration if the appellant is successful
on ground 2. Success on ground 2 would
be a complete answer to
ground 1. Other than via ground 2, it seems that the terms of
section 53A of the New South Wales Act are
not directly relevant to the
determination of ground 1. Ground 1 hinges on the interpretation of
the words in
section 16AAA
. Either the section,
when it applies, requires a court to impose a sentence exclusively for a listed
offence or it does not.
There is no dispute that the word
“for” – “for the offence” – is
section 16AAA
; the Court of Criminal Appeal accepted as much.
It is the extra word that the appellant is really asking this Court to read in,
which, in my submission, should not be read in, that it is a sentence
exclusively for that particular offence.
If that is not the meaning of
section 16AAA
– if it does not mean that the sentence must be
exclusively for that offence and not for any other offence as well –
then the ground 1 fails. If it does require an exclusive sentence, then of
course ground 1 will succeed, because no aggregate sentencing
regime would
be able to comply or be picked up. In my submission, if we go to the words of
section 16AAA
, joint appeal book page 67:
section 16AAC
, if a person is convicted of an offence
described in column 1 of an item in the following table, the court must
impose a sentence
of imprisonment of at least the period specified in
column 2 of that item.
It is conceded that that means a sentence of imprisonment for that
offence. The only issue is whether a sentence of imprisonment
in that context
means a sentence of imprisonment imposed exclusively for that offence or a
sentence of imprisonment which is also
for other offences. This Court in a
different context, in the case of
, joint appeal book 1422,
paragraph [50], found that:
the natural meaning of “sentence” –
is not one that necessarily:
a single form of punishment for more than one offence.
In my submission, that is the natural meaning of a sentence of
imprisonment – simply a sentence of imprisonment – there
is nothing in the text of
section 16AAA
to indicate that the meaning must
be a single sentence of imprisonment exclusively for that particular
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Wilson, how long will the balance
of your submissions take? I am not trying to hurry you at all.
Not terribly long on this ground, I do not think. I would say,
looking at the time, it is possible I would finish by lunch, but
GAGELER CJ:
We normally take the luncheon adjournment now,
so we will take it now.
AT 12.46 PM LUNCHEON
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 2.15
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, thank you, your Honour.
Before I continue on with the final part of my submissions on ground 1, I
will just revisit three
questions that I was asked in relation to ground 2.
The first one was a question from Justice Gleeson in relation to when a
has before it an offender who has committed both State and federal
offences and is therefore exercising both jurisdictions.
authority for the proposition that it is inconsistent – that it is
not possible to have an aggregate sentence for
a combination of State and
federal offences. The initial authority for that proposition is the case of
Fasciale v The Queen
(2010) 30 VR 643. That has been followed
in a number of cases in New South Wales. So, it makes sense that a court cannot
a single order in the exercise of two jurisdictions, and it
raises – and one of the matters of concern was who administers
in the sentence in that case. So, that is a settled issue, it is not a matter
that comes before this Court as a possibility.
In relation to
Justice Edelman, who asked whether I was submitting or the respondent was
submitting that section 53A(2) was requiring
simply exposure of an
intellectual process or engagement in it, and if my answer was not clear, my
answer to that is that is that
explicitly it is requiring exposure, but by
necessary intention it requires engagement, because otherwise there would be
to expose. There is no – the result – it requires
a statement of what would have been imposed, the sentence that would
otherwise been imposed.
Is that right? Is not the
engagement the product? So, for a Commonwealth offence, for example, the
engagement would be the product
section 16A
and then, on your
submission, the effect of 53A would just be to expose the reasoning process
that was the product of the federal
In relation
to an aggregate sentence in the federal context, section 53A(2)(b), leaving
aside the parenthetical words for the moment,
sill commands the court to
indicate to the offender the individual sentences that it would have
Yes, but would have under the federal
legislation.
Yes, that is right.
So, it is not picking up the federal legislation in any way. It is just
adding to it. It is superimposing an exposure – the
intellectual
process that had already occurred.
BEECH-JONES J:
Section 16A
applies of its own force to
Yes, that is right.
BEECH-JONES
It is not picked up by anything. It just tells the court what to
That is right, but
BEECH-JONES J:
think what has been put to you is 53A(2)(b) then is the process of that
court recording or exposing what it did in complying
with a command
Yes. The last question was from
Justice Steward, and it was: is there anything else in
could be picked up? Perhaps the question might be – given the terms
of the words in parentheses, which include the entire
Act, I will answer it in
or the entire Act. I cannot point to anything that would
definitely be picked up.
That is not to say that something might not be able to be picked
up, but there are a lot of provisions, and section 68 would need
applied to them. Certainly, the potential is there, but I cannot point to
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Wilson, before you leave
ground 2, it has been brought to my attention that you had sought what is
in effect leave to file a
notice of contention to raise what has been described
as the severance point.
I take it that that is not opposed? You have that leave.
Thank you, your Honour. I am grateful. I will very briefly
deal with the issue of whether
section 16AAA
has some special need for
general deterrence, which is best put into effect by a single sentence. In my
submission, it is accepted
that one of the purposes of the introduction
of 16AAA and mandatory minimum sentencing was general deterrence. It was
also to effect
an overall increase in sentencing, but as a mandatory minimum
sentencing provision,
section 16AAA
in and of itself provides a very
powerful deterrent message.
Unlike offences where there is no command
that somebody must be sentenced to gaol and must be sentenced to gaol for some
very existence of 16AAA has a built‑in, powerful deterrent
effect, but that is the only way in which it is special in relation
deterrence. The general deterrence – it is to say that general
deterrence cannot be effectively given – cannot
be given effect where
there are multiple sentences, in my submission, is not a supportable
proposition.
In terms of the interpretation of
section 16AAA
general deterrence was the overarching purpose, then it is very curious that
there is no minimum non‑parole period and
no minimum and period in gaol as
a result of
section 16AAA.
One would have thought that for an offender,
even just as important as the head sentence of potential time that they could be
in gaol, a non-parole period – the period that they must be kept
in gaol – is of most significance to deterrence.
So, there is
no minimum period of non‑parole where someone must be kept in gaol. In
answer to the appellant’s argument
that only by a single sentence that is
solely imposed for that particular offence can general deterrence properly be
given effect,
that flies in the face of the single aggregate non‑parole
period that is required by
section 19AB
, from the operation of which
section 16AAA
could have been accepted if general deterrence was the
overriding value and that an aggregate sentence could not be
Part of the statutory context is also the existence of
section 19AB
and there is no exception from it. Another part of the
context is the existence of aggregate sentencing for summary offences and
manner in which they can apply. They are not excluded from applying to
section 16AAB
They are excluded merely by the length of
the sentences and so that they exceed the jurisdictional limit on any view under
but the companion provision 16AAB has minimum sentences as low as two
years and which, with a discount, can come down to one year,
has offences with
maximum penalties which are amenable to summary jurisdiction, and in the
respondent’s submissions at paragraph
13 and 14 there is some
detailed explication of that.
In my submission, the fact that if it
was the intention of the provision of both 16AAB and 16AAA to exclude their
operation by way
of aggregate sentencing, one would expect that would have been
provided for. If I could just turn to the joint book of authorities
pages 740 to 741, just quickly take your Honours to
Do you have a tab
740 to 741 of
Electrolux Home Products v AWU
, in the judgment
of Justice McHugh, Justice McHugh held, at the bottom of the
industrial relations is a specialised and politically sensitive field with a
designated Minister and Department of State. It is no
fiction to attribute to
the Minister and his or her Department and, through them, the Parliament,
knowledge of court decisions —
or at all events decisions of this Court
— dealing with that portfolio.
In my submission, Commonwealth
criminal law is also a specialised and politically‑charged area of law.
The introduction of
mandatory minimum sentencing was a significant substantive
change, and the rolling out of it in different arenas.
It is not a
fiction to say that the drafters of
section 16AAA
would have been aware of
decisions in relation to Commonwealth criminal law where aggregate sentencing
had been held to be able to
be picked up and applied back as early as 1998 in
in South Australia, by this Court in 2004 in
and in 2017, not long before the introduction of
section 16AAA
in the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal in relation to
section 53A.
Also, we have referred – in the
respondent’s submissions at paragraph 17, we explain the manner in
which reference to
the report of the Royal Commission would have at least
alerted the existence of aggregate sentences. So, with all that background
that statutory landscape, we submit it would have been simple to explicitly
provide that where
section 16AAA
or section AAB apply, there must be a
sentence exclusively for that offence and no aggregate sentence can meet the
Unlike the word “for” – “for the
offence” – which can readily be read into
section 16AAA
to read in another word, “exclusively for”, is a gloss on that
section which is not required by the text, the purpose
or the statutory context
of that section. For those reasons, the appellant’s interpretation should
not be accepted and ground
1 should be dismissed.
Unless I can be
of any further assistance, those are my submissions.
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Wilson. Mr Gleeson.
MR GLEESON:
Your Honours, I will reply on ground 1 first. The issue has largely
been joined, I just want to deal with a couple of discrete
points. There are
four of them. The first is the submission just made was that our construction
requires the reading in of a word
like “exclusively” or
“solely”. We would submit it does not depend on that. It is a
natural use of language
to say you must impose X for Y, to say that that is
satisfied by doing X for Y and is not satisfied by doing X for Y, Z
both are available, it does not require reading
Secondly, there was a submission that it is curious
that – if we are correct – the Parliament did not impose a
non‑parole period for these particular offences. That is not
curious, that is directly answered by the parliamentary speeches
that the Court
considered in
. I will give the reference again. They are in
JBA 7, at tab ‑ ‑ ‑
MR GLEESON:
your Honour.
Paragraphs [41] to [44].
MR GLEESON:
Yes, but 42 I wanted to go to, of the EM.
That is tab 42 at page 1677. The Attorney explained that the
Parliament had directly
turned their mind to the
Migration Act
provisions. They are the provisions which currently appear in section 236B
Migration Act
. They are the equivalent provisions which this
Court considered in
[2013] HCA 40
(2013) 252 CLR 381.
migration provision is like the present provision in imposing a mandatory
minimum sentence. It goes further in imposing a mandatory
non‑parole period. The Parliament, for the present very serious offences,
decided to replicate the migration model
at the stage of the sentence but not go
further for the non‑parole period.
So, that being a deliberate
parliamentary choice, it does not expose any light on the construction question
before you, the relationship
between the migration provisions and their
mandatory minimum non‑parole period, and section 19AB is not an issue
in this case, but again, we would be saying that the one does not
inform the other. So, nothing curious about that.
Thirdly, the
submission I put about purpose was slightly overstated by Mr Wilson, which
I think you have probably picked up. We
did not say this is the only way that
general deterrence can be achieved. We said it is a significantly better
Finally, on ground 1, in relation to
– which is in volume 5, tab 30, commencing
at page 1412 – you were referred to paragraph [50], which
of course needs
to be read together with paragraph [61], which is the
dispositive provision. The reason that in that context the aggregate sentence
could be treated as picked up by the relevant provision was that the provision
required being:
sentenced to a term of imprisonment –
paragraph [61]. What the relevant provision did not do in its terms was
provide that the person must be sentenced to a term
of imprisonment
of 12 months or more for a single offence. We submit that is the
effect of the language in our case.
Can I come back to ground 2.
First, I want to clear away Mr Wilson’s initial argument –
it was not his only argument,
but his initial argument was that the Court of
Appeal’s reasons between paragraphs 73 to 80 – which
are the core reasons
– are not reasons construing the New South Wales
statute but rather they are reasons as to how section 68 applies to the
statute. In other words, they are of themselves evidence of a process
of translation having occurred, and therefore the court did
not commit the error
they had identified in them.
The difference between us is that we say
that on any fair reading of this part of the judgment, the court has not yet
reached section
68. What it is doing is simply construing the New South
Wales statute so that it can then ask the question: if that is what the
South Wales statute means in its own right, is any degree of translation
involved when I come to pick up the provision under
section 68? The court
then subsequently, in its alternative reasons, went to translation, and we would
submit the whole of the argument
you have heard today from the respondent, which
may be good or bad, is really an argument about translation. There is no
that can properly answer what we submit is the error in 73
Now, to show that is the correct way to read 73
to 80, if your Honours pick it up at paragraph 68, at the foot of
page 68, our argument
there, accurately recorded, was an argument solely
correct construction, as the court noted at the end of 68, our argument was
that there would be an inconsistency with Part IB and
it would not be
picked up by section 68. Then the respondent’s arguments are
recorded at 69, and then at 70 the court says:
The Crown’s argument is not made out.
And the argument that they
are responding to is the argument at 68 and, as your Honour the
Chief Justice raised with me, the court
made an assumption in our favour.
That is, that if it were construed as we say it is:
to mandate the application of State sentencing considerations . . .
for federal offences then that would be inconsistent –
everything that follows is the court – 72 – the State
Should not be construed in the way –
Resolution of the issue involves both construction and, on one view,
translation.
The construction resolution is the construction of the New
South Wales statute, which is dealt with at paragraph 73 to 80. The
alternative
translation conclusion is at paragraph 81, and what you see
there between 73 and 80 is an argument that the New South Wales
construed in its own right – before one ever gets to
section 68 – does not have the meaning we say it
That is because – various reasons are given. One of
them, which is the reason at paragraph 74, was sought to be defended this
morning, that the New South Wales statute requires you to take into account
Part 3 only if and to the extent if is relevant. If
it is not relevant,
those matters can be and should be ignored. Mr Wilson put that strand of
the argument this morning and said
he agrees with us that the State factors
cannot govern in federal jurisdiction, therefore there are no factors that are
For that reason, he then leaps to the ultimate conclusion, you
must apply the federal factors, but you cannot take that final step
without some
exercise in translation. We would submit paragraph 76 is the court
attempting to get to the bifurcated conclusion on
the construction of the State
statute. That approach is apparent from 75, where it is being informed by
the Minister’s speech.
In 79, the court says:
In substance, thus, the answer to the Crown’s argument is one of
construction. When properly construed as a matter of text,
context and
that is of the New South Wales statute:
s 53A(2)(b) simply requires –
something. Namely, to do the sentencing exercise:
as would have otherwise occurred –
At this stage, the court is contemplating the New South Wales statute is
saying: if it is a New South Wales offence, do it by the
Wales factors; if it is a federal, do it by the federal factors. They are
getting all of that out of the New South Wales
So, if that is
what they are doing – and the same appears from paragraph 80
where they cite your Honour Justice Edelman in
and say that
what you have to do is to get the meaning of the State statute at the right
level of generality, and if you get it at
the higher level of generality, then
the result is there is no inconsistency.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Gleeson,
I am not sure they are getting it all out of the State statute. Are they not
getting it out of the text of the State
statute as picked up by
section 68(1)?
MR GLEESON:
No, your Honour, because
text as picked up by 68(1) is what they turn to at paragraph 81 when
If the contrary view were taken –
this is 81:
and the purpose of the provision –
so, as a matter of construction of a New South Wales statute
was understood to be indicating a sentence the court would otherwise have
imposed under State law –
that is our construction of the text and the purpose. If that be the
right construction, it does not lead to a different conclusion
because you are
then allowed a degree of translation under section 68.
So, the way
the court has set it up, our argument was clear: if you look for the meaning of
the law as a New South Wales law and
all ordinary principles of construction, it
is saying when a court is exercising State jurisdiction with respect to State
you must build up and expose your indicatives by reference to the factors
in the State Act. If that is the meaning of it as a New
South Wales statute,
section 68 cannot pick it up unless some exercise of translation is done to
say read it now as meaning: do
the exercise by reference to the federal
factors, not the State factors.
Our submission is that the true
battleground between the parties is about paragraph 81, which is
whether – if the New South
Wales law means what we say it
does – there is a process under section 68 where through analogy
one can apply the federal factors
if it is a federal offence. That is the real
battleground, we submit. That is the first point in reply on
Your Honours, the second point concerns
section 53A itself, if your Honours could go to that. It may be
useful to conceive of the
provision as doing two cumulative things.
Subsection (1) is creating a new power of disposition for State offences,
the disposition
by way of an aggregate sentence instead of a separate sentence
for each. That effectively is the provision as it was considered
, a new power of disposition.
held that there was
no inconsistency between creating that new power of disposition and either
section 4K or Part IB of the
. That is all
Subsection (2) is about process. It is
imposing a mandatory obligation upon the court to do certain things when it is
this new power of disposition. Subsection (2) was not in force
on the Northern Territory statute book and was not considered in
Within subsection (2) – and I am now seeking to construe it as
the State statute before section 68 descends upon it –
one strand of the argument where the appellant and the respondent are actually
tolerably close as to what it means.
It is not the only strand, because
there are many that have floated around, but on one strand on the argument, what
it is saying,
explicitly, is: you must indicate and make a record of:
the sentence that would have been imposed for each –
New South Wales:
I will leave out the parentheses for the
had separate sentences been imposed instead of an aggregate
So, before coming to the parentheses, on one view, it was
imposing this mandatory command on the New South Wales court when doing
South Wales offences and when exercising the new power of disposition to
indicate what would have been the separate sentences
if the court were doing
everything it is otherwise required to do under
and so on of this
In that sense, the statement of the Minister to the Parliament,
which the Court of Appeal relied upon, may be regarded as informative
slightly narrower way than the Court of Appeal concluded. The statement is at
paragraph 42 of the Court of Appeal, and
particularly at 44:
the Parliamentary Secretary emphasised that the amendments were “not
intended to alter the way offenders are sentenced in any
substantial way, or to
have any impact on the overall length of sentences”.
element of the New South Wales parliamentary purpose was –
having created this new power of disposition, which could
be exercised in
various ways if it were left undefined – we are going to impose, for
the purpose of relative transparency,
a requirement you identify the
indicatives, but we want to emphasise that by giving you this new power of
disposition, we are not
intending the courts to depart from all of the more
detailed sentencing principles we have laid down as part of
New South Wales law.
If that is what (2)(b) is broadly getting
at, the words in parentheses can then be understood as being there for emphasis.
instantiating the parliamentary secretary’s intention that when
you exercise the new power of disposition, and when you do
indicate indicatives,
you will not otherwise be freeing yourselves from the detailed rules that New
South Wales has put around the
sentencing process.
Related to that,
Mr Wilson said the words in parentheses are not exhaustive, or they are
inclusive. We disagree with that as a matter
of New South Wales law.
The matters that are relevant under
commence with section 21A,
and as I read out this morning, you have mandatory aggravating factors,
mitigating factors, other objective
or subjective factors affecting
seriousness:
in addition to any other matters that are required or permitted to be taken
into account by the court under any other Act –
capital “A”:
or rule of law.
Lowercase “l”. So, what the words in the
parentheses are doing is emphasising that the process in section 21A, which
leads to a large amount of expressed text in the Act but also recognises there
could be common law or other statutes picked up, is
the process that the
New South Wales court must apply to each offence as if it were being
sentenced separately. That, we submit,
is the true meaning of the
New South Wales law.
That gets you to base camp for how does
section 68 apply to this provision, because it is common ground between the
parties that,
if it applies in those terms, it would be inconsistent and it
would not be picked up under section 68. The respondent then says,
of translation, it now applies requiring the court to build the indicatives,
– keep that closed – instead open
you will find out how to do the process for
each individual offence and then you can determine your overall
The critical question for your Honours, which is why we
submit this is an even harder case than
, is that this is changing
the function that the court is engaging in. It is not simply changing the
identity of the executive officer
who initiates the process. Therefore, it is a
translation beyond anything we have found in any of the cases, and it is a
translation
which, contrary to the purpose of section 68, does not end up
putting federal and State offenders in New South Wales on the same
It puts them on different footings, because one group of
offenders have their aggregates done through State factors and the other
of offenders have them done through federal factors. That is a rewriting of the
legislation. That is why it is a bridge too
GAGELER CJ:
On any view, the word “offence” in (2)(b) has to be translated,
does it not, to a federal offence?
MR GLEESON:
If there is
to be any form of translation, yes, it goes from New South Wales to federal
GAGELER CJ:
And you do not have difficulty with that,
or you cannot?
MR GLEESON:
No. On its own, just
that – no, that is the sort of thing that might be – that
is contemplated, that it is the next step
where – then
your Honour asked me is our complaint about the parentheses. It is,
because they are the explicit statement of
the problem, but even if they were
not there, if the construction I just put is correct, what they are doing is
making very explicit
what would otherwise be implicit in the
So, that equally is part of the complaint, because it is
logically the same complaint, and it is using section 68 to say the
of the court has changed from the application of one entire New South
Wales statutory scheme to an inconsistent Commonwealth statutory
scheme. Can
that be done under section 68? We see that as the ultimate issue for
your Honours. We say it cannot.
To use your
metaphor, if what section 53A(2)(b) is doing, is not saying open up the
federal statute book and then perform your indicatives
– or perform
the exercise of working out what the indicative is going to be – but
is instead saying having already performed
that exercise under the federal Act,
just indicate in exactly the same way as you would have indicated under the New
South Wales
Act what that amount would be. Would that type of translation be
problematic?
MR GLEESON:
Well, can I just pause – I
am struggling to contemplate how it would work. We are starting with the New
South Wales statute,
saying: use the New South Wales book to build your
indicatives. We are then contemplating the step I outlined this morning, that
because the general scheme of Part 3 is inconsistent, as a scheme, with
Part IB, it cannot be picked up as a scheme.
So, the judge is
opening Part IB and is not opening Part 3 at that stage. You have
gone through that entire exercise, and your Honour’s
question is:
what if, at the end of that, the provision as translated is simply saying
complete the job, as it were, using those
very same factors?
MR GLEESON:
I am just going to ask Mr Tran to
tell me how to answer your Honour’s question, which sounds like a
good question. Not even
Mr Tran can answer it. Our answer is it cannot be
construed that way. If it could be, it may be that would be legitimate
translation.
BEECH‑JONES J:
But do you not
apply – you open the book with the sentencing factors or you get
to 53A; not go to 53A, then open the book.
MR GLEESON:
BEECH‑JONES J:
It is only when you have
done – you have the idea of what your periods are for each individual
sentence, you then go: hang
on, can I impose an aggregate sentence? So, it is
not a matter of 53A directing you to factors, it is a matter of you have
considered them when you arrive there.
that approach accepts, I think, your construction of 16AAA.
Well, I am not sure. It may, it may,
Another way of putting it is what I put to you before lunch which I do not
want to reagitate, but if one does it in the chronological
order that Justice
Beech-Jones just put it to you and one has the process of identifying what is
the possible sentence for the federal
offence, the logic which then follows is
53A(1) – which we have had the conversation why that is not the
subject of challenge
– giving rise to an aggregate sentence, and all
that (2) is doing is recording that mental process that has been gone on as
a result of taking those two steps in order for transparency and for the other
matters. Or to put it more pragmatically, in a sense,
it is a cross‑check
that I have done what I needed to do earlier on.
MR GLEESON:
Your Honour, I would put that it is more than a cross‑check. It is
more than that. It is saying you have got this new power
of disposition. You
have got a discretion of whether to exercise it. If you are to exercise that
discretion, you must go through
the process which is set out
subsection (2).
I accept that but, in a sense,
because it is a process which is done as part of having undertaken the first two
MR GLEESON:
That is its
objective and practical purpose.
MR GLEESON:
I understand
your Honour’s questions. I will just check whether the ground wishes
to put anything else on them. So, we rest
with our submission that this case on
ground 2 should be resolved at the stage of translation. The meaning of the New
South Wales
statute as a New South Wales statute should be ascertained in a way
that the Court of Appeal did not adopt. That was an error of
the Court of
Appeal. It is then a question of whether there can be translation and that may
depend upon how closely your Honours
understand the command in (2)(b) to
relate to the exercise that is otherwise being done under the factors in
GAGELER CJ:
And you explained those bracketed
words as saying, in effect, that the State court – going to the
exercise in (2)(b) –
is not freed from all of the detailed
requirements that would otherwise apply to the determination of a separate
MR GLEESON:
GAGELER CJ:
put it at that level, it is pretty easy to translate, I think.
Well, I have put my submissions, your Honour. May it please
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you. The Court will consider its
decision in this matter and will adjourn until 10.00 am
AT 2.56 PM THE MATTER WAS ADJOURNED
RTF format (1.56 MB)
Signed PDF/A format