Anthony Paul Rotheray v Foster's People Pty Ltd - re Jurisdiction - extension of time [2009] AIRC 906; (16 December 2009)
Download Word Document
The attached document (pages 1,4 and 5) replaces the document previously issued with the above code on 17 December 2009.
Elizabeth Winstanley
Associate to Commissioner Spencer
Dated 18 December 2009
[2009] AIRC 906
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Termination of employment
Anthony Paul Rotheray
Foster's People Pty Ltd
(U2009/4467)
COMMISSIONER SPENCER
BRISBANE, 17 DECEMBER 2009
Introduction
This matter relates to an application made by Mr Anthony Rotheray (‘the Applicant’) in relation to the termination of
his employment by Foster’s Group (‘the Respondent’) on the basis that it was unfair pursuant to
section 643(1)(a)
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(‘the Act’).
The Application was filed 47 days over the 21 days allowed under
of the Act. The Applicant sought an
extension of time.
Section 643(14)
of the Act provides the Commission with discretion to allow an
extension of time with regard to the 21 day time limit prescribed in the Act. A conciliation conference was listed on receipt of the
Application, however the Respondent objected to conciliation prior to the determination of the extension of time. Accordingly Directions
were set in this matter and a copy of the relevant criteria set out in the "
Brodie-Hanns
" decision (as referred to in the legislation) was attached.
Whilst not all of the evidence, submissions and materials have been referred to in this decision, all of such has been considered
in the determination of this matter.
The Applicant’s employment was terminated on 2 April 2009. The reasons provided for the termination was unsatisfactory conduct
and refusing to comply with a lawful direction within the scope of his contract of employment. The Application was filed on 9 June
The Applicant claimed the dismissal was unfair pursuant to
s.643(1)(a)
and unlawful pursuant to
s.659(2)(f)
of the Act.
Relevant Legislation
The legislation relevant to this extension of time decision is as follows:
643 Application to Commission to deal with termination under this Subdivision
(1) Subject to subsections (5), (6), (8) and (10), an employee whose employment has been terminated by the employer may apply to the
Commission for relief in respect of the termination of that employment:
(a) on the ground that the termination was harsh, unjust or unreasonable; or
(b) on the ground of an alleged contravention of
section 659
(c) on any combination of grounds in paragraph (b) or on a ground or grounds in paragraph (b) and the ground in paragraph (a).
(14) An application under subsection (1) or (3) must be lodged within 21 days after the day on which the termination took effect,
or within such period as the Commission allows on an application made during or after those 21 days…
Note: In Brodie-Hanns v MTV Publishing Ltd
(1995) 67 IR 298
the Industrial Relations Court of Australia set down principles relating to the exercise of its discretion under a similarly worded
provision of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
Brodie-Hanns
(1995) 67 IR 298
noted in s.643(15) were stated by Marshall J at paragraph 299 as follows:
1. Special circumstances are not necessary but the Court must be positively satisfied that the prescribed period should be extended.
The prima facie position is that the time limit should be complied with unless there is an acceptable explanation of the delay which
makes it equitable to so extend.
2. Action taken by the Applicant to contest the termination, other than applying under the Act will be relevant. It will show that
the decision to terminate is actively contested. It may favour the granting of an extension of time.
3. Prejudice to the respondent including prejudice caused by delay will go against the granting of an extension of time.
4. The mere absence of prejudice to the respondent is an insufficient basis to grant an extension of time.
5. The merits of the substantive application may be taken into account in determining whether to grant an extension of time.
6. Consideration of fairness as between the Applicant and other persons in a like position are relevant to the exercise of the Court's
discretion.
Sections 647 and 648 of the Act, provide that s.643(14) applications may be decided by the Commission without conducting a hearing.
The sections are in the following terms:
647 Extension of time applications may be decided without a hearing
(a) an employee whose employment has been terminated by an employer makes an application (the extension of time application) under
subsection 643(14) requesting the Commission to allow an application to be lodged under subsection 643(1) after the period of 21
days after the termination took effect; and
(b) the proposed application under subsection 643(1) is an application:
(i) on the ground referred to in paragraph 643(1)(a); or
(ii) on grounds that include that ground;
the Commission is not required to hold a hearing in relation to the extension of time application.
Section 648 of the Act outlines the considerations that must be taken into account in the decision not to have a hearing:
648 Matters that do not require a hearing
(1) The Commission must, in deciding whether or not to hold a hearing for the purposes of deciding:
(a) whether to make an order under subsection 645(5) or (6) or 646(1) or (2); or
(b) whether to grant an extension of time application within the meaning of section 647;
take into account the cost that would be caused to the business of the employer concerned by requiring the employer to attend a hearing.
(2) If the Commission decides not to hold a hearing, the Commission must, before making a decision:
(a) invite the employee and the employer concerned to provide further information that relates to whether the order should be made
or the extension of time granted; and
(b) take account of any such information.
(3) If, as a result of information provided as mentioned in subsection (2), the Commission considers that it would be desirable to
hold a hearing, the Commission may do so.
(4) An invitation under paragraph (2)(a) must:
(a) be given by notice in writing to the employee and the employer concerned; and
(b) specify the time by which the information referred to in the invitation is to be provided…
Decision not to hold a hearing
Section 647 of the Act states that the Commission is entitled to determine this jurisdictional objection without holding a hearing.
In the Directions issued by the Commission, submissions were sought as to whether the parties required a hearing or would prefer
the matter determined on the basis of written submissions.
The Respondent in their submissions indicated they would like the matter determined by written submissions. No submission was received
from the Applicant in this regard. Having considered all the circumstances the matter has been determined without a hearing as provided
for in s.648 of the Act.
Summary of Applicant’s submissions
In support of his application for an extension of time the Applicant made a number of submissions. The Applicant stated he consulted
a legal firm, on 9 April 2009. The Applicant submitted he was told by the firm they could not assist and he was referred to another
legal firm. The Applicant had an appointment with the second law firm that afternoon and left his paperwork with a lawyer for the
firm to go through and advise on the Applicant’s prospects for unfair dismissal.
The Applicant claims that he made various phone calls to that second legal firm during the period 15 to 28 April 2009 to follow up
and chase any advice as a result of his original instructions.
The Applicant stated he decided to refer his matter to a third legal firm, and met with a representative of that firm on 29 April
2009 leaving the paper work with the firm so that they could provide advice. The Applicant stated the reason he changed lawyers to
the third law firm, was that this advice was not forthcoming in a suitable timeframe considering his desire to proceed with an Unfair
Dismissal claim against Fosters.
The Applicant further stated that he was contacted by Centrelink on 28 April 2008 regarding an online application he had made on
approximately 8 or 9 April seeking Job Search and monetary assistance. This resulted in a referral from Centrelink on 28 April to
Sarina Russo for assistance in a job search. This agreement also committed him to be involved in a week’s Job Search training
at Sarina Russo commencing the week of 11 -15 May.
The Applicant stated he made a number of follow up phone calls to the lawyer at third law firm and the firm advised him on 14 May
2009 that they thought he had a case against the Respondent for Unfair Dismissal and that he could himself lodge an application able
to be sourced from the Queensland Industrial Relations website.
The Applicant stated in his submission that he spent the week of 25 May 2009 “putting together his submission for Queensland
Industrial Relations Commission”. The Applicant claimed that he had another meeting with a representative of the third law
firm on 28 May 2009. This was to ensure that his submission to the QIRC was correct and after he advised it was he undertook photocopies
of the application and later lodged this application with the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission 4 days later on 1 June 2009.
The Applicant stated the only advice received regarding lodging an Unfair Dismissal claim came from the third law firm. He stated
that the approaches initially made to the first and second law firm never resulted in advice being supplied.
The Applicant stated he was contacted by the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission on 3 June 2009 and informed that he was jurisdictionally
barred from filing with the QIRC and should instead file in the federal jurisdictional.
The Applicant stated he mailed his “submission” to the Commission on 5 June 2009 and it was received by the Registry
on 9 June 2009.
The Applicant stated that there were Public Holidays that should be accommodated in the delay as these impacted on his ability to
access lawyer appointments.
He further stated he was told he would be contacted by the Human Resources Department after the dismissal. He stated this never occurred,
apart from the issuing of a Separation Certificate sent from the Respondent which arrived by post on the afternoon of Thursday 9
April, 7 days after the termination. He submitted that this should be taken into account as it impacted into the 21 day limit.
The Applicant submitted that his statements, as to obtaining legal advice are supported by proof of payments made to the second and
third law firms.
He submitted in relation to the time period that any like minded person in the same situation having no income and still having committed
financial outgoings would think getting another job a very high priority especially considering there was no assistance possible
at that stage from Centrelink to meet these commitments.
He argued that he approached the matter with urgency. He continued follow up calls to both law firms chasing up progress and emphasised
the very time consuming exercise of putting together the four initial submissions to the QIRC. He also stated he acted quickly in
forwarding his AIRC application when he was informed of the jurisdictional barrier in the QIRC.
Summary of Respondent’s submissions
The Respondent submitted that the Applicant had not provided any satisfactory explanation for the extraordinary delay between being
terminated and ultimately lodging his application with the Commission.
The Respondent stated the applicant had not adequately addressed what advice he was provided by the number of legal firms he contacted
or what instructions, if any, he gave to the firm and the delay in obtaining appointments. Further the Respondent submitted that
it was extraordinary that three separate legal firms all failed to properly advise the Applicant on the relevant lodgement periods
under either the relevant state or federal jurisdictions.
Further the Respondent stated that there is no evidence that the Applicant acted with a sense of “urgency” at any stage
during the period between the termination and ultimately filing his application with the Commission.
The Respondent made the following submission with regard to the suggested representative error:
“…The Applicant appears to in part suggest that the delay should be attributed to the delay and competence of the legal
advice given to him by the various legal firms consulted.
Representative error in extension of time cases has been considered in a number of rulings by the Commission. In
Clark v Ringwood Private Hospital
a Full Bench of the Commission set out a number of general propositions to be taken into account in deciding whether or not representative
error constitutes an acceptable explanation for a delay. In particular the Commission held that a distinction should be drawn between
delay properly apportioned to an applicant’s representative where the applicant is blameless and delay occasioned by the conduct
of the applicant. This was affirmed in a later Full Bench ruling in
Renee Ackary v MPDG Investments Pty Ltd
which held at paragraph 45 that:
‘In representative error cases the central consideration is the conduct of the applicant and in particular the extent to which
the delay was occasioned by that conduct…it matters not whether the delay in lodgement was caused by the incompetence, wilful
deceit or dishonesty of the applicant’s representative. What matters is the extent to which (if at all) the applicant’s
conduct contributed to the failure to file the notice of election within the prescribed time.’
The Applicant claimed that subsequent to his termination, he sought legal advice although there is no evidence to support this other
than some receipts provided by the Applicant for unspecified advice. Even if he did so as claimed it is clear that the Applicant
did not rely on this advice and lodged his application with the Commission himself. Accordingly the Applicant was responsible for
the conduct of his application including the responsibility of ensuring that it was lodged within the prescribe time.”
Considerations
The Commission is required to determine whether the extension of time should be granted under s.643(14) of the Act. In making this
determination the
Brodie-Hanns
principles referred to in the Act have been considered. The
prima facie
position is that the 21 day time limit should be complied with unless there is an acceptable explanation of the delay, which makes
it equitable to so extend.
Action taken by the Applicant
The Applicant has provided an outline of the action taken by him over the period of 68 days after the dismissal of his employment.
He has referred to the contact he made with a number of legal firms who he claims did not provide him with appropriate advice to
assist him in lodging his application.
The Respondent submitted in relation to the delay that the onus is on the Applicant to demonstrate that he was actively contesting
his termination and in turn that he took all reasonable steps to lodge his application within the prescribed time. The Respondent
argued that his actions and conduct after the termination do not satisfactorily explain why it took him up to 47 days to lodge his
application outside the prescribed 21 days.
The Respondent stated that whilst the Applicant claimed that he lodged an application with the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission
on 3 June 2009 by the time he did so he was already 43 days outside the prescribed time. Accordingly this action by itself does not
support his application for an extension of time.
Further prior to the Applicant lodging his application with the QIRC there had been no correspondence between the parties other than
the Respondent’s paperwork associated with paying the Applicant’s accrued entitlements on termination. The Respondent
had no notice that the Applicant was contesting the dismissal.
Prejudice to the Respondent
The Respondent submitted that the Applicant’s delay in lodging his application was excessive and that accordingly the Respondent
would suffer prejudice and it should be entitled to consider matters at an end when the Applicant was terminated and particularly
when the prescribed time limit had expired. Further to this, the Respondent stated that as there was an absence of information from
the Applicant contesting the termination, the Applicant’s former position was filled prior to his application being lodged
with the Commission. The appointee to the position was required to relocate for the purpose of taking up the position and there are
no other suitable vacancies available for which the Applicant or the appointee could be considered for.
In the alternative, it submitted by the Respondent that the mere absence of prejudice is an insufficient basis to grant an extension
Merits of the substantive application
The Applicant submitted that he had 20 years unblemished employment with the Respondent despite the issue of a final warning. He
“The final warning, which is the subject of serious debate, was issued on the 11th March and I did not sign it then due to its
very contentious content. I consider this final warning very much a part of Fosters orchestrated plan to remove from the company
before the state restructure.”
The Applicant stated that he was not aware that any previous counselling had taken place and believed he had always been professional
in dealing with both external customers and with Fosters people in any department during my 20 year employment.
The Respondent submitted the Applicant did not address the merits of the substantive application. The Respondent made the following
submission:
“The Respondent denies the Applicant’s claim as made at paragraph 2 of his submission that he had an “unblemished
employment record”. The Applicant had been previously issued with a final warning in relation to such conduct on 11 March 2009.
A copy of this warning is at Attachment 1. This warning followed the Applicant being directed to return or call a particular the
customer about selling in the additional wine of the month that the customer was willing to put in place on that day.
The Applicant was terminated for unsatisfactory performance and refusing to comply with a lawful direction within the scope of his
contract of employment. The refusal to comply with a lawful direction constitutes serious misconduct within the meaning of section
661 (7) the Act and regulations 12.10(1) (a) and 12.10 (1) (c) of the
Workplace Relations Regulations
(Cth.) (“the Regulations”).
The Applicant’s conduct and performance was not satisfactory despite previous counselling over an extended period of time and
the final warning as per Attachment 1.
Under the provisions of the Act and the Regulations the Respondent was permitted to summarily terminate the Applicant’s employment.”
The Full Bench determined in
Telstra-Network Technology Group and Kornicki
that the merits of the matter in determining whether an extension of time should be granted should not assume significant consideration.
Accordingly in this jurisdictional matter the Commission does not seek to determine the merits of the application, given the disparity
between the parties on these issues and therefore this element has been deemed as neutral in the consideration of this extension
of time application.
Fairness as between the Applicant and other persons in a like position
The Respondent stated they had no submissions to make on this principle and the Applicant did not make any specific submission in
this regard.
Conclusions
The Commission has a discretion to extend the statutory time limit, where warranted. Such extensions should not make the time limit
meaningless.
The Applicant demonstrated an initiative to seek legal advice and Centrelink payments, but did not pursue the advice or the unfair
dismissal application with sufficient vigour.
There has been an extensive delay in this matter and the conduct of the Applicant has primarily been responsible for the delay in
filing the application. Whilst there is evidence that the Applicant took action quickly to seek advice regarding his rights it cannot
be satisfactorily concluded that the Applicant took appropriate action to contest the termination.
Significant periods of the delay can be attributed to the Applicant’s conduct. There was a period of 13 days after consulting
the second law firm that no progress was made as the Applicant waited for advice. On 29 April 2009 when the Applicant made an appointment
with the third law firm and by this stage he was already one day out of time. It then took a further 35 days before the application
was incorrectly filed with the QIRC by the Applicant. If the Applicant was dissatisfied and worried with the speed of which the legal
advice was provided, it is expected in light of his sense of urgency and the number of calls he made to follow up his queries, the
delay should have triggered an independent inquiry by the Applicant as to the unfair dismissal jurisdiction.
Despite a significant concern that the firms contacted allegedly did not provide basic advice regarding the well known statutory
time bar in a timely manner, the delay cannot entirely be attributed to a failure on the part of the legal representatives consulted.
This is not an application where the Applicant had given clear instructions to his representatives to file an application on his
behalf and they failed to do so; in this matter the Applicant was waiting for advice as to his rights. Further once the Applicant
became aware of the ability to file an unfair dismissal application with the QIRC on 14 May 2009 where it is assumed the time limit
should have become apparent it was still a further 20 days before an application was filed.
Once the Applicant did receive notification from the QIRC of the jurisdictional bar he did act relatively quickly to file his application
in the Australian Industrial Registry, however by the time the QIRC application was filed he was 43 days out of time. Ignorance of
the time limit cannot be relied on for the granting of an extension of time.
The submissions of the parties and the reasons for delay have been considered against the
Brodie-Hanns
principles. There has not been an acceptable explanation for the delay which makes it equitable to extend the time for filing. Therefore,
an extension of time is not granted and the Application made pursuant to
s.643(1)(a)
of the Act is dismissed. I Order accordingly.
BY THE COMMISSION:
COMMISSIONER
Clark v Ringwood Private Hospital (
1997) 74 IR 413.
Renee Ackary v MPDG Investments Pty Ltd
, 31 October 2002.
Respondent’s submissions paragraph 12.
Applicant’s submissions.
Respondent’s submissions paragraph 15.
Ross VP, SDP Watson, Gay C, 22 July 1997, P3168.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR990307>
No downloadable files available