Yowie Group Ltd 04 & 05 [2025] ATP 22 (29 July 2025)
Reasons for Decision
Yowie Group Ltd 04 & 05
Catchwords:
Decline to make a declaration – board control – association
– placement – frustrating action
Corporations Act 2001
sections 203D(2)
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Regulations, regulation
ASX Listing Rules 7.6, 10.11
Guidance Note 12: Frustrating Action
Yowie Group Ltd and Bolton v Keybridge Capital Ltd (No 3)
[2025] NSWCA
, In the matter of Yowie Group Ltd
[2025] NSWSC 648
Yowie Group Ltd 07 [2025] ATP 27, Keybridge Capital Limited 21R [2025]
ATP 24, Yowie Group Ltd 06 & Keybridge Capital Limited
19 [2025] ATP 23,
Keybridge Capital Limited 20 [2025] ATP 20, Keybridge Capital Limited 18R [2025]
ATP 17, Keybridge Capital Limited
17 [2025] ATP 15, Factor Therapeutics Limited
[2019] ATP 5, Hastings Rare Metals Limited [2013] ATP 13, Mount Gibson Iron
[2008] ATP 4
Interim order
IO undertaking
Declaration
Final order
Undertaking
INTRODUCTION
Panel, Teresa Dyson (sitting President), Christopher Stavrianou and James
, declined to make a
declaration of unacceptable circumstances on two applications by Keybridge
Capital Limited in relation to the
affairs of Yowie Group Ltd. The
applications, heard together, concerned two purported control effects on Yowie.
The first stemmed
from a placement undertaken by Yowie and the second was a
downstream control effect from an issue of units in HHY. The Panel was
satisfied that the circumstances had or were likely to have an effect on the
control, or potential control of Yowie by a person
with a substantial interest
in Yowie or were otherwise inconsistent with the purposes of
Therefore, the Panel
considered that there was no reasonable prospect that it would declare the
circumstances unacceptable.
these reasons, the following definitions
Aurora Funds Management Limited
Constitutional Amendment
has the meaning given in paragraph
HHY Placement
has the meaning given in paragraph
Keybridge Capital Limited
Keybridge s249F Proceedings
has the meaning given in paragraph
has the meaning given in paragraph
Placement Shares
the ordinary shares in Yowie issued under the Yowie Placement
WAM Active Limited
WAM Capital
WAM Capital Limited
WAM Active, WAM Capital, WAM Strategic Value Limited and Botanical Nominees
Yowie Group Ltd
Yowie Placement
has the meaning given in paragraph
Yowie Takeover Bid
has the meaning given in paragraph
Yowie s249F meeting
has the meaning given in paragraph
is an ASX-listed investment and financial services firm with a portfolio of
listed and unlisted investments (ASX: KBC).
is an ASX-listed company that manufactures chocolate (ASX: YOW).
Active is an ASX-listed investment company managed by WAM Group (ASX: WAA).
historical events between WAM Group, Keybridge and Yowie leading up to the Yowie
Placement are set out in detail in the reasons
for decision in
Capital Limited 17
Keybridge Capital Limited
13.3 of Yowie’s constitution (adopted in 2012) states, among other things,
The Company shall observe the requirements of
Section 225
Corporations Act
with respect to the election of
Directors”.
is unclear why
section 225
is referenced in clause 13.3 of Yowie’s
constitution relating to the election of directors. The section prohibits
related parties and their associates for the purposes of shareholder
approvals under the related party provisions. It does not apply
meetings generally.
29 April 2024, Keybridge lodged a substantial holding notice
disclosing:
(a) it held a relevant interest in 178,689,829 Yowie shares (with a voting power
(b) it was either the “registered and beneficial owner” or
“holder” of 153,163,186 Yowie shares (with a voting
power of 66.78%)
(c) the difference between (a) and (b) (being a voting power of 11.56%) was due
to Keybridge’s deemed relevant interest in
Yowie shares held by Aurora as
a responsible entity for HHY, an unlisted managed investment scheme, arising by
reason of Keybridge
having more than 20% of the voting power in HHY.
9 May 2025, Yowie announced a one for one conditional scrip takeover bid for
Keybridge (
Yowie Takeover Bid
). The Yowie Takeover Bid has been the
subject of a number of applications to the
12 May 2025, at a Yowie directors meeting that commenced at 10.30am (AEST),
Yowie agreed to issue 34,406,185 shares (15% of Yowie’s
issued capital)
under a placement (
Yowie Placement
12 May 2025 at 2pm (AEST), Keybridge applied to the New South Wales Supreme
Court seeking an order for a copy of Yowie’s
register in order to call a
meeting. At 3.06pm (AEST), a copy of the affidavit in support of that
application was served by email to Yowie.
12 May 2025 at 5.30pm (AEST), Yowie disclosed (among other things) in an ASX
announcement that it had:
received applications for, and
has resolved to issue, 34,405,185 new shares in Yowie at 1.5c per share (a 7%
premium to the last traded
price of Yowie securities) under a private placement
to wholesale investors raising A$516k”.
13 May 2025, WAM Capital applied for a copy of HHY’s unit holder register
for the purpose of calling a meeting under
to replace Aurora as the
responsible entity of HHY.
or before 15 May 2025, the Yowie Placement was made to:
(a) Milani Family Investments Pty Ltd ATF Milani Family Trust (Mr Jarrod Milani)
– 666,666 shares
(b) Ms Franca Capelli – 30,807,786 shares and
(c) Peter Davies Pty Ltd (Mr Peter Davies) – 2,930,733 shares
(together, the
a result of the Yowie Placement, Keybridge’s registered or beneficial
interest in Yowie (excluding its relevant interest
through its interest in HHY)
was reduced from 66.78% to 58.07%.
28 May 2025, Keybridge despatched to Yowie members a notice of meeting under
scheduled to be held on Friday, 27 June 2025 seeking the following
resolutions:
(a) As a special resolution –
Company’s Constitution is amended with immediate effect by deleting the
words “The Company shall observe the
requirements of
Section 225
Corporations Act
” from clause 13.3
Constitutional Amendment
(b) Ordinary resolutions to in effect remove Messrs
John Patton, Nicholas Bolton, Andrew Ranger, Diesel Schwarze and Daniel Agocs
directors of Yowie and appoint Messrs Geoffrey Wilson, Jesse Hamilton, Martyn
McCathie, Frank Antony Catalano and Sulieman Ravell
as directors of Yowie
to 30 May 2025:
(a) Keybridge held 31.15% of the units in HHY and
(b) WAM Group held 31.98% of the units in HHY.
30 May 2025, Aurora approved the issue of units equivalent to 42% of all HHY
units on issue to:
(a) Mr Ranger (6,849,315 units)
(b) Mr Roger Hearnden (8,904,110 units) and
(c) Australian Style Holdings Pty Ltd (18,493,151 units) (
HHY Placement
a result of the HHY Placement:
(a) Keybridge’s holding in HHY reduced to 21.89% and
(b) WAM Group’s holding in HHY reduced to 22.48%.
APPLICATION
Yowie Group Ltd 04
application dated 13 May 2025, Keybridge sought a declaration of unacceptable
circumstances. Keybridge submitted (among other
things) that:
(a) Yowie (and by extension, Keybridge and WAM by virtue of
relevant interest in the Placement Shares, as the Placement Shares were
securities”
(b) Keybridge and WAM contravened
as a result of the Yowie Placement, as
they had a relevant interest in the Placement Shares and
(c) the issue of the Placement Shares breached ASX Listing Rule 7.6 as Yowie had
been on notice since at least 1 April 2025 and on
numerous occasions since, that
Keybridge intended to call a meeting to appoint and remove the directors of
Interim orders sought
sought the following interim orders that:
(a) no further steps be taken by Yowie to issue the Placement Shares and
(b) recipients of the Placement Shares not dispose of those shares.
Final orders sought
sought final orders:
(a) preventing Placees (and any person acting on their behalf) from exercising
voting rights in any Yowie shares acquired under the
Yowie Placement at any
members meeting called by Keybridge under
within the next 12 months and
(b) that either the issue of the Placement Shares be cancelled or vested in the
Commonwealth on trust for the current holder for
sale by ASIC with the condition
that Messrs Bolton, Patton, Ranger, Schwarze, Agocs and their respective
associates not purchase
any of those shares.
Yowie Group Ltd 05
application dated 3 June 2025, Keybridge sought a declaration of unacceptable
circumstances. Keybridge submitted (among other
things) that some or all of
Yowie’s former directors, the subject of removal resolutions at the Yowie
meeting, sought to influence the composition of Yowie’s board in the
period prior to the Yowie
meeting by:
(a) causing HHY to undertake the HHY Placement for the improper purpose of
diluting unitholders ahead of a
meeting to change its responsible
(b) participating in the HHY Placement (either directly or indirectly)
(c) failing to disclose the identity of HHY unitholders who (with their
associates) held greater than 20% of HHY’s total issued
(d) preventing Keybridge from passing any resolution to replace Aurora as
HHY’s responsible entity in a
meeting and, as a result, precluding
HHY from voting in favour of the Constitutional Amendment at the Yowie
Interim orders sought
sought the following interim orders that:
(a) Messrs Bolton and Ranger and their associates be prevented from acquiring
any additional interests in HHY until further order
of the Panel
(b) Messrs Bolton and Ranger and their associates lodge substantial holding
notices with ASX under
of the Act disclosing their combined voting power,
relevant interests, and associations in Yowie
(c) Messrs Bolton and Ranger and their associates update their Appendix 3Y
disclosures as Yowie directors and
(d) Aurora disclose the dates and details of any HHY units issued since
31 December 2023, including the number of units issued on
participants in those issues, and third-party confirmation of the date(s) funds
were received in HHY’s bank account
as consideration of those new units.
Final orders sought
sought final orders that:
(a) HHY unitholders who received units on or from 1 April 2025 be restrained
from voting at any meeting called within 12 months under
of the Act to
replace Aurora as responsible entity of HHY and
(b) Aurora in its capacity as responsible entity of HHY be restrained from
voting its interests in Yowie shares against the Constitutional
Amendment at the
the allegation of a breach of
was retracted by Keybridge (see paragraphs
), the other issues raised in
Group Ltd 04
, including the circumstances surrounding the Yowie Placement,
warranted further consideration and we decided to conduct proceedings.
Yowie Group Ltd 05
application on 3 June 2025, three weeks after
Yowie Group Ltd 04
application was made on 13 May 2025. Given the
overlap in the subject matter and the Panel’s aim of resolving disputes
consistently
and in a timely manner, we made a direction on 13 June 2025 that
the applications be heard
have considered all the material presented to us in coming to our decision, but
only specifically address those matters that we
consider necessary to explain
our reasoning.
Deferral of proceedings
we consider each of Keybridge’s submissions in turn, we summarise the
timeline of the proceedings.
2 June 2025, Yowie disclosed (among other things) in an ASX announcement that
its board unanimously resolved to postpone the Yowie
meeting by a
fortnight and change the location of the meeting.
4 June 2025, Keybridge commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court of New South
Wales, seeking a number of declarations in relation
to the validity of the Yowie
Proceedings
20 June 2025, Justice Black handed down his judgment in the Keybridge
Proceedings, declaring (among other things) that
“the notice of general
meeting dated 26 May 2025 issued by [Keybridge] and despatched to shareholders
of [Yowie] under s 249F
of the Act (Notice of 249F Meeting) is a valid notice
convening a general meeting of shareholders of [Yowie] to be held on Friday
In coming to
his decision, Justice Black provided an interpretation of clause 13.3 of
Yowie’s constitution which, unless overturned
by a higher Court, rendered
the Constitutional Amendment
unnecessary.
23 June 2025, Keybridge suggested that the Panel defer proceedings for a week,
stating that Justice Black’s decision
“included declarations as
to Yowie’s constitution provisions and shareholder voting entitlements for
the Yowie 249F meeting
on Friday 27 June 2025”
. We considered that
Justice Black’s decision commercially addressed several issues raised in
the proceedings and accordingly
sought submissions from the parties on whether
to make the direction. On 24 June 2025, after receiving no submissions from the
we directed that the proceedings be deferred until 1 July
Friday, 27 June 2025, the Yowie s249F meeting proceeded and resolutions to
replace the former Yowie directors with Messrs Wilson,
Hamilton, McCathie,
Catalano and Ravell were passed. The Constitutional Amendment resolution was
not carried with 72.33% of Yowie
shareholders voting for and 27.67% voting
against the resolution.
Monday, 30 June 2025, we invited parties to provide submissions on how the
results of the Yowie s249F meeting would impact the
continuation or conduct of
the proceedings.
1 July 2025, Keybridge submitted that:
(a) the proceedings should continue and was of the view that both the Yowie
Placement and HHY Placement represented unacceptable
circumstances
Yowie’s new directors are now in a position to review the
circumstances surrounding the Yowie Placement”
(c) "the Panel consider deferring conduct of this proceeding for one further
week to allow this review to occur and for Yowie to consider
making its own
submissions to the Panel in relation to the Yowie Placement”.
granted the request and directed that the proceedings be deferred until
Keybridge’s suggestion that further investigation, by both Keybridge and
Yowie, may yield relevant material.
sought further submissions from parties, on 10 July 2025 by email and on
17 July 2025 by supplementary brief.
17 July 2025, the new board of
submitted a replacement
notice to become a party. Yowie submitted that it was conducting an internal
review into the use of funds
from the Yowie Placement and noted that
based on current bank records and the information available to it,
approximately $414,000 or 87%
of the placement funds were paid to the
former Yowie directors, including the payment of accrued directors’ fees,
and discretionary
short-term incentive payments to certain former Yowie
directors”.
submitted (among other things) that:
(a) the steps discussed in the chronology in Justice Black’s decision,
together with the Yowie Takeover Bid, in effect evidenced
a strategy by the
former Yowie directors
“to do all things possible to dilute Keybridge
ahead of the Yowie 249F meeting, entrenching the former directors via blatant
misuse of company resources for their own advantage”
(b) “Yowie’s directors at the time of the Yowie placement on 12
May 2025 and the HHY Dilution of 30 May 2025 should be
directed to pay the costs
of these applications”
(c) “these circumstances are so egregious as to warrant a declaration
of unacceptable circumstances, independently of any decision
the Panel might
make as to awarding costs orders against any party”
did not press for any orders other than a costs order and did not provide any
further information into the circumstances
surrounding the Yowie Placement.
therefore have considered whether on the material there are grounds to make a
declaration of unacceptable circumstances, given
that Keybridge continued to
seek such a declaration.
Contravention of s606
submitted that there was a contravention of s606 as their own relevant interest
in Yowie shares increased from 78.34% to
81.17% as a result of the Yowie
Placement (see table below).
Before Placement
After placement
Voting Power
Keybridge (direct voting control)
153,163,186
153,163,186
HHY (direct voting control – not under Keybridge control)
Placement shares
Keybridge relevant interest
179,689,829
214,095,014
crux of Keybridge’s assertion stemmed from the classification of the
Placement Shares as “restricted securities”
under s707(3) and, as a
result, the restriction arrangements gave Yowie a relevant interest in the
Placement Shares by virtue of
s608(1) and
as the registered holder of over 50% of Yowie’s issued capital, controls
Yowie and therefore under s608(3)(b), held
a relevant interest extending to
every interest that Yowie itself held.
subsequently retracted the allegation that the Yowie Placement caused itself to
breach s606 in relation to its own relevant
interest in Yowie as any increase in
its relevant interest fell within the 3%
on our initial observations, we considered that there was an open query as to
whether the restriction arrangements on the Placement
Shares gave rise to a
relevant interest on the part of Yowie in relation to its own shares.
given the retraction of its own submissions, we decided not to examine
Keybridge’s potential contravention of s606
any further.
Association
identified the 3 Placees who received Placement Shares under the Yowie Placement
(see paragraph
Milani is an employee of Yowie’s Australian and New Zealand Division and
was allocated 1.94% of the Placement Shares issued.
He is not a director of
Yowie and was not prevented by ASX Listing Rule 10.11 from participating in an
issue of Yowie shares.
Davies Pty Ltd was allocated 8.52% of the Placement Shares. Yowie did not
directly receive cash for the placement to Peter
Davies Pty Ltd and the shares
issued were funded from a transfer to Yowie of the residual interest in a loan
made to Mr Catalano.
Davies and Mr Bolton have a business relationship. Mr Davies has worked with
and invested together with Mr Bolton at Keybridge
over the last decade on a
number of deals. One of Mr Davies’ businesses, Roadnight Capital, had
lent money to Keybridge at
various times from 28 January 2022 to 11 December
2023. The loan was secured and documented. It started at $500,000 and grew to
$5,000,000 under the terms of the agreement.
Furthermore,
in February 2014, a related entity of Mr Davies provided a $700,000 loan to
entities associated with Mr Bolton. The
loan was amortised over the term and
fully repaid in October 2018.
Capelli is a resident of Italy and was allocated 89.54% of the Placement Shares.
Yowie submitted that it received an approach by
phone on behalf of Ms Capelli in
February or March 2025 inquiring about Yowie’s need for capital whilst
Keybridge was in administration.
Yowie understood that the phone call was
linked to press about Keybridge’s administration and its impact
on Yowie and general interest in the Yowie brand”.
sought submissions from Ms Capelli directly to explain the circumstances
surrounding her investment in Yowie.
Capelli submitted that:
(a) she first became aware of Yowie in or around mid-February 2025 while doing
due diligence on the holdings of Keybridge from its
public documents while
Keybridge was in administration; and
(b) she chose to invest in Yowie “
because of [her] view on the growth
prospect of the confectionary with surprise market in Europe and the United
States...and was encouraged
by the cheap valuation and thought it represented
good value given the restructuring occurring around Keybridge and the discount
of the placement to the Net Asset Value. The opportunity was flagged by [her]
on the materials provided, we considered that the quantum of Ms Capelli’s
investment to purchase the Placement Shares
(approximately $460,000) and her
apparent limited knowledge of Yowie and its operations warranted closer
examination.
observed that there was a notable absence of documentation explaining the basis
of her investment. There was no material from
the application form,
correspondence or other records that clarified how Ms Capelli approached Yowie
or how the investment decision
was made. The lack of material significantly
impeded our ability to understand the circumstances of her participation in the
particular, there was no credible explanation as to how contact was established
between Ms Capelli and Yowie prior to the Yowie
Placement. The absence of such
fundamental information raised questions about the transparency of how Ms
Capelli came to participate
in a substantial proportion of the Yowie Placement.
evidence was produced by Keybridge to support a finding that there was an
association, despite our specific request for submissions
on this point. We had
directed the parties to the proceedings not to contact any Placee, other than to
obtain a Placee’s contact
the circumstances, we did not consider we were able to make any inferences from
the absence of material that would lead to a finding
of association.
Keybridge suggested a deferral of proceedings so that the new board of Yowie
could make enquiries, the only relevant submission
we received from Yowie was
that approximately 87% of the placement funds were paid to the former Yowie
directors in accordance with
pre-existing entitlements of those directors to
those payments (see paragraphs
). While this raised questions as to
the motivations behind the Yowie Placement, it did not in our view support any
finding of association.
do not consider it would be in the public interest to prolong proceedings by
making further enquiries. We also observe that Keybridge
and Yowie could, after
investigating the circumstances of the Yowie Placement further, take the matter
to court or make a further
Panel application.
Control effect of
the Yowie Placement
Guidance Note 12: Frustrating Action
does not apply to meetings to change
a company’s board
court is the appropriate forum for considering whether a placement was made for
a proper purpose
, the Panel has
acknowledged that
“a placement made prior to such a meeting may have an
effect on control and impact on voting at the meeting in an unacceptable
. Accordingly we
considered, applying our commercial judgment, whether the Yowie Placement had an
unacceptable effect on control.
to the Yowie Placement, Keybridge was in a position to directly exercise the
voting over 66.78% of the shares in Yowie (see
Following the placement, this was diluted to 58.08%. While this represented a
significant reduction in the number of shares Keybridge
could directly vote and
its broader voting power, and 66.78% is closer to the 75% threshold to pass
special resolutions, we note
that this did not cross any critical statutory
thresholds under the
Corporations Act
. This reduction also had less
significance following Justice Black’s decision in the Keybridge
Proceedings (see paragraph
replacement of Yowie directors as a result of Yowie
Specifically, following Justice Black’s decision, the replacement of
directors as a result of Yowie
meeting only required the passing of an
ordinary resolution (and not a special resolution), and Keybridge had over 50%
of the voting
power in Yowie at all times.
on the above, we considered that the potential control effect of the Yowie
Placement was not unacceptable.
Breach of ASX Listing Rule
consider that whether the issue of the Placement Shares was unacceptable because
it was in breach of ASX Listing Rule 7.6, as Keybridge
submitted, has been
overtaken by events (see above). In any event, we are inclined to consider that
in the absence of a control
effect any breach of ASX Listing Rule 7.6 is
primarily a matter for ASX.
Affairs of HHY
note from the outset that HHY is not subject to Chapter 6 of the
Corporations
. However, we considered the circumstances surrounding the HHY Placement to
determine whether it had an unacceptable downstream control
effect on Yowie,
which is a Chapter 6 company and within our jurisdiction.
alleged that the issue of units under the HHY Placement was undertaken, at least
in part, to dilute significantly Keybridge
and WAM Group’s holdings in HHY
ahead of a HHY
meeting and the Yowie
to the HHY Placement, we note that HHY had not issued new units for some time.
Aurora, as the responsible entity of HHY and
of which Mr Patton is a director,
decided to issue new units under the HHY Placement to certain former directors
of Yowie and to
a company associated with Mr Bolton. The units issued under the
HHY Placement represented approximately 42% of the total units on
issue in HHY
at the time of issue.
took into account Keybridge’s submission that the circumstances of the HHY
Placement were unusual given its size and the
fact that HHY had not issued new
units for a considerable period of time. Furthermore, we observed that the HHY
Placement resembled
the Yowie Placement considered in
Yowie Group Ltd 04
and its effect was to potentially diminish Keybridge’s voting power in
Yowie by diluting its interest in Yowie held through
in light of Justice Black’s decision and the results of the Yowie
meeting, the downstream effect of control of HHY’
interest in
Yowie is of less significance. We do not consider that the issue of units in
HHY had an unacceptable downstream control
effect on Yowie.
may decide to conduct a deeper examination into the circumstances surrounding
the HHY Placement
and take Court
action if warranted.
the reasons above, we declined to make a declaration of unacceptable
circumstances. We consider that it is not against the public
interest to
decline to make a declaration
and we had regard to the matters in
that we made no declaration of unacceptable circumstances, we make no final
orders, including as to costs.
Teresa Dyson
President of the sitting Panel
dated 29 July 2025
Reasons given to parties 18 September
Reasons published 23 September 2025
Mills Oakley (until 1 July 2025)
Gadens (from 1 July 2025)
Gilbert + Tobin (from 17 July 2025)
There was no objection to the
same sitting Panel as in
Keybridge Capital Limited 17
[2025] ATP 15
Yowie Group Ltd 06 and Keybridge Capital Limited 19
[2025] ATP 23
(to be published)
otherwise indicated, all statutory references are to the
Corporations Act
(Cth) and all terms used in Chapter 6, 6A or 6C have the meaning given
in the relevant Chapter (as modified by
Keybridge Capital Limited
[2025] ATP 15,
Keybridge Capital Limited 18R
[2025] ATP 17,
Keybridge Capital Limited 20
[2025] ATP 20,
Yowie Group Ltd 06 &
Keybridge Capital Limited 19
[2025] ATP 23 (to be published),
Capital Limited 21R
[2025] ATP 24 (to be published) and
Yowie Group Ltd
[2025] ATP 27 (to be
Yowie’s securities were suspended for more than 5 days in the last 12
months, Keybridge submitted that
contemplates that any capital raising
by Yowie without a prospectus requires restriction arrangements, making the
placement shares
“restricted securities”.
regulation 16
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Regulations 2001
In the matter of
Yowie Group Ltd
[2025] NSWSC 648
. Postscript - on 30 July 2025, the
Full Court of the Supreme Court of New South Wales dismissed an appeal of
Justice Black’s
decision, see
Yowie Group Ltd and Bolton v Keybridge
Capital Ltd (No 3)
[2025] NSWCA
Ibid at [41] to
Pursuant to
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Regulations
Pursuant to
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Regulations
Through its legal
representative, Gilbert +
Yowie also referred to
instances where the former board of Yowie sought legal advice on matters that in
its view gave “
weight to the argument that the Former Yowie Directors
were on a “frolic of their own”: if so, it is they and not Yowie
that should bear responsibility for the resulting wasteful costs”
considered that this material did not take us far in relation to the
consideration of the matters raised in the
applications.
Under s608(1)
and s608(2), a person who is the beneficiary of restriction or escrow
arrangements with a security holder in relation
to securities has a relevant
interest in those securities as they have the power to control the disposal of
those securities.
Factor Therapeutics
[2019] ATP 5 at
Hastings Rare Metals
[2013] ATP 13 at
Factor Therapeutics
[2019] ATP 5 at [12],
Accelerate Resource Limited 01 & 02
[2020] ATP 7 at [39]
does not include HHY’s shareholding in Yowie. We consider that
Keybridge’s ability to control HHY’s shares
in Yowie was dependent
on Keybridge seeking to replace HHY’s responsible entity. Given the
timing of achieving such an outcome,
we considered that we did not need to
consider HHY’s holdings for this analysis (see paragraph
Including whether there has been any contravention of the substantial holding
We considered in
the circumstances of these matters, that it was not in the public interest to
make a declaration for the purposes
of making a costs order
RTF format (7.23 MB)
Signed PDF/A format