Central Queensland Services Pty Ltd v David Weule [2025] FWCFB 239 (24 October 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 239
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
—Appeal of decision
Central Queensland Services Pty
David Weule
(C2025/4951)
VICE PRESIDENT ASBURY
DEPUTY PRESIDENT CROSS
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
SYDNEY, 24 OCTOBER 2025
Appeal against Decision and Orders requiring reinstatement – valid
reason found in circumstances of fighting and self-defence
– findings that
opportunity to respond denied and reinstatement appropriate also challenged
– appeal merely seeks to
re-agitate findings of fact - appropriate
standard of appellate review considered – whether correctness standard
decisions under
– correctness standard
does not apply - House v The King applied – no appealable error
established - public interest
not satisfied- permission to appeal
Introduction
Mr David Weule began working for Central Queensland Services Pty Ltd
as mineworker in July 2022. He was dismissed on 20 September
2024 for fighting
at work. At the time he was dismissed he was employed at the Caval Ridge coal
mine near Moranbah in Central Queensland.
The fight was with an employee of a
labour hire provider. It took place in and around a light vehicle which was on a
haul road in
the mine. Mr Weule maintained that he was defending himself.
Mr Weule made an application for an unfair dismissal remedy under
Fair Work Act 2009
). He was successful. Deputy
President Butler decided to order the Appellant to reinstate him with continuity
of employment and service
and compensate him for lost pay
After hearing from the parties on the form of the orders the Deputy President
issued a further
final Orders on 24 June 2025
The Appellant seeks to appeal the Decision and Orders. An application
to stay the operation of the orders was heard and determined
on 27 June 2025. A
stay order was made with conditions. The conditions were that Mr Weule be paid
an amount equal to the wages and
other payments he would have received had he
been reinstated. The payments were to be made to the date the appeal is
determined,
less any income earned in other employment. The stay order lapses
upon the determination of the appeal.
The appeal is brought pursuant to
of the Act.
provides that appeals from decisions of the Commission may only proceed
with the permission of the Commission. As the decision was
of the Act,
also applies such that permission to appeal may only be
granted if it is in the public interest to do so.
In her Decision the Deputy President found that the dismissal was
harsh in light of the circumstances of the altercation and the lack
of any other
disciplinary history. The Deputy President also found the dismissal was unjust
because Mr Weule was entitled to defend
himself rather than allow a co-worker to
attack him. His acts were found to be proportionate and reasonable in the
circumstances.
The Deputy President also found the dismissal was unreasonable
because there was no valid reason for termination or alternatively
the failure to provide him with a proper opportunity to
. Orders for
reinstatement and related relief were found to be
appropriate.
We refuse permission to appeal. We find that the Decision and Orders
constitute an orthodox exercise of the Commission’s powers
of the Act. The Appellant has established no appealable error. In the absence of
error an appeal cannot succeed and permission to
appeal is futile. These are our
The Decision
A detailed background to the matter is found in the Decision. The
evidence is canvassed in a thorough and detailed manner. Findings
are made where
contests arose. We don’t propose to repeat those matters here. Put
briefly, Mr. Weule began working for the
Respondent in July 2022. ​On 20
September 2024, he was dismissed following an altercation with another worker,
Mr Torcello.
The fight involved verbal and physical exchanges. The dismissal
occurred after an investigation which found Mr Weule guilty of misconduct
warranting dismissal. ​
The issue to be determined in the proceedings at first instance was
whether the dismissal was harsh, unjust, or unreasonable for the
of the Act. ​The Appellant contended that the altercation involved
misconduct on Mr. Weule’s part which justified dismissal
Mining and Energy Union (
) which represented Mr Weule contended that
he acted in self-defence. ​
The Decision is unremarkable. It sets out the statutory framework,
noting that the application was made under
of the Act, Mr Weule was
protected from unfair dismissal for the purposes of
, and the question
that arose was whether he was unfairly dismissed. It notes that
relevantly provides that a person has been unfairly dismissed if the dismissal
was harsh, unjust, or unreasonable and that in determining
that question each of
the matters in
must be taken into account. The Decision considers each of
those matters in detail.
the question of whether there was a valid reason the
Deputy President referred to long standing authority on misconduct arising from
At [38] of the Decision the often quoted
extract from the Full Bench decision in
Newton v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
The Decision addressed in detail the evidence concerning the fight
and dealt with what were described as the significant controversies
the parties which were considered to be significant. Those issues were recorded
in the Decision at [78] as follows:
next consider, in more detail, some of the significant areas of controversy
between the parties. They relate to:
whether the
altercation had escalated from verbal to physical by Mr Weule saying
“let’s sort it out now,” or similar;
whether Mr Weule
had undone his seatbelt in order to turn and punch, or attempt to punch, Mr
Torcello; and
whether Mr Weule
had been the first of the two to make, or attempt to make, physical contact, by
punching Mr Torcello or attempting
to do so, or whether he had acted in
self-defence;
Torcello had put Mr Weule into a headlock, or whether he had tried to
“bear hug” Mr Weule;
whether, in any
event, Mr Weule had been at least partly at fault because he had started an
argument when he should not have;
Hurley could have stopped the car sooner;
whether Mr Weule
could have got away from Mr Torcello rather than try to defend himself against
Mr Torcello;
Hurley had physically broken up the altercation or whether he had just yelled at
the two to stop;
whether riding
the extent of Mr
Weule’s injuries and whether they were consistent with his
Each of the matters were considered by reference to the evidence and
submissions. Findings were made concerning contested evidence.
resolved by reference to the reliability of the accounts in the evidence and the
demeanour of witnesses. The Deputy President
found that the fight was initiated
by Mr Torcello and Mr Weule acted in self-defence. His actions were said to be
proportionate and
reasonable in the circumstances. The Deputy President found no
valid reason for dismissal related to his capacity or
The Deputy President referred to Full Bench authority in
Security Australia Pty Ltd v
Read v Cordon Square Child Care
purposes of
, noting that as there was no valid reason for dismissal,
whether Mr Weule was given an opportunity to respond to a valid reason conduct
was not relevant.
The Decision then makes a number of observations that would be
relevant if the finding under
was wrong. Those observations amount to
a finding that the Appellant had not kept an open mind during the investigation
and by doing
so did not give Mr Weule a proper opportunity to respond to the
For the purpose of
, the Deputy President noted that Mr
Weule was assisted by his union throughout the process and that there was no
unreasonable refusal
to allow him a support person during discussions related to
the dismissal.
Subsection s. 387(d) was considered irrelevant as the dismissal was
not in relation to unsatisfactory performance.
Observations were made under
subsections 387(e)
and (f) about the
size of the employer and the presence of dedicated human resource specialists so
those matters were also considered.
The Decision notes under
matters including Mr Weule’s age and the impact of losing his job, his
work record, his injury during the assault, a delay
on the part of the Appellant
in providing Mr Weule with a skills list to assist him to obtain another job,
and the steps taken by
the Appellant in providing him access to its employee
assistance program, were relevant.
The ultimate finding on unfairness is made at [168] where the Deputy
President said:
Having considered each of the matters
specified in
section 387
Fair Work Act
and for the reasons set out above,
I am satisfied that the dismissal of the Applicant was harsh, unjust and
unreasonable. It was
harsh in light of the circumstances of the altercation and
the lack of any adverse disciplinary history. It was unjust because Mr
entitled to defend himself rather than allow a co-worker to attack him, and his
acts were proportionate and reasonable
in the circumstances. It was unreasonable
because there was no valid reason for termination or alternatively because of
the failure
to provide him with a proper opportunity to respond.”
The Decision considers remedy by first addressing whether
reinstatement was appropriate. Reference was made to the evidence concerning
Weule’s disciplinary history (or lack thereof), his extensive experience,
and that he got along with work colleagues. The
Decision records the Deputy
President’s finding that reinstatement was appropriate. As were orders
recognizing Mr Weule’s
service and awarding an amount for lost pay.
At [182] the Decision states:
I am satisfied that the Applicant was
unfairly dismissed within the meaning of
section 385
Fair Work Act
have decided that the Applicant should be reinstated, with orders as to
continuity of employment and period of continuous
service, and loss of pay.
Directions will issue so that the parties can be heard as to the form and
content of the orders.”
In the further decision the Deputy President determined that Mr
Weule be reinstated from 15 July 2025, that his prior service and
employment be
recognised, and that he be paid an amount for remuneration lost because of the
dismissal. The Orders reflect those
The notice of appeal lacks focus. It sets out eight primary grounds,
some with sub-grounds. The grounds allege various errors in
law, including
failures to consider relevant evidence and statutory safety obligations. The
first ground asserts that the Deputy
President erroneously applied the common
law test for self-defence by improperly shifting the burden of proof onto the
rather than requiring Mr Weule to establish self-defence. The second
ground contends, more broadly, that the Deputy President failed
to correctly
apply the test for determining whether there was a valid reason for dismissal
related to employee conduct.
The third ground maintains that the Deputy President did not
adequately consider or appropriately weigh evidence and statutory context.
ground lists complaints about how the evidence was treated and asserts a number
of failures being consideration of the Appellant's
workplace violence policies,
Code of Conduct, and statutory safety obligations. The fourth ground alleges
that certain findings were
not reasonably supported by the evidence. Another
list of challenged evidentiary findings is provided.
The fifth ground claims that the Deputy President did not properly
apply the correct principles when assessing whether Mr Weule was
provided with
adequate opportunity to respond to allegations. The sixth ground makes a general
assertion that the Deputy President
failed to correctly apply the appropriate
test and principles in evaluating whether the dismissal was harsh, unjust, or
unreasonable.
The seventh ground challenges the decision to order reinstatement,
arguing that insufficient consideration was given to the evidence
and another
list of challenged findings of fact is provided. The list repeats complaints
the Appellant’s statutory
safety obligations, safety risks arising from Mr Weule’s conduct, the
breakdown of the employment
relationship, and Mr Weule’s lack of
contrition.
Finally, the eighth ground alleges that the Decision was infected
with various errors of fact. It describes the errors as significant.
list is provided, this time identifying more granular factual errors such as
failing to find that Mr Weule removed his seatbelt
during the incident,
inadequate weight being given to witness accounts, investigation reports and
assessments of the injuries arising
from the fight, and the making of incorrect
findings about witness credibility and the Appellant’s management of the
The grounds are elaborated upon in the written submissions. The
submissions attempt to give the grounds some focus. They group them
complaints. The first goes to the finding of self-defence and asserts that the
correctness standard applies to the application
of the test of self-defence and
the Deputy President applied the test incorrectly. This is said to be caught by
appeal Grounds 1,
3(e), 3(g), 4(a) to (h), 6, 8(a), 8(b)(i), 8(d). The second
complaint goes to errors concerning findings in support of valid reason
than self-defence (appeal grounds 2, 3(a), 3(b), 3(c), 3(d), 6, 7(a), (b), (c),
(d)). The third goes to the Deputy President’s
finding that Mr Weule was
not given a proper opportunity to respond to the reasons for dismissal (appeal
grounds 3(f), 4(k), (l)
and (m), 5, 6, 8(e)). The fourth complaint goes to
asserted errors relating to reinstatement (appeal ground 7).
At hearing, the Appellant challenged the Decision of the Deputy
President in relation to the findings regarding self-defence, and
reliance on the correctness standard. The complaint about the findings in
relation to Mr Weule not being given a proper opportunity
to respond was
maintained. As was the complaint about the appropriateness of reinstatement. The
Appellant submitted that the Deputy
President made significant errors of fact
and reasoning, which resulted in an unjust outcome. It maintained that the
finding of self-defence
was mistaken and unsupported by the evidence, and that
insufficient weight was given to each of the accounts of the fight found in
evidence. The Appellant asserted that Mr Weule instigated the physical
altercation and that his actions were not consistent with
self-defence.
In his written submissions, Mr Weule submitted that the grounds of
appeal should be rejected. He asserted that the Appellant has not
demonstrated
any substantial error of fact or law warranting permission to appeal. On the
first ground, Mr Weule contended that the
Deputy President correctly applied the
common law test for self-defence, which requires the party asserting
self-defence to provide
supporting evidence. The evidence provided by Mr Weule
was thoroughly examined, and there is no indication that the test was
incorrectly
On the second ground Mr Weule submitted that the Deputy President
appropriately applied the test for valid reason. It was contended
Appellant had not established that acting in self-defence violated any statutory
or regulatory safety obligations. As to
the third ground, Mr Weule argued that
complaints about the weight accorded to evidence does not amount to appealable
further stated the Appellant had not, in any event, shown that
workplace policies, codes, or statutory obligations were breached
where Mr Weule
acted in self-defence. It was also put that the issues raised do not involve
significant factual errors as contemplated
Other findings related to
opportunities to respond were also, in Mr Weule's submission, open on the
The list of findings challenged by the fourth ground were likewise
said to be open on the evidence. The Deputy President’s determination
it was reasonable for Mr Weule to act in self-defence was supported by the
evidence, and the correct test for proportionality
in self-defence was applied.
The finding that it was reasonable for Mr Weule to assert self-defence was,
again, open. Findings asserted
to be implausible - such as Mr Weule allegedly
punching someone in the back seat while seated in the front - were said to be
supported by evidence. The Deputy President’s preference for Mr
Weule’s evidence were credit findings which were reasonable
susceptible to challenge on appeal.
As to the fifth and sixth grounds which were said to be contingent
on the success of earlier grounds, Mr Weule submitted they too
rejected. On the seventh ground, which goes to reinstatement, Mr Weule submitted
this as another complaint about the weight
given to evidence that did not rise
to appealable error. The Deputy President’s findings were, in Mr
Weule’s submission,
both reasonable and supported by evidence. They
included evidence relating to Mr Weule’s work performance and positive
among colleagues, which indicated sufficient trust to sustain an
effective employment relationship.
Finally, the eighth ground was described as a collection of
complaints about subsidiary findings which should be considered immaterial.
Findings about conflicting evidence about whether Mr Weule wore a seatbelt did
not constitute a significant factual error. The weight
to be attributed to
written accounts of the incident was within the Deputy President’s
discretion, and findings that about
evasive testimony was open.
At the hearing Mr Weule submitted that the findings giving rise to
the conclusions that the dismissal was harsh, unjust and unreasonable
reinstate was appropriate, were open. The Deputy President was best placed to
evaluate the evidence, having observed the
witnesses and assessed their
demeanour. The bulk of the Appellant's arguments constitute an attempt to
re-agitate factual findings,
which is not the proper function of an appeal. Mr
Weule makes the same submission that he was not provided with a proper
opportunity
to respond, arguing that the investigation conducted by Mr
Everingham was deficient and that he maintained a closed mind throughout
process. It is submitted that the Deputy President’s findings were
informed by her direct observations of the witnesses
during the hearing.
Permission to Appeal
An appeal may only be brought with the permission of the Commission.
Section 400 of the Act applies to this appeal. It requires that
permission only
be granted if it is in the public interest to do so. The nature of permission
to appeal under the Act was considered
Coal & Allied Mining Services
Pty Ltd v Lawler and others
[2011] FCAFC 54
; 192 FCR 78 where Buchanan J
said at [44] (Marshall J and Cowdroy J agreeing):
“The nature of the task committed to the Full Bench at
this stage of the appeal process (i.e. assessing whether a “public
interest” test was met) was a discretionary one involving a broad value
judgment, as has recently again been emphasised. In
Hogan v Hinch
85 ALJR 398
, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ said (at
‘The expression “that it is in the public interest” imports
a judgment to be made by reference to the subject, scope
and purpose of the
Matters that may engage the public interest were described by the
Full Bench in
GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty Ltd v Makin
[2010] FWAFB 5343
(2010) 197 IR 266
as follows:
“... the public interest might be attracted where a matter
raises issues of importance and general application, or where there
diversity of decisions at first instance so that guidance from an appellate
court is required, or where the decision
at first instance manifests
an injustice, or the result is counter intuitive, or that the legal
principles applied
appear disharmonious when compared with other recent
decisions dealing with similar matters.”
Stephanie Muir Ridge v Mr Alex Yates
the Full Bench said:
Section 400(1) dictates that permission to
appeal may only be granted if the Commission is satisfied that it is in the
public interest
to do so. The public interest test is stringent. A would-be
appellant will generally need to show there is an arguable case of appealable
error. Even where an arguable case is demonstrated, that is not necessarily
sufficient to warrant a grant of permission to appeal.
The statutory context may
be relevant in deciding whether to exercise the discretion to grant permission
to appeal, without fettering
that decision. In matters where s 400 applies, it
will “commonly not be in the public interest to grant permission to appeal
where the grounds of appeal, in substance, seek to relitigate the factual
findings made at first instance,” and often it will
not be in the public
interest for a Full Bench to analyse “the primary factual material simply
because an appellant alleges
that different conclusions should have been drawn
from the evidence.”
We consider that this appeal, in substance, seeks to relitigate the
factual findings made at first instance. Much of what is put by
the Appellant
simply challenges findings of fact. On unfairness it challenges the finding that
Mr Weule was defending himself in
the fight with Mr Torcello and the related
finding that his actions were proportionate and reasonable. It asserts that the
President did not give sufficient weight to evidence that favoured the
Appellant’s case. The Appellant wants to re-agitate
its arguments that the
safety critical nature of the workplace and Mr Weule’s safety obligations
outweighed any explanation
by Mr Weule for his conduct. The challenge in
relation to the opportunity to respond similarly asserts errors in findings of
The reinstatement ground seeks a different factual conclusion about the
ability to restore the employment relationship. The final
ground is a complaint
The Appellant in its grounds and submissions simply ask us to
analyse the primary factual material as it alleges that different conclusions
should have been drawn. In relation to the findings about self-defence the
Appellant is quite forthright. It contends that we must
reconsider the evidence
as the correctness standard of appellate review applies. If we were to accept
that proposition we would have
to reconsider the evidence and determine for
ourselves the correct outcome, rather than apply the standard for appeal from
discretionary
decision which, as described in
House v The
confined to identifying error in the reasoning process. We reject the
proposition. The correctness standard does not apply.
The applicability of the correctness standard to appeals under the
Act was dealt with by the High Court recently in
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v
[2025] HCA 29.
The reasons of the plurality (Gageler CJ, Gordon and
Beech-Jones JJ) included the following:
The appeals to the Full Bench were appeals by
way of rehearing. The Full Bench properly understood that it could only
exercise its
powers on appeal if there was an error on the part of Commissioner
Riordan in his decisions that the dismissals of the Employees
cases of genuine redundancy. In other words, the Full Bench's function or
"role" on appeal was to determine whether there
was an error on the part of
Commissioner Riordan.
There is a distinction between the nature of the appeal and the
standard of appellate review applicable to a particular decision
instance. The former goes to jurisdiction, the latter does not. The
standards of appellate review are concerned, in essence,
with the nature of an
appeal – that is, the nature of the error of the primary decision-maker
that the appellate court or tribunal
is required to identify in order to uphold
the appeal. Under the correctness standard, the appellable error is that
the primary decision-maker
made the wrong decision. Under
House v The
the appellable error is that the primary decision-maker made an error
of the kind described in
House v The
Fundamentally, however, both standards of appellate review
are concerned with identifying error.”
(Footnotes omitted)
Helensburgh Coal
the decision under challenge was a
decision as to whether the Commissioner was satisfied for the purpose of s.
385(d) that the dismissal
was not a case of genuine redundancy. In determining
that question the Commissioner was required to consider whether s. 389, which
sets out the meaning of ‘genuine redundancy’, applied. In this case
the Deputy President was deciding whether she was
satisfied, for the purpose of
s. 385(b) that the dismissal was harsh, unjust, or unreasonable. In determining
that question the Deputy
President was required to take into account the matters
in s. 387, including s. 387(a), being whether there was a valid reason for
dismissal related to capacity or conduct.
The plurality did not resolve the question of which appellate
standard applied in
Helensburgh
. The matter did not arise for judicial
review because it was considered that the relevant Full Bench decisions
identified that its
role was to identify error. Any purported failure to apply
the correct standard in the appellate process would not amount to jurisdictional
error but would be an error within
In separate reasons Edelman J considered the nature of the decision
to be made under s. 3859(d) and s. 389(2) and stated that appeals
under s. 604
of the Act concerning such decisions are discretionary in the sense that they
are subject to the more limited appellate
review under
House v King
Commission’s original decision is given deference due to its broad
discretion, specialist expertise, and the open-textured
statutory criteria it
applies. Further the Act provides that appeals in unfair dismissal cases may
only proceed if leave to appeal
is granted based on public interest
considerations and may only proceed on issues of fact if a significant error of
fact is identified.
The Commission is not bound by strict rules of evidence and
is empowered to consider matters according to equity, good conscience,
merits of the case. Precedents and legislative intent indicate that appellate
intervention should be limited to the grounds
House v The
, reflecting an approach of appellate restraint where significant
discretion has been exercised by the primary decision-maker.
His Honour concluded:
For these reasons, an acceptance of
Helensburgh Coal's submission that the correctness standard of appellate review
applies to ss
385(d) and 389(2) would require the rejection of the plain
intention of the Commonwealth Parliament. The consequence is that the
was not in error in affording latitude in the assessment of whether there was
error in the decision of the Commissioner.
Without error, the Full Bench could
not have made any jurisdictional error. Nevertheless, like Steward J, I agree
with the reasons
of Gageler CJ, Gordon and Beech-Jones JJ that any error by the
Full Bench in this respect would not have been jurisdictional.”
We consider this the reasoning that led to this conclusion applies
equally to decisions made under s. 385(b) and s. 387. The decision
involved the consideration of an array of facts, the need to resolve conflicts
in evidence, and the weighing of competing inferences.
To use the language used
by the High Court in
Moore (a pseudonym) v The King
[2024] HCA 30
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
, the Deputy President’s decision
under s. 385(b) and s. 387(a) as to whether the dismissal was harsh, unjust or
unreasonable
taking in account whether there was a valid reason for termination
did not demand a unique outcome, in which case the correctness
standard applies
but rather it tolerated a range of outcomes, in which case the
House v The
standard applies.
We note that the same conclusion was reached by a Full Bench of the
Commission in
DP World Sydney Limited v Mr Lee Witherden
, which was decided before Helensburgh. The Full Bench said:
Where the source of the power being exercised
is found in a statute, whether “judicial restraint” is or is not to
is an issue of statutory construction. That is, the question is whether,
properly construed, the statute conferring the power being
exercised tolerates a
range of outcomes or requires a unique decision in each case. In our opinion, an
umber of features of the Act
generally, and Part 3-2 of the Act in particular,
are inconsistent with the submission of DP World that the correctness standard
is to be applied on appeal from a finding that a dismissal was harsh, unjust or
unreasonable. The Act contemplates that determination
of whether a dismissal is
harsh, unjust or unreasonable, and whether reinstatement is inappropriate, are
matters intended to be determined
by way of a discretionary assessment by an
individual member of the Commission.”
Mr Weule submitted that regardless of what standard of appellate
review applied, the Appellant has not established error. We agree.
wrong and the applicable standard is not the
House v King
standard, we
consider that the decision of the Deputy President was correct.
The Appellant has not raised an arguable case of appealable error.
No basis was established upon which the Full Bench could disturb
the findings
made at first instance and we do not consider that it is in the public interest
for the Full Bench to revisit factual
findings made at first instance. In the
absence of error, it is not in the public interest to grant permission to
For these reasons we refuse permission to appeal, and the
application is dismissed.
VICE PRESIDENT
Appearances
H Blattman KC
, of counsel, instructed by
of Landers & Rogers for the Appellant
C. Tran and F. Leitch of counsel instructed by J Patrick of the Mining and
Energy Union
for the Respondent
Hearing details:
Sydney (by video using Microsoft Teams):
Id at [168].
Id at [182].
Id at [38].
Id at [137].
Print S2679
(AIRCFB, McIntyre VP, Marsh SDP, Larkin C, 2 February 2000).
, [46]-[49].
Decision at
At [140] to
Commencing at
paragraph [162].
(1936) 55 CLR 499
at 504-505.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (594 KB)
Signed PDF/A format