Jaguar Land Rover Limited v. The Trustee for the Trivett Family Trust [2016] AUDND 25 (10 October 2016)
WIPO Arbitration and Mediation Center
ADMINISTRATIVE PANEL DECISION
Jaguar Land Rover Limited v. The Trustee for the Trivett Family Trust
Case No. DAU2016-0033
1. The Parties
The Complainant is Jaguar Land Rover Limited of Whitley Coventry, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented
by Phillips Ormonde & Fitzpatrick, Australia.
The Respondent is The Trustee for the Trivett Family Trust of Queensland, Australia represented by Woods Prince Lawyers, Australia.
2. The Domain Name and Registrar
The disputed domain names
are registered with Web Address Registration Pty Ltd.
3. Procedural History
The Complaint was filed with the WIPO Arbitration and Mediation Center (the "Center") on August 19, 2016. On August 19, 2016, the
Center transmitted by email to Web Address Registration Pty Ltd a request for registrar verification in connection with the disputed
domain names. On August 23, 2016, Web Address Registration Pty Ltd transmitted by email to the Center its verification response confirming
that the Respondent is listed as the registrant and providing the contact details.
The Center verified that the Complaint satisfied the formal requirements of the .au Dispute Resolution Policy (the "Policy" or ".auDRP"),
the Rules for .au Dispute Resolution Policy (the "Rules"), and the WIPO Supplemental Rules for .au Domain Name Dispute Resolution
Policy (the "Supplemental Rules").
In accordance with the Rules, paragraphs 2(a) and 4(a), the Center formally notified the Respondent of the Complaint, and the proceedings
commenced on August 24, 2016. In accordance with the Rules, paragraph 5(a), the due date for Response was September 13, 2016. The
Response was filed with the Center on September 13, 2016.
The Center appointed Alistair Payne as the sole panelist in this matter on September 26, 2016. The Panel finds that it was properly
constituted. The Panel has submitted the Statement of Acceptance and Declaration of Impartiality and Independence, as required by
the Center to ensure compliance with the Rules, paragraph 7.
4. Factual Background
The Complainant, Jaguar Land Rover Limited ("JLR"), is a globally renowned manufacturer of premium saloons and sports cars and sports
utility vehicles, based in the Midlands region of England and is the successor in business of a car manufacturing business that has
operated from the UK since 1922.
The Complainant has produced motor vehicles under the brand and trade mark JAGUAR since approximately 1935, under the LAND ROVER trade
mark since about 1948 and under the RANGE ROVER mark since 1970. The Complainant owns numerous trade mark registrations worldwide
for each of these marks including Australian trade mark 83411 for the word mark JAGUAR registered since 1945, Australian trade mark
number 96332 for LAND ROVER registered since 1948 and Australian trade mark 230454 for RANGE ROVER registered since 1969.
The disputed domain names were registered between 2014 and 2015 by the Respondent who holds the disputed domain names on behalf of
the Trivett family beneficiaries. Mr. J. Trivett by statutory declaration has stated that the disputed domain names were acquired
by the Respondent for the purposes of developing the proposed "Maintain My" web platform which would connect consumers to a range
of service providers, including manufacturers of both genuine and non-genuine automotive spare parts.
5. Parties' Contentions
A. Complainant
The Complainant submits that it owns numerous trade mark registrations for its JAGUAR, LANDROVER and RANGE ROVER marks including the
Australian registrations noted above. It says that as a result of the Complainant's very substantial business and advertising and
promotional efforts worldwide, including print media and television advertising, presence at motor shows and motor vehicle award
competitions and a substantial on-line presence in 142 countries that it has developed a very substantial presence and renown attaching
to each of these marks and as a result its marks are very well known. The Complainant notes that it operates websites for its products
under each mark respectively at a number of domain names including
The Complainant further submits that each of the disputed domain names is confusingly similar to the names and trade marks in which
it has rights. In each case, the disputed domain name incorporates as the distinctive and dominant component one of the trade marks
JAGUAR, LAND ROVER or RANGE ROVER. It says that in broad terms, the disputed domain names fall into categories where the respective
trade marks of the Complainant have been combined with geographical words such as "Australia", "Melbourne" and "Sydney", with words
indicating vehicle type,
., "hybrid" or "electric", or combined with a descriptive term such as "capped price service", "fixed price service", "finance" or
the surname of the registrant contact for each of the disputed domain names, namely "Trivett".
The Complainant lists the disputed domain names as set out below:
Disputed domain name
Creation Date
landrovercanberra.com.au
landroverdarwin.com.au
landroverhobart.com.au
landroverperth.com.au
melbournelandrover.com.au
bennettsgreenlandrover.com.au
brookvalelandrover.com.au
cairnslandrover.com.au
doncasterlandrover.com.au
geelonglandrover.com.au
goldcoastlandrover.com.au
hawthornlandrover.com.au
indooroopillylandrover.com.au
alicespringslandrover.com.au
artarmonlandrover.com.au
blakehurstlandrover.com.au
canningtonlandrover.com.au
coffsharbourlandrover.com.au
landroverindooroopilly.com.au
landrovertaringa.com.au
landrovertoowong.com.au
landroveralbany.com.au
landroverartarmon.com.au
landroverbrighton.com.au
landroverbundaberg.com.au
landrovercoffsharbour.com.au
morwelllandrover.com.au
mosmanlandrover.com.au
narellanlandrover.com.au
orangelandrover.com.au
osborneparklandrover.com.au
portlincolnlandrover.com.au
toowonglandrover.com.au
taringalandrover.com.au
northlandrover.com.au
eastlandrover.com.au
citylandrover.com.au
landrover.net.au
mylandrover.com.au
maintainmylandrover.com.au
servicemylandrover.com.au
landrovercappedpriceservice.com.au
landroverleasing.com.au
landrovercappedpriceservicing.com.au
landroverelectric.com.au
landroverhybrid.com.au
australiarangerover.com.au
rangeroveraustralia.com.au
actrangerover.com.au
canberrarangerover.com.au
darwinrangerover.com.au
hobartrangerover.com.au
brisbanerangerover.com.au
melbournerangerover.com.au
perthrangerover.com.au
rangeroveradelaide.com.au
adelaiderangerover.com.au
rangerovercanberra.com.au
rangeroverdarwin.com.au
rangeroverhobart.com.au
rangeroverperth.com.au
rangeroversydney.com.au
sydneyrangerover.com.au
portlincolnrangerover.com.au
albanyrangerover.com.au
alexandriarangerover.com.au
alicespringsrangerover.com.au
artarmonrangerover.com.au
bennettsgreenrangerover.com.au
blakehurstrangerover.com.au
brightonrangerover.com.au
brookvalerangerover.com.au
cairnsrangerover.com.au
canningtonrangerover.com.au
coffsharbourrangerover.com.au
doncasterrangerover.com.au
geelongrangerover.com.au
goldcoastrangerover.com.au
hawthornrangerover.com.au
indooroopillyrangerover.com.au
rangeroverindooroopilly.com.au
rangerovertaringa.com.au
rangerovertoowong.com.au
taringarangerover.com.au
malvernrangerover.com.au
launcestonrangerover.com.au
lavingtonrangerover.com.au
mackayrangerover.com.au
maroochydorerangerover.com.au
millicentrangerover.com.au
toowongrangerover.com.au
narellanrangerover.com.au
osborneparkrangerover.com.au
parramattarangerover.com.au
morwellrangerover.com.au
mosmanrangerover.com.au
orangerangerover.com.au
portmacquarierangerover.com.au
rangeroverartarmon.com.au
rangeroverbrighton.com.au
rangeroverbundaberg.com.au
rangerovercoffshabour.com.au
rangeroverdoncaster.com.au
rangeroverdubbo.com.au
southportrangerover.com.au
tamworthrangerover.com.au
toowoombarangerover.com.au
townsvillerangerover.com.au
wollongongrangerover.com.au
northrangerover.com.au
southrangerover.com.au
westrangerover.com.au
cityrangerover.com.au
rangerover.net.au
rangeroverhse.com.au
trivettrangerover.com.au
myrangerover.com.au
financerangerover.com.au
newrangerover.com.au
rangerovercappedpriceservicing.com.au
rangeroverleasing.com.au
rangeroverservicecentre.com.au
rangeroversport.com.au
servicemyrangerover.com.au
servicerangerover.com.au
preownedrangerover.com.au
rangerovercappedpriceservice.com.au
rangeroverfixedpriceservice.com.au
rangeroverparts.com.au
rangeroverreview.com.au
rangeroverspareparts.com.au
rangeroverwarranty.com.au
electricrangerover.com.au
hybridrangerover.com.au
rangeroverelectric.com.au
rangeroverhybrid.com.au
australiajaguar.com.au
jaguardarwin.com.au
adelaidejaguar.com.au
canberrajaguar.com.au
jaguarbrisbane.com.au
jaguarhobart.com.au
wollongongjaguar.com.au
townsvillejaguar.com.au
osborneparkjaguar.com.au
mosmanjaguar.com.au
taringajaguar.com.au
toowongjaguar.com.au
jaguarcoffsharbour.com.au
malvernjaguar.com.au
launcestonjaguar.com.au
lavingtonjaguar.com.au
narellanjaguar.com.au
maroochydorejaguar.com.au
southportjaguar.com.au
millicentjaguar.com.au
morwelljaguar.com.au
orangejaguar.com.au
albanyjaguar.com.au
alexandriajaguar.com.au
jaguartoowong.com.au
westjaguar.com.au
northjaguar.com.au
southjaguar.com.au
servicejaguar.com.au
maintainmyjaguar.com.au
servicemyjaguar.com.au
myjaguar.com.au
jaguarcappedpriceservice.com.au
jaguarfixedpriceservice.com.au
jaguarreview.com.au
jaguarspareparts.com.au
jaguarwarranty.com.au
jaguarelectric.com.au
jaguarhybrid.com.au
It then goes on to categorise them in the manner further described below:
- Disputed domain names 1 to 5 each incorporate the LAND ROVER trade mark in combination with the name of a capital city in Australia
– variously "Canberra", "Darwin", "Hobart", "Perth" and "Melbourne".
- Disputed domain names 6 to 34 incorporate the LAND ROVER trade mark with geographical terms being the names of towns, regions or
suburbs in Australia,
Bennetts Green", "Brookvale", "Cairns", "Doncaster", "Geelong", "Gold Coast", "Hawthorn", "Indooroopilly", "Alice Springs", "Artarmon",
"Blakehurst", "Cannington", "Coffs Harbour", "Taringa", "Toowong", "Albany", "Brighton", "Bundaberg", "Morwell", "Mosman", "Narellan",
"Orange", "Osborne Park" and "Port Lincoln".
- Disputed domain names 35 to 37 incorporate the LAND ROVER trade mark in combination with the geographical indicators "north", "east"
and "city".
- Disputed domain name 38 comprises the LAND ROVER trade mark alone with the designation ".net.au".
- Disputed domain names 39 to 44 combine the LAND ROVER trade mark with various descriptive words, being respectively, "my", "maintain
my", "service my", "capped price service", "leasing" and "capped price servicing". In each case, these descriptions add nothing to
the distinctive character of the LAND ROVER trade mark in these combinations.
- Disputed domain names 45 and 46 combine the LAND ROVER trade mark with the descriptive words "electric" and "hybrid". The word "electric"
is a descriptive word used in relation to vehicles powered with an electric engine and the word "hybrid" is a descriptive word used
in connection with vehicles which incorporate both a fuel engine and an electric engine.
- Disputed domain names 47 and 48 combine the trade mark RANGE ROVER with the geographic name of the country "Australia".
- Disputed domain names 49 to 63 each incorporate the trade mark RANGE ROVER with the name of a territory or capital city in Australia,
, "ACT" (Australian Capital Territory), "Canberra", "Darwin", "Hobart", "Brisbane", "Melbourne", "Perth", "Adelaide" and "Sydney".
- Disputed domain names 64 to 109 combine the trade mark RANGE ROVER with geographical terms being the names of towns, regions or
suburbs in Australia,
., "Port Lincoln", "Albany", "Alexandria", "Alice Springs", "Artarmon", "Bennetts Green", "Blakehurst", "Brighton", "Brookvale", "Cairns",
"Cannington", "Coffs Harbour", "Doncaster", "Geelong", "Gold Coast", "Hawthorn", "Indooroopilly", "Taringa", "Toowong", "Malvern",
"Launceston", "Lavington", "Mackay", "Maroochydore", "Millicent", "Narellan", "Osborne Park", "Parramatta", "Morwell", "Mosman",
"Orange", "Port Macquarie", "Bundaberg", "Dubbo", "Southport", "Tamworth", "Toowoomba", "Townsville" and "Wollongong".
- Disputed domain names 110 to 113 combine the trade mark RANGE ROVER with the geographical indications "north", "south", "west" and
- Disputed domain names 114 to 116 combine the trade marks RANGE ROVER with the Respondent's name Trivett, the non-distinctive term
"hse" and the non-distinctive designation ".net.au".
- Disputed domain names 117 to 132 combine the trade mark RANGE ROVER with various descriptive words, being respectively, "my", "finance",
"new", "capped price servicing", "leasing", "service centre", "sport", "service my", "service", "preowned", "capped price service",
"fixed price service", "parts", "review", "spare parts" and "warranty".
- Disputed domain names 133 to 136 combine the trade mark RANGE ROVER with the words "electric" and "hybrid" respectively. In the
combination "Range Rover Electric", the word "electric" makes reference to a vehicle powered by an electric engine. In the combination
"Range Rover Hybrid", the word "hybrid" makes reference to a vehicle powered by a hybrid engine.
- Disputed domain name 137 combines the trade mark JAGUAR with the geographic name of the country "Australia".
- Disputed domain names 138 to 142 combine the trade mark JAGUAR with the name of a capital city in Australia, namely "Darwin", "Canberra",
"Adelaide", "Brisbane" and "Hobart".
- Disputed domain names 143 to 161 combine the trade mark JAGUAR with geographical terms being the names of towns, regions or suburbs
in Australia, namely, "Wollongong", "Townsville", "Osborne Park", "Mosman", "Taringa", "Toowong", "Coffs Harbour", "Malvern", "Launceston",
"Lavington", "Narellan", "Maroochydore", "Southport", "Millicent", "Morwell", "Orange", "Albany" and "Alexandria".
- Disputed domain names 162 to 164 combine the trade mark JAGUAR with the geographical indications "west", "north" and "south".
- Disputed domain names 165 to 173 combine the trade mark JAGUAR with the descriptive words "service", "maintain my", "service my",
"my", "capped price service", "fixed price service", "review", "spare parts" and "warranty".
- Disputed domain names 174 and 175 combine the trade mark JAGUAR with the descriptive words "hybrid" and "electric".
The Complainant submits that it is well settled that the use of a well-known mark in its entirety, together with a geographic term
or a descriptive term in a domain name, creates a domain name that is confusingly similar to the well-known mark. Accordingly the
Complainant submits that each of the disputed domain names is confusingly similar either to its JAGUAR, LAND ROVER or RANGE ROVER
As far as the second element of the Policy is concerned the Complainant submits that the Respondent has not been licensed or otherwise
permitted by the Complainant to use any of the JAGUAR, LAND ROVER or RANGE ROVER trade marks, or to apply for or use any domain name
incorporating any of those marks or names. It further says that in light of the Complainant's numerous trade mark registrations and
worldwide reputation, it is inconceivable that the Respondent did not know of the Complainant's rights and interests in the trade
marks upon registration in 2014/2015.
The Complainant notes the cease and desist letter sent by its lawyers to the Respondent in late 2015 and the response from the Respondent's
lawyers that the Respondent acquired the disputed domain names for the purpose of developing a web-based application to promote genuine
parts and services and was aiming for a 2018 test release. The Complainant says that the Respondent has provided no evidence of preparations
to use any of the disputed domain names in connection with a
offering of goods or services. Even if there were preparations to develop a web-based application to promote genuine parts and services
(as claimed), such use cannot be characterised as
in accordance with the principles of
Oki Data Americas, Inc. v. ASD, Inc.
, WIPO Case No. D2001-0903.
The Complainant says in this regard that the Respondent is not, and has never been, known by any of the disputed domain names. Further
it says that the words in each of the disputed domain names are associated exclusively with the Complainant. Finally it says that
the Respondent has not acquired any trade mark or service mark rights in any of the disputed domain names.
As far as bad faith is concerned the Complainant says that the Respondent registered the disputed domain names in order to prevent
the Complainant from reflecting its trade marks in corresponding domain names and that the number of similar domain names subject
of this Complaint shows that the Respondent has engaged in a pattern of such conduct. Further says the Complainant, the Respondent
has registered the disputed domain names to disrupt the business of the Complainant in Australia.
Although the Complainant notes that the Respondent is not actively using any of the disputed domain names and has taken no active
steps to sell any of the disputed domain names, the Complainant submits that this does not preclude a finding of bad faith use arising
from inaction and passive holding based on the decision in
Telstra Corporation Limited v. Nuclear Marshmallows
, WIPO Case No. D2000-0003.
The Complainant notes that the only use to which the Respondent claims that it intends to put the disputed domain names is for a web-based
application to promote genuine parts and services which is aimed to be tested in 2018.
The Complainant relies on the four pronged test from the
case for determining whether a third party can use a domain name for promoting the genuine parts and services of another's trade
mark in good faith and says that in the instant case while it is far from clear how the Respondent intends to use the disputed domain
names, it is plain that the Respondent has tried to corner the market in all relevant domain names. For example, says the Complainant,
for the geographical city names the Respondent has registered not only a geographical name followed by the relevant trade mark, but
in many cases the reverse combination with the relevant trade mark followed by the geographical name. As a result, says the Complainant,
the Respondent's registration of the disputed domain names and its potential use of the disputed domain names could not be in good
B. Respondent
The Respondent does not challenge the Complainant's demonstrated trade mark rights but submits that there is no use of each disputed
domain name such as would constitute trade mark infringement and that there is also no misleading or deceptive conduct. It says that
a reasonable and fair-minded member of the public would exercise independent thought and apply common sense when considering whether
a particular disputed domain name or page is affiliated or endorsed by a trademark owner or a particular brand. It says that as far
as the disputed domain names are concerned, either in their current form or linked in some way to the Respondent's "MaintainMy" project,
a reasonable person would not be misled into believing there was a particular relationship or affiliation between the Complainant
and the Respondent and neither does the inclusion of geographical terms impugn the disputed domain names in any way. The Respondent
submits that if the Complaint is to succeed under the first element of the Policy then there would need to be a finding of use made
in relation to each of the disputed domain names.
The Respondent says that there was a legitimate commercial purpose for its registration of each of the disputed domain names being
for the purpose of its potential "MaintainMy" web platform which will connect consumers to a range of service providers, including
manufacturers of both genuine and non-genuine automotive spare parts. Mr. Trivett gives evidence by declaration on behalf of the
Respondent as to the steps he has taken to secure finance and the engagement of a consultant for business development advice. However
the "MaintainMy" project is envisaged by the Respondent to be a substantial undertaking that has already taken up substantial time
and is expected to take considerable further time to develop to market. It says that the work undertaken to date in this project
goes well beyond merely perfunctory steps.
The Respondent notes that its "MaintainMy" project does not contemplate going "behind" any existing businesses, unfairly competing
with existing businesses or seeking to pass itself off as having an affiliation to any businesses that it does not in fact possess.
In fact it submits that a component of the project development is to liaise with suppliers of parts, which would include the Complainant,
before offering services in relation to vehicles manufactured by the Complainant.
Importantly it says that the disputed domain names do not, on the evidence, match any current dealership names or business descriptions
which the Complainant uses in its marketing – for example, there is no evidence of the Complainant marketing products by reference
to the geographic descriptions which form part of some of the disputed domain names. Further, according to the Respondent, the "MaintainMy"
project will not be domiciled at the disputed domain names but rather the disputed domain names will be used (in due course) as a
way of advertising the existence of the "MaintainMy" service to consumers who (in the present case) drive vehicles manufactured by
the Complainant.
The Respondent notes that the content of the existing websites makes it obvious that the disputed domain names are not associated
with such a large, long-established car manufacturer as the Complainant. It observes that the pages currently present only standard
"Crazy Domains" default setting pages and that an Internet user might have interpreted a "parking" page some years ago as potentially
belonging to a recognised brand, but no longer. It says therefore that the use of parking pages which it says are not "pay per click"
advertising pages, does not negate the Respondent's argument that it has a legitimate interest in the disputed domain names. It notes
as set out in Mr. Trivett's declaration that the Respondent intends for future content on the disputed websites to prominently disclose
the true relationship (or lack of relationship) between the sites and the Complainant and is not trying to improperly associate itself
with the Complainant or its trade marks. Finally under the second element, the Respondent says that it has not attempted to "corner
the market" by registering a series of domain names that reflect the Complainant's trademarks.
As far as bad faith is concerned the Respondent says that there is no evidence for the assertion that the Respondent has registered
the disputed domain names to prevent the Complainant from reflecting its trade marks in corresponding domain names and that the Complainant
had ample opportunity to register any of the disputed domain names in the decades prior to the Respondent's registration. Neither
says the Respondent is there any evidence that the Respondent has either intended to disrupt, or has actually disrupted, any part
of the Complainant's business by the registration of any or all of the disputed domain names and in fact this would be very unlikely,
says the Respondent, in view of its requirement for the Complainant's approval of its project. Further, the Respondent notes that
it is not actively using any of the disputed domain names and has taken no active steps to sell any of the disputed domain names.
It says that there is no particular significance in the fact that the Respondent has taken time in developing the "MaintainMy" project.
decision also indicates that passive holding alone does not establish bad faith – rather, all of the circumstances of the case
must be taken into account and that these circumstances are not present in the current case as the Respondent has not failed to correspond
with the Complainant, has not made extortionate transfer claims against it and has not sought to profit from the parked disputed
domain names.
The Respondent says that the matters set out above indicate that the considerations set out in the
caseare satisfied in favour of the Respondent in the present case. The goods and services to be offered by the Respondent under the
currently-in-progress project are of genuine interest to consumers. There is no suggestion of a "bait and switch" or entrapment process
being used. The "MaintainMy" project explicitly distinguishes between genuine and non-genuine parts and Mr. Trivett confirms that
the relationship (if any) between the Complainant and the Respondent will be accurately described in the website that is yet to be
developed so that there can be no suggestion of passing off. The Respondent also submits that it has not sought to corner the market
in domain names because no domain name that the Complainant might wish to register for itself has been registered by the Complainant.
The Respondent notes that if the Complainant genuinely wished to register any of the disputed domain names it could be inferred that
the Complainant with (1) decades of market presence (2) competent legal representation and (3) a suite of trade marks could have
done so long ago had it considered it prudent to do so.
6. Discussion and Findings
A. Identical or Confusingly Similar
The Complainant has demonstrated that it owns registered trade mark rights in Australia for its marks, including Australian trade
mark 83411 for the word mark JAGUAR registered since 1945, Australian trade mark number 96332 for LAND ROVER registered since 1948
and Australian trade mark 230454 for RANGE ROVER registered since 1969. The Panel also notes that such a high degree of recognition
attaches to each of these marks in Australia and elsewhere in the world that these marks fall into the category that could truly
be said to be "well known" marks.
Each of the disputed domain names wholly incorporates one of these trade marks and has no other distinguishing term, or as in the
large majority of cases, contains additional terms that are either geographical or ordinary English descriptive words, such as "capped
price service", "fixed price service", "finance", "service", "review", "electric", "warranty", "spare parts", "pre-owned", "hybrid",
"sport" or pro-nominal expressions such as "my" and "maintain my". The only exceptions to this are the disputed domain names
The Panel notes that, contrary to the Respondent's submissions, the assessment of confusing similarity under the first element of
the Policy should not be confused with a test for trade mark infringement. The test under the first element is essentially a test
of standing and the relevant assessment as undertaken by the majority of panels in .auDRP cases (and as also noted at paragraph 1.2
of the WIPO Overview of Panel Views on Selected UDRP Questions, Second Edition and paragraph 1.2 of the auDA Overview of Panel Views
on Selected auDRP Questions First Edition) in circumstances that the Complainant's trade mark has been wholly incorporated into the
disputed domain name is a simple side by side comparison of the disputed domain names and the Complainant's mark in order to assess
whether the additional term distinguishes the disputed domain name adequately from the Complainant's mark.
The Panel has reviewed each of the disputed domain names, not including in this category the disputed domain names
and finds that neither the inclusion of the geographical terms nor of any the ordinary English words noted above has the effect of
distinguishing any of the disputed domain names from the relevant Complainant's highly distinctive and well known trade marks. Accordingly,
the Panel finds that each of these disputed domain names is either identical or confusingly similar to either the JAGUAR, LANDROVER
or RANGEROVER trade marks as are incorporated into each example in this category of disputed domain names.
The disputed domain names
in the list above do not fit into this category. While each of these disputed domain names wholly incorporates the Complainant's
well known RANGEROVER mark, one incorporates the letters "hse" and the other includes the surname "Trivett". The Panel finds that
the addition of the letters "hse" does not distinguish the disputed domain name
from the Complainant's highly distinctive and well known RANGEROVER mark. Further, the addition of the surname "Trivett" is in the
Panel's view not sufficient to escape a finding of confusing similarity under the first element of the Policy with the Complainant's
RANGEROVER mark.
As a result the Panel finds that the Complaint succeeds under the first element of the Policy in relation to each and every one of
disputed domain names.
B. Rights or Legitimate Interests
The Complainant has submitted that the Respondent has not been licensed or otherwise permitted by the Complainant to use any of the
JAGUAR, LAND ROVER or RANGE ROVER trade marks, or to apply for or use any domain name incorporating any of those marks or names.
The Panel notes the acknowledgement in the Respondent's submissions that it was well aware of these three trade marks at the time
that it registered the disputed domain names.
The Complainant alleges that there is no evidence of preparations to use the disputed domain names in connection with a
offering of goods and services.
In considering this issue it is appropriate to consider the
criteria which, as acknowledged by both parties, previous panels have used to assess whether a respondent's use of a complainant's
mark in a disputed domain name amounts to
use or not using the analysis from
Oki Data Americas, Inc. v. ASD, Inc
case the panel set out four minimum factor requirements as follows in helping to decide whether a respondent was possibly making
use of the disputed domain name, or not:
Respondent must actually be offering the goods or services at issue. See
World Wrestling Federation Entertainment, Inc. v.Ringside Collectibles
, WIPO Case No. D2000-1306 (respondent failed to show demonstrable preparations to use the domain name in connection with a
- Respondent must use the site to sell only the trademarked goods; otherwise, it could be using the trademark to bait Internet users
and then switch them to other goods.
Nikon, Inc. v. Technilab
, WIPO Case No. D2000-1774 (use of Nikon-related domain names to sell Nikon and competitive cameras not a legitimate use);
M.F.H. Fejlesztõ Korlátolt Felelõsségû Tvrsaság v. Dany Daniele
, D2015-0639;
- The site must accurately disclose the registrant's relationship with the trademark owner; it may not, for example, falsely suggest
that it is the trademark owner, or that the website is the official site, if, in fact, it is only one of many sales agents. See
Houghton Mifflin Co. v. Weatherman, Inc
, WIPO Case No. D2001-0211 (no
offering where website's use of Complainant's logo, and lack of any disclaimer, suggested that website was the official Curious George
R.T. Quaife Engineering v. Luton
, WIPO Case No. D2000-1201 (no
offering because domain name
improperly suggested that the reflected site was the official U.S. website for Quaife, an English company; moreover, respondent's
deceptive communications with inquiring consumers supported a finding of no legitimate interest);
Easy Heat, Inc. v. Shelter Prods.
, WIPO Case No. D2001-0344 (no
use when respondent suggested that it was the manufacturer of complainant's products);
Grundfos Holding A/S v. Ahmed Alshahri
, WIPO Case No. D2015-1112;
- The Respondent must not try to corner the market in all domain names, thus depriving the trademark owner of reflecting its own mark
in a domain name.
Magnum Piering, Inc. v. Mudjackers
, WIPO Case No. D2000-1525 ("a single distributor is extremely unlikely to have a legitimate interest in precluding others from using
numerous variants on a mark");
Johnson & Johnson v. Ebubekir Ozdogan
, WIPO Case No. D2015-1031.
The application of these factors to a case such as the current one in which the re-seller is unauthorized was confirmed by the panel
National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing, Inc. v. Racing Connection / The Racin' Connection, Inc
., WIPO Case No. D2007-1524and the approach was adopted quite recently by this panel under the .auDRP in
BlueScope Steel Limited v. Jye Fulton
, WIPOCase No. DAU2016-0029
As noted above, the Respondent submits that it has registered the disputed domain names for the purposes of developing its proposed
"Maintain My" web platform which will connect consumers to a range of service providers, including manufacturers of both genuine
and non-genuine automotive spare parts.
Although this business is not yet up and running it is clear based on the statutory declaration of Mr. Trivett that it is under development
albeit that it is a substantial project and will take some time to get to launch point. As part of this platform it is apparent that
the Respondent intends to offer services in relation to JAGUAR, LANDROVER and RANGEROVER spare parts. It seems that a key part of
preparations for the business to date has been registration of the disputed domain names. However, the Respondent acknowledges that
the disputed domain names are to be used to drive traffic to the Respondent's website and have been registered for this purpose;
in this regard and as further discussed below in relation to the fourth
factor, the Respondent's registration of the disputed domain names for such purpose cannot be considered as being demonstrable preparations
Regarding the second requirement of
, the Respondent maintains that there is no suggestion of a "bait and switch" or entrapment process being used here. It says that
the "MaintainMy" project will explicitly distinguish between genuine and non-genuine parts and that Mr. Trivett confirms in his declaration
that the relationship (if any) between the Complainant and the Respondent will be accurately described in the website that is yet
to be developed so that there can be no suggestion of passing off. The Panel also notes Mr. Trivett's acknowledgement that the Respondent
intends to seek the Complainant's approval for its website use of the Complainant's trade marks and therefore infers that this will
not be a "bait and switch" case and that the Complainant will in any event have the opportunity to check the manner of use and mechanism
of the website to ensure prior to launch that this is not a case of "bait and switch" and that no infringing use is made of the Complainant's
trade marks.
As to the third
factor, Mr. Trivett has expressly confirmed in his declaration that the proposed "MaintainMy" website will accurately disclose the
registrant's relationship with the trade mark owner; and will not suggest that it is the trademark owner, or that the website is
the Complainant's official site. Therefore at this point the Panel is satisfied as to the Respondent's future intentions in this
The application of the fourth
factor presents a further difficulty for the Respondent. In registering 175 domain names containing the Complainant's trade marks,
the Panel must determine whether the Respondent has tried to corner the market in all domain names, thus depriving the Complainant
of reflecting its own mark in a domain name.
The Panel notes that the Respondent says that the web platform will not be domiciled at the disputed domain names but rather will
be used as a way of advertising the existence of the "MaintainMy" service to consumers who drive vehicles manufactured by the Complainant.
The Respondent expressly asserts that it is not trying to corner the market in this way. It says that the disputed domain names do
not, on the evidence, match any current dealership names or business descriptions which the Complainant uses in its marketing –
for example, there is no evidence of the Complainant marketing products by reference to the geographic descriptions which form part
of some of the disputed domain names. In other words it seems to the Panel that the disputed domain names will be used in on-line
advertising programmes to trigger advertisements or possibly links to the parts of the Respondent's web platform that are relevant
to consumers who drive the Complainant's vehicles.
The fact remains that the Respondent has registered 175 domain names that each contain the Complainant's trade marks together with
geographical or common English terms except in two cases (namely disputed domain names
) which the Panel will discuss further below. As noted under the first element there are no distinguishing elements in these disputed
domain names and the Respondent has as noted by the Complainant registered not only a geographical name followed by the relevant
trade mark, but in many cases the reverse combination with the relevant trade mark followed by the geographical name. The Panel also
notes that in every case and as confirmed by the Respondent, these are for its own commercial purposes and not for a legitimate non-commercial
purpose. While the Respondent may not have sought to register domain names that are directly apposite to the Complainant's local
Australian dealers, in the Panel's view Internet users seeing the disputed domain names would at first glance expect them to relate
to websites affiliated with or authorised by the Complainant and the Complainant will be potentially deprived in the future from
seeking to register these domain names. In these circumstances the Panel fails to see how registering 173 domain names containing
a trade mark owner's well known marks without distinguishing elements does not amount to an attempt to corner the market in relevant
domain names.
The two domain names that do not merely contain geographical terms or common English words, namely domain names
all feature the Complainant's well known marks and in the Panel's view on first glance Internet users would also reasonably assume
that the Respondent's use of the particular disputed domain name was authorised by, or that the Respondent was an affiliate or re-seller
of the Complainant's products.
Had the Respondent been able to point to evidence that it had developed trade mark rights in its proposed "MaintainMy" mark, and had
it been able to suggest that its Trivett family members sold Range Rover vehicles then, all other things being equal and supposing
that there was no evidence to support the allegation that it had attempted to corner the market in relevant domain names, the result
might have been different under this element of the Policy. However no such evidence has been put forward and in the circumstances
the Panel finds that the Respondent has failed to rebut the case made out by the Complainant that the Respondent has attempted to
corner the market in relevant domain names.
The Panel notes that the Respondent has registered other domain names for its "MaintainMy" project that do not contain the Complainant's
or any other party's trade marks and it was perfectly entitled to do so. However in relation to the disputed domain names the Panel
finds that the Respondent's case has not met the criteria set out in the
The Respondent might have been able to succeed under this element if it had only sought to register disputed domain names that contained
an adequate distinguisher in circumstances that the other criteria of the
guidelines were fulfilled. It is not legitimate for a party to seek to register 175 domain names for commercial purposes where those
domain names wholly incorporate a third party's well known trade marks without any proper distinguisher and without the trade mark
owner's authority. For these reasons the Complaint succeeds under the second element of the Policy.
C. Registered or Subsequently Used in Bad Faith
It is clear that the Respondent and its "moving spirit" Mr. Trivett, who has many years' experience as a car dealer across Australia
for a whole range of brands of motor vehicle (although not for the brands at issue in this Complaint), were well aware of the Complainant's
trade marks at the date of registration of each of the disputed domain names. Mr. Trivett has in fact confirmed in his declaration
that he is very cognizant of the intellectual property rights of vehicle manufacturers and that he will need the involvement and
support of every manufacturer of any vehicle brand involved in his "MaintainMy" project concerning in particular parts, compliance
and up to date servicing information. He notes that obtaining this support has to date proved to be one of the major challenges of
the project.
In this light it is extremely surprising that the Respondent, at Mr. Trivett's direction, sought to register 175 domain names that
wholly incorporate the Complainant's very well-known trade marks without first seeking the Complainant's authority. The rationale
according to Mr. Trivett was to register all of the key domain names that would be necessary in order to maximize the effectiveness
of a strategy to build on-line traffic around the particular brands for the benefit of the "Maintain My" project. He submits that
he expressly instructed the consultant not to register domain names that might include business names of the Complainant's dealers
or businesses. However it seems that at this early stage of the project neither he nor his Internet consultant considered the likely
attitude of the Complainant to the Respondent's wide ranging domain name registration scheme, or to the need to obtain the future
support and co-operation of brand owners, such as the Complainant.
The overwhelming inference is that the Respondent, for its own commercial purposes and as directed by Mr. Trivett, effectively sought
to corner the market in relevant domain names incorporating the well-known JAGUAR, LANDROVER and RANGEROVER marks in the ".au" domain
name space. The argument, as raised by the Respondent, that the Complainant had the opportunity to register these domain names for
many years but has chosen not to do so, misses the point. The owner of a well-known trade mark cannot be expected to register every
variation of any relevant domain name that may incorporate its well-known trade mark as a defensive measure.
The Respondent's domain name registration scheme was undertaken knowingly but without proper consideration of the Complainant's trade
mark rights. The result might have been different had the Respondent registered a single domain name that incorporated a distinguisher
in which it owned trade mark rights as well as the Complainant's brand name, provided always that the surrounding circumstances otherwise
fulfilled the
requirements, particularly the actual use to which such domain name would be put. However that is certainly not the case in respect
of any of the disputed domain names.
The Panel also notes that the Respondent alleges that the disputed domain names have been registered to drive traffic to the "MaintainMy"
project main website. The Panel finds that the Respondent has registered the disputed domain names to attract, for commercial gain,
Internet users to its "MaintainMy" project website, by creating a likelihood of confusion with the Complainant's trade marks.
The Panel does not need to consider passive use as in its view and for the reasons set out above the Respondent's registration of
the disputed domain names amounts to registration in bad faith. Under paragraph 4(b)(ii) of the Policy the registration of a domain
name in order to prevent the owner of a name, trademark or service mark from reflecting that name or mark in a corresponding domain
name is considered to be evidence of registration or use in bad faith. The Respondent's registration of the disputed domain names
has effectively precluded the Complainant from registering geographical domain names in Australia that incorporate the JAGUAR, LANDROVER
and RANGEROVER marks and therefore the Panel also finds that the requirements of this section of the Policy are fulfilled and that
this amounts to further evidence of registration or use in bad faith.
As a result the Panel finds that the Complaint succeeds under this element of the policy in relation to each of the disputed domain
7. Decision
For all the foregoing reasons, in accordance with Paragraphs 4(i) of the Policy and 15 of the Rules, the Panel orders that the domain
be transferred to the Complainant. The Panel orders that the disputed domain name
which contains the family name of a beneficiary of the Respondent, be cancelled.
Alistair Payne
Sole Panelist
Date: October 10, 2016
No downloadable files available