D20-21\087 [2020] SCTA 195 (20 November 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\087
FILE NUMBER : 17-2146
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
JOINED PARTY
The Insurer
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
The Financial Counsellor
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(Cth) (the Complaints Act) and held on 22 September 2020 before:
Jane Abbott,
Presiding Member
McAlister, Member.
DECISIONS UNDER REVIEW
decisions under review are as follows:
That of the
Insurer to reject the Complainant’s claim for interest on the insured
Total and Permanent Disablement (TPD) benefit
paid by the Insurer on 25 May
That of the
Trustee to affirm the Insurer’s rejection of the Complainant’s claim
for interest.
Insurer notified the Complainant by letter dated 13 October 2017 and, following
review, by letter dated 31 October 2017 of its
decision to reject the
Complainant’s claim.
Trustee notified the Tribunal of its decision on 20 September 2019.
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal determines to set aside the decisions under review and substitute its
own decisions that the Complainant’s claim
for interest on the insured TPD
benefit is accepted.
Insurer must pay interest as set out below to the Trustee. The Trustee must then
pay the Complainant expeditiously.
is to be calculated by the Insurer from the date the Tribunal considered it was
unreasonable for the Insurer to have withheld
payment of the Complainant’s
TPD benefit. The Tribunal has determined this date to be 58 days after the
conciliation conference
held on 23 September 2015, being 20 November 2015.
Interest is to be calculated to 25 May 2017, the date the benefit was paid by
the Insurer to the Trustee, as per
Insurance Contracts Act
interest is to be calculated from 9 August 2011 to 30 March 2012 as it was
unreasonable for the Complainant not to be advised
of the reasons the Insurer
was considering declining her TPD claim in the procedural fairness letter.
Interest is to be calculated
in the same manner as per
Contracts Act 1984
the Complainant has been denied the use of the above amounts of interest, the
Insurer is required to pay further interest on the
total of the two amounts,
calculated by reference to the Reserve Bank’s cash rate, from 25 May 2017
up until the date the Insurer
makes payment to the Trustee.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
to s32 of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal requested submissions from the
submission was received from the Complainant.
Trustee and the Insurer declined to provide a submission, choosing instead to
rely on information previously submitted to the
submissions were exchanged and responses were invited. No responses were
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
papers provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant made a complaint that the decisions of the Trustee and the Insurer
were unfair or unreasonable for the reasons summarised
determination.
Complainant is currently aged 59 years. On or about 9 February 2010, she lodged
a TPD claim with the Trustee.
Insurer declined the claim on or about 14 November 2011 on the basis that it was
not satisfied that the Complainant had provided
enough information to establish
that she was working more than 10 hours a week. The claim was assessed under the
‘Activities
of Daily Living’ (ADL) definition of the relevant policy
and it was determined that she was not TPD.
Complainant disagreed with the Insurer’s decision as her position was that
she provided sufficient information to establish
she was working more than 10
hours a week, including a Statutory Declaration, and asserted her claim to a TPD
benefit should be assessed
under the ‘unlikely to work’ (UTW)
definition. In December 2014, the Complainant lodged a complaint to the Tribunal
Tribunal) in relation to the Insurer’s and the Trustee’s
28 March 2017, the 2017 Tribunal remitted the Trustee’s and the
Insurer’s decisions with directions to assess the TPD
claim under the UTW
definition as opposed to the ADL definition. The Insurer and the Trustee
accepted the claim and the benefit was
paid to a Fund account for the
Complainant on 8 June 2017.
Complainant has stated that the Insurer decided to use the date of 28 March 2017
to pay out the claim, based on the information
the Complainant provided to the
2017 Tribunal. The Complainant contends that the Insurer neither accepted the
evidence nor assessed
the claim properly in the first instance, as there was
ample evidence she had other employers and worked more than 10 hours a week
the relevant time. The Complainant is of the view that the claim should have
been assessed properly when it was first lodged.
She seeks interest to be back
paid to the date of the initial rejection, being 3 November 2011.
Insurer and the Trustee have made offers of interest to the Complainant in
attempts to resolve the complaint. All offers have
been rejected by the
Complainant.
Benefit in dispute
resolution sought by the Complainant is for the payment of interest in the
amount of $23,579.33 which is calculated using the
rate specified under the ICA
from 3 November 2011 to 8 June 2017.
Events not in dispute:
− The Complainant’s date of birth.
− The Complainant lodged a TPD claim with the
− The Trustee forwarded the claim after receipt of
further information to the Insurer.
− The Trustee sent a procedural fairness letter to
the Complainant’s lawyers.
− The Insurer completed its assessment and
declined the Complainant’s TPD claim.
− The Insurer advised the Trustee it had declined
the Complainant’s claim.
− The Trustee advised the Complainant her TPD
claim had been declined.
− The Complainant lodged her first complaint
with the 2017 Tribunal.
− The 2017 Tribunal determined the Insurer had
enough information to establish that the Complainant was working, on average,
more than 10 hours a week over the 12-month period before she lodged her TPD
− The Complainant’s claim was accepted by the
Insurer and her insurance of $67,200 was paid to the Trustee.
− The Trustee paid the insurance to an account for
the Complainant in the Fund.
The Complainant lodged a claim for
interest on her TPD claim with the Insurer.
− The Insurer notified the Complainant of its
decision to decline a payment of interest.
− The Complainant lodged a complaint with the
− The Insurer notified the Complainant of its
review decision.
− The Complainant lodged a complaint with the
Tribunal considers that there are no provisions in the trust deed relevant to
the complaint.
INSURANCE POLICY
Tribunal considers that there are no provisions in the insurance policy relevant
to the complaint.
LEGISLATION
ICA is relevant to this complaint. The relevant provision is:
Part VI—Claims
(1) Where an insurer is liable to pay to a person an amount under a
contract of insurance or under this Act in relation to a contract
of insurance,
the insurer is also liable to pay interest on the amount to that person in
accordance with this section.
(2) The period in respect of which interest is payable is the period
commencing on the day as from which it was unreasonable for the
insurer to have
withheld payment of the amount and ending on whichever is the earlier of the
following days:
(a) the day on which the payment is made;
(b) the day on which the payment is sent by post to the person to whom it is
(3) The rate at which interest is payable in respect of a day included in the
period referred to in subsection (2) is the rate applicable
in respect of that
day that is prescribed by, or worked out in a manner prescribed by, the
regulations.
(4) This section applies to the exclusion of any other law that would
otherwise apply.
(5) In subsection (4):
(a) a statutory law of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory; or
(b) a rule of common law or equity.
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
main points made by the Complainant are as follows:
The Financial
Counsellor, on behalf of the Complainant, submitted:
We are seeking interest from the date of rejection, that
being from the Final Claims Summary 3 November 2011 to the date that claim
paid out to the client (hit clients [sic] account 8 June 2017).
The delay was based on them rejecting the claim. This rejection was
challenged internally and eventually at the SCT. ...
On the 13 October the insurer, ... agreed that insurance should be paid
however they decided to use the date of 28 March 2017 to pay
out the claim based
on info we provided to give to the SCT. We contend that [the Insurer] did not
accept this evidence nor assess
the claim properly in the first place as their
[sic] was ample evidence the client had other employers and [the Insurer] chose
ignore this evidence in order to not pay the claim. The SCT ultimately found
against [the Insurer] and [the Trustee] and forced them
to pay $62,700. As [the
Insurer] and [the Trustee] where [sic] forced to pay the insurance by SCT we
believe that the client should
have been assessed properly first time around and
ask that interest be back paid to date of initial rejection.
We are requesting $23579.33 in interest.
The Insurer
failed by not referring to either the Complainant’s pay from Employer 1 or
the payments made by Employer 2 that
are listed on the 2009 tax return in its
final summary of 2011. Having access to the tax returns the Insurer should have
of payments from both employers. This would have highlighted that the
Complainant had more than one employer and the ADL definition
was not the
correct definition to use.
Insurer’s submission dated 25 August 2016 (related to the previous
complaint), it noted there is income from Employer
1 but assumed that it was not
relevant to the period.
If the Insurer
had followed up for full employment details, the Complainant could have provided
details of all her employers and clarified
the nature of her employment with
Employer 1.
Tribunal found that the Complainant did not need to provide additional
information. The Insurer is still arguing they needed
until the date of the 2017
Tribunal determination to make the payment.
The Trustee has
breached its obligation to identify a breach of duty as it ignored evidence,
like payslips from a second employer.
The Complainant
had provided the Insurer and the Trustee permission to contact her employers.
If evidence submitted was inadequate then there is a legal requirement for
more investigation. The Trustee must make further enquiries
to resolve the
apparent conflicts in evidence.
The Trustee and
the Insurer ignored a contribution made by Employer 2 into the
Complainant’s account shown on her 30 June 2009
statement. The payment was
for work performed during the assessment period.
The Trustee does
not appear to have independently assessed the claim after rejection by the
Insurer. The way the complaint has been
dealt with by the Trustee has wrongly
imposed the onus of proof on the Complainant.
The Trustee
needs to do everything to pursue a claim for the benefit of the beneficiary and
they have not done this.
In dismissing
evidence of another employer in the tax return and ignoring a superannuation
contribution, the Insurer made an unfounded
assumption. Ignoring evidence of
multiple roles with Employer 1 the Insurer and the Trustee breached their duty
to act reasonably.
▪ The Insurer stated in its letter of decline of the interest claim that it did not receive
of the Complainant’s employment hours from Employer 2 until 28 March 2017 and it could not finalise its decision on her TPD
claim until then.
confirmation
▪ The Insurer did not provide procedural fairness to the Complainant when assessing her TPD
as it did not advise her lawyers she was being assessed against the ADL definition due to insufficient working hours.
The Insurer
stated in a letter dated 31 October 2017 that they had all the information
required to complete the claim as of 3 August
2011. Thus, the Complainant could
ask for interest from this date, however, the Complainant is happy to receive
interest from the
date of rejection of her claim, 3 November 2011.
The Complainant
submitted she suffered financially by not being paid her TPD benefit when she
originally lodged her claim. She lost
opportunities by not being paid until
The Trustee
main points made by the Trustee are as follows:
On 27 February
2009 an inquiry was made on the Complainant’s behalf regarding accessing
TPD benefits.
On 9 February
2010 the Trustee received a Member Statement and obtained information from
Employer 1 relating to the Complainant’s
claim and on 3 March 2010 her
claim documents were forwarded to the Insurer and the assessment process began.
Lawyers were then acting
for the Complainant.
The terms of the
insurance policy had a requirement that a member work more than 10 hours per
week averaged over the previous 12 months
to be considered under the UTW
disability definition. If the hours were less than that, the disability
definition required the assessment
to be made based on:
(a) specific loss of limbs or sight;
(b) inability to independently perform ADLs; or
(c) suffering from terminal illness.
consideration of all the material provided, the Insurer concluded that the
Complainant’s pre-disablement average hours
over the previous 12 months
were less than 10. She was not terminally ill and had not lost any limbs and was
still able to perform
the relevant ADLs. Since the UTW definition was excluded
by the limited hours worked the claim was declined.
The Trustee was
advised of this on 2 March 2012 and wrote to the Complainant’s new lawyers
on 30 March 2012 setting out the
reasons the claim had been declined including
the Insurer’s detailed advice to the Trustee and offering the option of a
by the Trustee’s complaints coordinator. No review was sought then
and no additional information was provided.
The Trustee next
heard of the matter in May 2014 when the Insurer advised the Trustee that they
had received a complaint from the
Financial Ombudsman Service and could the
Trustee initiate their internal review process. The Trustee subsequently
received a letter
dated 10 July 2014 from the Tribunal advising that a complaint
had been lodged with them by the Complainant's Financial Counsellor
assisting the Complainant and it had been closed and passed to the Trustee.
This material
sought a review of the hours worked to see if the UTW definition might be
appropriate but, unfortunately, while a review
was sought there was no evidence
forthcoming which gave a clear indication of the actual hours worked in the
relevant period. It
was difficult to obtain hard evidence on hours worked from
the Complainant and her representatives when the Trustee requested it
of her claim.
The matter was
eventually determined, after information provided to the 2017 Tribunal was
sufficient for it to require the Insurer
and the Trustee assess the claim
against the UTW definition. This was done and the benefit was approved and
signed off for payment
by the Trustee on 30 May 2017.
The insurance
amount of $67,200 was credited to an account in the Complainant’s name on
8 June 2017 and a pre-payment letter
was sent to the Complainant on 20 June 2017
including a withdrawal form. A partial withdrawal was made on 26 March 2018. The
benefit balance has been accessible since 8 June 2017.
The present
matter relates to whether interest should be payable because of the time taken
to finalise the determination. Unfortunately,
there were delays in the provision
of satisfactory evidence that the Complainant was working adequate hours to be
assessed under
the UTW definition. This was crucial to determining whether any
payment could be made.
Once that matter
was clarified the Insurer promptly used the existing medical evidence to approve
the claim and it was credited with
minimal delay to be accessible to the
Complainant through the Fund.
The Insurer
main points made by the Insurer are as follows:
The Insurer
declined the Complainant’s TPD claim in November 2011 on the basis it was
not satisfied that the Complainant had
provided enough information to establish
that she was working more than 10 hours a week. As a result, the Insurer
assessed the Complainant
under the ADL definition of the policy and determined
that she was not TPD.
The Complainant
disagreed with the decision and asserted that her entitlement to a TPD benefit
should be assessed under the UTW definition.
On or about 11 December 2014, the
Complainant lodged a complaint to the 2017 Tribunal.
On 28 March
2017, the 2017 Tribunal found in favour of the Complainant with respect to the
complaint and determined that the Insurer
did have enough information to
establish that the Complainant was working, on average, more than 10 hours a
week over the 12-month
period before she lodged her TPD claim. Therefore, rather
than assessing the Complainant’s entitlement to a TPD benefit under
ADL definition, the Insurer was required to assess her under the UTW definition,
which ultimately led to the acceptance of her
The Insurer
submits there is no ‘standard practice’ that requires insurers to
pay interest from three months after a claim
for a benefit has been lodged.
Under section 57 of the ICA, an insurer is liable to pay interest from the day
on which it was unreasonable
to the insurer to have withheld payment of a
benefit, ending on the day on which payment is made.
When determining
the question of interest, a Court will have regard to the particular
circumstances of each case – for example
in the matter of
FSS Trustee
Corporation
[2015] NSWSC 795
, interest was awarded nearly two
years after the date the relevant TPD claim was lodged. On that basis, the
Insurer denies any liability
to pay the Complainant interest from three months
from the date she lodged her TPD claim.
The Insurer
contends that any issues with respect to the TPD claim were adequately dealt
with by the 2017 Tribunal in the determination
issued for the TPD complaint. On
that basis, the Insurer submits the Tribunal should not consider any of these
issues a second time.
The Insurer has
acted reasonably in investigating, assessing and determining the
Complainant’s TPD claim. Since the complaint
was lodged, the Insurer has
made genuine offers to resolve the complaint on a commercial basis, which it
considers were fair and
reasonable.
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
s37(2)(a) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must review the decisions of both
the Trustee and the Insurer.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must determine whether the decisions
of the Trustee and the Insurer to reject the
Complainant’s claim for
interest on the insured TPD benefit paid by the Insurer on 25 May 2017 were fair
and reasonable in
their operation in relation to the Complainant in the
circumstances.
issue is not what decision the Tribunal would have made on the material before
the Trustee and the Insurer but whether the decisions
were fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal has taken into account all the material
provided by the Parties, the provisions of the
Trust Deed and the Policy and the
relevant law. The Tribunal is satisfied that the material it has relied on has
been provided to
all Parties.
Complainant lodged a TPD claim with the Trustee in February 2010. The claim was
declined on 3 November 2011 by the Insurer as
the Complainant did not satisfy
the ADL definition of TPD in the insurance policy.
ADL definition applied if a member was working less than 10 hours per week for
the 12 months prior to disablement. The relevant
period for establishing the
Complainant’s hours of work per week was 17 September 2007 to 16 September
the evidence before them at the time, the Trustee and the Insurer determined the
Complainant was working less than 10 hours per
week at the relevant time.
Complainant lodged a complaint about the denial of her claim with the 2017
Tribunal. She provided evidence from her employers
concerning her working hours
and the 2017 Tribunal determined on 28 March 2017 to remit the decline decisions
to the Trustee and
the Insurer to assess her claim under the UTW definition in
the insurance policy.
Complainant’s claim was accepted and the Insurer paid her insured benefit
to the Trustee on 25 May 2017.
current complaint concerns the payment of interest on that benefit. Under s57 of
the ICA, interest is payable if an insurer unreasonably
withheld payment of an
insured amount. The Tribunal’s approach to claims for unreasonable delay
is to consider when it would
have been reasonable for the Insurer to admit the
Complainant’s TPD claim based on the objective facts of the claim. This
has been judicially approved in
O’Neill v FSS Trustee
Corporation
[2015] NSWSC 1248.
2017 Tribunal
Complainant submitted the 2017 Tribunal determined the TPD benefit should be
paid to the Complainant. However, it made no such
determination. Its finding was
that the incorrect policy definition of TPD had been used by the Insurer and it
should reassess her
claim under the correct definition.
Complainant’s position is that the Insurer and the Trustee had enough
evidence of her employment arrangements, when they
originally assessed her
claim, to conclude she worked more than 10 hours per week for the relevant
Trustee and the Insurer submitted there was no clear evidence of her hours
worked in the documents provided by the Complainant
for her TPD claim. The
Insurer was of the opinion the information originally provided by the
Complainant concerning her hours worked
was not supported by her tax returns or
payslips, where they existed.
Insurer submitted to the 2017 Tribunal that income from Employer 3 did not
appear in the Complainant’s tax returns and no
payslips were provided for
work undertaken with Employer 2. There was no income from Employer 2 shown on
her 2008 tax return.
the 2017 Tribunal determined the Complainant was not required to provide the
Insurer ‘with payslips, tax assessments
or GST and PAYG returns, in order
to reasonably establish the amount of hours she had worked for Employers 2 and
3’. This was
based on its conclusion that the word ‘work’
should have its common sense meaning, as it was not defined in the relevant
insurance policy.
2017 Tribunal accepted the hours worked by the Complainant, based on the
information provided by her employers, totalled greater
than 10 hours per week
for the relevant period, and therefore the UTW definition of TPD applied to the
Complainant’s claim.
Current Tribunal
Employer did not initially have sufficient information about hours
her current claim for interest, the Complainant submitted the Insurer had
material, when originally assessing her claim, which
highlighted she had more
than one employer and therefore the ADL definition was not the correct
definition to use. She further submitted
the Insurer dismissed evidence of an
employer other than Employer 1 in her tax returns and ignored a superannuation
contribution
from Employer 2 shown on her 30 June 2009 annual member
this Tribunal considered having knowledge of other employers does not mean the
Insurer had information on hours worked for
those employers, which was the
critical factor in determining the correct TPD definition.
particular, this Tribunal noted the Insurer did not have the material from
Employers 2 and 3 or the additional material provided
by Employer 1 to the 2017
Tribunal when making its original decision.
Complainant submitted the Insurer should have requested further information when
originally assessing her claim to clarify the
hours she worked at the relevant
this Tribunal is satisfied the tax returns indicated Employer 1 was the
Complainant’s main employer and the pay information
provided showed she
only worked on average approximately one hour per week. This Tribunal does not
consider that information would
reasonably have put the Insurer on notice of the
possibility of the Complainant working 10 hours or more.
this Tribunal could not find it was unreasonable for the Insurer to conclude the
Complainant worked less than 10 hours
per week for the relevant period on the
information it had available. This Tribunal is satisfied it was reasonable for
the Insurer
to rely on information in tax returns and payslips to ascertain
whether it was likely further information may be available. The 2017
determined the Insurer should not have taken this approach, but that was on the
basis of the further information provided
by the Complainant and the 2017
Tribunal’s interpretation of the insurance policy. However, in addressing
the question of whether
the Insurer unreasonably delayed in its assessment of
her claim, this Tribunal considers the Insurer’s treatment of the material
it had available when assessing the Complainant’s claim was not
unreasonable.
Insurer responsible for delay caused by lack of procedural
Insurer sent the Trustee a draft procedural fairness letter dated 3 August 2011,
requesting the Trustee forward it to the Complainant.
The Trustee sent the
contents of this letter, on the Trustee’s letterhead, dated 9 August 2011
to the Complainant’s lawyers.
The letter detailed the medical reports and
other information obtained by the Insurer to assess her claim. It stated:
Our Insurer has advised that the above material contains
information which is adverse to [the Complainant’s] claim.
Our Insurer would like to give [the Complainant] an opportunity to comment on
the enclosed material and provide any further information
in response, before
they make a decision as to whether [the Complainant] is entitled to receive a
benefit under the terms and conditions
of the Insurance policy.
Complainant’s lawyers advised they had queried what specifically were the
adverse effects by letters dated 15 August 2011
and 9 September 2011 to the
Trustee, but received no reply. The lawyers further advised the Trustee rang
them on 26 September 2011
asking if the Complainant wished to provide further
medical evidence. The lawyers advised there was no further medical evidence
to provide.
Complainant was advised of the decline of her TPD claim by the Trustee on 30
March 2012.
Tribunal considered that it was at this date the Complainant became aware her
claim had been denied because she did not satisfy
the ADL definition of TPD. The
Tribunal further considered the procedural fairness letter should have advised
the Complainant’s
claim was being assessed against the ADL definition and
that the hours she worked for the relevant period were important.
Tribunal is of the opinion, had the Complainant known the significance of her
employment information, she could have provided
it at an earlier time. Later
events showed information was available.
Insurer not responsible for delay attributable to the
Complainant
the Tribunal noted neither the Complainant nor her lawyers lodged a complaint
with the Trustee and supplied evidence of her
hours worked even when they became
aware of the claim assessment using the ADL definition on 30 March 2012. The
Tribunal does not
consider it reasonable for either the Trustee or the Insurer
to be responsible for the payment of any interest for the period during
the Complainant did not provide supporting evidence when she was aware of the
reason for her claim being declined.
Tribunal noted the Complainant lodged her first complaint with the Tribunal in
December 2014. As part of the 2017 Tribunal’s
investigation process, the
Complainant submitted documents from each of her three employers to support her
position that she worked
more than 10 hours a week for the relevant period.
documents included:
Employer 1 − a letter advising hours the Complainant worked
during the relevant period both as a contracted employee and on
Employer 2 − a letter confirming the Complainant worked for over 250
hours over the period 2 November 2007 to 23 July 2008.
Employer 3 − an email from the editor of a magazine, for whom the
Complainant provided articles, advising the Complainant’s
role required 60
to 70 hours per issue as a minimum; and
− various payslips.
information from Employer 1 was provided to the Tribunal on 5 August 2015,
Employer 2 on 26 August 2015 and Employer 3 on 11 September
the basis of the documents provided, the 2017 Tribunal determined the
Complainant had worked more than 10 hours per week and should
have been assessed
against the UTW TPD definition. The determination was sent to the Parties on 28
March 2017.
When could the Insurer have reasonably paid the TPD benefit
once it had the relevant information?
Tribunal noted the Insurer assessed the Complainant’s claim against the
UTW definition, and accepted and paid her TPD benefit
on 25 May 2017.
2017 Tribunal based its determination on the above documents and other
supporting material. Therefore, this Tribunal is satisfied
the Insurer and the
Trustee could also have concluded from the same material the Complainant was
entitled to have her TPD claim assessed
against the UTW definition. It is
therefore unfair and unreasonable for the Insurer and the Trustee to deny the
Complainant’s
claim for interest in these circumstances.
last of the documents was received by the 2017 Tribunal on 11 September 2015 and
forwarded to the Trustee on 14 September 2015.
A conciliation conference was
held with the Parties on 23 September 2015 by which time these documents had
been exchanged with all
Parties and they had been able to consider the material.
The Insurer paid the Complainant’s claim on 25 May 2017, 58 days after
date of the 2017 Tribunal’s decision of 28 March 2017.
this Tribunal is satisfied the Insurer could have taken the same period to
assess the Complainant’s claim on earlier
receipt of the documents from
the Employers. 58 days after 23 September 2015 is 20 November 2015. This
Tribunal is satisfied interest
is reasonably payable by the Insurer to the
Complainant from 20 November 2015 to the date of payment of the benefit on 25
Tribunal also considers interest should be payable for the period from the date
of the procedural fairness letter to the date
the Complainant was advised her
claim had been declined. This Tribunal is satisfied the Complainant was denied
the opportunity to
lodge further employment material for this period as she was
not advised of the reason she was being assessed against the ADL definition
the first letter. It is fair and reasonable for the Insurer to also be held
responsible for this period of delay.
interest is therefore payable from 9 August 2011 to 30 March 2012.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decisions under review
if it is satisfied that the decisions, in their
operation in relation to the
Complainant, were fair and reasonable in the circumstances.
the reasons stated above the Tribunal is not satisfied that the decisions under
review were fair and reasonable in their operation
to the Complainant in the
circumstances. Under s37(3) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must make a
determination and it can set
aside the decisions of the decision-makers and
substitute another decision.
s37(1)(a) and (2)(b) of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal has all the powers,
obligations and discretions of the Trustee and
the Insurer.
making its decision, s37(5) of the Complaints Act requires that the Tribunal
must not do anything that would be contrary to law
or to the governing rules of
the Fund and the contract of insurance between the Insurer and Trustee.
s37(4) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal may only exercise its determination
making power for the purpose of placing the Complainant
as nearly as
practicable, in the position that they would have been in but for the
unfairness, unreasonableness, or both, that the
Tribunal has determined to exist
in relation to the Trustee’s and Insurer’s decisions.
accordance with these provisions, the Tribunal determines to set aside the
decisions under review and substitute its own decision
Complainant’s claim for interest on the insured TPD benefit is accepted.
Insurer must pay interest as set out below to the Trustee. The Trustee must then
pay the Complainant expeditiously.
is to be calculated by the Insurer from the date the Tribunal considered it was
unreasonable for the Insurer to have withheld
payment of the Complainant’s
TPD benefit. The Tribunal has determined this date to be 58 days after the
conciliation conference
held on 23 September 2015, being 20 November 2015.
Interest is to be calculated to 25 May 2017, the date the benefit was paid by
the Insurer to the Trustee, as per s57 of the ICA.
interest is to be calculated from 9 August 2011 to 30 March 2012 as it was
unreasonable for the Complainant not to be advised
of the reasons the Insurer
was considering declining her TPD claim in the procedural fairness letter.
Interest is to be calculated
in the same manner as per s57 of the ICA.
the Complainant has been denied the use of the above amounts of interest, the
Insurer is required to pay further interest on the
total of the two amounts,
calculated by reference to the Reserve Bank’s cash rate, from 25 May 2017
up until the date the Insurer
makes payment to the Trustee.
Jane Abbott, Presiding Member
Date of Tribunal signature: 20 November 2020
RTF format (411 KB)
Signed PDF/A format