Application by Isentia Pty Limited [2021] ACopyT 1 (9 February 2021)
Application by Isentia Pty Limited
File number:
CT 2 of 2018
The Tribunal:
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT)
Date of decision:
Legislation:
Cases cited:
Betfair Pty Ltd v Racing New South Wales and Another (No 7)
[2009] FCA 1140
(2009) 181 FCR 66
Field v Commissioner for Railways for New South
[1957] HCA 92
(1957) 99 CLR 285
Yokogawa Australia Pty Ltd and Others v
Alstom Power Ltd
[2009] SASC 377
(2009) 262 ALR 738
Date of hearing:
No Catchwords
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Ms L Thomas
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Clayton Utz
Counsel for the Respondent, Fairfax Media Limited and Nine Entertainment Co
Mr R Yezerski
Solicitor for the Respondent:
MinterEllison
Counsel for News Pty Limited:
Ms J Beaumont
Solicitor for News Pty Limited:
Counsel for Meltwater Australia Pty Ltd:
Ms F St John
Solicitor for Meltwater Australia Pty Ltd:
Baker McKenzie
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 2 of 2018
APPLICATION BY:
ISENTIA PTY LIMITED (ABN 11 002 533 851)
ISENTIA PTY LIMITED (ABN 11
002 533 851)
001 228 799)
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL DIRECTS
challenge to each summons the subject of the applications before the Tribunal on
4 February 2021 is dismissed.
REASONS FOR
DETERMINATION
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT):
Thursday afternoon, 4 February 2021, the Tribunal heard submissions in
relation to objections to five summonses issued by the
of those summonses were issued on 13 October 2020 and two were issued on
16 October 2020. Each summons was issued at the request
of Isentia Pty
Limited (“Isentia”).
three summonses issued on 13 October 2020 are addressed respectively to
News Pty Limited (“News”), Fairfax Media Limited
(“Fairfax”) and Streem Pty Limited (“Streem”).
summons calls for documents relating to the negotiation of Deed Polls between
News and Streem on the one hand and Fairfax and
Streem on the other, and
communications about the Deed Polls.
to the summonses issued on 16 October 2020, one summons is issued to
is issued to Streem.
the Deed of Settlement between Streem and CA in settlement of the Streem
application, each party releases the other from all claims
in relation to
matters recited in the Deed including the Previous Agreement, the Interim
Licence and the Interim Orders as those
terms are understood. Each summons of
16 October 2020 seeks documents relating to the topic of the releases.
Isentia seeks those
documents so as to investigate and understand the extent of
CA’s claim or entitlement under those instruments against Streem
particular, whether Streem or CA has quantified the value of the foregone
entitlements.
matter is said to be relevant because CA pleads that the arrangements with
Streem taken together with the Settlement Agreement
and the Deed Polls is a
comparable bargain that the Tribunal should take into account in resolving the
applications by Isentia and
Meltwater Australia Pty Ltd
(“Meltwater”).
advantage conferred on Streem, in its capacity as a licensee to a contended
comparable bargain, by being released from any anterior
claims by CA, is a
material matter in determining the scope of the contended comparable bargain.
Isentia and Meltwater contend that
the bargain reached with Streem is not
comparable due in part to the element relating to the releases: see, for
example, Isentia
Second Further Amended Statement of Points in Support of the
Applicant’s Case (“Statement of Points”) at para 126.
the issuing of each summons, the parties have been conducting negotiations with
a view to resolving the various challenges to
each summons. Some aspects of
each summons have not been able to be resolved.
to the summons issued to News on 13 October 2020, the only remaining
question is whether the documents set out in the Schedule
described as
“Annexure Revised C1 – WPP claims only” attract privilege from
production to Isentia (and ultimately
Meltwater) on the ground that they contain
“without prejudice” communications within the limits of the scope of
privilege. Streem objects to production of documents comprehended by the
summons to it and contends that it will be prejudiced by
production because the
information contained within the documents is “commercially
sensitive”.
have had the benefit of reading Streem’s written submissions although
Streem elected not to appear on the hearing of the challenge
to each summons and
thus elected not to make any oral submissions. I have also considered the
written submissions of News and I
have had the benefit of oral submissions from
counsel for News, Ms Beaumont. CA was represented by counsel but took the
that in circumstances where Streem asserts claims of “without
prejudice” privilege over documents which are “counterparts”
of documents in CA’s possession, CA will not produce the documents pending
a determination of whether the privilege, if it
subsists at all, can be
unilaterally waived. Nine and Fairfax, by counsel, did not wish to be heard on
any issues concerning “without
prejudice” privilege.
other aspect of the new Isentia points in support of its application should also
be noted. Isentia says at para 127 of its Statement
of Points that the New
CAL Licence (otherwise known as the Alternative Licence) should not be regarded
as a comparable bargain, “because
it appears to be a bargain struck by
competitors (being CAL, Fairfax and News Corp) acting collectively”. No
further particulars
are given of that proposition and it is contested by CA.
the purposes of resolving the challenges to each summons it is sufficient to
make these observations.
neither News nor Fairfax are parties to either of the two applications presently
before the Tribunal. News and Fairfax could have
elected to have been joined
but they have chosen not to become parties to any controversy. Nor were they
parties to the Streem application.
the question of whether the arrangements with Streem and thus the contents of
those arrangements in their entirety constitute, in
all the circumstances, a
comparable bargain is expressly in issue on each application as is the
contention that the releases are
material to the question of whether the bargain
is truly comparable. Fairness would suggest that, absent any properly
privilege from production, documents relevant to these matters ought
to be produced to enable the parties to address the contentions
raised on each
application and to enable the Tribunal to reach an informed view about whether
the bargain reached with Streem is
truly a comparable bargain.
the privilege from production of documents relevant to a question in issue in
each application on the ground that the documents
reveal “without
prejudice” communications is confined to a document (or as some
authorities suggest, parts of a document)
revealing express or implied
admissions about a claim or integers of a cause of action. The privilege arises
as a matter of public
policy so that settlement negotiations may take place
between parties to a dispute unhampered by the embarrassment of subsequent
probative disclosures of admissions made, either expressly or by conduct, of
aspects of a claim.
it follows that if B makes admissions in negotiations with A concerning aspects
of A’s claims about a particular subject
matter, C could not compel
production of documents by B to prove admissions about that subject matter in
subsequent litigation, assuming
that the subject matter in question is relevant
to C’s proceedings. However, if the purpose of the disclosure is not to
to prove an admission but simply to address and prove facts about a
relevant matter in the proceeding, no privilege from production
regard to the composition of the present proceedings, the only party against
whom a statement could operate as an admission,
is CA. If CA has said something
which amounts to an admission of relevant subject matter then CA could assert
“without prejudice”
privilege in relation to the document so as to
prevent the document being used as probative evidence of an admission it may
made. However, that question simply does not arise as no assertion of that
kind is made.
documents Isentia seeks are plainly relevant to the scope of the
“pleading”, and the evidence put on to resist production
documents on the ground of “without prejudice” do not establish that
the documents contain admissions which would
fall within the scope of the notion
of “without prejudice” privilege, at least as articulated in
Field v Commissioner for Railways for New South Wales
[1957] HCA 92
at 291 and 292;
Betfair Pty Ltd v Racing New South Wales and
Another (No 7)
[2009] FCA 1140
(2009) 181 FCR 66
, [4] and [64] to [74].
further question that arises is whether, if the privilege subsists, the
privilege is jointly held and whether it can be waived by
one of the parties
which enjoys the privilege.
in a case between A and B in which those parties conduct negotiations with a
view to resolving matters between them, the
contents of statements amounting to
admissions cannot be put into evidence except with the consent of the
participants to the negotiations.
If it were otherwise, the privilege would not
count for much. However, in cases of subsequent litigation in which one of the
to the negotiations becomes a party to the later proceedings and those
proceedings plead into relevance, for the purposes of the
proceedings, matters which touch upon matters the subject of the earlier
proceedings, there can be an implied waiver by
one of the parties to the earlier
proceedings of the “without prejudice” communications.
those circumstances, as elaborated in the observations of Duggan J in
Yokogawa Australia Pty Ltd and Others v Alstom Power Ltd
[2009] SASC 377
to [100], there can be unilateral waiver of the privilege.
Accordingly, the cases discussed by Duggan J support the proposition
the unilateral actions of one of the negotiating parties can have the effect of
waiving the privilege in subsequent litigation
involving a third party. That is
the position in these applications.
to the documents, I have not had the benefit of looking at each individual
document. However, I have looked closely at the Schedule
provided by News. I
am satisfied that those documents ought to be produced and are not subject to
“without prejudice”
privilege on the present material. Having
regard to the obvious relevance and materiality of the contentions on the
“pleadings”,
I am satisfied that the documents in the hands of CA
and Streem ought to be produced on the footing that they go to issues which
been made relevant and the material does not suggest that the privilege
otherwise subsists. Even if it did, the documents appear
to be sufficiently
connected with such an important question presently in issue that the parties
and the Tribunal ought, as a matter
of fairness, to have access to the
says that the documents are commercially sensitive.
may be necessary to adopt a protocol about who can look at those documents but,
subject to that matter, the documents are to be
produced to enable the parties
and the Tribunal to do the work contemplated by the provisions of the
(Cth) that place matters of this kind before the
I certify that the preceding twenty‑five
(25) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination herein
the Honourable Justice Greenwood, President, Australian Copyright
Dated: 9 February 2021
RTF format (292 KB)
Signed PDF/A format