1418564 [2015] MRTA 830 (11 June 2015)
[2015] MRTA 830
(11 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
Mr Yadwinder Singh
MRT CASE NUMBER:
DIBP REFERENCE(S):
BCC2014/1569817
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Sue Raymond
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal remits the application for a Regional Employer
Nomination (Permanent) (Class RN) visa for reconsideration, with the
that the applicant meets the following criteria for a Subclass 187 (Regional
Sponsored Migration Scheme) visa:
cl.187.234 of
Schedule 2 to the Regulations
Statement made on 11 June
2015 at 2:51pm
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
This is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the
Minister for Immigration to refuse to grant the applicant
a Regional Employer
Nomination (Permanent) (Class RN) visa under
Migration Act
The applicant applied to the Department of Immigration for the visa on 26 June
2014. At the time of application, Class RN contained
one subclass: Subclass 187
(Regional Sponsored Migration Scheme).
The criteria for a Subclass 187 visa are set out in
of Schedule 2 to
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). Applicants seeking to satisfy
the primary criteria must meet the 'Common criteria', as well as the criteria of
one of three alternative visa streams: the Temporary Residence Transition
stream, the Direct Entry stream, or the Agreement stream.
In the present case, the applicant is seeking the visa in the Direct Entry
stream, to work in the nominated position of Cook (ANZSCO
351411). This stream
is designed for persons who have never, or have only briefly worked in the
Australian labour market and are
applying for the visa outside Australia, or are
applying from inside Australia but are not eligible for the Temporary Residence
The delegate refused to grant the visa because the applicant did not meet
cl.187.234 of Schedule 2 to the Regulations. The delegate
relied on departmental
policy to the effect that an alternative to the requirement for two years
on-the-job training is two years
post qualification experience. The delegate
noted that, based on the course transcripts provided, the applicant did not
any formal on-the-job training during his Certificate IV and Diploma of
Hospitality courses and determined that accordingly those
qualifications cannot
be taken to substitute for the two years on-the-job training. The delegate noted
the work nominated on his
application at three different restaurants but
concluded that at the time of application, that the applicant’s total work
of either on-the-job work experience or post qualification work
experience in the occupation of a Cook is less than the required
two years. He
further indicated that the two-year work experience requirement is a necessary
component of the qualification as stated
in ANZSCO and the Certificate IV
qualification cannot be considered in lieu of this. Consequently, the delegate
determined that the
applicant did not obtain the “necessary qualification
“in Australia and that as clause 187.234(b) applies he must have
skills assessed as suitable for the occupation by an assessing authority when
his application was lodged. The delegate further
noted that at the time of
application, the applicant has provided a Provisional Skills Assessment from TRA
however because it was
issued for the purposes of a Skilled Graduate (Temporary)
visa it was not acceptable for the purpose of this application. Further,
delegate concluded that as he did not have a suitable skills assessment from the
relevant assessing authority prior to the lodgement
of the application, he found
he had not satisfied clause 187.234(b).
The applicant was represented in relation to the review by his registered
migration agent.
Following the receipt of submissions and documents from the applicant’s
representative, the Tribunal has been able to find
in favour of the applicant on
the basis of the material before it. Consequently, a hearing has not been held
and the scheduled hearing
has been cancelled.
For the following reasons, the Tribunal has concluded that the matter should be
remitted for reconsideration.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
The issue in the present case is whether the applicant meets the requirements
of cl.187.234 which must be satisfied at the time
of application.
Skills and qualifications
For applicants in the Direct Entry stream, cl.187.234 requires that at the time
of the application:
the applicant is
in a specified class of persons (exempt persons), or
applicant’s occupation has been specified by the Minister and the
applicant did not obtain the necessary qualification
in Australia – that
the applicant’s skills have been assessed as suitable for the occupation
by a specified assessing
authority (the skills assessment must meet certain
requirements, depending on the date of visa application),
if neither of
the above applies, the applicant had the qualifications listed in ANZSCO as
being necessary to perform the tasks of
the occupation.
applicant meet cl.187.234(a)?
The relevant classes of exempt persons for the purposes of cl.187.234(a) are
specified in a legislative instrument, IMMI 12/060.
It specifies three classes
of persons. Class I is not applicable to subclass 187 visas and is therefore not
relevant to the current
application.
Classes 2 and 3 fall for consideration and are as
Persons who are nominated for a visa under the Regulations for a position
where their nominated
will be at least equivalent to the
current Australian Tax Office top individual income tax rate.
Persons who are currently in Australia as the holder of a subclass 444 or 461
visa and have been working with their nominating employer
in their nominated
occupation for at least two years (excluding any periods of unpaid leave) in the
last three years immediately
before making their visa application.”
I find that the applicant was not in either class of exempt persons. The
proposed base salary of the visa applicant is an amount
and there is
no evidence before me that the applicant was the holder of a subclass 444 or 461
Consequently, I find that clause 187.234(a) does not apply.
the applicant meet cl.187.234(b)?
This subclause is only relevant if the applicant did not obtain the necessary
qualification in Australia. The applicant has provided
copies of documents to
the Tribunal which show that he has obtained the necessary qualifications in
Australia, namely Certificate
IV in Hospitality (Commercial Cookery) from the
Holmes Institute which is dated March 2012. A copy of the certificate together
the academic transcript was provided to the Tribunal.
Although the occupation of Cook (ANZSCO 351411) is specified in an instrument
in writing for this
applicable to the applicant because his qualifications were obtained in
Consequently, I find that clause 187.234(b) does not apply.
the applicant meet cl.187.234(c)?
If neither paragraph (a) or (b) applies, this subclause requires me to be
satisfied that the applicant had the qualifications listed
in ANZSCO as being
necessary to perform the tasks of the occupation.
I have had regard to the ANZSCO description for the occupation of Cook. It
states the following as to the skill level required for
the Unit Group 3514
“Indicative Skill Level:
Most occupations
in this unit group have a level of skill commensurate with the qualifications
and experience outlined below.
In Australia:
AQF Certificate III including at least two years of on-the-job training, or
AQF Certificate IV (ANZSCO Skill Level 3)
In New Zealand:
NZ Register Level 4 qualification (ANZSCO Skill Level 3)
At least three years of relevant experience may substitute for the formal
qualifications listed above. In some instances relevant
experience and/or
on-the-job training may be required in addition to the formal
qualification.”
As noted above, I have been provided with a copy of a certificate, together
with the academic transcript, issued by Holmes Institute.
Based on this
documentation I find that the applicant was awarded a Certificate IV in
Hospitality (Commercial Cookery) in March
. Having regard
to the documentation I am satisfied that it is in a relevant field of study. I
find that the certificate is a qualification
listed in ANZSCO and is relevant to
performing the occupation of Cook. I also find that the applicant has a Diploma
of Hospitality
Management from the Holmes Institute. This certificate was issued
in October 2010.
Consequently, I am satisfied that the applicant meets the requirements of
cl.187.234(c).
The applicant also has a Certificate IV in Business and a Diploma of Business
from another institution in Queensland. These qualifications
are less relevant
to the occupation, the subject of this application.
I note that the Department’s policy in PAM3, which is set out in the
annexure, is consistent with my finding. I also note
that the policy appears to
have altered from that cited by the delegate at the time of the departmental
Therefore, cl.187.234 is met.
Given these findings, the appropriate course is to remit the visa application
to the Minister to consider the remaining criteria
The Tribunal remits the application for a Regional
Employer Nomination (Permanent) (Class RN) visa for reconsideration, with the
that the applicant meets the following criteria for a Subclass 187
(Regional Sponsored Migration Scheme) visa:
cl.187.234 of
Schedule 2 to the Regulations
Sue Raymond
Senior Member
ANNEXURE-PAMS-Policy excerpt
30.2 AQF Certificate III, IV and Diploma​
qualifications
If the applicant relies on an Australian qualification, that qualification
must be as specified within the ANZSCO framework for that
occupation. For
example, if the nominated position were that of a cook (ANZSCO 351411), the
applicant must:
a relevant AQF Certificate IV or
a relevant AQF Certificate III including at least two years of on the job
training or
at least 3 years of relevant experience.
If the Certificate III was obtained without the formal on-the-job
training component, to satisfy the skill requirement the applicant
must have at
least 2 years post-qualification experience, obtained on a full time basis or
its part-time equivalent. The 2 years
of post-qualification experience is taken
to be equal to the on-the-job training component. This is to ensure that the
qualification
is relevant to the tasks of the occupation and that the applicant
indeed has the practical skills required to perform the task of
occupation.
Under ANZSCO, there is no requirement of 2 years of on-the-job training for
Certificate IV qualifications. Therefore the applicant
is not required to
demonstrate 2 years of on-the-job training for Cert IV qualifications.
If an applicant provides evidence of having a higher qualification than the
required level listed in ANZSCO such as a Diploma, delegates
satisfied that the applicant’s qualifications and skills are relevant to
the tasks to be performed in the nominated
occupation. If the higher-level
qualification is not relevant to the occupation, then the applicant needs to be
assessed against
the qualification that is relevant.
The particular
circumstances of each application will be assessed and finally determined on a
case-by-case basis by the delegate.
folio 39 of the
departmental file
Folio 7 of the Tribunal
that PRISMS records available to the Tribunal registry confirm the
applicant’s start date for the course as 9 November
2009 and end date as 5
21/05/2015 -
P. 21/05/2015 -
PAM3 - MIGRATION REGULATIONS -
> PAM - Sch2 Visa 187 - Regional Sponsored Migration Scheme
RTF format (158 KB)
Signed PDF/A format