Applicant: Mahesh Weeratunga IRT Reference: W98/00342 #number 13397 [1999] IRTA 13397 (28 January 1999)
IMMIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
Decision and Reasons for Decision
IRT Reference : W98/00342 13397.doc
Applicant : Mahesh
Tribunal : Ms M Fadjiar, Senior Member
Date : 29 January 1999
Place : Perth
Decision : Pursuant to its powers under
section 349(2)(c)
(Cth), the Tribunal remits this application for
reconsideration with the direction that Mahesh Weeratunga satisfies all the
criteria relevant to the grant of an Extended Eligibility
(Temporary) (Class TK Subclass 820 (spouse)) visa with the exception of
criteria relating to public interest and the provision of an acceptable
assurance of support.
Reasons for Decision
This is an application lodged on 3 March 1998 by Mahesh Weeratunga ('the
Applicant') under
section 347(3)
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) ('the
'). It seeks review of a decision made on 5 November 1997 ('the primary
decision') by a delegate of the Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural
Affairs refusing his Application to Remain Permanently in Australia ('the
original application') on the basis of
his relationship with his then de facto
partner Marivic Mahusay, an Australian citizen. The Applicant married Ms
Mahusay on 1 December
1997. The primary decision was affirmed by the Migration
Internal Review Office, a first tier review body, on 5 February 1998.
The original application was lodged on 28 July 1997 with the Perth office of
the then Department of Immigration and Multicultural
Affairs ('the Department')
and was completed on form 887. It is a joint application for an Extended
Eligibility (Temporary) (Class
TK Subclass 820 (spouse)) visa and a General
(Residence) (Class AS Subclass 801 (spouse)) visa (respectively called '820
spouse visa'
and '801 spouse visa') and is supported by Ms Mahusay, as the
The Applicant is a twenty-six year old national of Sri Lanka who had arrived in
Australia on 14 July 1996 under a student visa which
allowed him to stay in
Australia until 5 August 1998. On 10 July 1997 he was granted what was then
known as a Sri Lankan (Temporary)
visa (Class TT Subclass 435) valid until 31
July 1997. In the meantime his student visa was cancelled as the Applicant had
from his studies.
Schedule 1 to the Migration Regulations ('the Regulations') sets out the
various prescribed classes of visas and the 'specific ways
non-citizen applies for a visa of a particular class'. Under each class there
may be one or more subclasses. The relevant
criteria which must be met before
the visa sought may be granted are set out in that Part of Schedule 2 which
bears the same number
as the Subclass. Accordingly the relevant criteria for
the grant of the 820 visa and the 801 visa are those prescribed respectively
under Parts 820 and 801 of Schedule 2 to the Regulations. Under clause 801.221
of the Regulations one of the criteria prescribed
for the grant of an 801
spouse visa is that the applicant must be the holder of an 820 spouse visa.
Full particulars of the original application and all documents lodged in
support may be found in the Department's file 97006976 ('the
file') which has
been submitted to the Tribunal pursuant to
section 352(2)
coming to its decision the Tribunal has had regard to the contents of the file
and to the various documents and submissions
lodged in the course of this
review. As well at a hearing held on 22 September 1998 the Applicant, his
wife, her parents, her brother
and Ms Mahusay's best friend Maria Stanneveld
were in attendance and gave oral evidence variously under oath and affirmation.
So far as relevant
provides as follows:
820.21 Criteria to be satisfied at time of application
820.211 (1) The applicant:
(a) is not the holder of a subclass 771 (Transit) visa; and
(b) meets the requirements of subclause (2), (3), (4) or (5).
(2) An applicant meets the requirements of this subclause if:
(a) the applicant is the spouse of an Australian citizen, an Australian
permanent resident, or an eligible New Zealand citizen;
(c) the applicant is nominated by that Australian citizen, Australian
permanent resident or eligible New Zealand citizen; and
(d) in the case of an applicant who is not the holder of a substantive
(i) either:
(A) the applicant entered Australia as the holder of a subclass 995
(Diplomatic) visa or as a special purpose visa holder who
at the time of
entry met the requirements of subclause (6); and
(B) he or she satisfies Schedule 3 criterion 3002; or
(ii) he or she satisfies Schedule 3 criteria 3001, 3003 and 3004.
820.22 Criteria to be satisfied at time of decision
820.221 (1) In the case of an applicant referred to in subclause 820.211 (2),
(3), (4) or (5), the applicant either:
(a) continues to meet the requirements of the applicable subclause; or
(b) meets the requirements of subclause (2) or (3).
820.4 CIRCUMSTANCES APPLICABLE TO GRANT
820.411 The applicant must be in Australia, but not in immigration clearance,
when the visa is granted.
The word 'spouse' is defined in regulation 1.15A of the Regulations as
1.15A.(1) For the purposes of these Regulations, a person is the spouse of
another person if the 2 persons are:
(a) in a married relationship, as described in subregulation (1A); or
(b) in a de facto relationship, as described in subregulation (2).
(1A) Persons are in a married relationship if:
(a) they are married to each other under a marriage that is recognised as
valid for the purposes of the
(b) the Minister is satisfied that:
(i) they have a mutual commitment to a shared life as husband and wife to the
exclusion of all others; and
(ii) the relationship between them is genuine and continuing; and
(iii) they:
(A) live together; or
(B) do not live separately and apart on a permanent basis.
(2) Persons are in a de facto relationship if:
(i) are of opposite sexes; and
(ii) are not married to each other under a marriage that is recognised as
valid for the purposes of the
(iii) are not within a relationship that is a prohibited relationship for the
purposes of
subsection 23B
Marriage Act 1961
(b) they are full age, that is:
(i) if either of the persons is domiciled in Australia-both of them have
turned 18; or
(ii) if neither of the persons is domiciled in Australia-both of them have
turned 16; and
(c) the Minister is satisfied that:
(i) they have a mutual commitment to a shared life as husband and wife to the
exclusion of all others; and
(ii) the relationship between them is genuine and continuing; and
(iii) they:
(A) live together; or
(B) do not live separately and apart on a permanent basis; and
(d) subject to subregulation (2A), where either of them is an applicant for a
permanent visa, an Extended Eligibility (Temporary)
(Class TK) visa or a Spouse
(Provisional) (Class UF) visa-the Minister is satisfied that, for the period of
12 months immediately
preceding the date of application of the party relying on
the existence of the relationship:
(i) they had a mutual commitment to a shared life as husband and wife to the
exclusion of all others; and
(ii) the relationship between them was genuine and continuing; and
(iii) they had:
(A) been living together; or
(B) not been living separately and apart on a permanent basis.
(2A) Paragraph 2 (d) does not apply if:
(a) the applicant is applying as:
(i) the spouse of a person who:
(A) is, or was, the holder of a permanent humanitarian visa; and
(B) before that permanent humanitarian visa was granted, was in a relationship
with the applicant that satisfies the requirements
of subparagraphs (2) (c)
(i), (ii) and (iii) and of which Immigration was informed before the visa was
granted; or
(ii) a member of the family unit of a person who is an applicant for a
permanent humanitarian visa; or
(b) the applicant can establish compelling and compassionate circumstances for
the grant of the visa.
[NOTE: 'permanent humanitarian visa' is defined in
regulation 1.03.]
(3) In forming an opinion whether 2 persons are in a married relationship, or
a de facto relationship, in relation to an application
(aa) an Extended Eligibility (Temporary) (Class TK) visa; or
(ab) a Family (Residence) (Class AO) visa; or
(ac) a General (Residence) (Class AS) visa; or
(ad) a Spouse (Migrant) (Class BC) visa; or
(ae) a Spouse (Provisional) (Class UF) visa;
the Minister must have regard to all of the circumstances of the relationship,
including, in particular:
(a) the financial aspects of the relationship, including:
(i) any joint ownership of real estate or other major assets; and
(ii) any joint liabilities; and
(iii) the extent of any pooling of financial resources, especially in relation
to major financial commitments; and
(iv) whether one party to the relationship owes any legal obligation in
respect of the other; and
(v) the basis of any sharing of day-to-day household expenses;
(b) the nature of the household, including:
(i) any joint responsibility for care and support of children, if any; and
(ii) the parties' living arrangements; and
(iii) any sharing of responsibility for housework;
(c) the social aspects of the relationship, including:
(i) whether the persons represent themselves to other people as being married
or in a de facto relationship with each other;
(ii) the opinion of the persons' friends and acquaintances about the nature of
the relationship; and
(iii) any basis on which the persons plan and undertake joint social
activities;
(d) the nature of the persons' commitment to each other, including:
(i) the duration of the relationship; and
(ii) the length of time during which the persons have lived together; and
(iii) the degree of companionship and emotional support that the persons draw
from each other; and
(iv) whether the persons see the relationship as a long-term one.
(4) In forming an opinion whether 2 persons are in a married relationship, or
a de facto relationship, in relation to an application
for a visa of a class
other than a class specified in paragraph (3) (aa), (ab), (ac), (ad) or (ae),
the Minister may have regard
to any of the factors set out in subregulation
(5) If 2 persons have been living together at the same address for 6 months
or longer, that fact is to be taken to be strong evidence
that the relationship
is genuine and continuing, but a relationship of shorter duration is not to be
taken not to be genuine and
continuing only for that reason.
As one would reasonably expect, subject to certain exceptions which are
irrelevant for present purposes, the main criterion for the
grant of an 820
spouse visa is that an applicant be the 'spouse' of an Australian permanent
resident or Australian citizen both at
the time of lodgement of the original
application and at the time of decision which includes the time the Tribunal
makes its decision
herein. By definition of law, as provided under regulation
15A(1)(a) set out above, a de facto spouse relationship is recognised
purposes of ascertaining whether a person is the 'spouse' of another.
The Tribunal heard from the Applicant and Ms Mahusay separately during the
hearing and found the evidence of the couple generally
to be consistent. The
Applicant told the Tribunal that he had met Ms Mahusay at the Perth central
train station very soon after
his arrival in Perth in July 1996. They started
talking and rode together all the way to Fremantle although she lived at Mosman
Park a suburb just before Fremantle. They walked around Fremantle and talked
for some time. He obtained her telephone number and
called her that evening.
At the time the Applicant was working as a casual steward at the Rydges Hotel
in the city. The relationship
developed steadily from there and by late August
1996 the Applicant had moved into the flat which Ms Mahusay shared with her
friend Maria Stanneveld who told the Tribunal that she and Ms Mahusay have
been best friends since they were in high school. She
told the Tribunal that
she had moved out of the flat to live with her boyfriend about three weeks
after the Applicant moved in.
She told the Tribunal that Ms Mahusay has
confided in her that she is very worried about her financial situation,
particularly after
the baby is born, should her husband be required to leave
Australia. As well it was Ms Stanneveld's evidence that the couple share
very close relationship and Ms Mahusay will be devastated emotionally if she
was separated from her husband.
Sometime in May 1997 the Applicant and Ms Mahusay decided to move into smaller
one-bedroom unit in order to save on the rental as
Ms Stanneveld and Ms
Mahusay's brother no longer shared accommodation with them. The Applicant is
presently employed at the same
hotel as a kitchen-hand. Ms Mahusay also works
part-time at a restaurant.
Evidence tendered indicates that the couple share joint bank accounts and
jointly own various household goods like a motor vehicle
and a computer. On 1
December 1997 the couple was married. Photographs of the occasion were
tendered to the Department. Ms Mahusay
is presently pregnant and her baby is
due in April 1999.
As the parties were not legally married when the original application was
lodged, the Tribunal must assess whether they were de facto
spouses as at 28
July 1997 within the meaning set out in the relevant provisions of regulation
1.15A of the Regulations. The Applicant
and Ms Mahusay are of opposite sexes
and were not married to each other at the time. They are also not in a
'prohibited relationship'
for the purposes of the
Marriage Act
both of them are above the age of eighteen years.
The law provides that the parties are in a de facto relationship when they
'have a mutual commitment to a shared life as husband
and wife to the exclusion
of all others', when the relationship between them is a 'genuine and continuing
one' and when they are
living together or not living apart on a permanent basis
during the period of twelve months preceding the lodgement of the original
application. The relevant period in this instance being 28 July 1996 to 28
July 1997. The said twelve-month period 'does not apply'
if the Applicant can
establish 'compelling and compassionate circumstances' for the grant of the
visa. In assessing whether the
parties are in a de facto relationship the
Tribunal is to have regard to the circumstances set out in subparagraphs (a) to
paragraph (3) of regulation 1.15A. Paragraph (5) of Regulation 1.15A
provides that the fact that two persons have been living together
at the same
address for six months or longer is to be taken as 'strong evidence that the
relationship is genuine and continuing'.
The questions of whether the couple have a mutual commitment to a shared life
as husband and wife to the exclusion of others and
whether their relationship
is a genuine and continuing one necessarily involve an assessment of factors
which are not dissimilar.
Those questions are questions of fact to be
determined on the circumstances of the case taking into consideration the
various facets
of the relationship including those set out in regulation
1.15A(3). In various of its decisions, the Tribunal has found that given
tapestry of indices which make up a marriage relationship, no one factor can be
determinative of the crucial issues.
As pointed out by the Court in
[1978] 2 NSWLR 453
people enter into marriage relationships for a variety of reasons some of which
may not conform to 'community expectations'. This
is not necessarily
inconsistent with a genuine marriage relationship. In recognising this, the
Full Court of the Federal Court in
Minister for Immigration, Local
Government and Ethnic Affairs
(8 May 1990, unreported)
found that,
The true test, we would suggest the only test, is whether at the time at which
the matter has to be decided it can be said that the
parties have a mutual
commitment to a shared life as husband and wife to the exclusion of others.
Indeed this test has been incorporated into the definition of a 'spouse' under
regulation 1.15A of the Regulations, under subparagraph
Having considered the evidence as a whole the Tribunal is satisfied that the
couple share a relationship which may be described as
genuine and continuing
when the issue is considered both at the time of lodgement of the original
application and at the time of
the Tribunal's decision herein. Although
previous decision makers had made no finding on this issue, mainly because the
application
was refused on another ground which the Tribunal will deal with
later in these reasons, there is ample evidence to support this finding.
couple has been living together since August 1996. According to a file note
dated 10 July 1997 (folio 20 in the file) in one
of his telephone conversations
with a Departmental officer the Applicant had stated that he 'has been living
with an Australian citizen
for the last 11 months - had a relationship'. Their
friends and Ms Mahusay parents accept them as a couple and they share their
household expenses as would a married couple where both parties are gainfully
employed. They have mutual wills, a joint bank account,
joint electricity
account with Western Power as well as a joint telephone account. The Applicant
and Ms Mahusay have since married
and Ms Mahusay is expecting their first child
However a finding that the couple meets the requirements of paragraphs (a), (b)
and (c) of regulation 1.15A(2)
is not enough for the purposes of
meeting the prescribed criteria. Subparagraph (d) of the regulation requires
that as assessment
of whether the couple meets the requirements prescribed
under those paragraphs must be confined to the twelve-month period preceding
the date of application, the relevant period in this instance being 28 July
1996 to 28 July 1997. On 28 July 1996 the couple had
just met. As at the date
of lodgement of the original application on 28 July 1997 the couple has known
each other for about twelve
months and have been living together for just under
twelve months.
Subparagraph (2A)(b) of regulation 1.15A provides that the visa may be granted,
in other words the 'twelve-month requirement' waived,
if 'compelling and
compassionate circumstances' can be established by the Applicant.
What amounts to 'compassionate' or 'compelling' circumstances is in each
instance a question of fact, having regard to the circumstances
of the case.
Circumstances occurring after the lodgement of the original application was
lodged although not necessarily directly
relevant to a consideration of the
crucial question may be taken into account in so far as they '[tend] logically
to show the existence
or non-existence of facts relevant to the issue to be
determined', see
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Pochi
(1980) 4 ALD at 160 per Deane J and quoted with approval in
Immigration Review Tribunal and Minister for Immigration, Local Government and
Ethnic Affairs
(unreported, Federal Court, SG 72 of 1991, 29 November
Neither of the word 'compassionate' nor 'compelling' is defined in the relevant
legislation. They must therefore be accorded their
ordinary meaning. The
Macquarie Dictionary
(2nd revised ed.) defines 'compassion' as follows:
a feeling of sorrow or pity for the sufferings or misfortunes of another;
It further defines the word 'compel' as,
to force or drive, esp. to a course of action ... to secure or bring about by
force ... to force to submit; subdue ... to overpower
... to drive together;
unite by force; herd
It would be reasonable to say that the word 'compelling' denotes the use of
force towards a particular course of action, the circumstances
surrounding
which are usually involuntary and generated by necessity.
(IRT Decision No. 1538, 23 December 1992) and followed in
(IRT decision No. 2179, 9 June 1993) and
Re Ratcliffe
(IRT Decision No. 04043, 29 July 1994) it was noted that the mere existence or
state of a de facto or spouse relationship
does not amount to
'compelling or compassionate circumstances' so as to justify the waiver of the
applicable exclusion period. If
this was intended it could easily have been
provided for under the legislation with no discretion reposing in the decision
Indeed the test prescribed under the legislation before the Tribunal in
those two instances are in my view less strict as either
'compelling' or
'compassionate' circumstances would have been sufficient to invoke the waiver
of the exclusion clause. The legislation
in this instance calls for both
'compelling and compassionate circumstances'. The relevant Explanatory
Memorandum provides that
such circumstances include but are not limited to a
situation where a dependent child is involved.
The Applicant told the Tribunal that his wife will need to stop work soon. She
will then be totally dependent on him for financial
support. He said that his
wife is very worried and is under considerable stress over his possible
departure from Australia particularly
given that their baby is due very soon.
Having regard to those circumstances coupled with the fact that there will soon
be an Australian
citizen child who will be dependent on the Applicant the
Tribunal finds that the Applicant has established that 'compelling and
compassionate
circumstances' exist to warrant the grant of the visa sought.
For the above reasons, pursuant to its powers under
section 349(2)(c)
, the Tribunal remits this application for reconsideration with the
direction that the Applicant satisfies all the prescribed criteria
relevant to
the grant of an Extended Eligibility (Temporary) (Class TK Subclass 820
(spouse)) visa with the exception of the criteria
relating to public interest
and the provision of an acceptable assurance of support.
____________
Ms M Fadjiar
Senior Member
I certify that this and the 11 preceding pages are a true copy of the Decision
and Reasons for Decision herein of Ms M Fadjiar, Senior
Member of the
for Assistant Registrar
RTF format (57.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format