Application by Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd [2019] ACompT 1 (30 October 2019)
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
Application by Port of Newcastle
Operations Pty Ltd
[2019] ACompT 1
Review from:
The arbitration determination by the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission under
section 44ZP
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) in relation to an access dispute between Glencore Coal Assets Australia
Pty Ltd and Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd
File numbers:
ACT 2 of 2018
ACT 3 of 2018
MIDDLETON J (PRESIDENT)
MR r F SHOGREN (MEMBER)
DR D R ABRAHAM (MEMBER)
Date of Determination:
Catchwords:
COMPETITION
– applications for review
of the arbitration determination made by the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission in respect
of access dispute between provider and user of a declared
service – review to be conducted by way of ‘re-arbitration’
pursuant to
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) – where
declared service is the right to access and use monopoly infrastructure assets
at Port of Newcastle – where
access dispute concerns quantum of charges
levied for access and use of declared service and proper scope of application of
charges – how declared service to be interpreted and appropriate
scope of application of arbitration determination –
whether and how to
account for contributions of service users in calculating regulated asset base
– determination of projects
that were the subject of contributions of
service users – whether such projects would be undertaken by a
hypothetical new entrant
– determination of appropriate costs of such
projects – determination of appropriate timeframe for such projects
consideration of impact of timeframe on interest – whether service
provider able to recover costs of non-coal assets through
arbitrated charges
– whether to apply true-up for return on actual capital expenditure
compared to return on forecast capital
expenditure
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Competition Policy Reform Act
Ports and Maritime Administration Act 1995
Trade Practices Act 1976
Cases cited:
BHP v National Competition Council
[2008] HCA 45
236 CLR 145
East Australian Pipeline Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2007] HCA 44
(2007) 233 CLR 229
Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission
[2017] FCA 1330
(2017) 350 ALR 552
Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Competition
[2017] FCAFC 124
(2017) 253 FCR 115
Date of hearing:
6-13 May 2019
Victoria (Heard in Sydney)
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for Port of Newcastle Operations Pty
Mr CA Moore SC with Dr DJ Roche
Solicitor for Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd:
Webb Henderson
Counsel for Glencore Coal Assets Australia Pty Ltd:
Mr NJ Young QC with Mr N De Young SC and Mr C Henderson
Solicitor for Glencore Coal Assets Australia Pty Ltd:
Clifford Chance
Counsel for Australian Competition and Consumer Commission:
Mr S Lloyd SC with Ms C Dermody
Solicitor for Australian Competition and Consumer Commission:
DLA Piper Australia
IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
ACT 2 of 2018
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW OF THE ARBITRATION DETERMINATION BY THE
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION AND CONSUMER COMMISSION UNDER
SECTION 44ZP
COMPETITION AND CONSUMER ACT 2010
(CTH) IN RELATION TO AN ACCESS DISPUTE
BETWEEN GLENCORE COAL ASSETS AUSTRALIA PTY LTD AND PORT OF NEWCASTLE OPERATIONS
PORT OF NEWCASTLE OPERATIONS PTY LTD
MIDDLETON J (PRESIDENT)
MR R F SHOGREN (MEMBER)
R ABRAHAM (MEMBER)
DATE OF DETERMINATION:
THE TRIBUNAL DETERMINES THAT:
The ACCC’s Final
Determination made under
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) dated 18 September 2018, be varied by deleting Clauses 2.1, 2.2 and 6.1
and replacing them as follows:
2.1 The scope of the determination is confined
to the terms and conditions of access where Glencore owns or, either directly or
agent, charters a vessel that enters the Port precinct and loads Glencore
2.2 For the avoidance of doubt, the determination does not apply to:
(a) the terms and conditions of access to apply in
respect of vessels carrying coal that are not owned, or have not been chartered,
by Glencore;
(b) the terms and conditions of access for vessels other than those calling at
the coal terminals at the Port; and
(c) any charges imposed by PNO other than the Navigation Service Charge and the
Wharfage Charge.
6.1 The Navigation Service Charge payable by Glencore to PNO in accordance
with this determination will be $1.0058 as at 1 January
IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION
ACT 3 of 2018
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW OF THE ARBITRATION DETERMINATION BY THE
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION AND CONSUMER COMMISSION UNDER
SECTION 44ZP
COMPETITION AND CONSUMER ACT 2010
(CTH) IN RELATION TO AN ACCESS DISPUTE
BETWEEN GLENCORE COAL ASSETS AUSTRALIA PTY LTD AND PORT OF NEWCASTLE OPERATIONS
GLENCORE COAL ASSETS AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
MIDDLETON J (PRESIDENT)
MR R F SHOGREN
DR D R ABRAHAM (MEMBER)
DATE OF DETERMINATION:
THE TRIBUNAL DETERMINES THAT:
The ACCC’s Final
Determination made under
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) dated 18 September 2018, be varied by deleting Clauses 2.1, 2.2 and 6.1
and replacing them as follows:
2.1 The scope of the determination is confined to the terms and conditions of
access where Glencore owns or, either directly or by
agent, charters a vessel
that enters the Port precinct and loads Glencore coal.
2.2 For the avoidance of doubt, the determination does not apply to:
(a) the terms and conditions of access to apply in
respect of vessels carrying coal that are not owned, or have not been chartered,
by Glencore;
(b) the terms and conditions of access for vessels other than those calling at
the coal terminals at the Port; and
(c) any charges imposed by PNO other than the Navigation Service Charge and the
Wharfage Charge.
6.1 The Navigation Service Charge payable by Glencore to PNO in accordance
with this determination will be $1.0058 as at 1 January
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
INTRODUCTION
Declaration of services at the
Notification and arbitration of the
Judicial review of the notification
of the dispute
The ACCC’s Draft
Determination
The ACCC’s Final
Determination
LEGISLATIVE CONTEXT
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Ports and Maritime Administration Act
PRELIMINARY ISSUES
Extension of the statutory timeframe
for the Tribunal’s determination
Glencore’s application for the
Tribunal to request further information
TOPICS OF CONTENTION
SCOPE OF THE FINAL
DETERMINATION
PNO’s submissions
submissions
submissions
Consideration
USER CONTRIBUTIONS
Overview of the calculation of the
What the ACCC decided and its
Submissions to the
The Tribunal’s
USER FUNDING OF RECLAMATION
Submissions to the
The Tribunal’s
COSTS OF CHANNEL
IMPORTATION OF RECLAMATION BUNDING
LENGTH OF CONSTRUCTION PERIOD AND
INTEREST COSTS
Consideration
NON-COAL ASSETS
What the ACCC decided
Submissions to the
The Tribunal’s
CAPEX TRUE-UP
What the ACCC decided
Submissions by the parties to the
Submissions by the parties to the
The Tribunal’s
INTRODUCTION
two applications before the Tribunal concern a dispute between Port of Newcastle
Operations Pty Ltd (‘
’) and Glencore Coal Assets Australia
’) regarding the terms and conditions of
access to the Port of Newcastle (the ‘
is the operator of the Port and Glencore is a user of the Port. PNO filed its
application on 8 October 2018 (ACT 2 of 2018) and
Glencore filed its application
a day later on 9 October 2018 (ACT 3 of 2018).
Port is subject to the access regime contained in
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) (the ‘
Pursuant to that regime, and by Glencore’s notification dated 4 November
2016, the dispute between it and PNO was
referred to the Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission (the ‘
’) for arbitration. As a
result of that arbitration the ACCC determined the value of certain charges that
PNO could levy on
Glencore for access to the Port and the circumstances in which
such arbitrated charges could be levied. The ACCC’s determination
these matters was published in its Final Determination on 18 September
application calls on the Tribunal to review the Final Determination by
conducting a ‘re-arbitration’ pursuant to
Tribunal’s function in applications of this kind is not to identify error
in the relevant arbitration determination but
to re-arbitrate the dispute
between access seeker and access provider based on the information, reports and
things referred to in
s 44ZZOAAA.
there was some disputation as to the material the Tribunal should consider in
this re-arbitration, nothing turned upon this
disputation in the
Tribunal’s deliberations and its ultimate determination. Putting aside
the report which Glencore asked
the Tribunal to consider (to which we will
return) there were a number of documents that were
taken into account
by the ACCC, which are set out in an annexure to the ACCC’s submissions in
each application, dated 5 April
2019. The Tribunal has not taken these
documents into account, but as mentioned nothing turns on this for the purposes
of the Tribunal’s
deliberations and determination.
Tribunal will be referring to the ACCC’s Draft and Final Determinations as
a convenient way to address the issues raised
in the re-arbitration. In doing
so the Tribunal follows the approach of the parties, although the relevant
materials and arguments
were strictly set out in the Statements of Reasons
provided with each Determination, not in the Determinations themselves. The
is still undertaking a re-arbitration and not a review or appeal of the
ACCC’s Final Determination. However, just as the applications
presented to the Tribunal by the parties, the task of the Tribunal does not
require it to ignore the reasoning of the ACCC.
In fact a great deal of the
reasoning and the Final Determination itself remained non-contentious.
convenience’s sake, the ACCC’s Final Determination is annexed to
these reasons as Annexure “A”. A document
which identifies aspects
of the Final Determination
in dispute, jointly prepared by the
parties and the ACCC (at the request of the Tribunal), is annexed to these
reasons in summary
form as Annexure “B”.
Port is a major commercial shipping port and one of the largest coal export
ports in the world. It is considered to be the only
port from which it is
commercially viable to export coal from the Hunter Valley coal fields in New
South Wales (‘
’). The Hunter Valley coal industry and its
associated supply chain is responsible for around 90% of NSW’s coal
and 40% of Australia’s total black coal production.
is the largest exporter by volume of coal from the Port. Approximately 85% of
the coal mined by Glencore is exported to
global markets including Japan, South
Korea, Taiwan, China and Europe. Thermal coal exported from the Port to these
destinations
competes with coal exported from other countries such as
has operated the Port since May 2014. Prior to this, the Port was operated by
the State of NSW. In May 2014, the joint venture
parents of PNO (Hastings Fund
Management and China Merchants Group) acquired a 98 year lease from the NSW
Government effectively
privatising the Port’s assets. PNO is now jointly
owned by The Infrastructure Fund (a wholesale investment fund under the
trusteeship of Gardior Pty Ltd) and China Merchants Group.
Under the terms of the lease, PNO has the power and
authority to, amongst other things, fix and collect port charges pursuant to
Ports and Maritime Administration Act 1995
’). Two such charges are relevant to this access
dispute: the Navigation Service Charge (the ‘
’) (which is
payable in respect of general use by a vessel of the Port and its
infrastructure) and the Wharfage Charge (which
is payable in respect of the
availability of a site at which stevedoring operations may be carried out).
After it assumed the role
of Port operator, PNO implemented a restructure of its
charges with the effect that the price for coal ships using the Port increased
by between 40% and 60% for some vessel types. The charges applied by PNO to
Glencore (and other users of the Port) were as follows:
Service Charge: $0.7286 per gross tonne in its 2015 port pricing schedule, and
increased to $0.7553 per gross tonne in
its 2018 port pricing schedule; and
Wharfage Charge:
$0.0746 per revenue tonne.
observe that the NSC is applied by PNO at different rates to coal vessels,
cruise vessels, and non-coal vessels (other than cruise
Declaration of services at the Port
the wake of PNO’s restructure of Port charges, Glencore made an
application to the National Competition Council (‘
May 2015 for certain services at the Port to be ‘declared’ for the
purposes of
The NCC issued its recommendation to the relevant
Minister on 2 November 2015 which recommended the service not be declared on the
grounds that it did not meet the requirement that declaration would promote a
material increase in competition in at least one market
other than the market
for the service. The NCC was otherwise satisfied that all other criteria were
met. On 8 January 2016, the
Minister published his decision under s 44H(1)
in which he decided not to declare the nominated service on the same basis as
recommended by the NCC.
29 January 2016, Glencore applied to the Tribunal under s 44K for review of the
Minister’s decision. The Tribunal set aside
the Minister’s decision
Re Application by Glencore Coal Pty Ltd
[2016] ACompT 6
, and on 16
June 2016 declared the following service:
the provision of the right to access and use the
shipping channels (including berths next to the wharves as part of the channels)
at the Port of Newcastle (Port), by virtue of which vessels may enter the Port
precinct and load and unload at relevant terminals
located within the Port
precinct and then depart the Port precinct.
precise drafting of the description of the Service is important. It is a matter
to which we will return later in these reasons.
Notification and arbitration of the dispute
the declaration of the Service, Glencore made a series of attempts to negotiate
with PNO in respect of the terms and conditions
upon which Glencore could access
the Port. No agreement was reached and on 4 November 2016, Glencore notified
the ACCC under s 44S(1)
of the existence of an access dispute in relation to the
Service. In its notification to the ACCC, Glencore described the dispute
Although PNO is currently providing access (and
maintaining that it will always do so) the terms of access, in particular the
service charges for coal vessels, are unreasonable and Glencore is
seeking to negotiate with PNO on reducing these charges to approximately
pre-privatisation levels (or pre-2015 levels as 2015 was the point at which PNO
increased the charges, shortly after the Service
was privatised and assets
re-valued from $1.75 billion to $2.4 billion). Glencore submits that, at the
very least, an economically
efficient charge is likely to be significantly lower
than the rates which are currently being applied by
22 December 2016, the ACCC advised Glencore and PNO that:
(1) the pre-conditions for notification of an access
dispute under s 44S had been met;
(2) an access dispute relating to the Service existed between Glencore and PNO;
(3) the access dispute had been validly notified by
ACCC also established a ‘Commission’ for the purposes of the access
dispute arbitration pursuant to ss 44U to 44ZNA
of the CCA.
22 December 2016 and 20 July 2018, the parties provided the ACCC with a
considerable volume of information pertaining to the
arbitration, and more
specifically information to be used to determine appropriate regulated access
prices for the Service.
Judicial review of the notification of the dispute
9 October 2017, during the course of the arbitration, PNO filed proceedings
against the ACCC and others in the Federal Court of
Australia seeking judicial
review in relation to the conduct of the ACCC’s arbitration. PNO and
Glencore agreed to stay the
arbitration while PNO’s challenge to the
conduct of the arbitration was reviewed by the Court.
claimed that the arbitration had not been validly commenced by the ACCC and that
pre-conditions for notification of the access
dispute had not been satisfied.
On 9 November 2017, the Federal Court dismissed PNO’s application and
found that the ACCC
should be permitted to complete the arbitration process
without interference from the Court:
Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd v
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2017] FCA 1330
arbitration resumed shortly after the Court’s judgment was handed
The ACCC’s Draft Determination
20 July 2018, the ACCC published its draft determination (‘
Determination
’) as required by s 44V(4), accompanied by a draft
statement of reasons. PNO and Glencore were invited to make further submissions
in light of the Draft Determination and did so. In its Draft Determination, the
charges payable by Glencore as at 1 January 2018
on access to the Service within
the scope of the determination were as follows:
Service Charge: $0.4685 per gross tonne; and
Wharfage Charge:
$0.0746 per revenue tonne.
The ACCC’s Final Determination
18 September 2018, the ACCC issued its Final Determination of the access dispute
pursuant to s 44V(1)(b) along with a statement
of reasons as required by s
44V(5), and an arbitration report. In its Final Determination, the charges
payable by Glencore as at
1 January 2018 on access to the Service within the
scope of the determination were as follows:
Service Charge: $0.6075 per gross tonne (ie an increase of $0.1390 as compared
to the Draft Determination); and
Wharfage Charge:
$0.0746 per revenue tonne (unchanged from the Draft
Determination).
Relevantly,
the scope of the Final Determination was limited to access to the
(1) where Glencore, either directly or by agent,
charters a vessel to enter the Port precinct and load Glencore coal; and
(2) where Glencore makes a representation to PNO of the kind referred to in
of the PMAA that it has the functions of the owner of a vessel,
or accepts the obligation to exercise those functions, in order to
Port precinct and load Glencore coal.
ACCC determined that the Final Determination did not apply to:
(1) the terms and conditions of access in respect of
vessels carrying coal which have not been chartered by Glencore or in respect
which Glencore has not made a representation of the kind referred to in
of the PMAA;
(2) the terms and conditions of access for vessels other than those calling at
the coal terminals at the Port, and
(3) any charges imposed by PNO other than the NSC and the Wharfage
will return to this defined scope and to the meaning of a representation of the
kind referred to in
of the PMAA later in these reasons.
Final Determination also provided for:
(1) ‘backdating’ provisions to the effect
that the charges apply from the period starting 8 July 2016, being the date
of declaration of the Service by the Tribunal as contemplated by s 44ZO(4)(b);
(2) ‘five-year review’ provisions which contemplate a five-year
review of the NSC involving a roll forward of the regulated
asset base (the
’) including actual capital expenditure which is incurred
in the five-year period not funded by users (‘
LEGISLATIVE CONTEXT
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
of the CCA is concerned with third party access to certain
‘declared’ services such as the Port. In circumstances where
provider of a service and a user of a service cannot reach a commercial
agreement on the terms and conditions upon which the
user can access the
service, either the user or the provider may notify the ACCC of an access
dispute and request that the ACCC arbitrate.
To this end,
provides as follows:
(1) If a third party is unable to agree with the
provider on one or more aspects of access to a declared service, either the
or the third party may notify the Commission in writing that an access
dispute exists, but only to the extent that those aspects
of access are not the
subject of an access undertaking that is in operation in relation to the
(2) On receiving the notification, the Commission must give notice in writing
of the access dispute to:
(a) the provider, if the third party
notified the access dispute;
(b) the third party, if the provider notified the access dispute;
(c) any other person whom the Commission thinks might want to become a party
to the arbitration.
contains the definition of ‘third party’ among other
“third party”, in relation to a service,
means a person who wants access to the service or wants a change to some aspect
of the person’s existing access to the
a dispute has been notified to the ACCC, an arbitration is commenced.
Relevantly,
The parties to the arbitration of an access dispute
(a) the provider;
(b) the third party;
(c) any other person who applies in writing to be made a party and is
accepted by the Commission as having a sufficient
relevantly provides:
(1) Unless it terminates the arbitration under
section 44Y
Commission:
(a) must make a written final
determination; ...
on access by the third party to the
(2) A determination may deal with any matter relating
to access by the third party to the service, including matters that were not
basis for notification of the dispute. By way of example, the determination
(a) require the provider to provide
access to the service by the third party;
(b) require the third party to accept, and pay for, access to the
(c) specify the terms and conditions of the third party’s access to the
(d) require the provider to extend the facility;
(2A) Without limiting paragraph (2)(d), a requirement
referred to in that paragraph may do either or both of the
(a) require the provider to expand the
capacity of the facility;
(b) require the provider to expand the geographical reach of the
(3) A determination does not have to require the
provider to provide access to the service by the third
should at this juncture comment on the operation of
, which was relied
upon by Glencore in support of its contention on the scope of the arbitration.
In short, Glencore contended that
the terms of
were such to permit a
determination making Glencore’s terms of access available to persons who
access facilities at a berth
to load coal onto a vessel, regardless of whether
that person is the owner or charterer of the vessel. The Tribunal does not
the expansive operation of
as contended for by Glencore.
disputes within the context of
are bilateral in nature. The
consequence of the declaration of the Service was that a party (ie the person
seeking access to the
Service) had a right to negotiate with the provider of the
Service. If they were unable to agree, then the party seeking access
notify the dispute to the ACCC. Access disputes are not intended to address
rights of access by all users of a declared service.
Further, the Final
Determination under scrutiny in these applications does not deal with the
right of access by Glencore to the Port, but with the terms of
access pertaining to that right of access already available. Glencore
wanting a change to aspects of the existing access to the Service. The contest
is thus as to the terms of the access already
made available to Glencore, and
relating to Glencore’s access as defined in the Service.
allows the ACCC, in making a determination, some flexibility to deal with
matters to the access sought in Glencore’s notification.
The inclusory matter mentioned in
suggests this by indicating matters,
that were not the basis of notification of the dispute, which must nevertheless
be related to
the actual dispute between the parties as notified to the ACCC.
provision in
s 44V(2)(d)
, which deals with the provider extending the facility
(including expanding its capacity), is within the scope of determining
by a third party’. This is because it deals with the
provider needing to act in connection with the circumstances relating
particular third party, who notifies or who has been notified of the access
dispute, which currently existed and which gave
rise to the request for the ACCC
to arbitrate.
the present case, the Service consists of the provision of the right to access
and use the shipping channel at the Port, by virtue
of which vessels may enter
the Port precinct, and load and unload at terminals within the Port precinct.
The only circumstance in
which Glencore could be said to be using the Service so
defined is where it owns or, whether directly or by agent, charters a vessel
enter the Port precinct and load Glencore coal. We will return to this issue
later in these reasons. However, it is important
to appreciate that
whilst allowing for certain related matters to be dealt with by the ACCC that
were not the basis for notification of the dispute,
would not permit a change to
the Service as defined and declared by the Tribunal on 16 June 2016.
we have already observed, the applications before us call on the Tribunal to
conduct a ‘re-arbitration’ of the access
dispute. In this sense,
the Tribunal is not required to identify any form of error in the Final
Determination having regard to,
for instance, the mandatory considerations the
ACCC is required to take into account. That said, it is nevertheless helpful to
the ACCC’s obligations when arbitrating disputes under
Division 3 of
, particularly as these are also relevant to our
determination.
sets out the matters that the ACCC must take into account in making final
determinations in notified access disputes. At the time
of the dispute being
notified to the ACCC, it provided:
(1) The Commission must take the following matters
into account in making a final determination:
(aa) the objects of this Part;
(a) the legitimate business interests of the provider, and the
provider’s investment in the facility;
(b) the public interest, including the public interest in having competition
in markets (whether or not in Australia);
(c) the interests of all persons who have rights to use the service;
(d) the direct costs of providing access to the service;
(e) the value to the provider of extensions whose cost is borne by someone
(ea) the value to the provider of interconnections to the facility whose cost
is borne by someone else;
(f) the operational and technical requirements necessary for the safe and
reliable operation of the facility;
(g) the economically efficient operation of the facility;
(h) the pricing principles specified in
(2) The Commission may take into account any other
matters that it thinks are relevant.
should observe that amendments have been made to the CCA since the time of
notification to the ACCC, but the parties agreed that
the amendments were of no
significance to the dispute before the Tribunal.
to subsection (aa), the objects of
are set out in
(a) promote the economically efficient operation of,
use of and investment in the infrastructure by which services are provided,
promoting effective competition in upstream and downstream markets;
(b) provide a framework and guiding principles to encourage a consistent
approach to access regulation in each industry.
to subsection (h),
sets out three pricing principles:
The pricing principles relating to the price of
access to a service are:
(a) that regulated access prices
(i) be set so as to generate
expected revenue for a regulated service or services that is at least sufficient
to meet the efficient
costs of providing access to the regulated service or
services; and
(ii) include a return on investment commensurate with the regulatory and
commercial risks involved;
(b) that the access price structures
(i) allow multi-part pricing
and price discrimination when it aids efficiency; and
(ii) not allow a vertically integrated access provider to set terms and
conditions that discriminate in favour of its downstream operations,
the extent that the cost of providing access to other operators is higher;
(c) that access pricing regimes should
provide incentives to reduce costs or otherwise improve
productivity.
relevant to the ACCC’s role in arbitrations of access disputes are the
statutory restrictions on final determinations.
Section 44W
provides that a
determination of the ACCC has no effect if it would have any of the following
(a) preventing an existing user obtaining a
sufficient amount of the service to be able to meet the user’s reasonably
anticipated
requirements, measured at the time when the dispute was
(b) preventing a person from obtaining, by the exercise of a pre-notification
right, a sufficient amount of the service to be able
to meet the person’s
actual requirements;
(c) depriving any person of a protected contractual right;
(d) resulting in the third party becoming the owner (or one of the owners) of
any part of the facility, or of extensions of the facility
(including expansions
of the capacity of the facility and expansions of the geographical reach of the
facility), without the consent
of the provider;
(e) requiring the provider to bear some or all of the costs of extending the
facility (including expanding the capacity of the facility
and expanding the
geographical reach of the facility);
(ea) requiring the provider to bear some or all of the costs of maintaining
extensions of the facility (including expansions of the
capacity of the facility
and expansions of the geographical reach of the facility);
(f) requiring the provider to bear some or all of the costs of
interconnections to the facility or maintaining interconnections to
Separately,
the Tribunal’s role in re-arbitrations of access disputes is set out in
Relevantly, that section provides:
(3) A review by the Tribunal is a re-arbitration of
the access dispute based on the information, reports and things referred to in
section 44ZZOAA.
(4) For the purposes of the review, the Tribunal has the same powers as the
Commission.
(5) The member of the Tribunal presiding at the review may require the
Commission to give assistance for the purposes of the review.
(6) The Tribunal may either affirm or vary the Commission’s
determination.
, the Tribunal is required to make a decision within the
‘consideration period’. The consideration period is ordinarily
period of 180 days from the date of the application for review, but may be
extended by written notice to the relevant Minister
s 44ZZOA(7))
extended in effect by agreement between the relevant parties (see
s 44ZZOA(5)).
The consideration period for the Tribunal’s
determination of these applications is further addressed below.
, the Tribunal must have regard to all of the information that the
ACCC took into account in connection with the making of its Final
Determination,
as well as any information that the Tribunal has requested under the powers set
s 44ZZOAAA(4)
or anything done as mentioned in
information or report given to the Tribunal under
s 44ZP(5A).
44ZZOAAA(4)
below in the context of an application made by Glencore for the
Tribunal to request and consider additional information that was
taken into account by the ACCC in connection with the making of its Final
Determination.
the outset the Tribunal makes the following observations relating to these
statutory provisions and their operation in these proceedings,
particularly in
relation to the important issue of ‘user contributions’ (to which we
will return in more detail).
is clear from the mandatory considerations that the Tribunal can and must have
regard to a range of matters in a determination.
The weight to be given to each
matter is a question for the Tribunal depending on the circumstances before the
Tribunal. To the
extent mandatory considerations pull in different directions,
again this is a matter the Tribunal needs to consider and undertake
a balancing
exercise. It is essentially an evaluative exercise.
business interests of the provider are a factor to consider, and these need to
be carefully considered and evaluated.
This consideration is referred to
expressly in
s 44X(1)(a)
, the objects of
) and the pricing
(s 44ZZCA).
is important (as one aspect to consider) that the price and terms of access
should provide an incentive to a service provider to
efficiently (and in a
timely fashion) invest in maintaining and improving infrastructure necessary to
provide facilities at the Port.
Prices that are too low can lead to
non-investment or delayed investment, or the non-provision of some
infrastructure services.
significance of this consideration is confirmed by the extrinsic materials to
Trade Practices Amendment (National Access Regime) Bill 2005
which introduced the pricing principles. The Revised Explanatory Memorandum to
that Bill notes (at [22.2]) that the pricing
principles were introduced to
address concerns that the potential for access regulation would deter investment
in essential infrastructure,
and that the pricing principles are intended to
ensure that ‘the objects clause has more than just symbolic value, by
effective market signals for the efficient use of existing resources
and for future investment in infrastructure’. The Explanatory
goes on to explain (at [22.7]) that the pricing principle in
s 44ZZCA(a)(ii) requires the ACCC to specifically factor
in regulatory and
commercial risks faced by service providers, to counter the perception that
regulation favours service users:
The reference to regulatory risk in Pricing Principle
(a)(ii) is intended to refer to the perception that the exercise of regulatory
discretion will be undertaken in a heavy-handed, arbitrary or uneven fashion.
While such perceptions may deter investment in any
dysfunctional market subject
to regulation, regulatory risk takes on greater importance for infrastructure
investors, due to the
length of time and expense required for service providers
to respond to changes in a market, perceptions that regulatory decisions
be biased in favour of service users rather than service providers/investors,
the scale of investment in infrastructure and
the sunk nature of the assets.
Pricing Principle (a)(ii) requires regulators specifically to factor in
regulatory and commercial
risks in setting access prices. This may assist to
address perceptions that regulatory bias favours service
other matter to recall is that regulation under
is not an end in
itself, but rather, the means of promoting effective competition in upstream and
downstream markets. In
BHP v National Competition Council
[2008] HCA 45
(2008) 236 CLR
, the High Court reviewed the background against which the
Competition
Policy Reform Act
(Cth) (the ‘
introduced Part IIIA to the
Trade Practices Act 1976
’). The Court quoted (at [13]) from the Second Reading
Speech in the Senate on the Bill for the 1995 Act, where the Minister
The bill inserts a new Part into the [TPA], to
establish a legal regime to facilitate third parties obtaining access to the
of certain essential facilities of national significance. The notion
underlying the regime is that access to certain facilities with
natural monopoly
characteristics, such as electricity grids or gas pipelines, is needed to
encourage competition in related markets,
such as electricity generation or gas
production. Access to such facilities can be achieved if a person seeking access
is successful
in having the service ‘declared’ and then negotiates
access with the service provider.
already has access to the Port, and this Tribunal has previously reached the
view that it was not satisfied that increased
access would promote a material
increase in competition in the coal export market, or any other dependent market
Application by Glencore Coal Pty Ltd
[2016] ACompT 6
These findings were made in the context of whether the service should be
declared but are relevant to pricing and terms of access.
For instance, there
can be no competition-related justification to deduct $912.0 million from the
optimised replacement cost (‘
’) for “user
contributions” on the basis that the deduction will promote competition in
related markets.
number of other matters should be mentioned relating to the statutory provisions
under consideration, particularly in respect of
contributions’. As initial observations we make the following
do not see a deduction being made to the RAB for user contributions as
consistent with allowing the Port to recover its efficient
costs. Undoubtedly,
the concepts of efficient costs and efficient operation appear in several
provisions: ss 44X(1)(g), 44AA(a)
and 44ZZCA(a)(i). However the efficient
costs, pursuant to the methodology adopted by the ACCC, are those which a new
entrant would
incur, the depreciated ORC (‘
’) value. The
concept of “efficiency” does not explain or justify any deduction of
particular assets for historical
44X(1)(e) provides that in making a determination the ACCC must take into
account the value to the service provider of
extensions whose cost is borne by
someone else. The Tribunal takes the view this factor is directed at situations
where the determination
requires the provider to extend the facility (for
example by extending a train line to a third party’s mine) and is not
the question arises whether the deduction is justified as being in the interests
of those who have a right to use the Service
(s 44X(1)(c)) because it will
ensure that users do not pay for the same assets twice: once through their
initial investment and again
through PNO’s charges. This presupposes,
however, that the user has made an initial contribution with the expectation of
a future price benefit. In the present case, that assumption is not
valid. However, we will return later to this issue in more
Ports and Maritime Administration Act 1995
of the PMAA governs the imposition of various port charges on either the owner
of the vessel in which cargo is loaded or the owner
of the cargo being loaded.
Ordinarily, such charges are payable to the relevant port authority (see
but by virtue of the 98 year lease arrangement, these charges are payable to PNO
in the case of the Port.
noted above, two charges are relevant to this access dispute: the NSC and the
Wharfage Charge.
of the PMAA relevantly provides for the imposition of the NSC in respect of
the general use by a vessel of the Port and its infrastructure
(1) A navigation service charge is payable in respect
of the general use by a vessel of a designated port and its
infrastructure...
(2) Unless the regulations otherwise provide, the
(a) is payable on each entry by the
vessel into any designated port, and
(b) is to be calculated by reference to the gross tonnage of the
(4) A navigation service charge is payable by the
owner of the vessel concerned.
of the PMAA also relevantly provides for the imposition of the Wharfage
Charge in respect of the loading and unloading of cargo at
the Port as
(1) A wharfage charge is payable in respect of the
availability of a site at which stevedoring operations may be carried
(3) The charge is payable:
(a) in the case of cargo that is unloaded
at the site—by the person who, immediately after it is unloaded, is the
the cargo, and
(b) in the case of cargo that is loaded at the site—by the person who,
immediately before it is loaded, is the owner of the
(4) To the extent, however, that the charge is not
paid by the person indicated in subsection (3) as liable for its payment, the
is payable by the person who, at the time payment is demanded by the
relevant port authority, is the owner of the
Relevantly,
of the PMAA provides as follows:
(1) The relevant port authority may enter into an
agreement with a person liable to pay any kind of charge under this
(2) Such an agreement may make provision for or with respect
(a) fixing the amount of any charge
payable by the person to the relevant port authority, and
(b) any other matter which the relevant port authority is permitted by or
under this Part to determine in respect of the charge, and
(c) any right or privilege which by or under this Part accrues to the person
liable to pay the charge, or which the relevant port
authority may confer on the
(3) To the extent that provision is so made, the
agreement displaces any determinations of the relevant port authority in
to the charge or to the matter, right or privilege
Importantly,
the PMAA defines for the purposes of that Act the term ‘owner’ when
used in the context of a vessel or cargo.
In this respect, s 48 of the PMAA
relevantly provides:
(1) In this Act, owner of a vessel or cargo means
(subject to this section) the person who owns the vessel or cargo.
(2) A reference in this Act to the owner of a vessel includes a reference
(a) a person registered as the
vessel’s owner in the relevant authority under the marine legislation or
the National law or
other certificate of registry for the vessel, or
(b) a person who has chartered the
(4) A reference in this Act to the owner of a vessel or cargo includes a
reference to any person who, whether on the person’s
own behalf or on
behalf of another:
(a) exercises any of the functions of the
owner of the vessel or cargo, or
(b) represents to the relevant port authority that the person has those
functions or accepts the obligation to exercise those functions.
section, and more specifically s 48(4)(b), formed part of the basis for the
scope of the determination defined by the ACCC in
its Final Determination, and
is a topic of contention between PNO and Glencore in this access dispute.
Separately,
Division 6A of the PMAA was introduced by amendments made on
26 November 2012. It allows the relevant port authority
(PNO in the case
of the Port) to levy on port users ‘infrastructure charges’ to fund
investment in infrastructure projects
such as the acquisition or development of
land to be used as part of the port precinct, or the provision of services and
by the operator of the Port. As will be seen, this Division is
relevant to one of the topics of contention raised in Glencore’s
application regarding user contributions.
we mention cl 11 of the
Ports and Maritime Administration Regulation 2012
(NSW), which provides as follows relating to the responsibility of an
‘owner’ of a vessel to provide certain particulars
to PNO relevant
to the NSC:
The owner of a vessel in respect of which a
navigation service charge is payable must, at such time as the relevant port
requires, furnish the relevant port authority with the following
particulars:
(a) the owner’s name and address,
(b) the name, identifying particulars and relevant voyage number of the
(c) the gross tonnage of the vessel,
(d) the port in respect of which the navigation service charge is
(e) the date on which, the time at which, and the purpose for which, the
vessel entered the port,
(f) such other information with respect to payment of the navigation service
charge as the relevant port authority reasonably requests.
Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units.
PRELIMINARY ISSUES
embarking on the parties’ submissions regarding the substantive aspects of
the access dispute, it is appropriate to briefly
address the two preliminary
issues that arose as part of the case management of the applications before the
Extension of the statutory timeframe for the Tribunal’s
determination
noted above, the Tribunal is statutorily required to make its determination on
applications brought before it under
within the ‘consideration
period’, ordinarily a period of 180 days from the date of the
applications save for the effect
of any extensions of time or an agreement to
disregard certain periods of time (see s 44ZZOA).
application was made on 8 October 2018 and Glencore’s application was made
a day later on 9 October 2018. In the
absence of any extension of time or an
agreement to disregard certain periods of time, the ordinary application of the
consideration
period would require the Tribunal to make its determination as
early as 6 April 2019.
the initial case management hearing of the applications, it became apparent that
the hearing timetable agreed between the parties
and the ACCC was such the
applications would not – or rather could not, for a want of sufficient
time for the parties and the
ACCC to prepare – be heard by the Tribunal,
much less decided by the Tribunal, prior to the date on which the Tribunal would
be required to make and publish its determination. The parties and the ACCC
subsequently gave further consideration to the most
appropriate means by which
to effectively extend the timeframe for the Tribunal’s determination on
the applications to a date
that afforded time for the applications to be heard
and for the Tribunal to make its determination. Ultimately, it was considered
that an agreement to ‘stop the clock’ pursuant to s 44ZZOA(5) was
the most appropriate means.
2 April 2019, the Tribunal issued a direction to memorialise its agreement
pursuant to that subsection with each of the parties
and the ACCC. By that
direction, it was agreed that the period between 2 April 2019 and 15 July 2019
would be disregarded for the
purposes of calculating the consideration period.
The effect of this agreement was that the Tribunal would be required to make its
determination on the applications before it by as early as 20 July 2019.
to a number of factors, including the nature of the disputation between the
parties and the complex issues that arose for determination,
the Tribunal
concluded that it would not be in a position to make its determination on the
applications before it by that date.
Accordingly, by notice dated 13 June 2019,
the Tribunal advised the Treasurer, pursuant to s 44ZZOA(8) of the Act, that it
make its decision by 29 November 2019. In keeping with the requirements
of that section, the Tribunal provided a copy of the notice
to each of the
parties and the ACCC and published a short form notice in
The Australian
newspaper. A copy of the notice to the Treasurer was also uploaded to the
Tribunal’s website.
Glencore’s application for the Tribunal to request
further information
12 February 2019, Glencore made an application seeking that the Tribunal request
additional information in the form of an expert
report from Baggerman
Associates, Marine Dredging Consultants, dated 12 February 2019 (the
Baggerman Report
to s 44ZZOAAA(4) the Tribunal may request such information that the Tribunal
considers reasonable and appropriate for the
purposes of making its decision on
a review under Part IIIA.
so requested, that information must be considered by the Tribunal in addition to
the information that the ACCC took into account
(see s 44ZZOAA(a)(ii)), as noted
contended that the Baggerman Report should be requested (and included in the
materials considered by the Tribunal) because
it would assist the Tribunal to
make a fully informed determination in relation to the costs of dredging.
Specifically, it was claimed
that the Baggerman Report would shed light on
whether, as contended by Glencore, dredging of the entrance channel to the Port
be undertaken with modern dredging equipment alone, or whether, as
contended by PNO, additional and expensive steps (specifically
drilling and
blasting pre-treatment) would need to be undertaken before dredging could
27 February 2019, the Tribunal issued a memorandum to the parties and the ACCC
which stated that it would refuse Glencore’s
application, but that its
reasons for doing so would be provided upon the publication of these
proceeding further on this topic, we should mention the way in which Glencore
put its request, recalling this is a request
for Glencore effectively to rely
upon another expert report commissioned by it in respect of issues that were
before the ACCC.
support of its application, Glencore submitted:
Access disputes under Part IIIA are difficult matters
for access seekers as they face an asymmetry in obtaining data as to the
cost structures that the access provider enjoys. The Baggerman Report
addresses a critical gap in the material before the ACCC.
In Glencore’s
submission, its consideration is essential to permit the Tribunal to make a
fully informed determination of
an important issue in this proceeding, namely
whether, as contended by Glencore, dredging of the Entrance Channel to the Port
be undertaken with modern dredging equipment alone (as was done, for
example, at Walker Shoal near Darwin) or, as argued by PNO,
whether substantial
additional costs for pre-treating hard rock with drilling and blasting should be
the outset, we do not accept that the Baggerman Report “addresses a
critical gap” in the material before the ACCC.
It supplements that
material, but there is no critical gap. Further, the consideration of the
Baggerman Report is not “essential”
to permit the Tribunal to make
the informed decision of the issue identified by Glencore. The Tribunal already
has material on this
topic on which it can make an informed decision.
addition, the context in which it is sought to introduce the Baggerman Report is
a factor to take into account.
the lead up to the Draft Determination, Glencore, through its consultant
engineers, Arup, contended that modern ‘Cutter Suction
’) are capable of dredging of the entire Port,
including the hardest rock located at the Entrance Channel (referred to as
direct’). To support its opinion, Arup referred to the
dredging of Walker Shoal in Darwin in 2014 where ‘rock with a
strength to the Entrance of Newcastle was dredged direct by the CSD,
rejected this approach and, via its experts, AECOM, argued that the very hard
rock at the Entrance Channel could not be dredged
by CSDs and ‘would
require the mobilisation of additional plant at significant cost’. AECOM
also proffered the view
that ‘[d]rilling and blasting then double handling
with a TSHD [Trailer Suction Hopper Dredger] is also a much slower process
using a CSD’.
and PNO were also unable to agree on the volumes and types of material that were
required to be dredged, particularly from
the Entrance Channel.
its Draft Determination, the ACCC accepted the position proposed by
... [B]ased on the evidence before it, the Commission
has concluded that Arup’s modelling provides a more robust approach to
estimating the volume and type of material to be dredged. This extends to the
UCS and RQD figures. The Commission also notes that
Arup’s proposed
methodology to dredging is based on what it submits has occurred in practice on
at least one occasion such
that it goes beyond a theoretical exercise. The
Commission considers that these two factors suggest that the use of more
technology as proposed in Arup’s report is an appropriate
assumption for the purposes of a DORC valuation for this arbitration.
informs the Commission’s consideration of dredging costs
response to this finding, on 17 August 2018, PNO provided the ACCC with new
expert material to explain why Arup’s proposed
dredging methodology was
impractical. This included material claiming that the sea conditions at the
Port restricted the use of
a CSD for much of the year and that the rock type and
strengths at the Port were incomparable with those at Walker Shoal. The ACCC
was critical of PNO, noting that it could have provided this information earlier
in the arbitration as it was aware of Glencore’s
position well before the
Draft Determination. Nevertheless, the ACCC had regard to the further
received PNO’s additional material, on 17 August 2018, Glencore was
required to provide any reply to the additional material
from PNO within 10
3 September 2018, Glencore provided the ACCC with a further report by Arup,
responding to PNO’s additional material with
as much information as it
could obtain in the time available to it. That report included revised
geological modelling for the Port
but noted that the geotechnical data for
Walker Shoal was the subject of confidentiality to a third party and thus could
not be disclosed
at that time. Arup also sought to address the claim that sea
conditions at the Port were not suitable for the economic use of a
pointed out that smaller dredgers had been employed at the Port throughout its
history and assessed the ‘operating
envelope’ of newer,
significantly larger CSDs.
its Final Determination, the ACCC departed from the view it had expressed in its
Draft Reasons and instead adopted the position
argued by PNO: that pre-treatment
of the rock with drilling and blasting was necessary. The ACCC took this view
“specifically
having had regard to the additional material submitted by
the parties following the Draft Determination.”
our determination of whether to receive and consider the Baggerman Report, a
number of matters needed to be considered.
is significant that the issues the Baggerman Report addressed were before the
ACCC and well-known by the parties at least upon
the delivery of the Draft
Determination.
Baggerman Report addressed the following questions:
(1) the extent to which the Entrance Channel at the Port
could, as a practical matter and had it not already been dredged, be dredged
today using a modern CSD, without a requirement for drilling and blasting
pre-treatment; and
(2) to the extent that a significant portion of the Entrance Channel could be
dredged by use of a CSD, the approximate total cost
of dredging (including any
necessary drilling and blasting pre-treatment).
addressing these questions, Baggerman Associates:
(1) introduced background information regarding dredging
technology, including CSDs and other methods such as drilling and blasting;
(2) considered the sea (wave) conditions in which modern CSDs can operate and
considered independently collected data relating to
the actual conditions
experienced at the Entrance Channel over many years;
(3) considered the rock types and strengths that can be dredged by modern CSDs,
analysed the geotechnical aspects of the rock at
the Entrance Channel by
reference to bore hole data, and compared them with rock conditions found at
Walker Shoal – a project
in which Baggerman Associates was intimately
involved; and
(4) determined an economically appropriate work method for dredging the Entrance
Channel and calculated the estimated costs of doing
so. Reference was made to
the volumes and geotechnical characteristics of the various materials to be
removed, along with the specific
production rates expected of modern dredging
equipment operating at the Entrance Channel; and the real costs likely to be
in a commercial project.
cannot be said that any of these questions or issues were only raised by the
Draft Determination.
on 17 August 2018, PNO lodged material in response to the Draft Determination,
it included reports from Evers Consult on dredging
and Akuna Dredging Solutions
on dredging methodology and the assessment of hard rock at the Entrance Channel
to the Port.
on 3 September 2018, when Glencore lodged its submissions in reply to
PNO’s submission on 17 August 2018, that submission
noted as follows:
PNO Submission repeats a number of arguments already addressed by Glencore in
previous submissions made to the ACCC in this arbitration
and, in particular,
many of these arguments have been addressed in Glencore’s submission dated
17 August 2018. As such, Glencore
does not seek to address each argument in the
PNO Submission and instead maintains and refers to Glencore’s previous
submissions
in this matter, and in particular, its submissions to the ACCC dated
17 August 2018...
with this submission is a report from Synergies Economic Consulting (Synergies
Report) and a confidential report from Arup
(Arup Report) which also respond to
Direction 2 of the ACCC’s Direction.
Synergies report dated 3 September 2018 (referred to by Glencore)
After considering the suite of reports that PNO has
submitted, they, while lengthy, introduce only limited new information. In many
instances, PNO’s submission restates material from previous submissions,
to which we have previously responded.
accept that it may have been difficult for Glencore to respond to the Draft
Determination and material put forward by PNO on 17
August 2018. However,
Glencore acted by 3 September 2018 in providing the ACCC with a further
report from Arup on the material then
obtained and available, and significantly
did not request an extension of time to put further material before the ACCC.
Presumably,
Glencore considered it did not need to put further material before
ACCC: after all, the Draft Determination on this issue was in
its favour.
was only upon its review of the Final Determination that Glencore wanted to rely
on further material, as attested to in the affidavit
of its solicitor (Mr
Poddar) sworn 12 February 2019:
review of the Final Determination, I formed a view that the ACCC had relied on
the Further PNO Material lodged on 17 August 2018
in response to the Draft
Determination, and that Glencore had not had an adequate opportunity to address
the matters which had impacted
on the decisions reached by the ACCC in the Final
Determination.
such, the need for Glencore to seek to engage an expert to provide an expert
report in response to the Evers Report and Akuna Report
did not become apparent
until after publication of the Final Determination on 15 September
Mr Poddar also attested, to address the PNO material (once the decision had been
made to obtain more information
the Final Determination was
published) would require time and resources to access information and obtain
inputs from wave specialists.
accepting that Glencore could not reasonably have made available to the ACCC the
Baggerman Report in the time limit it proposed,
Glencore did not request an
extension of time (presumably because it did not think it necessary) and, as we
have indicated, the Baggerman
Report covered issues well identified during the
course of the arbitration before the Draft Determination was published.
it is important to recall the statutory context.
a review of a final determination under s 44ZP, the Tribunal must only consider
specified information. This primarily comprises
the information the ACCC took
into account in connection with the making of the determination to which the
review relates, subject
to the application of s 44ZZOAA.
are a limited number of other categories of information or material that the
Tribunal must have regard to that provide a potential
“new” material (that is, material the ACCC did not take into account
in making the Final Determination) to
be considered as part of the review
process. Each of these exceptions is only enlivened essentially by the request
of the Tribunal.
light of the above, the text and context make clear that s 44ZZOAA operates to
limit the material that the Tribunal may consider
in a review under s 44ZP. As
such, to the extent “new” information is allowed into the review
process it may only come
(1) a request from the presiding member of the Tribunal
for the ACCC to give assistance to the Tribunal pursuant to s 44ZP(5);
(2) a request from the presiding member of the Tribunal by written notice
requiring the ACCC to give information and to make reports
for the purposes of
the review pursuant to s 44ZP(5A);
(3) a request from the Tribunal for ‘such information that the Tribunal
considers reasonable and appropriate for the purposes
of making its decision on
a review’ pursuant to s 44ZZOAAA(4).
connection with s 44ZZOAAA(4), the Tribunal must positively form a view that any
information it requests is ‘reasonable and
appropriate’ for the
purposes of making its decision.
a starting proposition, where a party before the Tribunal urges it to request
information that could reasonably have been made
available to the ACCC before it
made a final determination, it would not be reasonable for the Tribunal to
request such information.
This is because in order for the arbitration before
the ACCC to have meaning, it is critical that the parties place before the ACCC
all of the material that they consider to be relevant to the determination of
the access dispute.
considering making any request for information, the Tribunal should also keep
firmly in mind that the CCA provides for the Tribunal
to make a decision within
180 days from when the application for review is made: s 44ZZOA. Although this
period can be lengthened,
either by agreement of relevant persons or by the
Tribunal extending the time in which it has to make a decision, it is an
that the Tribunal should be able, and should endeavour, to make
decisions within that period unless there are exceptional circumstances.
this way, the time period in which it is intended that a decision will be made
(referred to as the ‘expected period’
or the ‘consideration
period’) should inform whether any request for ‘new’
information is reasonable and
appropriate.
whether it is ‘reasonable and appropriate’ to request information
will be necessarily informed by a consideration
of the text and context of the
ss 44ZZOAAA(4) and 44ZZOAA, including:
that the primary
material on which the review is to be based is that which was before the ACCC
when it made the determination, which
indicates that the review process before
the ACCC is to be a meaningful one, and one in which the parties have every
incentive to
place the material that they consider to be relevant to the
resolution of the dispute before the ACCC; and
the limited
timeframes in which the Tribunal has to make a decision, which indicates that it
is not intended that there be any material
broadening of the information that
was before the ACCC when it made its final determination.
we observe that Glencore submitted that it is in the public interest for the
Baggerman Report to be received and considered
by the Tribunal because of its
‘broader relevance to future access issues’. Undoubtedly this may
be so in that any determination
by the Tribunal with the Baggerman Report before
it will be made public and so will have some ‘precedent’ value in
regard; but this is but one consideration to be taken into account.
accept that the Baggerman Report does contain information that is of general
relevance to the declared services the subject of
the arbitration.
a high level, it goes to the optimised replacement cost of the assets required
to provide the Service, which as will be seen, represents
a significant
battleground in this access dispute. However, relevance is not the only focus
of the inquiry invited by s 44ZZOAAA(4).
Indeed, we consider that
requesting the Baggerman Report pursuant to that subsection, and at the behest
of Glencore, would not be
in keeping with the purpose of the statutory power,
keeping in mind the Tribunal’s role as re-arbitrator in applications of
this kind is constrained in the material it may consider in this role.
respect of the specific subsection, the purpose of s 44ZZOAAA(4) is for the
Tribunal to request information which it has identified
as a means to fill a gap
in its knowledge. It is not to be used to introduce new information –
much less information which
is the product of a commission of the party seeking
to have it requested – that was not available at the time of the Final
Determination. In this respect, the absence of any mechanism designed to be
used by a party seeking to adduce new information for
the Tribunal’s
consideration is telling.
ACCC recognised in its Final Determination that although the arbitration was
between Glencore and PNO and conducted on the basis
of the issues and materials
put forward by the parties, the Final Determination and the supporting statement
of reasons may be relevant
to other users in their future negotiations with PNO.
Similar observations could be made about this review process undertaken by
Tribunal. Nonetheless, the benefit of the Tribunal’s consideration of the
information for any future negotiations or arbitrations
needs to be balanced
against the intent of the regime: that the parties to an arbitration put all
relevant information before the
ACCC as the original decision-maker.
Nevertheless,
as we have already mentioned, this access dispute is bilateral in nature. It is
open to the ACCC (and the Tribunal)
to determine different terms and conditions
of access to the Service for different users of the Service. We also mention
Tribunal is not aware that any other user of the Service has notified
any access dispute to the ACCC in relation to the Service.
any pricing methodology adopted in one arbitration may change in a later
arbitration, particularly if changes in future events
suggest different
assumptions may be appropriate to adopt in any pricing approach.
whilst many considerations needed to be evaluated in determining whether it was
reasonable and appropriate to request the
Baggerman Report, in the end the
proper approach was not to make any such request.
it bears noting that the Tribunal was aware of the contents of the Baggerman
Report and its relevance to the issues between
the parties in this
re-arbitration at the time it made its decision on the issue. The Tribunal did
not consider it was reasonable
and appropriate to request the Baggerman Report
in view of the ACCC process, the information already before the Tribunal and the
statutory context of the Tribunal’s task. We also observe that assuming
the Tribunal has the power to request the Baggerman
Report now it has had a
hearing and considered the submissions of the parties, the Tribunal would still
not consider it reasonable
and appropriate to request (on its own motion) the
Baggerman Report for the same reasons. The Tribunal still considers that it
not require the Baggerman Report to assist it in the re-arbitration and
does not consider that any request for such information is
reasonable and
appropriate for the purpose of making its determination in this
re-arbitration.
TOPICS OF CONTENTION
and Glencore identified seven topics of contention for the Tribunal’s
consideration. In support of their positions, each
made a series of written
submissions (received between 1 March 2019 and 15 April 2019), presented oral
argument before the Tribunal
over six days between 6 and 13 May 2019, and
provided subsequent documentation to the Tribunal.
ACCC also made submissions regarding each of the applications in accordance with
the Tribunal’s directions dated 6 December
2018 and subsequent requests,
which in effect required the ACCC to give assistance for the purposes of the
Tribunal’s review
pursuant to s 44ZP(5).
seven topics of contention are summarised below:
(1) the scope of the Final Determination;
(2) the ACCC’s deduction of user contributions from the RAB;
(3) the costs of channel dredging;
(4) the inclusion in the RAB of $145 million for the importation of reclamation
bunding material, and the associated issue of user-funded
reclamation bunding
(5) the length of the construction period and the associated issue of the amount
of interest during that construction period;
(6) whether prices should be permitted to be set at a higher level than what
represents an appropriate return on coal-related assets;
(7) the true-up in respect of forecasted capital expenditure, and any difference
between forecast capex and actual capex within each
SCOPE OF THE FINAL DETERMINATION
noted above, the ACCC concluded that the regulated prices set out in its Final
Determination would only cover access to the Service:
(1) where Glencore, either directly or by agent,
charters a vessel to enter the Port precinct and load Glencore coal; and
(2) where Glencore makes a representation to PNO of the kind referred to in
s 48(4)(b) of the PMAA that it has the functions of the
owner of a vessel,
or accepts the obligation to exercise those functions, in order to enter the
Port precinct and load Glencore coal.
ease of reference, we will refer to the above as the first and second
limbs, as appropriate, of the determination scope adopted by
ACCC also expressly excluded certain matters from the scope of its Final
Determination. As noted above, these matters were:
(1) the terms and conditions of access in respect of
vessels carrying coal which have not been chartered by Glencore or in respect
which Glencore has not made a representation of the kind referred to in s
48(4)(b) of the PMAA;
(2) the terms and conditions of access for vessels other than those calling at
the coal terminals at the Port, and
(3) any charges imposed by PNO other than the NSC and the Wharfage
for ease of reference, we will refer to the above as the first, second and third
limbs, as appropriate, of the scope adopted by the ACCC.
and Glencore both challenged this scope of the Final Determination. PNO
contended it was too broad, while Glencore contended
it was too narrow.
Further, and as we will indicate later, the ACCC suggested a revised scope
different from that in the Final Determination.
PNO’s submissions
primary contention was that, having regard to the provisions of Part IIIA, the
ACCC had no statutory power to extend the
scope of its Final Determination to
the circumstances described in the second inclusive limb. In the alternative,
PNO contended
that even if it was within the ACCC’s statutory power (which
PNO denied), the inclusion of the second inclusive limb would
reveal a failure
by the ACCC to have had proper regard to the mandatory considerations set out in
first turned to the description of the Service. It argued the focus of that
description was access to and use of the Port’s
shipping channels,
including its berths. On PNO’s submission, that meant from both a
practical perspective, and from the perspective
of a proper construction of the
description of the Service, that the only persons who could conceivably access
or use the Service
are persons that control a vessel (whether through direct
ownership or a charter arrangement) for the purposes of loading or unloading
a terminal. This formed the foundation of PNO’s arguments against the
ACCC’s adoption of the second inclusive limb
in its determination
then referred to a number of provisions of Part IIIA including ss 44S, 44U, 44V,
44W, 44ZO(4), 44ZV, 44ZY and the definition of
‘third party’ in s
44B. PNO also referred the Tribunal to a decision of the Full Court of the
Federal Court of Australia,
which held that in the context of Part IIIA the word
‘access’ should be given its ordinary meaning, being ‘a right
or ability to use a service’:
Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd v
Australian Competition Tribunal
[2017] FCAFC 124
(2017) 253 FCR 115.
net effect of the provisions and the authority referred to was said to be that
the ACCC (and indeed the Tribunal) has statutory
authority to make access
dispute determinations
in respect of the ‘third party’
who sought to access the Service and who had notified the access dispute to the
in accordance with the provisions of the CCA. In other words, the ACCC and
the Tribunal only have the power to arbitrate a
dispute between
the relevant access provider and a (single) access seeker, not the power to
arbitrate general terms of access between
an access provider and all other
then referred to s 48 of the PMAA which among other things, deems for the
purposes of that Act a person to be an ‘owner’
of a vessel, where
that person makes a representation that it has the functions of the owner or
accepts the obligations of the owner
through its conduct. On PNO’s
submission, the purpose of this deeming provision was to assist the relevant
port authority
in recovering charges for use of port infrastructure.
submitted that the provisions of the PMAA (a State Act) were not intended to,
and in any event could not for constitutional reasons,
broaden the powers of the
ACCC or the Tribunal to make access dispute determinations under the CCA (a
Commonwealth Act). In other
words, representations made pursuant to a section
of the PMAA could not change who is in fact the owner of a vessel (when the word
‘owner’ is used in its ordinary sense) or alter the identity of the
person who is in fact accessing or using the Service.
It was on this basis that
PNO contended that the second inclusive limb exceeded the ACCC’s power
under Part IIIA to make a
determination dealing only with the terms and
conditions of access by the ‘third party’ that originally notified
dispute to the ACCC.
also identified certain unintended and undesirable consequences of the second
inclusive limb. First, by allowing Glencore to
take advantage of the
ACCC’s arbitrated prices whenever a s 48(4)(b) declaration was made,
Glencore could engage in a form
of arbitrage. For example, Glencore could
represent to PNO that it had undertaken to pay another user’s fee for
the Service thereby permitting that user, who was not a party to the
ACCC’s arbitration, to take advantage of the regulated
prices PNO must
provide to Glencore. Second, and relatedly, if the second inclusive limb of the
ACCC’s determination scope
were allowed to stand without intervention from
the Tribunal, PNO would have no certainty as to whom it is required to provide
arbitrated terms of access which, on PNO’s submissions,
would, contrary to s 44X(1)(a) of Part IIIA, fail to take account of
the service
provider’s legitimate business interests. This consequence, as it was
described by PNO, was also argued as illustrative
that – in the
alternative world where the ACCC had statutory power to extend the scope of its
determination in the manner identified
in the second inclusive limb (which PNO
denies) – the ACCC had, in any case, made its determination beyond power
had plainly not taken into account PNO’s legitimate business
interests by extending the scope to the second inclusive limb.
Glencore’s submissions
contended that the scope for the ACCC’s determination was unduly
restrictive on account of the first exclusive limb
which expressly excluded the
arbitrated NSC from applying in respect of vessels carrying coal which have
been chartered by Glencore or in respect of which Glencore has
made a representation of the kind referred to in s 48(4)(b) of the
PMAA. Glencore sought for the first exclusive limb to be excised
advanced this contention from two fronts. On one front, Glencore argued that in
order to fulfil the purpose of declared
services regime in Part IIIA, the
Tribunal needed to approach the matter from a practical and commercial point of
view. This meant
taking a ‘substance over form’ approach by
ensuring that no matter the precise manner in which Glencore and its customers
choose to contract with one another, the arbitrated terms and conditions of
access to the Port should apply when Glencore is exporting
its coal from the
Port. On the other front, Glencore urged the Tribunal not to take an overly
restrictive view of what the Service
actually is. It argued that whenever
Glencore uses the Port and its associated facilities and infrastructure to load
coal onto a
vessel for export, it was ‘using’ or
‘accessing’ part of the Service within the meaning of Part IIIA, and
therefore should be able to enjoy its arbitrated prices.
each of the fronts advanced by Glencore in turn, its primary submission in
respect of the first was that because Glencore bears
the ultimate economic cost
of port charges in circumstances where vessels that are using the Service are
chartered by Glencore’s
customers and carrying Glencore’s coal, in
order to effect the Final Determination, this practical and commercial reality
be recognised by excising the first exclusive limb, thereby extending the
scope accordingly.
support of this, Glencore submitted that its coal is sold to export customers
under a number of different contract types, but that
no matter the type,
Glencore seeks to sell coal at the most competitive price on a delivered basis.
In some cases, Glencore will
arrange for the transporting vessel, and in other
cases, the customer will make those arrangements. Glencore submitted that in
case, market structure and dynamics are such that Glencore bears the
ultimate economic burden of the NSC imposed by PNO for use of
the Service in the
form of lower delivered coal prices. It claimed that for the Final
Determination to only to apply to circumstances
where Glencore arranges for the
delivery of coal to its customers – and to ignore instances where
Glencore’s customers
make such arrangements – risks undermining the
utility of the application of the Part IIIA regime to the Port.
the second of Glencore’s two fronts, Glencore sought to emphasise that in
circumstances where vessels using the Service are
chartered by Glencore’s
customers and carrying Glencore’s coal, Glencore is still a third party
accessing or seeking
access to the Service for the purposes of Part IIIA. It
was said that by using or accessing the berthing boxes and the revetments
associated with the berthing boxes for the purposes of loading coal into
vessels, Glencore is accessing the Port’s infrastructure
facilities which
are a critical component of the Service as declared. Conversely, using the
berthing boxes was not simply a matter
of using an area of water otherwise
unconnected with the Port infrastructure. In other words, once Glencore is
of the Service (by loading coal onto vessels), the rest of the
Service is incidental and likewise being used as a necessary incident
loading of coal. Glencore willingly conceded that the relevant service is
defined by the declaration of the Service, but
pressed that it should be
understood as including, consistent with the provisions of Part IIIA and in the
context of the Tribunal’s
determination in which it declared the Service,
the facility and associated infrastructure by means of which the Service is
also pointed to the fact that it was subject to and liable to pay the Wharfage
Charge no matter whether Glencore or its customers
were responsible for
chartering the relevant vessel. It effectively inferred from this that Glencore
was using, or PNO was providing
access to, the Service. On this basis, Glencore
contended that it should have the benefit of its arbitrated prices in both the
circumstances
outlined in the ACCC’s determination scope, as well as in
respect of vessels carrying coal which have not been chartered by
Glencore or in
respect of which Glencore has not made a representation of the kind referred to
in s 48(4)(b) of the PMAA.
then proceeded to advance its first alternative submission, which we briefly
canvassed above: that even if Glencore is not
a user or access seeker of the
Service when it loads its coal onto vessels at the terminal by virtue of
s 44V(2), Glencore is still
utilising the Service by using facilities which
depend on the berthing box infrastructure. Glencore argued that the effect of
subsection was to open up any other matters relating to access such that,
once it is accepted that Glencore is using certain facilities
to load its coal
onto vessels, and those facilities are supported by the berthing box facilities
(which are, on Glencore’s
submissions, expressly included within the
Service), it follows that Glencore is a user of the Service whenever it is
loading its
coal onto vessels at the Port.
then proceeded to advance its second alternative submission. Glencore began by
observing that under the ACCC’s scope,
PNO must charge the NSC at the
regulated price when Glencore is the owner or charterer of the vessel
transporting Glencore’s
coal but may charge a
unregulated
NSC when someone else is the owner or charterer of the vessel transporting
Glencore’s coal. Glencore then referred
to the pricing principle found in
s 44ZZCA(b)(i), which must be taken into account by the ACCC by virtue of s
that the access price structures should ... allow
multi-part pricing and price discrimination when it aids efficiency
then submitted that the sort of price discrimination brought about by the
ACCC’s scope, and more specifically the first
exclusive limb of that
scope, was not the sort that aided ‘efficiency’ as required under
the pricing principle in s 44ZZCA(b)(i).
Glencore made a submission directly in respect of s 48(4) of the PMAA. It
contended that s 48(4) of the PMAA served as a
useful mechanism to determine in
what circumstances a person is accessing the Service. It was submitted that
both when a formal
representation is made pursuant to that section, and even
when no such representation is made but Glencore is loading its coal onto
another person’s vessel (with the implicit authority to do so, lest the
tort of trespass be committed by Glencore against the
ship owner), it is
apparent that Glencore is using or accessing (within the meaning of Part IIIA)
the Service. On that basis, Glencore
contended that the ACCC was right to
include the second inclusive limb as part of its defined scope.
ACCC’s submissions
its written submissions, the ACCC responded to the PNO and Glencore challenges
to the scope of the Final Determination.
respect of PNO’s submissions, the ACCC contended that the imposition of
legal liability to pay for a service is a strong
indicator that the service is
or will be supplied to that person, or is at least for their benefit. On this
account, when Glencore
makes a representation of the kind referred to in s
48(4)(b) – thereby making itself liable to pay the NSC – this
that Glencore is a user of the Service. The ACCC also dismissed
PNO’s concerns about the implications of preserving the second
limb of the determination scope. On the risk of creating an arbitrage
opportunity, the ACCC submitted that the concern
was overstated because it only
applies where the representation is made in order for a vessel to enter the Port
to load Glencore
coal, meaning it only applies where Glencore coal is loaded.
The ACCC considered it was unlikely that Glencore would deploy its
arbitrage opportunity to grant its coal export competitors what would be, in
essence, a reduction to those exporters’
cost base. On the spectre of
there being uncertainty as to whom PNO would be required to offer
Glencore’s arbitrated prices,
the ACCC dismissed this on the basis that
PNO would presumably be in a position to know when another person makes a
representation
of the kind referred to in s 48(4)(b) and therefore the
circumstances in which Glencore will be considered to have made such a
representation.
the ACCC did at the hearing endorse PNO’s characterisation of the Service.
Counsel for the ACCC said that the Service
did not itself directly involve the
loading and unloading of coal – it involved the accessing of the shipping
channels and
berths, a purpose of which was the loading and unloading of coal.
Counsel for the ACCC also expressed support for PNO’s view
Service, being relevantly described as ‘the right to access and use the
shipping channels (including berths next to
the wharves as part of the
channels)’ did not strictly include use of or access to the wharves.
respect of Glencore’s submissions, the ACCC took issue with
Glencore’s assessment that the determination scope would
permit PNO to
engage in price discrimination between economically identical transactions, that
is, transactions for the sale of coal
that are identical save for who of either
the vendor or customer arranges for the transportation of the coal. The ACCC
denied that
the scope permitted such price discrimination and that such
transactions are in any case economically identical. The ACCC contended
44ZZCA, which contains the pricing principle referred to by Glencore, only ever
prevents price discrimination where a price
falls within a determination. So to
that extent, alleging price discrimination between a regulated price (which, as
is apparent,
falls within a determination) and an unregulated price (which falls
outside of a determination) is circular.
ACCC also dismissed Glencore’s reliance on its liability to pay the
Wharfage Charge as demonstrative of it using the Service.
Counsel for the ACCC
clarified that the question of whether or not the Wharfage Charge (and thereby
the use of ‘sites’
for which it is levied) falls within the Service
was not a live issue before the ACCC. Rather, before the ACCC, the parties had
provided an agreed model of charges and the Wharfage Charge was fixed (that is
to say, agreed).
Separately,
at the hearing before the Tribunal, the ACCC stated that, on further reflection,
certain amendments should be made to
clarify, but not substantively change, the
meaning of the first inclusive limb of the determination scope. In response to
this indication
the Tribunal invited the ACCC to set out its proposed amendments
to the scope, and it did so by a separate written document provided
Tribunal following the hearing. That document explained that the ACCC
considered the following amendments to clause 2 of
its Final Determination were
appropriate:
2.1 The scope of the determination
is confined to
the terms and conditions of
a. where Glencore
directly or by agent, charters a vessel
the Port precinct and load
Glencore coal, and
b. where Glencore
falls within the extended definition of “owner of
makes a representation to PNO of the kind referred
section 48(4)
Ports and Maritime
Administration Act 1995
that is has the functions
of the owner of a vessel, or accepts the obligation to exercise those functions,
in order to
in respect of a vessel
ing and using
precinct and
in order to
load Glencore
, as a consequence of which
(i) is liable to pay the
navigation service charge under
section 50(4)
of the PMAA; and
(ii) as a person liable to pay that charge, has the authority under
of the PMAA to negotiate with the relevant port authority with
respect to: fixing the amount of any charge payable by the person
relevant port authority, and any other matter which the relevant port authority
is permitted by or under
of the PMAA to determine in respect of the
charge, and any right or privilege which by or under
of the PMAA accrues
to the person liable to pay the charge, or which the relevant port authority may
confer on the
2.2 For the avoidance of doubt, the determination
does not apply to:
a. the terms and conditions of
access to apply in respect of vessels carrying coal that have not been chartered
by Glencore or in
respect of which Glencore has not made a representation of the
kind referred to in
section 48(4)(b)
of the PMAA,
. terms and conditions of access for vessels other
than those calling at the coal terminals at the Port, and
any charges imposed by PNO other than the
Navigation Service Charge and the Wharfage
for the ACCC claimed that redrafting the scope in this manner would assist in
making clear that whenever a person falls into
the definition of
‘owner’ under the PMAA, then the determination applies.
Consideration
of PNO, Glencore and the ACCC were in agreement that in determining the
appropriate scope for the application of the determination,
the starting point
is the description of the Service, as declared by the Tribunal on 16 June 2016.
We agree. To repeat it, the
Service declared by the Tribunal on that date
the provision of the right to access and use the
shipping channels (including berths next to the wharves as part of the channels)
at the Port of Newcastle (Port), by virtue of which vessels may enter the Port
precinct and load and unload at relevant terminals
located within the Port
precinct and then depart the Port precinct.
simply, the debate between the parties and the ACCC regarding the scope of the
determination is resolved by answering the question
what it means to access or
use the Service. No one suggested the phrase ‘right to’ altered or
impacted on the proper
construction of the Service. PNO says that to use or
access the Service means to navigate the shipping channels of the Port. Because
of this, only a person controlling or in charge of a vessel is able to use or
access the Service, which means that Glencore is only
using or accessing the
Service when it owns or charters a vessel to transport its coal. On the
contrary, Glencore says that to use
or access the Service means using
part of facilities or infrastructure of the Port, including loading of Glencore
coal onto a ship. In reaching this view, Glencore
relies on the language which
follows ‘by virtue of which’ and say that the activity of loading
and unloading at relevant
terminals is so central to the economic exercise that
is the subject of the Service declaration, that to construct the Service in
other way would be unduly narrow. On the back of this approach, Glencore says
that it is accessing or using the Service whenever
it loads its coal on vessels
(regardless of who controls them) because it uses or accesses part of the Port
infrastructure to do
first to the terms of the Service, the primary focus of the declaration is on
‘the provision of the right to access
and use the shipping
channels’. The parenthetical language that follows is inclusive:
‘(including berths next to the
wharves as part of the channels)’.
It helps to clarify, almost in a ‘for the avoidance of doubt’
fashion, that
the ‘right to access and use the shipping channels’ is
not limited to the thoroughfares of those shipping channels which
are used by
vessels to navigate the Port. In other words, when reference is made to the
shipping channels, it extends to the areas
of those shipping channels that lie
adjacent to the wharves.
the crux of debate between PNO and Glencore as to the scope of the Service lies
in the meaning given to the connecting phrase
‘by virtue of which’.
In the Tribunal’s view, this connecting phrase describes the
of the shipping channels
(as was contended by PNO), not the
the Service
(as was contended by Glencore). When one, as an exercise in
interpretive analysis, substitutes ‘by virtue of which’
synonymous connecting phrases in the context of the description of the Service,
such as ‘as a result of which’
or ‘through which’ or
‘by reason of which’, the language that follows (‘vessels may
enter the Port
precinct and load and unload at relevant terminals...’)
strikes the reader as secondary to the primary thrust of the description
Service, being access and use of the shipping channels. On our view, it
describes the function of such access and use of the
shipping channels.
Glencore’s construction requires a reading which substitutes ‘by
virtue of which’ with ‘in
order for’ and replaces the modal
verb ‘may’ with the preposition ‘to’. The effect of
construction is to qualify access and use of the shipping
channels by reference to the apparent purpose of such access and use, being
load and unload at relevant terminals. In this sense, Glencore calls for a
construction whereby the words which follow ‘by
virtue of which’
work to expand the meaning of the words which precede it. We do not consider
this to be the correct manner
in which to interpret the Service from a textual
perspective, and favour PNO’s construction as a result.
second to the context of the declaration of the Service, PNO submitted in reply
that notwithstanding the clear textual support
for its interpretation in the
definition of the Service, further support could be found in considering the
original application made
by Glencore for the Service to be declared. That
document, dated 13 May 2015, made a series of references to the NSC (which, as
already mentioned, is levied on the ‘owner’ within the meaning of
the PMAA) and that otherwise placed the shipping channels
as the physical
infrastructure that is being used and accessed at the centre of Glencore’s
application:
The Council has previously found that Australian
shipping channels are natural monopolies in the certification of the Victorian
Regime for Commercial Shipping Channels...
Access to the shipping channels at the Port of Newcastle is a natural
“bottleneck” monopoly that it is submitted should
be subject to
The uncertainty of future pricing for accessing the shipping channels also
affects the competitive dynamics in operations in shipping
The facilities used to provide the Service are the shipping channels and
vessel berth areas (as described above) identified in the
attached...
A navigation service charge is payable by the owner of a vessel or cargo in
respect of the Service...
The Applicant appreciates that the current increase in navigation service
charges may appear marginal in terms of initial percentages
significant costs involved in large scale coal
certainly not decisive, we agree with PNO’s submission that these passages
illustrate that the focus of Glencore’s
initial application was on the
shipping channels and the need to access those shipping channels by vessels.
If, on the contrary,
the focus of Glencore’s application and the Service
as declared was
on the shipping channels and their use by vessels, a
peculiar situation could arise whereby both the loader of the coal and the
in control of the transporting vessel could each amount to a ‘third
party’ under
If that were so, both could claim to be using or
accessing the same Service, which could give rise to circumstances where there
is confusion as to which arbitrated terms of access to apply. An example was
given by PNO to illustrate the point: assume that one
of Glencore’s
customers, which has chartered its own vessel to pick up Glencore’s coal
from the Port, and assume further
that that customer wants to negotiate terms
and conditions of access with PNO that permit the customer to obtain
preferential berth
treatment. In that scenario, Glencore would advise its
customer that Glencore has already arbitrated terms of access with PNO, and
customer would have no independent right to negotiate (and arbitrate, if need
be) with PNO directly. The effect of this would
be that Glencore’s
arbitrated terms of access would bind other potential users of the Port so long
as Glencore’s coal
was being shipped.
should also indicate that for the reasons identified by PNO in its submissions
and set out above, even if there was the power to
determine the scope as defined
by the ACCC or Glencore, the Tribunal considers it inappropriate and not
consistent with the purpose
of a declaration of a service under
should also mention that the revised scope put forward by the ACCC during the
hearing before the Tribunal and referred to above
does not address the
submissions raised by PNO. It also introduces a further uncertainty as to how
PNO would determine whether Glencore
exercises any of the functions of the owner
of the vessel within the meaning of
of the PMAA. Therefore, even if
the ACCC could have so defined the scope as it did, the Tribunal would now vary
the scope in line
with the reasons advanced by PNO.
as to Glencore’s argument that its responsibility for paying various
charges (including the Wharfage Charge) indicated
that Glencore was an access
seeker, no matter the precise circumstances of who chartered the vessel upon
which coal was loaded, the
Tribunal considers this to amount to ‘letting
the tail wag the dog’. It is of little significance who is liable to pay,
for instance, the Wharfage Charge. That is merely the product of the terms of
the PMAA and the pricing schedule issued by PNO from
time to time. The Wharfage
Charge relates to different services and facilities, and reflects the level of
facilities and services
provided at a particular berth – such as berthing
boxes, site offices, wharf sheets, pavements and worker amenities. On their
own, the requirement to pay says nothing about whether or not the payee of a
charge has access to and is the user of the Service.
This must be determined in
the context of the
and the actual service declared thereunder. The
only thing that matters in this respect is whether the use of certain
infrastructure
at the Port – whether it be the shipping channels, the
berths, the wharves, or ‘sites’ within the meaning of the
– equates to access and use of the Service.
this is mind it becomes apparent that there is no significance at all to be
drawn from the fact that the Wharfage Charge (for
instance) is levied on
Glencore when it occupies sites at the Port under the provisions of the
light of the above reasoning, we consider the scope of the application of the
determination should be confined to where Glencore
is the actual owner of the
vessel, or either directly or by its agent charters a vessel that enters the
Port precinct and loads Glencore
coal. This is the access and use of the
shipping channels that is properly the subject matter of the access dispute
between PNO
and Glencore, and the physical infrastructure that is being accessed
USER CONTRIBUTIONS
have already touched upon this important area of the dispute before the
Tribunal. Before setting out each of the parties’
submissions on the
topic of user contributions, it is first necessary to explain the approach used
by the ACCC in calculating the
value of the assets required to provide the
Overview of the calculation of the DORC
does not mandate a particular pricing model to be applied when calculating
charges that a service provider can charge users for accessing
the present case, the ACCC calculated the appropriate charges for the Service
using a Building Block Model (‘
’) produced by the parties
to the arbitration with contents substantially agreed between them.
Specifically, the parties agreed
to use a modified version of the Australian
Energy Regulator’s publicly available Post-Tax Revenue Model
’). As described by the ACCC in its Final
Determination, the BBM is a ‘widely-recognised and relatively standard
pricing model’. It is used to assess the maximum allowed
revenue (the ‘
’) of a provider of a declared service as
being equal to the sum of underlying components (or building blocks) consisting
(1) the return on capital (based on the value of the
regulated asset base (‘
’) and the weighted average cost of
(2) the return of capital (or depreciation);
(3) the operating expenditure; and
(4) tax and various other components.
order to determine the RAB, the parties agreed for the ACCC to use the DORC
methodology to value the assets required to provide
the Service. A DORC
valuation uses optimised replacement cost as its starting point. In essence, in
assessing ORC one asks:
what would be the cost of replacing the asset using
the latest technology and methods of construction, and a design which is
to construct the asset and provide the required service in the most
efficient way possible?
To calculate the DORC, the ORC is adjusted to
reflect the remaining useful life of the asset (in this case, the Port).
rationale for using the DORC methodology is that it is thought to mimic the
pricing of a competitive market for the purposes of
promoting competition in a
related market. In a competitive market, incumbent firms are constrained by the
threat of new entry to
charge no more than the minimum efficient cost of their
production. If any incumbent firm charges excessive prices, a new efficient
operator can enter the market and replace the higher priced incumbent. Although
the provider of a declared service is unlikely to
face actual entry, its costs
should not exceed the costs that would be incurred by an efficient hypothetical
entrant. It is assumed
that the hypothetical new entrant would build a
competing facility in the most cost-efficient and optimised manner possible (or
itself be replaced by a more efficient rival), and seek to recover its
costs and return on investment on that basis.
the case of the Port, and indeed in all cases, the application of the DORC
methodology is a hypothetical exercise. A new entrant
would not be able to
build a competing facility to the Port, and in any case, the Port was not built
with the latest technology and
was not optimised in the manner conceived of by
the DORC methodology. The methodology serves as a mere tool to calculate the
which is used as part of the BBM to arrive at the appropriate access charges
for the Service.
the DORC methodology, the ACCC calculated the optimised cost of replacing the
Port, as at 1 January 2018, to be $2,169.5 million.
calculated the optimised costs of replacing the Port, the ACCC then adjusted
that figure downwards to take account of five
instances in which improvements to
the Port (specifically various dredging projects) had been funded or undertaken
by third parties.
The rationale for excluding the value of these projects from
the asset base of the Port (or any other declared service) is that
the relevant
service provider should not be permitted to generate revenue from parts of an
asset for which it was not responsible
or did not pay. As a result of this
exercise, the ACCC deducted $912.0 million from ORC. This reduced figure was
used, together
with an assessment of the remaining useful life of the port
assets, to calculate the DORC. That, together with the other inputs,
used to calculate the MAR, from which the access charges for the Service were
derived. As a result of the deduction of
the identified user contributions, PNO
could not obtain any revenue in respect of approximately 42% of the value of
assets of the
canvassing the submissions put to the Tribunal, it is useful to go into greater
detail as to what the ACCC decided in respect
of the deduction of user
contributions and the approach that it adopted.
What the ACCC decided and its approach
explained earlier in these reasons, the ACCC set the NSC so as to recover the
maximum allowed revenue, and it set the MAR by using
an agreed modified version
of the Australian Energy Regulator’s PTRM. A key building block in the
PTRM is the RAB, valued
its Final Determination, the ACCC wrote:
The parties have agreed to the use of a DORC
methodology for the initial valuation of assets required to provide the Service,
depreciation to be assessed on a straight line over the useful life of the
The asset value is an important input to the BBM as it informs the
calculation for return on capital and depreciation. As such, the
asset value
will directly affect the MAR and, ultimately, prices.
The DORC methodology involves valuing an asset at the cost of replacing it
with a technologically modern equivalent asset (
optimised’ to provide the required
service in the most efficient way possible
adjusted to reflect the remaining useful life of the ass
Given the agreement between the parties, the
Commission adopts the DORC methodology for the purposes of this arbitration.
The Commission
notes that there are several approaches that can be taken for the
valuation of assets, and the DORC methodology is among the methods
various regulators.
As discussed below, the DORC methodology values assets at the costs of a
hypothetical efficient entrant to the market who will optimise
the use of,
operation of and investment in the asset. That is, it corresponds to the
efficient costs of replacing the existing infrastructure
with their modern
equivalent to supply a given quantity and quality of output as would be expected
in a perfectly contestable market.
The Commission therefore considers the use of the DORC methodology for
valuing assets that then form the initial asset base contributes
to ensuring
that prices reflect efficient costs (sections 44X(1)(h) and 44ZZCA(a)(i)) while
also ensuring that PNO is able to earn
an appropriate return on its investment
(sections 44X(1)(h) and 44ZZCA(a)(ii)). This is in the legitimate business
interests of
PNO (section 44X(1)(a)) and is also in the interests of those who
have a right to use the Service (section 44X(1)(c)). This is also
with promoting the economically efficient operation of, use of and investment in
in the facility (the objectives of
and also having regard to section
44X(1)(g)).
the arbitration before the ACCC, PNO and Glencore each submitted estimates of
DORC prepared by their respective consultants, AECOM
argued that the value of user funded or user contributed assets should be
deducted from the DORC value to establish PNO’s
initial RAB. PNO opposed
this deduction. The ACCC ultimately made the deductions sought by Glencore and
that is the decision in
dispute in this re-arbitration.
amount that the ACCC deducted was $912.0 million, reducing the ORC by 42 per
cent from $2,169.5 million to $1,257.6 million.
Although other costs are
recovered through the MAR, the relatively large share of capital costs meant
that this had the effect of
reducing arbitrated NSC by almost 40 per cent from
the level that would otherwise have arisen.
the ACCC, the parties identified the projects undertaken by State and non-State
entities at the Port. These were set out by
the ACCC in Table 22 of its Final
Determination:
its Final Determination the ACCC stated relevantly:
User funded
capital contributions should be recognised and deducted from the DORC value that
is used to establish PNO’s initial
RAB and to calculate prices to ensure
that PNO is able to reasonably recover its efficient costs.
efficient costs for the provision of the Service do not include capital costs
that have been funded by users. Additionally,
including user contributions in
PNO’s initial RAB would result in users paying for the same assets twice:
once through their
initial investment and again through PNO’s charges: see
Final Determination, page 130.
In order for any
adjustment for user funded contributions to be considered, there needs to be
information showing a commercial agreement
between the service provider and the
contributor of funds.
Alternatively,
there needs to be sufficient information demonstrating the nature of user funded
works undertaken, including any identifiable
value of the user funded capital
contributions. It was the latter that was predominantly presented to the ACCC
as evidence of the
nature of user funded contributions in the course of the
arbitration: see Final Determination, page 130.
In order for any
adjustment to be considered, user funded contributions must be identified in the
form of capital assets included
in the asset base that are the subject of the
DORC valuation (ie they are PNO’s owned and leased assets).
The ACCC accepts
Glencore’s submission that user funded or combined user and State funded
contributions to assets have increased
port capacity. The port assets Glencore
claims are subject to user funded contributions (channels and berth boxes,
riverwalls and
revetments) continue to provide value to users in perpetuity.
disagrees with one of the principles identified by PNO that ‘bygones
should be bygones’ in relation to the history
of the construction of the
assets. The ACCC is of the view that asset costs that have already been funded
by users cannot reasonably
be said to form part of the costs to PNO for
providing the Service, and users should not bear those costs again for using the
Therefore, the
ACCC considers that the DORC value used to establish PNO’s initial RAB
should be adjusted to reflect user funded
contributions to assets. This is in
the interests of those who have a right to use the Service (s 44X(1)(c))
and also takes into
account the value to PNO of extensions where the cost has
been borne by users (s 44X(1)(e)). However, the size of the adjustment
also informed by consideration of the other issues raised by PNO and Glencore in
relation to any mitigating factors and also estimation
approaches.
make an initial observation about the ACCC’s statements in the Final
Determination. Nowhere in its reasoning with respect
to user contributions did
the ACCC use the term “monopoly profits”. The ACCC repeatedly
stated that deducting user contributions
is necessary to prevent users paying
twice. The Final Determination only refers to monopoly profits once, when the
ACCC discusses
Section 44X(1)(a), which provides that in making a final
determination the ACCC must take into account the legitimate business interests
of the service provider. It commented that “[t]his includes allowing PNO
‘...to recover the costs of efficient investment
in the facility,
including having regard to its binding contractual obligations and relevant
commercial risk’. This approach
does not extend to PNO receiving
compensation for loss of any ‘monopoly profits’.”
the ACCC did consider certain ‘mitigating factors’ raised by
PNO had argued that in the past the State made major contributions to each user
funded project, such as environmental planning
approvals. PNO also argued that
numerous benefits accrued to users, such as not paying the State for the
material dredged from the
State’s landholdings that was subsequently used
in their own works.
this point, the ACCC agreed with Glencore that any costs incurred by the State
in planning, facilitating and accommodating user
funded capital would be
captured in the ‘pre-adjusted’ DORC value. This is because both
users and the service provider
would incur the same overhead costs in the
construction of assets they have funded, and such overhead costs are included in
value. The ACCC did not accept that there is a direct connection
between benefits accruing to users as a result of not having to
pay the State
for dredged material and the user funded amounts.
PNO had argued that historical user funded contributions that are excluded from
the DORC value should be balanced against
the Port’s past economic losses,
and when balanced against such losses no adjustment is required. PNO had also
claimed that
the value of the contributions had already been returned in the
form of past low prices and no further adjustments are justified.
response to this point, while the ACCC acknowledged that PNO had presented
information showing that there had been historical losses,
the ACCC did not
accept that there was a direct connection between past losses of the Port
operators and owners with the user funded
amounts. In particular, the ACCC
concluded that it had not been presented with evidence that the State intended
to recover any past
losses through future prices. The ACCC did not consider it
appropriate to form a judgment in relation to the past decisions of the
operators and owners, including about their pricing policy. The ACCC considered
that governments have many competing objectives,
which may mean that profit
maximisation or cost recovery are not always the priority, and that, by
contrast, there is a clear case
that users would expect a future pricing benefit
in instances where they have contributed to the cost of the asset, and would
certainly not expect to pay for the same assets twice.
PNO argued before the ACCC that it is only Glencore’s contributions that
are relevant for the consideration of any adjustment
to the DORC to determine
the prices charged to Glencore, and that Glencore had not made any such
contributions.
response to this point, the ACCC considered it to be an incorrect approach: the
of user funded assets in the DORC valuation, not the
source of the user funding, informs the adjustment. PNO’s initial RAB
needed to reflect its efficient costs for providing the Service. This
necessarily excluded any capital costs funded by users, regardless
identity of the contributor and the amount of their contribution.
Submissions to the Tribunal
give a brief overview of the approach taken by PNO before detailing some
specific matters by reference to the Final Determination.
contended that the ACCC miscarried its statutory task in making any deductions
of the value of user contributions from the asset
base of the Port.
on the decision in
Re East Australian Pipeline Ltd
[2004] ACompT 8
[2004] ATPR 42-006
, cited with approval in
East Australian Pipeline Pty Ltd v ACCC
[2007] HCA 44
(2007) 233 CLR 229
, [27], PNO described the DORC methodology as a
forward-looking methodology in the sense that it considers the replacement cost
the asset using modern technology under modern conditions.
then referred to the ACCC’s justification of its approach. In its Draft
Determination (no equivalent section in the Final
Determination was referred to,
but this approach has been argued before the Tribunal), the ACCC stated
an efficient entrant as assumed under the DORC
framework would seek to avoid any capital cost it need not incur for the
of the service, which would include any capital costs that were funded
by users – regardless of the identity of the contributor
and the amount of
their contribution.
claimed that, in fact, there was no basis to conclude that a hypothetical
entrant seeking to replace the Port (as is assumed under
the DORC methodology)
could reasonably avoid the costs the ACCC had excluded. The only basis on which
the user contributions could
be deducted from the asset base is by having regard
to historical considerations which are irrelevant to the forward-looking
quantification
exercise required by the DORC valuation. Moreover, the ACCC also
did not explain why user contributions are relevant to the DORC
assessment but
other historical matters, such as historical losses incurred by the Port, were
submitted that to apply a DORC methodology, but to adjust it by reference to
historical considerations such as actual user contributions
in the past, would
amount to applying a ‘blended’ approach of the sort denounced by the
High Court in
East Australian Pipeline Pty Ltd v ACCC
[2007] HCA 44
(2007) 233 CLR 229.
PNO went on to submit that there was no legislative support for the
‘blended’ approach adopted by the ACCC. Specifically,
ACCC’s determination meant that PNO would not be permitted to generate
revenue from 42% of the assets over which it
acquired a 98 year lease, that
determination would not have properly taken into account PNO’s legitimate
business interests.
PNO also rejected the ACCC’s stated bases for finding
that the deduction of the value of user contributions from the DORC
enhance competition in upstream and downstream markets.
with the approach taken in other regulatory pricing decisions, PNO accepted that
the value of user contributions should
be deducted in circumstances where those
users made capital contributions with the express intent of obtaining future
price benefits.
However, on its submission, none of the evidence supported a
finding that users’ capital contributions were made with the
expectation that their contributions would be reflected in future prices, and
that meant that the contributions ought
not to be deducted from the RAB upon
which PNO may generate revenues.
the alternative, PNO submitted that even if the evidence was sufficient to
establish an expectation that user contributions would
be recognised in future
prices, those contributions were not made by Glencore and so it has no
legitimate expectation that the value
of the contributions would be reflected in
its access prices.
now look to specific matters that require our attention.
submitted that the ACCC calculated the DORC in an orthodox manner, but that
having done so, it proceeded to adjust the DORC by
reference to historical
considerations which PNO regarded as improper. PNO couched some of its
criticism of the ACCC’s decision,
to adjust the DORC value, in terms of
what costs a hypothetical new entrant would incur in building an optimised
replacement port.
It said that the ACCC had not explained why it made such an
adjustment.
ACCC’s Draft Determination had said that an efficient entrant, as assumed
under the DORC framework, would seek to avoid
any capital cost it need not incur
in the provision of the Service, which would include any capital costs that were
funded by others.
On this, PNO argued that the whole purpose is to calculate
what it would cost to replace a facility and that such an exercise would
defeated if it were assumed that a hypothetical new entrant could avoid certain
we have alluded to already, PNO submitted that both the ACCC and Glencore were
incorrect to assert, as a general proposition, that
in a competitive market a
service provider could not charge a user for assets that the user (or any user)
had funded, without the
threat of being displaced by an efficient entrant.
Instead, PNO submitted that, in actual fact, if a person were to provide a
competitive
service, that person would need to build the whole of the facility,
equivalent to the facility used by PNO to provide the Service.
In other words,
in order to constrain PNO, the rival facility would have to be of the same
quality as the PNO facility, and a rival
could not constrain PNO by building
just some parts of the facility (ie those parts which were not the subject of
some user funding
or contribution).
its submissions, PNO pointed out that the present case was not one where the
provider of the Service does not own or control the
whole facility, or is not
entitled (either pursuant to statute or contract) to charge for the use of some
part of the facility.
On the contrary, in this case PNO leases the whole
facility, and is not subject to any constraint (other than the application of
itself) in charging Glencore for access to the entire facility, and
each part thereof. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXX XX XXX XXXXX XXXX.
contended that the large deduction made by the ACCC for user contributions would
deprive it of its ability to make a proper return
on the investment it has made
in the Port. That investment included paying for the long-term lease of the
assets that were the subject
of the ACCC’s deduction and were leased
without adjustment for any obligation not to seek a return on these assets
there is no such obligation). To make such a deduction would be, on
PNO’s view, inconsistent with having regard to its legitimate
interests. It would mean that Glencore, which has no interest in the assets in
question and made no contribution to them,
would be free to obtain access to 42%
of the assets free of charge (and well below the competitive price), whilst PNO
which acquired
these assets for value and with no notice of any prior
entitlement to them, is forced to make them available without charge. That
result, it was said, would not promote competition in any market: it would lead
to fewer coal shipments and would have a chilling
effect on investment and the
incentive to acquire such assets. That, it was contended, was not an outcome
that would be in keeping
with the objects of
response to the ACCC’s justification (that the deduction is consistent
with allowing the Port to recover its efficient costs),
PNO contended that the
efficient costs, pursuant to the methodology adopted by the ACCC, are those
which a new entrant would incur;
in other words, the DORC value.
recap, PNO submitted that the approach of the ACCC and Glencore confuses
historical costs and forward-looking costs. Unless it
is a new asset, an asset
such as a port would usually represent the work of different construction
activities with different technologies
over time, in a way that would not be
replicated if the Port was constructed afresh. The DORC methodology, it was
said, involves
a hypothetical exercise rather than a modelling of steps in fact
taken: steps funded by a user might not be taken at all, or in the
same way, if
the Port was reconstructed again as the DORC methodology assumes. PNO contended
that the efficient replacement cost
is likely to involve a hypothetical
construction of the Port, as a whole, in a way that departs in significant
respects from the
way in which the Port was originally constructed. Though it
is possible to undertake a historical analysis, or a forward-looking
hypothetical analysis, it is not appropriate to mix the two PNO says.
ACCC also sought to justify its approach by reference to s 44X(1)(e), which
provides that in making a final determination the
ACCC must take into account
the value to the service provider of extensions whose cost is borne by someone
else. However, PNO contended
that the ACCC’s reliance on this factor was
misplaced. This factor, it was said, was directed at situations where the
determination
requires the provider to extend the facility (for example by
extending a train line to a third party’s mine): s 44V(2).
ACCC also justified the deduction as being in the interests of those who have a
right to use the Service (s 44X(1)(c)) because
it will ensure that users do not
pay for the same assets twice: once through their initial investment and again
through PNO’s
charges. PNO submitted, however, that this presupposes that
the user has made an initial contribution with the expectation of receiving
future price benefit and in the present case, in respect of Glencore, that
assumption is not made out.
relation to this last point, PNO referred to decisions by the Queensland
Competition Authority (‘
’). The gravamen of PNO’s
argument is that the QCA set out principles for the treatment of user
contributions, and that
the ACCC should have followed the QCA’s approach
but did not.
QCA, responding to a direction by the Premier and Treasurer, assessed certain
matters relating to gazetted prices for channel
and river irrigators receiving
water infrastructure services, provided by SunWater within the Burdekin River
Irrigation Area. Part
of that investigation involved user contributions. The
(1) noted that there is no legal requirement for the
Queensland Government to recognise any payments as capital contributions;
(2) concluded that the Scheme should be viewed as an integrated development with
payments from many sources contributing towards
its overall capital cost;
(3) found that available evidence indicates that there was an understanding
within the Queensland Government, and an expectation
on behalf of irrigators,
that irrigators’ payments for land, water and cane assignments were
intended as an offset against
the capital costs of the Scheme, and that this
would be taken into account in future price setting;
(4) accordingly, considered that payments for the land, water and cane
assignments should be recognised as capital contributions;
(5) considered that prices should not include a return on these capital
contributions, as this would represent an unwarranted impost
on growers.
Summarising
its conclusions, the QCA considered that a capital payment should be regarded as
a capital contribution if it was the
intention and expectation, of the relevant
parties at the time, that the capital payment would be recognized for pricing
Furthermore, a capital contribution should be recognized for pricing
purposes unless past price reductions have fully compensated
the contributor for
the contribution, or the asset towards which the contribution was made has been
QCA also recommended that, once recognised, users’ capital contributions
should be included in the capital base for the
purpose of determining prices,
with rebates incorporated in the prices for relevant users, equivalent to the
return on capital.
This pricing methodology was preferred to the alternative of
excluding the capital contribution from the regulated asset base of
the entity,
for the purposes of calculating prices.
arguing that the ACCC had failed to apply these or any similar principles, PNO
stated that the ACCC had instead proceeded on the
erroneous basis that it is
sufficient to show:
a commercial agreement between the service provider
and the contributor of the funds [or] [a]lternatively there needs to be
information demonstrating that nature of user funded works
undertaken, including any identifiable value of the user funded capital
contributions.
then made the following propositions by reference to principles applied by the
that it was common ground that there is no record of any agreement that capital
contributions would be recognised in future
price reductions.
consistent with the absence of any agreement, the historical records did not
support a finding that any of the dredging works
were undertaken in the
expectation that the parties’ contributions would be recognised in future
price setting.
the parties who contributed to the dredging projects received benefits at the
time. These benefits included the ability to
use larger, more efficient
vessels, access to clean dredging spoil used in land reclamation to construct
terminals, connection between
the shipping channel and the terminals, and
assistance in the form of pre-construction activities and coordination
(including the
State obtaining the necessary development approvals). The ACCC
considered that any costs incurred by the State in planning, facilitating
accommodating user funded capital would be captured in the
‘pre-adjusted’ DORC value. In response, PNO argued that
deduction made by the ACCC already included these costs and, more fundamentally,
the ACCC had failed to grapple with the significance
of these contributions
– the fact that contributors received an immediate
benefit is a reason not to infer that the works were completed with the
expectation of a future pricing benefit.
PNO contended that during the period in which the dredging works were
undertaken, the Port did not earn normal commercial
returns from access fees.
To demonstrate this, PNO analysed the annual accounts for the Newcastle Port
Corporation and the Maritime
Services Board (‘
’) over the
25 year period from 1990 to 2015. This showed, PNO explained, that even if
the value of the ‘South Arm’
and ‘Harbour Deepening’
dredging works are deducted from the DORC, the historical port charges imposed
by the State of
NSW did not recover the economic cost of providing the declared
ACCC accepted that the material before it showed there had been historical
losses, but then dismissed this material on the basis
that PNO had not
established that the Port intended to recover those losses.
PNO argued that the question is not whether the State intended to recapture any
past losses, through future prices, but whether
it can be inferred that there
was a contemporaneous agreement or clear expectation that the cost of dredging
works would be recognised
in future prices, notwithstanding that users were
receiving the benefit of less than cost recovery otherwise. PNO then said that
no such inference can be drawn, and such an inference would be entirely
observed that the only evidence identified by Glencore in respect of
expectations is an exchange of correspondence between Port
Waratah Coal Services
’) and the MSB in relation to a dredging agreement in
relation to Kooragong No 5 berth. PWCS’s letter of 18 November
1993 noted that the agreement of the same date “set out the terms on which
MSB has consented to PWCS undertaking certain dredging
operations”. The
letter then sought the MSB’s acceptance of the “commercial basis on
which PWCS [was] creating
the New Channel”, including that the MSB and
Hunter Port Authority (‘
’) would not levy any charge in
relation to the use of the New Channel by PWCS, any coal exporter exporting coal
through PWCS’s
coal terminal, or any vessel transporting coal, except
insofar as any such charge was directly related to activities or expenses
incurred by the HPA.
letter in response stated that the MSB was unable to accept the specific points
in PWCS’s letter. This was because,
relevantly, “there is no change
to each party’s right to charge a fee for the use of the assets legally
under the control
of each party”. That, contended PNO, was destructive of
any basis for a “user pays” adjustment. The letter further
... MSB’s current policy is to exclude from its
asset valuations any contribution or investment in port facilities by other
parties. The effective result of this policy is that asset value based pricing
will not give rise to any additional change [sic]
for use of the extension of
the port’s channel other than or [sic] cover actual services supplied (eg
maintenance dredging,
navigation aids, etc).
PNO observed that no commitment was made in relation to future policy or
the absence of evidence to the contrary, it was contended by PNO that it was
more likely that contributions made by users were
made on terms that were
commercially satisfactory, to that user, at that time. There was no evidence
that those terms included any
ongoing enforceable right, applicable in 2019, to
obtain use of the contributed asset free of charge. The Port was leased to PNO
on the basis that there were no such obligations.
was then contended by PNO that nowhere in the submissions of either Glencore or
the ACCC was there a satisfactory explanation of
why the Tribunal should have
regard to one type of historical fact – namely contributions by users
– but disregard all
others, including the basis on which the Port was
operated prior to privatisation.
further contended that the Final Determination did not seek to establish that
Glencore had made any contribution, reasoning that
the existence
of user funded assets in the DORC valuation, not the source of the user funding,
informs the adjustment.
says that the correct analysis is not to seek to strip out assets from the DORC
valuation, the value of which were quantified
by a hypothetical exercise.
Rather, the correct approach is to make any necessary adjustment at the point of
dealing with the price
payable by a particular user. It is at that point, it
was said, that one can properly address the relevant questions: “did
user make a contribution on a basis whereby this user can obtain access to the
service at a discounted price?” Or alternatively,
“was a user
contribution made of a type, and on terms, that would benefit all users,
including in 2019?” That, PNO said,
will require evidence of an agreement
or some other proper basis for making an adjustment for the particular user.
Ultimately,
PNO’s point on this topic was that in the absence of evidence of any
extant obligation to continue to take into
account some historical contribution
by a user there is no basis for making any adjustment. PNO said that it
operates under a statutory
scheme, by which it has a right to recover certain
charges, and where there is no evidence of any impediment to title or any
contractual
obligations relating to user contributions, it should be free to
enjoy its right to charge for its assets in an unqualified manner.
emphasised that the DORC is a forward-looking concept and involves a
consideration of replacing the Port now, using modern technology.
preclude excavating to one depth, and then later deepening the channel. The
ACCC’s approach (following Glencore)
of examining the historical records
of projects that deepened the channels involves the very things that would not
be done if the
Port were to be replaced today.
its written submissions, quoting from the Final Determination, Glencore
submitted that the ACCC did not deduct the user funded
capital contributions for
the purposes of determining or calculating DORC. Rather, the ACCC deducted the
user funded capital contributions
from DORC in order to determine the initial
argued that the ACCC’s approach is consistent with previous regulatory
decisions in which Australian regulators have
taken account of past user funding
of assets when setting regulated prices.
also argued that the approach is no different in principle from the ACCC’s
unchallenged decision to exclude from the asset
base assets that are neither
owned nor leased by PNO, but which play a part in the delivery of the service.
Specifically,
Glencore argued in its submissions:
In a competitive market, users of the Service ...
would not rationally agree to contribute or fund the development of assets and
pay (or see their customers pay or otherwise bear the cost of) prices that
generate a return to the new entrant from access to those
assets. Rather, in a
competitive market, all such contributors would stay with (or switch to) a
competing service. In other words,
competitive tension would ensure that the
service provider cannot seek to earn a return from users on assets in which, or
extent to which, the provider has not invested in those
oral submissions on behalf of Glencore, Mr Young QC adopted a somewhat different
line of argument in respect of a new entrant.
He pointed to
the PMAA, which he said provided the hypothetical entrant with a statutory right
to impose a requirement for user funding on all
port users, in respect of any
investment and any return on investment funding, the acquisition or development
of land, or the provision
of services and facilities.
thus putting the argument in terms of the calculation of the DORC, Mr Young QC
contended that, as a “post-DORC adjustment”
it did not pollute the
DORC methodology: see Transcript page 132.
then addressed PNO’s argument that, because it has a leasehold interest in
the Port that is free from any obligations
to third parties it is entitled to
charge for access to the whole of the Port. Glencore’s response to that
argument was that
while the Tribunal (and the ACCC before it) is required to
consider, amongst many other things, PNO’s business interests, those
interests must be
. Glencore submitted that an exercise of
market power that seeks to charge a capital return on assets that were funded by
other parties,
and thereby extract monopoly rents, is not a legitimate interest.
PNO’s proposed approach, which Glencore described as giving no recognition
to substantial capital contributions by
users in the past, is likely to
discourage users from making similar investments in channel extensions in the
future. Glencore argued
that in the sale of any major asset it is reasonable to
expect that all bidders will undertake an appropriate level of due diligence
the commercial and regulatory risks associated with that asset. In particular,
in the case of the Port, it is reasonable to expect
that bidders would have
factored in the risk of the service being declared under
price regulation of its charges would follow. In this regard, Glencore
submitted that it would be reasonable to factor
in to any bid the significant
risk that the regulator or individual users would object to being required to
pay for assets that users
had already funded. It was said that under
PNO does not have an entitlement to recover the price it paid for the leasehold
interest in the Port.
argued that, contrary to PNO’s submissions, there is nothing in the
decision by the QCA that suggests that assets which
the provider has not funded
should be included in the regulated asset base, unless there is documentary
evidence that a relevant
user agreed, or otherwise expected, future price
reductions. Indeed Glencore considered that the ACCC was correct in finding
provided the nature of user contributed assets (including their value) is
reasonably identifiable, those assets can and should be
recognised in
determining the regulated prices. In this case, Glencore considered that the
contributed assets (and the value of those
assets) were reasonably identifiable:
it is on Glencore’s view enough that there has been a user contribution
(regardless of
the circumstances in which it was made).
submitted that the ACCC was correct to exclude all of the cost of the
contributed asset from the regulated asset base and,
as per the ACCC, considered
that such an adjustment was in the interests of those who have a right to use
the Service for the purposes
of s 44X(1)(c). It was also something said to be
consistent with the objects of
, the pricing principles specified in s
44ZZCA and the public interest.
Glencore submitted that the ACCC’s decision to deduct user contributions
aligns with the way in which extensions are
to be treated under s 44X(1)(e),
namely that the value to the provider of extensions where the cost has been
borne by users is to
be taken into account. While PNO asserts that the
provision is directed at situations where the determination under
s 44V(2)(d),
requires the provider to extend the facility (eg by extending
a train line to a third party mine), this narrow construction is contrary
natural and ordinary meaning of the words. The focus of the section, Glencore
submitted, is to avoid the mischief of service
providers charging users for a
return on extensions to the facility providing the service, which have already
been paid for by users.
The dredging of the Port, paid for by user
contributions, falls within this category.
further submitted that, in any event, even if s 44X(1)(e) is directed at future
extensions, it is based on a principle that
has relevance to past investments
and that informs the proper application of other factors in s 44X in accordance
with the objectives
stated that it is axiomatic that users have received a benefit from the
deepening of the Port channels: that is why the projects
were undertaken and how
the Port was able to have users fund them. As the ACCC found, the Port has also
benefitted considerably
from these user contributed assets. The fact that the
users who have paid for the asset have benefitted from them does not support
being able charge users for use of the asset in which, or to the extent to
which, the investment was funded by others.
ACCC began its written submissions by observing that in regulatory regimes with
objectives similar to the objects of
, the overall objective of
regulation is to promote outcomes that would be consistent with those that would
result from an effectively
competitive market. There was no dispute between
the parties that the regime under
is, in the words of the High Court
East Australian Pipeline Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2007] HCA 44
(2007) 233 CLR 229
, at [18], in the context of the access regime
for gas pipelines, to operate as “a surrogate for the rewards and
disciplines
normally provided by competitive market”.
ACCC continued by contending that excluding user funded assets from a regulated
asset base was consistent with the outcomes that
would be expected in an
effectively competitive market. In such a market, a service provider would not
charge a user for assets
that the user had funded without the threat of being
entirely displaced by an efficient entrant. Charging the user for assets it
funded would result in a price above the service provider’s efficient
costs. A service provider could only charge the
user a price that, in
expectation, is just sufficient to recover the assets it has funded for the
provision of the service, and it
is this price that deters entry into the
ACCC then observed that it was commonplace in regulatory regimes for user
contributions to be excluded from valuations of the
asset base. The ACCC gave
examples from the National Gas Rules (‘
’) and the National
Electricity Rules.
said that in these regulatory regimes, user contributions are either excluded
from the asset base or prices are adjusted in respect
of such contributions.
The principle, as expressed clearly in the NGR, is that a service provider is
not to benefit through increased
revenue from a user’s contribution.
principle that a service provider is not to benefit through increased revenue
from user contributions is consistent with the principle
that underpins these
the assets ensure the net present
value of the provider’s investment is
zero (“NPV=0”). If a service provider receives a revenue stream
from assets
that it has not paid for, this will violate the NPV=0 principle, as
the service provider will receive revenues that exceed its investment.
ACCC contended that excluding user funded assets from the asset base is
consistent with the statutory criteria. Specifically,
excluding these assets
ensures that:
(1) prices reflect efficient costs (ss 44X(1)(h) and
44ZZCA(a)(i));
(2) PNO is able to earn an appropriate return on its investment (ss 44X(1)(h)
and 44ZZCA(a)(ii));
and is consistent with:
(3) PNO’s legitimate business interests (s 44X(1)(a));
(4) the interests of those who have a right to use the Service (s
44X(1)(c));
(5) the value to the provider of extensions whose cost is borne by someone else
(s44X(1)(e)); and
(6) promoting the economically efficient operation of, use of and investment in
the facility (the objectives of Part IIIA and also
having regard to s
44X(1)(g)).
ACCC considered that DORC was a methodology that could be used in order to
determine an access price that would be consistent
with the relevant statutory
criteria. The DORC methodology is directed at measuring the economic cost of
assets in service - that
is, the net present value of expected revenues over the
remaining life of the assets where monopoly profits are assumed to be zero.
ACCC pointed out that DORC valuations are based on a competitive concept: a
return on replacement cost is the maximum return that
the monopoly firm could
earn in a perfectly contestable market. The contestability standard assumes the
market is “as if”
the firm were operating in a perfectly contestable
market. Regulatory regimes with objectives akin to those set out in Part IIIA
seek to mimic the outcome of contestable markets as this is considered to
promote efficiency.
ACCC disagreed with PNO’s contention that, as the purpose of the DORC
methodology is to derive the cost of replacement of
the facility, there is no
justification for the removal of the costs of assets that were user-funded in
the past from the initial
capital base.
ACCC said that PNO was disregarding the premise underlying the DORC methodology,
being to derive the net present value of expected
revenues over the remaining
life of the assets where monopoly profits are assumed to be constrained to zero
by the threat of new
ACCC contended that the hypothetical exercise involved in the DORC methodology
can be reconciled with this underlying premise
by conceiving of that exercise as
involving not only the replacement today of the existing asset but also the user
funding, in the
presence of the competitive constraints imposed by potential
entry. These competitive constraints would operate to exclude the replacement
cost of the future required productive capacity attributable to user funding
from the replacement cost of the existing asset for
the reasons it had
key element is that in an effectively competitive market, a service provider
would not charge a user for assets that the user
had funded without the threat
of being entirely displaced by an efficient entrant.
was contended by the ACCC that there was nothing improper about recognising past
user contributions when determining the initial
capital base using a DORC
methodology. Indeed, in the decisions of the QCA referred to by PNO, the QCA
recognises past user contributions
when determining the initial capital base
using a DORC methodology.
the extent the ACCC’s reasons may be read as the ACCC adjusting ORC for
user contributions as an interim step to calculating
DORC, as there was no basis
to assume that user and State funded assets should be assigned different
depreciation rates, and the
relevant assets had been assigned a perpetual life,
no difference arises in making the adjustment at the ORC stage versus the DORC
stage. The ACCC said it made an adjustment to the value of the asset base that
resulted from the application of the ORC/DORC methodology.
It did so in light
of the matters it was required to take into account in s 44X.
ACCC’s submissions asserted that the decisions of the QCA neither
establish any economic or regulatory principle of general
applicability, nor
conclude that clear evidence is required for recognition of a user contribution
when setting prices.
Nevertheless,
the ACCC later stated that the QCA decisions set out a principle for the purpose
of distinguishing between capital contributions
which should be reflected in
future pricing and payments made for some other purpose, being that capital
payments should be recognised
as capital contributions if it was the intention
and expectation of the relevant parties at the time that the capital payment
be recognised for pricing purposes.
Notwithstanding
this characterisation, the ACCC was at pains to downplay the general
applicability of any conclusions reached by the
up its reasoning, the ACCC said that in the present case, the capital payments
for the ACCC’s consideration were user
contributions. The parties had
agreed that State contributions were not to be excluded for pricing purposes.
The evidence before
the ACCC did not establish one way or another whether there
was an intention or expectation at the time of the user-funded dredging
that a capital contribution would be recognised when setting prices.
with the views expressed by the QCA, the ACCC exercised judgment on the basis of
all available evidence. Having done so,
the ACCC concluded that the statutory
criteria were best served by not requiring users to pay a price that includes a
return on capital
for assets that they have already funded, and a service
provider should not earn a stream of revenue from assets that it has not
to the ACCC, there was nothing in this approach which was inconsistent with the
QCA decisions.
ACCC then addressed PNO’s submission that past port charges did not
recover the economic cost of providing the Service.
had contended that no inference can be drawn as to an intention or expectation
that user contributions would be recognised in
future pricing having regard to
the past losses sustained by the State. The ACCC said that the past losses
evidenced by the material
relied on by PNO were not specific to the Port; to the
contrary, that material discloses that the Port did not itself sustain
losses. In any event, any incurring of historical losses by the
State is potentially (even likely) explicable by policy objectives
unconnected
to user contributions. In circumstances where there is neither evidence of
historical losses at the Port nor any evidence
that such losses were not
informed by policy considerations unrelated to user contributions, it is not
appropriate to offset the
capital contributions by the benefit of past State
pricing concessions as to do so would negate the intended benefit of those
concessions. Again, the ACCC’s views in this regard are
consistent with the principles applied by the QCA in considering historically
low prices in making its decisions.
had contended that, as no contribution was made by Glencore and there is no
evidence to establish an expectation that a contribution
would be recognised in
Glencore’s access prices, there is no basis for recognising user
contributions in setting the charges
Glencore should pay.
ACCC said that its reasoning – the existence
of user funded
assets in the DORC valuation, not the source of the user funding, informs the
adjustment – engages with the
statutory criteria.
Lloyd SC, on behalf of the ACCC, summed up its argument by saying that
“[u]ser capital payments must be taken into account
where this is required
to avoid the provider earning monopoly rents and users paying twice for assets
that they have funded.”
This was in the context of, among other things,
denying that the ACCC considered the surrounding factual context irrelevant, see
Transcript page 306.
asked in what sense Glencore could be considered to have paid twice, it not
having made user contributions, Mr Lloyd SC said
that “the point is, I
suppose, in some sense, at a level of principle. If ... Glencore had have been
around for the entire
time, we would certainly say then they would have paid
twice” and further that “the paying twice is just a simple way
expressing the ideal. The ideal is that the provider, which doesn’t
require you to look at the user at all, the provider
not be able to have
monopoly rents. They will have monopoly rents if they can get a return on
capital that they didn’t - didn’t
invest”, see Transcript page
Lloyd SC said that the ACCC did not change the DORC but took an amount off the
DORC to adjust the RAB. However, he went on to
say that while the ACCC
certainly did not do it [the Glencore] way, “...that would be a way of
conceptualising it. [Y]ou could
say that the potential entrant is competing not
just to reconstruct the Port but to do it with the same assistance. We, as I
didn’t do it that way but the result is the same...”, see
Transcript page 310. He explicitly did not adopt Mr Young
QC’s reasoning
with respect to recovery of user contributions under ss 66A to 66C of the PMAA.
Lloyd SC responded to questions about the fact that PNO had not been the Port
operator at the time of the user contributions: it
had never built channels. He
said that “what investment PNO actually made ... is entirely a distraction
and is the wrong question
because the DORC value of the [Port], ... with or
without a user contribution deduction adjustment should be the same ... whether
the state still owned it, whether PNO owns it. The efficient value of the port
doesn’t change according to who owns it”,
see Transcript page
Ultimately,
Mr Lloyd SC summed up the ACCC’s reasoning in five propositions, see
Transcript pages 335-336:
(1) Part IIIA is designed with the objective that
regulated access prices specified in determinations following an arbitrated
dispute will generate revenues for access providers sufficient to meet
the economically efficient costs of providing access to the
(2) The economically efficient costs of providing access to a declared service
do not extend to giving an access provider a stream
of revenue by way of a
return of capital in respect of valuable assets that were contributed by access
(3) The exception to proposition 2 is where an access provider has subsequently
repaid the capital value of the asset.
(4) In the circumstances of the present case, access users contributed capital
to create perpetual capital assets held and legally
owned or leased by an access
(5) In the circumstances of the present case, neither of the access providers
-that is the state or PNO - has repaid or paid for
the capital value of those
user created assets.
The Tribunal’s analysis
referred to earlier, there were two major tranches of channel upgrades involving
user contributions:
(1) the Harbour Deepening dredging works from 1977 to
(2) the South Arm and berth pocket dredging primarily from 1989 to
ORC of the whole Port as estimated by the ACCC was $2,169.5 million.
ACCC deducted a proportion of this amounting to $912.0 million, arriving at a
pre-depreciation replacement cost of the Port of
$1,257.6 million (the small
discrepancy presumably due to rounding). The deductions were based on
“the percentage of user
funding” and concerned channel assets and
riverwalls and revetments, which are two of the eleven categories of assets in
DORC. After depreciation, the final DORC value of the RAB on 1 January
2018 for the purposes of calculating the MAR was $1,163.8
size and method for making the deductions (by a proportion of the total DORC)
were as proposed by Glencore.
starting point for considering the appropriate value of the RAB is the DORC.
Use of a DORC methodology was agreed between the
parties. The ACCC decided that
the DORC methodology would meet the requirements of s 44X.
Tribunal does not disagree with the ACCC’s reasoning that use of the DORC
methodology is appropriate. However, the Tribunal
also notes that use of the
DORC methodology is by no means mandatory. Other approaches could have been
adopted, such as starting
from the existing port charges and determining how
they might need adjustment.
Furthermore,
the Tribunal considers that use of the DORC methodology may lead to higher
charges than other approaches. In accepting
it as the starting point in this
re-arbitration, the Tribunal is not only accepting the ACCC’s reasons for
doing so, but acknowledging
that any other approach is effectively precluded by
the parties’ having agreed to use a DORC methodology.
this re-arbitration there was some confusion as to whether the user contribution
amounts were deducted from the estimated DORC
to arrive at the RAB, or whether
the adjustment was made within the DORC as part of its estimation.
Final Determination is perfectly clear that, as stated above, the DORC was
estimated on the basis of all the assets and that user
contributions were then
deducted. However, as set out above, the ACCC’s submissions adopted a
different approach. The argument
for the deduction was put in terms of what an
efficient entrant would charge, and recovery of assets it has funded for
of the service, this price deterring entry to the market. That is
equivalent to treating the deduction as a step in calculating
the DORC, not as
adjusting it after it has been calculated. This manner of framing the argument
hearkened back to a passage in the
ACCC’s Draft Determination that was
omitted from the Final Determination.
oral Submissions for the ACCC Mr Lloyd SC stated accurately what the ACCC said
it did in the Final Determination, but made his
argument for the deduction at
times in terms of an adjustment within the DORC and at times in terms of a
deduction from the DORC.
He said the two approaches were different ways of
conceptualising the issue, the result being the same.
Glencore noted what the ACCC had done in its Final Determination but couched its
argument for the adjustment in terms of
a hypothetical new entrant, ie as part
of the estimation of the DORC.
attacked the adjustment within the DORC as defeating the purpose of the DORC
estimation.
is accepted that, as the ACCC said, the two approaches lead to the same result,
which is to generate the same lower RAB (and lower
NSC) than if no deductions
were made. However, the proper estimation of the DORC needs to be considered,
and the thinking behind
what is actually adjusted goes to the reasoning for
making an adjustment.
vital questions when using a DORC approach are: what assets are being
considered, and what are the assets that are to be hypothetically
the submissions show, all parties ostensibly agreed that the relevant facility
is the whole port, meaning all the channels and
berths. Both Glencore and the
ACCC stated clearly at various points that this included user contributed
assets. Deductions for
user contributed assets were to be made after the DORC
was calculated to arrive at the RAB. We say “ostensibly” because
the Tribunal considers that the submissions just referred to - placing the
adjustment within the context of calculating the DORC
in the first place - are
inconsistent with the facility comprising all of the assets, including those
contributed by users.
them from the DORC is, in the Tribunal’s view, equivalent to deciding that
not all the assets are required to provide
the Service. Since the Tribunal is
of the view that all the assets, including the user contributed assets, are
required to provide
the Service, the Tribunal considers that excluding them from
the DORC could not generate efficient charges and would be inconsistent
Part IIIA, given that a DORC approach has been agreed and adopted.
Tribunal will now explain that thinking in more detail. It will then go on to
examine whether, nevertheless, there is a justification
for adjusting the DORC,
calculated for all assets including user contributed assets, by subsequently
deducting the user contributed
assets to arrive at the RAB.
range of arguments were mounted for adjusting the DORC, or at least the argument
was set out in a number of different ways. First,
the ACCC said that in an
effectively competitive market, a service provider would not charge a user for
assets that the user had
funded without the threat of being entirely displaced
by an efficient entrant. A service provider could only charge the user a price
that, in expectation, is just sufficient to recover the assets it has funded for
the provision of the service, and it is this price
that deters entry into the
the principle (as expressed clearly in the NGR) is that a service provider is
not to benefit through increased revenue from
a user’s contribution. This
principle is consistent with the “NPV=0” principle that underpins
these types of regulatory
regimes. If a service provider receives a revenue
stream from assets that it has not paid for, this will violate the NPV=0
as the service provider will receive revenues that exceed its
investment.
the premise underlying the DORC methodology is to derive the net present value
of expected revenues over the remaining life
of the assets, where monopoly
profits are assumed to be constrained to zero by the threat of new entry.
hypothetical exercise involved in the DORC methodology can be reconciled with
this underlying premise by conceiving of that exercise
as involving the
replacement today of not only the existing asset but also of the user funding,
in the presence of the competitive
constraints imposed by potential entry.
These competitive constraints would operate to exclude the replacement cost of
required productive capacity attributable to user funding from the
replacement cost of the existing asset.
Tribunal finds none of that reasoning convincing.
there is no explanation of how an efficient entrant could avoid paying the costs
that had been incurred by users in contributing
assets. The Tribunal does not
consider that the scenario propounded by Mr Young QC for Glencore, but not part
of the ACCC’s
reasoning - the hypothetical new entrant using provisions of
the PMAA to require users to provide funds equivalent to historical
user funding
- plausible.
appeal to the NPV=0 criterion adds nothing to the argument. The unanswered
question is how the hypothetical new entrant
could provide the service by
investing in an asset that excluded prior user contributions.
formulating the issue as a replacement of not only the existing asset but also
of the user funding begs the question how
this could be achieved. It is mere
assertion that (hypothetical) competitive constraints would operate to separate
and remove the
replacement cost of capacity attributable to user funding from
the total replacement cost of the facility. The Tribunal sees no
mechanism for
that to occur in the hypothetical situation envisaged by calculation of the
PNO asked: How could the hypothetical new entrant avoid those costs? If those
costs, why not other costs? At this point it might
be asked: What if all the
assets (assumed to be perpetual) had been contributed by users? The proposition
is that the access provider
would be able to charge only for operating expenses;
it would receive no return on capital (because it would have invested no
What hypothetical new entrant would accept such a dubious
agree with PNO that there is a conceptual difficulty in looking backward to
adjust the DORC. The user contributions consist of
channel-deepening projects.
The assets created were the lower parts of the channels, giving the channels
capacity to handle bigger
ships. In the DORC hypothetical, the whole port would
be constructed as a single, integrated project using modern technology.
would be excavated to the ultimate intended depth. The costs of
deepening, taken from historical information concerning projects
undertaken with old technologies and that would never be part of the DORC
construction process, cannot be reconciled with
estimation of the DORC.
in-principle difficulty is exacerbated by the manner in which the deduction was
made. In the DORC estimation, there were costs
of specific assets - channels,
reclaimed land, breakwaters, riverwalls and rivetments, etc, which the ACCC
calls direct replacement
costs - and common or indirect replacement costs, viz.
pre-construction costs and interest during construction (which is capitalised).
These common costs are clearly intrinsic to the notion of replacing the whole
port in a single integrated project.
having identified costs incurred years ago (eg dredging) associated with user
contributions to specific assets - channels and
riverwalls and rivetments - the
ACCC then allocated a proportion of the DORC common costs to the direct user
contributions. That
is, the estimates of direct costs associated with specific
historical projects were adjusted upwards to include a share of notional
pre-construction costs and interest during construction associated with the
creation of a replacement asset using modern technology
and sequencing of
construction. This inconsistency highlights the artificiality of the deduction
of user contributed assets.
is true that as presented in the Final Determination, the deduction - and
sharing of common costs - takes place after the DORC
has been calculated to
arrive at the RAB. But it will be remembered that the argument is that making
the adjustment within the DORC
or after it has been calculated are simply two
different ways of looking at the issue. The Tribunal considers that, if the
considered as part of the DORC calculation has fatal flaws, then the
deduction cannot be accepted.
Nevertheless
we turn now to the arguments for deducting user contributions that were not
related to calculation of the DORC. The
first is that the access provider would
make monopoly profits if the deductions were not made.
this point it is appropriate to deal with the question: how should the access
provider be characterised? PNO, which is undeniably
the access provider, said
that it leases the whole facility and is not constrained, except by Part IIIA,
in charging Glencore for
access to the entire facility. Of course, exactly how
Part IIIA constrains PNO is the issue at hand in the arbitration. We shall
said that making the deduction would deprive it of its ability to make a return
on the lease in which it invested, which came
with no obligation not to seek a
return on user contributed assets. It acquired the user contributed assets
along with the rest,
but would be required to make them available free of
ACCC said that the DORC value of the Port is the same no matter who owns it. In
particular, it would be no different if the State
still owned and operated the
Port. That is the nature of the DORC calculation exercise. PNO acquired a
right to charge what the
State would have been constrained by Part IIIA to
charge, were it still the operator.
Tribunal accepts the ACCC’s reasoning. Part IIIA cannot guarantee PNO a
return on its investment. Indeed, it is useful
for some purposes to abstract
from the fact of privatisation. Part IIIA must be conceived of as leading to
the same results for
access prices with or without privatisation.
as discussed in what follows, the Tribunal considers it useful to examine the
economic policy thinking that led to Part IIIA
and to changes in how the
services provided by government enterprises such as ports were charged for.
ACCC argues that PNO would obtain monopoly profits over the remaining life of
the assets if the user contributions were not deducted.
Deduction would be
consistent with Part IIIA on a number of grounds:
It promotes the
economically efficient operation of, use of and investment in the Service (ss
44X(1)(aa) and (g));
It takes into
account the value to PNO of extensions where the cost has already been borne by
users (ss 44X(1)(e));
It ensures that
PNO is able to earn sufficient revenue to recover its efficient costs (ss
44X(1)(h) and 44ZZCA(a)(i));
It is in the
legitimate business interests of PNO and its investment in the facility (s
44X(1)(a)); and
Furthermore,
making the deductions would be in the interests of those who have a right to use
the Service (s 44X(1)(c)) because it
will ensure that users do not pay for the
same assets twice: once through their initial investment and again through
also observe s 44X(1)(e). The Tribunal considers that sub-clause (e) does not
of itself require the deduction of user contributions;
but at the very least,
the circumstances of the contribution need to be examined.
ACCC accepts that deciding whether user contributions could lead to the access
provider making monopoly profits, and should therefore
be deducted, falls to the
factual circumstances of the contribution.
ACCC saw two alternatives in order for any adjustment for user funded
contributions to be considered:
there needs to
be information showing a commercial agreement between the service provider and
the contributor of funds; or
there needs to
be sufficient information demonstrating the nature of user funded works
undertaken, including any identifiable value
of the user funded capital
contributions. It was the latter that was predominantly presented to the ACCC
as evidence of the nature
of user funded contributions in the course of the
arbitration.
can be seen that the second alternative is different in nature from the first,
to the degree where it is hardly a real alternative.
That is, it sets a far
lower hurdle and is vague as to what the “nature” of the capital
contributions needs to be, and
hence what information would be sufficient. Even
in its written submissions, the ACCC’s statement of the criterion to be
became no more detailed than “[T]he Commission exercised judgment on
the basis of all available evidence. Having done so,
the Commission concluded
that the statutory criteria were best served by not requiring users to pay a
price that includes a return
on capital for assets that they have already
funded, and a service provider should not earn a stream of revenue from assets
it has not funded.”
is hard to read this as more than a statement of the conclusion, as opposed to
reasoning towards that conclusion.
Admittedly,
in this part of its written submissions the ACCC was dealing with the
QCA’s approach, which it rejected. But similar
restatements in a broader
context were also made, such as: “[u]ser capital payments must be taken
into account where this
is required to avoid the provider earning monopoly rents
and users paying twice for assets that they have funded.”
the hearing, the ACCC did set out reasons for considering that user
contributions needed to be deducted to avoid monopoly profits:
inferred that the contributors would have expected a commensurate economic
funded by the user contribution are perpetual in nature. Users would have had
an expectation at the time of making capital
contributions that they would
receive economic benefits from the user-funded assets in perpetuity.
There is no
cogent evidence before the Tribunal of pricing by the State below economic costs
at any time prior to privatisation.
Even if there
were evidence before the Tribunal of pricing by the State below economic costs
prior to privatisation, it would not
follow that this was intended to offset the
capital payments. There was no explicit or implicit agreement of the State to
vary charges
as compensation for user contributions.
is not clear why, if those propositions are accepted, they lead to a conclusion
that monopoly profits would be made, but it is
worth considering them to throw
light on the circumstances in which the contributions were made.
examples were proposed during the hearing to elucidate the monopoly profits
question, but they did not lead to clear conclusions,
perhaps because they could
not capture the complexities involved in the user contributions with which the
arbitration is concerned.
Consideration
of other possibilities - gifting of assets to the owner of the facility; and
provision of funding by the Commonwealth
- likewise do not help to resolve the
issues. On the one hand, some of these arguments introduced moral
considerations. Is it right
and fair that PNO should be able to charge for
assets contributed by others? On the other hand, speculation about government
was introduced. The Tribunal considered that, if anything, these other
possible sources of assets only reinforced the conclusion
that the asset
provider is entitled under Part IIIA to base charges on all assets it owns,
subject to considerations about understandings
and expectations that we now
is common ground that the users would have expected a return on their
investments in improving the channels. It appears that they
would have expected
that return through the ability to transport more goods than they otherwise
could have done. There is no evidence
that they received a reduction in charges
at the time, dependent on their making the investment, nor that they had an
expectation
of reductions later.
Tribunal considers that a user who made an investment in deepening a channel
would have accepted that it would not have exclusive
use of the deepened channel
and, of course, by its nature could not have exclusive use of the greater depth,
with other users being
confined to the original depth.
seems unlikely that the user making the investment would have had any detailed
expectation about the course of future pricing for
access over the longer term,
but it may well have expected that there at least be no significant increase -
or no increase based
on the increased value of the channel it had deepened - in
the period until it had recovered its investment (via greater throughput).
that were adduced as evidence indicated that in the case of one user dredging
project in 1993:
XXX XXXX XXXXX
XXXX XXXXX XX XXX XXX XXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
letters, which are the only relevant evidence available, confirm what the
Tribunal considers would be likely to be the strongest
degree of certainty
regarding expectations about the treatment of charging in respect of user
contributions.
is little likelihood of a user seeking, much less expecting to obtain,
assurances about pricing in perpetuity, or even beyond
the relatively short
seems far more likely that a user would only make a contribution of the type at
issue here if it was confident that the impact
of changes in charges was not a
risk that caused it to doubt its prospective investment. If it assessed that
there was some potential
for its investment to lead to higher prices in the
future, it would need to be confident that the investment would still make a
return. It would have taken into account its experience of dealing
with the Port operator and its knowledge of the history of port
access pricing.
the risk were considered material to the investment decision, the user would
surely have sought to deal with it by contractual
means. This is also an answer
to Glencore’s submission that not excluding user contributions would deter
any future such contributions.
the general case, it seems likely also that a user making an investment that
would provide benefits to other users, and in particular
competitors (if any),
would not object to higher charges being levied by the access provider on those
other users.
in the general case, a user acknowledging that title for an investment that it
made would belong to the Port operator might be
likely to expect that the owner
of the asset would at some stage charge for services provided by it. This would
depend on the economic
policy environment relating to government business
enterprise charging at the time.
QCA addressed the issue of expectations head-on. Differences between the
circumstances that the QCA was inquiring into and those
at the Port were not
explored in submissions or the hearing. The QCA set out the circumstances
relating to the Burdekin River Irrigation
Area. However, the Tribunal does not
know whether some features of the Port, such as inability to exclude other users
from access
to an asset contributed by a particular user, apply to the
irrigation system.
aspect is certainly different. The QCA found that there was an understanding
within the Queensland Government and an expectation
on behalf of irrigators that
irrigators’ payments for land, water and cane assignments were intended as
an offset against the
capital costs of the Scheme and that this would be taken
into account in future price setting. No such clear finding is available
this arbitration.
QCA’s conclusions were:
payment should be regarded as a capital contribution if it was the intention and
expectation of the relevant parties at
the time that the capital payment would
be recognized for pricing purposes.
Furthermore, a
capital contribution should be recognized for pricing purposes unless past price
reductions have fully compensated
the contributor for the contribution or the
asset towards which the contribution was made has been consumed.
is difficult to see why these criteria should not be relevant to the Port.
Indeed, they seem to be intermediate between what the
ACCC described as two
alternatives that would enable it determine the matter:
(1) information showing a commercial agreement between
the service provider and the contributor of funds, or alternatively;
(2) sufficient information demonstrating the nature of user funded works
undertaken, including any identifiable value of the user
funded capital
contributions.
Tribunal considers that evidence as to understandings and expectations could
reasonably substitute for evidence as to a commercial
agreement, but that
information demonstrating the nature of user funded works could not.
ACCC submitted that evidence did not establish one way or another whether there
was an intention or expectation at the time of
the user-funded dredging works
that a capital contribution would be recognised when setting prices. The ACCC
had accepted that such
an inquiry was relevant. The Tribunal does not consider
it acceptable to dismiss the relevance of - even the necessity for - such
evidence simply because there was none.
QCA’s second principle requires a check that the contributor of the assets
has not been fully compensated by past price
reductions. (The asset being fully
consumed is not relevant in the case of channels in a port.) This involves an
investigation
of the pricing by the State prior to privatisation. Such an
investigation was undertaken on behalf of PNO by Castalia in its report
August 2018.
to that report (at page 4), for the period before 1990:
While charges for Port services have been levied
since the middle of the 19th century, it is unlikely that charges prior to 1990
any commercial or economic basis. In 1990, the MSB, which was responsible
for all ports in NSW at the time, including Newcastle,
restructured prices.
At the time, the MSB described statutory port charges prior to 1990 as:
.... nothing more than a tax on people who
sent goods by sea. There were differing rates for different goods with no
relationship
as to the costs the Port incurred in handling them.
They were inefficient, inappropriate and extremely difficult to justify or
The different rates for each commodity for harbour
dues and wharfage, presumably reflected the value of the product to the State so
there was a “royalty” aspect to the charges. The rates were also
uniform across all four major ports (Newcastle, Sydney,
Port Botany and Port
Kembla) and thus did not reflect costs at each port, even in
ACCC submitted that, since there was no separate information regarding charges
at the Port before 1990, the report prepared by
Castalia did not provide support
for the proposition that the Port, considered in isolation, was not operating on
a commercial basis.
However, it did not challenge any of the material quoted
important points as far as the Tribunal is concerned are that until 1990,
charges were:
levied on goods
or commodities rather than vessels (while the current NSC, the subject of this
arbitration, is levied on vessels);
not based on
costs, at least not capital costs.
follows that, contrary to the ACCC’s submissions, it is beyond belief that
the charges could have delivered a normal rate
of return for the Port over the
period. But the real point is that the State Government and the Port operator
were not thinking
in terms of rates of return on investment in assets. These
were the days before corporatisation, privatisation and opening government
business enterprises to competition, or emulating competitive forces where
competition was impossible, eg for natural monopolies.
other words, it is no coincidence that the pricing practices of the period up to
1990 predate Part IIIA.
with the period since 1990, the Castalia report noted (at pages 4 to 5)
In 1990 the MSB announced a major restructure of
prices with the objective of shifting port charges from third parties, such as
owners, to the actual port users such as stevedores and ship owners and to
achieve a measure of cost reflectivity. Under the new
price structure, most
prices now differed by port and port charges were related to the vessel and not
the commodity being shipped.
While the restructured prices had some aspects of cost reflectivity, there
was no attempt to revalue or recognise assets in any systematic
way or to relate
port charges overall to the costs of providing the service, including return on
and return of capital. Total MSB
revenue before and after the restructure was
broadly similar so the restructure focussed largely on the distribution of
charges and
not the overall level. The MSB report showed that after the
restructure, NSC revenue would only recover 51 percent of the cost of
the service-based on the MSB’s understated asset values.
The low level of recognition and valuation of assets was highlighted by the
Curran Report in 1987 which found the economic return
on equity of the MSB was
1.0 percent compared to the return based on historical costs of 4.9 percent.
Since inflation at that time
was 8.5 percent and the Commonwealth Government
ten-year bond rate was 13 percent, this shows that the MSB did not make
or economic returns even on its undervalued asset base and was
providing services at below cost.
In the period after the 1990 restructure until 2014, NSC at Newcastle were
largely unchanged with charges in 2014 only 7 percent higher
than in 1990 in
nominal terms. In the same period, the CPI rose by over 80 percent, so prices
fell substantially in real terms ...
Prices remained unchanged from 1990 until 1996. In June 1996 the Premier
announced a 10 percent reduction over two years commencing
1 July 1996. This
was to assist trade and improve competitiveness to support the coal industry and
employment in the Hunter. There
was no commercial or financial basis for this
After that date, charges remained essentially unchanged until 2012 when a
series of small CPI-type annual increases of 3 percent to
4 percent were
We conclude that prior to a price restructure in 1990, Port charges were
little more than a tax on different commodities with no attempt
to reflect the
costs of the services provided and that financial accounts were non-commercial
and asset values understated or simply
undertook an analysis of charges at the Port from 1990 to 2014. 1990 was chosen
because it was then that the Port’s
charges were restructured with the NSC
being introduced, and from then that stand-alone data for the Port (separate
from other NSW
ports) are available. Castalia estimated the value of the asset
base in 1990 by deflating a DORC estimate for 2014. For the purposes
analysis it deducted the costs of user contributions although it did not
consider that there was a case for doing so.
found that economic costs over the period exceeded revenue by around $8 billion,
“an order of magnitude greater than the
... claimed
‘contribution’ for the Harbour Deepening dredging works and South
Arm Dredging works ...”. This analysis
is said by PNO to show that the
Port effectively paid for those projects.
mounted an attack on that analysis, the thrust of which was that the asset base
estimate could not be trusted. There was some
quibbling with terminology
(economic depreciation) but the only substantive issue was the methodology of
deflating the 2014 DORC
to estimate the value of the asset base in 1990.
Castalia had claimed that this was likely to overstate the value of assets as at
1990 because the DORC assumed newer, more efficient technology.
Tribunal has considered the opposing arguments and decided that the Castalia
analysis is if anything conservative and should not
be discounted. Moreover,
the ACCC did not challenge Castalia’s account of the history of the
Port’s charging from 1990
Tribunal does not go so far, however, as to agree with PNO that the user
contributions were effectively paid back by the Port.
To reach such a
conclusion it would require information about understandings and expectations
along the lines of the QCA principles.
Rather, it sees the Castalia analysis as
indicating that the Port operated in an environment where full cost recovery -
ie charging
for services on the basis of the economic costs of providing them -
was still not being practised in the period after 1990.
is nothing surprising about that, but it is useful to consider different
economic perspectives. We have become used, in a regulatory
context, to the
notion that efficiency requires that prices be based on costs, and that this
requirement implies that efficiency
requires a normal return on assets (more
accurately, an expectation at the time of an investment of receiving at least a
normal return).
requirements are what one sees being met in competitive markets. But natural
monopolies do not operate in competitive markets,
where the usual case is that
after some point marginal costs of production rise with increased volume. In
such markets, competition
between, and the long-run entry and exit of, similar
firms leads to prices equal to both average and marginal costs. Prices are
efficient, in the sense of maximising the difference between the costs of
production and consumers’ value of consumption,
and sufficient to recover
each firm’s costs, including a “normal” return on its invested
Consequently,
such prices have the happy property of representing the cost to the community of
using resources to produce the firm’s
output efficiently.
soon as we step away from workable competition, things become more complicated.
Prices based on a natural monopoly’s marginal
costs of supply are not
sufficient to recover its total costs. If the natural monopoly is to have a
private financial incentive
to invest in the first place, it must find a way -
and be allowed - to charge at more than marginal cost. Alternatively, the firm
must have some other ongoing means of financing its losses from marginal cost
pricing. As the history of pricing at the Port prior
to 1990 demonstrates, one
solution to the problem is public ownership, where the losses on capital
investments can be offset against
economy-wide benefits from pricing below
average cost. However, in practice, public ownership can cause other problems
that outweigh
any gains from more efficient pricing.
the assets producing the services provided by the natural monopoly are sunk - as
they typically are - prices that recover the
cost of those assets will be higher
than the opportunity cost to the community of providing the services. Users
will be paying more
than the efficient price, and will correspondingly tend to
use less of the service than would be optimal from the community’s
is to say, the economic interests of the community and the private natural
monopoly supplier are not in sympathy in the same
way as those of the community
and the supplier in a competitive market.
most natural monopolies in Australia were State-owned, the State did not face
the financial imperatives of a private supplier.
It could choose not to price
so as to recover fixed costs, or not to base prices on costs at all, or - as we
have seen in the case
of a port - to charge those supplying commodities through
the Port rather than those directly imposing costs on the Port’s
and berths, viz. owners of vessels.
pricing and operational behaviour of individual facilities was economically
inefficient, especially in the structure of charges.
But there was not
necessarily much intrinsically wrong with the notion that the State could stand
back and contemplate the whole
supply chain, decide where it wished to levy
charges and raise revenues, and make charging an instrument of various policy
objectives.
(Parties to the arbitration emphasised at times the range of
government policies that may have been reflected in port charging.)
basic point is that the State owner of a port did not see a virtue in emulating
competitive conduct. In particular, even in recent
times it did not occur to
State owners of service providers that they ought to base charges on, among
other things, the hypothetical
replacement cost of their assets. The assets
were sunk. Many assets - not channels in ports - were fully depreciated. Not
a return on assets did not pose the problem of abjuring an incentive
to invest in such assets. Government investment decisions were
considerations other than private financial returns.
if consideration turned to providing a return on new investment, there was no
need for prices to generate a return on sunk investments.
economic approach and policy framework were, and are, at odds with the economic
thinking that led, along parallel lines, to Part
IIIA and to the thrust for
corporatisation and privatisation of government-owned enterprises. They were
twin aspects of the search
for greater economic efficiency, to the benefit of
the wider community.
consequence of this is that the focus on returns on assets compelled by Part
IIIA applies to service providers regardless of their
ownership. Even if the
State still operated the Port, the effect of Part IIIA would be to require
consideration of returns on assets,
if Part IIIA applied to it. That would have
required declaration of the service provided by the Port.
while the State still owned and operated the Port, and the service was not
declared, the principles required by Part IIIA remained
in the background. The
State was free to pursue whatever pricing practices it chose, and as we have
seen, they did not, apparently,
seek to emulate what would occur in a
hypothetical competitive market.
imperative to make a return on assets only arises in a manner not to be gainsaid
when privatisation is contemplated. As we have
attempted to explain, the
pricing impact has pluses and minuses, whether the facility providing the
service is State-owned or in
private hands.
a private facility owner would still, if it were precluded from charging to
obtain a return on sunk assets, have an inventive
to continue to provide access,
contrary to PNO’s claims. And it would not lose the inventive to invest
in new assets and improvements
to the facility, so long as the new assets were
appropriately brought into the asset base on which charges provided a
return it would make on its investment in the business would depend on what it
paid for the business, which is not in evidence
before the Tribunal and is not
relevant to the determination of DORC-based pricing anyway.
precluding a return on all the assets that are part of the facility (sunk or
not) would send a signal to future investors in other
natural monopoly assets
that they risked having their investment, once made, treated as sunk, with
future returns confiscated. That
unfortunate investor would still have an
incentive to operate its asset as long as the returns exceeded the scrap value,
investment climate for such assets would be fatally damaged. In effect,
price regulation would have created a new sovereign risk.
sum up, Part IIIA - and the economic thinking about the discipline imposed by
competition and the resulting efficiency benefits
- leads to pricing of the
services of a natural monopoly that attempts to prevent the achievement of the
monopoly profits that would
be available to an unconstrained private owner. But
it also leads to pricing that provides a return on sunk capital as part of
costs. That means prices that, in the case of a natural monopoly, are
higher than the opportunity cost to the community of using
sunk assets. This is
especially highlighted when a DORC methodology is applied, and the value of
assets is based on the costs of
a hypothetical new entrant.
carries an inefficiency: users will, at the margin, use less of the service
than they would if it were charged for at marginal
cost, and that reduction in
usage has an economic cost to the community. This economic cost might be very
small if the cost of the
accessing the service is nevertheless a small
proportion of the economic surplus associated with the production process, in
case coal mining, that gives rise to demand for the service.
the situation in this arbitration is not the one contemplated in the excursion
we have just taken through alternative ways of
pricing the output of natural
monopolies, viz. of providing no return at all on assets. The Tribunal refers
to the change in policy
approach to make the following point. The enactment of
Part IIIA was a regulatory watershed. It effectively consigned to the past
old ways of thinking about pricing of essential services. It drew a line under
questions about what returns had been made in
the past, and focussed entirely on
the future.
a service provided by an essential facility was declared, then its pricing
became subject to the requirements of Part IIIA, whether
or not the facility was
privately or publicly owned. One element of those requirements is that the
legitimate business interests
of the access provider be taken into account.
That involves being able to achieve a reasonable return on its assets.
Tribunal considers that Part IIIA shines the light of regulation onto what
assets are required to provide a declared service.
Prices should reflect the
cost of those assets, whether through the DORC or some other approach. In this
case, that means all the
components of the DORC, regardless of their origins. A
hypothetical entrant would need all the assets to provide the declared service,
and would require a return on all the assets. Disputation over the treatment of
user contributed assets cannot be resolved by examinations
of past pricing. And
nor can it be resolved by simplistic claims that users should not have to pay
twice, or assertions that the
access provider would be making monopoly profits,
or that the NPV=0 criterion would be contravened.
clear indications of an understanding by the access provider and an expectation
by the access user that future pricing would
be adjusted in some way for the
value of those assets could justify excluding them from the RAB. Even then, the
better approach
may be to maintain the full value of the RAB and make adjustment
to the MAR for the effect of the understanding and expectation.
We note the
QCA’s approach in this regard.
there would also be a need for some mechanism for the passing-on to the current
access provider and access seeker of past
understandings and expectations is not
a question that needs to be addressed by the Tribunal. There is no evidence of
any such understandings
or expectations.
finish by considering Mr Lloyd’s final proposal of five propositions which
he said lead to the ACCC’s conclusion that
user contributed assets must be
deducted. They are set out above.
problem is with the second proposition: “The economically efficient costs
of providing access to a declared service do
not extend to giving an access
provider a stream of revenue by way of a return of capital in respect of
valuable assets that were
contributed by access users.” This proposition
implicitly appeals to a notion of fairness, or perhaps common sense. It seems
to demand acceptance as being self-evident. However, the ACCC has acknowledged
that other considerations apply. By way of economic
analysis of the facts, this
proposition is not self-evident.
the above reasons and analysis, the Tribunal considers that no deduction should
be made to the RAB for user contributions. The
RAB should be restored to its
ORC value of $2,169.5 million, with the associated 1 January 2018 DORC value of
$2,075.8 million.
indicate that even if some regard was had to the financing of particular
dredging projects (for instance), this would need to be
done as part of a
comprehensive examination of historical matters. This would include the
benefits provided by the State in return
for contributions, the history of
under-recovery by the State, the question of which users would be entitled to
the benefit of any
contributions and the users’ expectations. Such
matters should not be included in the calculation of a DORC value, but may
influence the MAR and associated prices. None of these matters were considered
properly by the ACCC nor could they be on the material
before it. Similarly,
the Tribunal could not undertake this task if we were of a different view to the
one we have already reached,
namely, no deduction at all should be made to the
RAB for user contributions.
USER FUNDING OF RECLAMATION BUNDING
issue addresses Glencore’s concern that the DORC valuation includes
estimated costs for reclamation bunding that have not
been adjusted for the
value of user contributions. As we have taken the view that no deduction should
be made to the RAB for user
contributions, it follows no deduction should be
made for reclamation bunding.
Nevertheless,
we make the following observations.
Submissions to the Tribunal
its submissions to the Tribunal, Glencore contended that, although the ACCC had
adopted Glencore’s preferred approach to
the value of user funded works
for channels and berths in its Final Determination, the ACCC’s estimated
costs for reclamation
bunding inconsistently, and possibly inadvertently,
excluded user contributions. Therefore it was contended that the Tribunal
apply the same user funding deduction to reclamation bunding as it did to
channels and berth boxes, which would reduce the DORC value
by $108.4 million
(as at 1 January 2018); and the value of the NSC (as determined by the
ACCC) by 7.7%.
was contended that, contrary to an assertion by PNO that this matter was not
raised in the arbitration Synergies had, in its 22
June 2018 report, highlighted
that its estimate of user funded works was based on its approach of including
bunding costs as part
of the dredged channel value. This report also pointed
out that it was insufficient to only recognise user contributions to the
dredging cost component and that the related user contributions to the land
reclamation cost category must also be recognised. Glencore
further asserted
that, contrary to PNO’s submissions, it was appropriate to apply the same
percentage adjustment to reclamation
bunding costs. While PNO had identified
separate cost items for channel dredging and land reclamation, as identified by
these are simply separate cost items within a dredging project.
Glencore’s estimation of the percentage adjustment to dredging
user funding was derived from information on users’ contribution to the
Harbour Deepening dredging works and the
South Arm channel and berth pocket
projects. Both of these projects included dredging and land reclamation.
Consistently, Glencore
applied this percentage to the combined value of dredging
and reclamation bunding. If these items are to be ascribed separate values,
then Glencore contends that the same percentage reduction should be applied to
both items.
the ACCC pointed out that, in response to the Draft Determination, Glencore did
not seek a proportional downward adjustment
for user funding of reclamation
costs, Glencore submitted in response that, given that in the Draft
Determination the ACCC had adopted
Glencore’s position (which incorporated
bunding costs into its dredging cost estimates and applied the downward
to the bundled cost) there was no need for Glencore to seek a
proportional downward adjustment to reclamation costs.
also responded to the ACCC’s claims that there was no investigation in the
arbitration process as to whether, or to
what extent, the user funded dredging
works contributed to the creation of bunding assets. Whether or not that is the
case, Glencore
considered that there was sufficient material before the Tribunal
to support the conclusion that user funded dredging programs also
funding of related reclamation programs. Glencore contended that this could be
submissions that the dredging programs were not limited to channel dredging but
also necessarily included the associated
costs of disposing of the spoil,
including the construction of any necessary bunding;
contract specification for the Harbour Deepening dredging works, which showed
that the necessary bunding works were included
in the dredging contract;
in relation to
South Arm channel development works, in each case the terminals undertook both
the dredging and land reclamation works,
including any required bunding, as an
integrated project.
submitted that, in light of this material, the Tribunal should conclude that
dredging and land reclamation form part of a
single project and, to the extent
that users are found to have contributed to that project, that contribution
should be applied to
both the dredging costs and land reclamation costs.
primary position was that no user contributions deductions of any kind should be
contended that even if the Tribunal affirmed the ACCC’s decision to reduce
the ORC values to account for user contribution
of assets, there was no basis
for making a simple percentage adjustment to reclamation bunding in the same
proportions. PNO claimed
that land reclamation was a separate and distinct step
to Harbour Deepening dredging works (even though it uses the dredge material
from the Harbour Deepening dredging works). PNO alleged that there had been no
examination, and Glencore adduced no evidence, identifying
any particular
reclamation bunding or the costs of such bunding which were allegedly paid for
for PNO argued that in relation to the Harbour Deepening dredging works there
was no user contribution to the costs of the
reclaimed land, since the disposal
of dredging spoils in reclamation bunds was an incidental part of the dredging.
It was argued
that the Port made areas available where the spoil could be
placed, as an alternative to the contractual requirement to otherwise
sea, and that there was no evidence that any user wanted the land.
generally, PNO contended that there was no proper calculation or assessment of
what reclaimed land was produced by which project,
how such land relates to land
which is reclaimed under the DORC calculation or whether it is properly or
separately identified as
a user contribution.
its submissions, the ACCC contended that there was sufficient information
demonstrating the nature of the user funded works undertaken.
This included the
identifiable value of the user funded capital contributions and identifiable
capital assets included in the asset
base. Because of this, the ACCC made a
proportional downward adjustment of the ORC values to account for the user
funded contributions
to assets including channel and berth boxes. Counsel for
the ACCC otherwise adopted the submissions of counsel for PNO at the Tribunal
hearing, insofar as even if there was user funding, no adjustment was
Separately,
and in response to Glencore’s submissions, the ACCC sought to explain how
its position in this issue had changed
between the Draft Determination and the
Final Determination. In its Draft Determination, the ACCC had initially adopted
position, which incorporated bunding costs into its dredging
cost estimates. In its submissions in response to the ACCC’s
Determination, Glencore did not seek, and the ACCC did not apply, a proportional
downward adjustment to reclamation costs on
the basis that a proportion of the
assets created by reclamation may have come from dredged material in the
formation of channel
and berth box assets to which users had contributed. In
the absence of this, and having regard to PNO’s submission made in
response to the Draft Determination, the ACCC ultimately accepted PNO’s
position that the importation of reclamation bunding
materials was required, and
accepted the costs of reclamation bunding as set out in AECOM’s DORC
valuation. The ACCC also
endorsed PNO’s submission to the Tribunal that
there was no investigation in the arbitration process as to whether, or to what
extent, the user funded works undertaken contributed to the creation of capital
assets in the form of reclamation bunding.
The Tribunal’s analysis
Tribunal’s decision that no adjustment should be made to the RAB for user
funding (as earlier explained) determines the
question of user funding of
reclamation bunding. It is, we think, a subset of user funding and no
adjustment should be made for
any case, the Tribunal accepts PNO’s position that, even if it were
accepted in principle that an adjustment should be made
for user funding, in the
case of user funding of reclamation bunding, insufficient evidence exists that
users actually made a contribution,
and there is no basis for applying the
across-the-board percentage adjustment used by the ACCC in respect of other user
contributions.
COSTS OF CHANNEL DREDGING
Tribunal is confronted by two different approaches to determining the
appropriate costs of channel dredging. We will seek to
describe and evaluate
the material before us, without examining the expert material other that through
the documentation provided.
No party suggested we should do otherwise, nor did
we consider it necessary to adopt any other course having regard to the
constitution
and function of the Tribunal.
this issue we do not separately detail each submission of the parties, other
than in the course of our own analysis.
support of its claimed reduction to the DORC, Glencore primarily contended that
a ‘jumbo’ CSD could be used at the
Entrance Channel, which would
avoid the need for drilling and blasting prior to dredging. Glencore submitted
that the dredging estimate
should be reduced by approximately $122 million (to
approximately $847 million), or alternatively that the $970 million
should be substantially discounted to reflect the “very real
probability” that the hard rock at the Entrance Channel
could be removed
using a CSD without drilling and blasting.
response, PNO submitted that to accept Glencore’s submission would be to
invite to error. The Tribunal agrees. On Glencore’s
own submissions,
there is at least a possibility that a CSD will not be able to remove the hard
rock, in which case Glencore’s
discounted DORC valuation would fail to
capture the full replacement cost of the assets used to provide the declared
service: any
price calculated on this basis would contravene the pricing
principle in s 44ZZCA(a)(i) by failing to generate expected revenue for
regulated service or services that are at least sufficient to meet the efficient
costs of providing access to the regulated service.
Tribunal has been faced with a choice between a proven construction technique
that both parties agree will work (drilling and
blasting), and an unproven one,
considers it most
prudent and correct to base the DORC valuation on techniques
that are proven. The Tribunal cannot be satisfied that the cost of
drilling and
blasting produces an inefficient price, and cannot (and should not) speculate as
to what any discount would be, as suggested
by Glencore.
understand that Glencore submitted there would be no error if the Tribunal were
to substantially discount PNO’s estimate
of the dredging costs that the
ACCC accepted (approximately $970 million) in comparison to Glencore’s
estimate (approximately
$847 million). It was contended that the
recognition of such a discount would accord with common sense in circumstances
competing figures rise no higher than hypothetical forward-looking
this context, the Tribunal accepts that when making an administrative decision,
neither party faces an onus or burden of proof.
While the Tribunal’s
acceptance of a party’s claims and the inferences to be drawn from them
obviously requires a proper
basis, so too should the rejection of any material.
In these proceedings, the decision to be made relates to an estimate of a
hypothetical
current replacement cost. We accept the Tribunal is able to
consider the two competing views, and if appropriate undertake a discounting
task in determining costs.
Tribunal is particularly aware that it is seeking to look into a hypothetical
alternative to historical costs. There is an element
of uncertainty in
assessing what may occur. The Tribunal needs to take into account commercial
realities, but still must look to
probable outcomes rather than just speculative
adapting this approach, having regard to the material before us, we are not
satisfied that a jumbo CSD would be effective to
dredge the hard rock at the
Entrance Channel, nor are we persuaded of the other matters raised by Glencore
stand as a proper informed
basis for discounting cost estimates.
reports prepared by Akuna and Evers Consult, each of which were commissioned by
PNO, are based on commonly accepted or traditional
views of the industry. While
we appreciate the position of Glencore put by Arup – that the newer class
of jumbo CSDs have
demonstrated an operational capacity beyond that previously
understood to be the case, we accept and adopt the approach taken by
Evers Consult.
explain our conclusion, it is helpful to set out and address in turn the
arguments put by Glencore in support of its preferred
approach, which as noted,
we have not accepted. We also set out PNO’s arguments in response.
drew the ACCC’s attention to the shortcomings of the Akuna and Evers
Consult material in Synergies’ report dated
3 September 2018. Arup also
pointed out how, in its view, Akuna and Evers Consult had erred in their
interpretation of the data
and Arup’s analysis.
argued that in the Final Determination, the ACCC accepted the views of
PNO’s expert without properly grappling with
the contrary evidence of
Glencore. In particular:
(1) in finding that drilling and blasting was required,
the ACCC cited Evers Consult’s opinion that a ‘Rock Quality
Descriptor’
’) of less than 75% was required
before any appreciable reduction in rock strength would be observed, and that
own analysis indicated the lowest RQD at the Entrance Channel was
86%. However, this ignored Arup’s contrary opinion that
observed RQDs of
between 79% and 97% would lower the effective strength of the rock to within the
capabilities of a modern CSD and,
importantly, that the hardest rock found in
the vicinity “is unlikely to be observed consistently and for significant
thicknesses
within the maintained channel area.”
(2) the ACCC found that sea conditions at the Port would prevent the efficient
use of very large CSDs (again on the basis of Evers
Consult’s opinion)
despite Arup pointing out that much smaller (and therefore more susceptible to
wave conditions) floating
dredging equipment had actually been used successfully
at the Port throughout its history; and
(3) the ACCC considered there was “insufficient information” on the
comparability between Walker Shoal and the Port to
support the use of CSDs
because the underlying data was unavailable. However, the ACCC failed to
grapple with Arup’s evidence,
which was based on actual involvement in the
Walker Shoal project, and rather adopted without any apparent scrutiny the
of Evers Consult and Akuna that the two locations were in fact not
comparable.
submitted that in doing so the ACCC disregarded Arup’s evidence about the
extent of the hardest rock and the volumes
and types of material in the channel
more generally. It was submitted that the requirement for drilling and blasting
the channel says nothing about the extent of that work, or the work
methods to be employed with material that does not require such
pre-treatment in
the channel generally.
was further submitted that the Tribunal’s assessment of the material
before it should include consideration of the probative
value of the expert
material adduced by each of the parties on the question of the estimated costs
of dredging. Glencore contended
that little weight should be attributed to the
Akuna and Evers Consult reports and that Arup’s evidence in this regard
be preferred. As already noted, Arup were of the view the most
appropriate and efficient method of dredging the channels and berth
(including the hard rock found at the entrance channel) would be the use of a
jumbo CSD. Arup explained (in its 12 June 2018
report at page 10) that recent
experience with this type of equipment established that it was capable of
cutting through the hardest
rock likely to have been situated in the operational
areas of the Port:
In their report Declared Assets DORC Report, AECOM
note that very large Cutter Suction Dredgers can dredge rock up to UCS 50MPa.
assumption, based on prior experience from comparable projects in
Australia, is that hard rock with a UCS 50-70MPa (depending on
RQD) can be
removed by CSD, without the need to revert to drilling and blasting. This
approach has been proven across a number of
projects over the past 5-10 years.
Since the agreed approach to DORC valuations is to use Modern Engineering
Approaches to value
asset replacement cost, Arup believes it is appropriate to
estimate the entrance channel replacement cost using CSD dredging techniques,
and not drilling and blasting.
provided geotechnical modelling of the Port, based on the information available
to it, to estimate the volume and strength of
the material to be dredged. It
estimated there to be approximately 1,260,038 m
of high strength
rock (that is, with a Uniaxial Compression Strength (‘
between 20 MPa and 60 MPa) and 51,378 m
of very high strength rock
(that is, with a UCS greater than 60 MPa). The considerable majority of this
hard rock was said to be
located at the Entrance Channel.
was uncontroversial, however, that the UCS is only one factor by which the
effective strength of rock (and therefore its dredgability)
is to be determined
and that specific fragmenting or fracturing of the rock needs also to be
considered.
extent of such fragmentation is described in terms of its RQD. In general
terms, the lower the RQD, the weaker the effective
strength of the rock. As
stated in the Arup 12 June 2018 report at page 9:
The assessment indicates that approximately 288,000
m3 of bedrock in the entrance channel has a UCS greater than 50MPa. However,
the RQD of the highest strength rock (>55MPa) indicates that it is
likely to have some fracturing, having an RQD between 79 to
97%. The presence of
fractures will lower the effective UCS of this material toward 50MPa.
to Arup, rock strengths of at least 60 MPa can be reliably fragmented with
modern jumbo CSD. In response to the ACCC’s
Draft Determination, Arup in
the 3 September 2018 report at page 17 went onto to advise:
Based on the results of UCS testing . . . the
percentage of very high strength rock (<60MPa) encountered in the Maintained
Channel is expected to be around 3.5%, with approximately 15% having a
strength in excess of 50MPa. The average UCS value . . . is
also cited (in its 12 June 2018 report at page 10) the recent example of the
dredging of Walker Shoal in Darwin, where rock stronger
than that at the
Entrance Channel of the Port was successfully dredged by a jumbo CSD named
‘Athena’. This dredging
at Walker Shoal took place without
requiring drilling and blasting, despite provision having been made for such
As further evidence that modern CSD dredging
techniques can accommodate high strength rock, we highlight the dredging of rock
Shoal, Darwin. In 2014, rock with a greater strength to the Entrance
of Newcastle was successfully dredged direct by the CSD, Athena.
Provision was
also made for drilling and blasting but was not required. INPEX noted that the
dredging was technically challenging,
and involved the removal of a ‘very
hard lump of rock’ that represented a safety risk to shipping. (Arup can
specific confidential information relating to the CSD dredging
undertaken at Walker Shoal under privilege should this be required.
includes details of the UCS and RQD of rock removed by CSD).
to this, Arup stated (in its 3 September 2018 report at page 32):
AECOM state that “the rock properties and wave
climate at the Walker Shoal are significantly different to the conditions at
Newcastle and that Arup’s suggestion that this is a comparable project is
invalid”. They arrive at this conclusion having
briefly reviewed
information from an earlier ACER Vaughan geotechnical report dated August 1996.
Arup can confirm that the dredging associated with this report is on the edge
of the Walker Shoal, and is not representative of the
strength of the rock
dredged by the Athena as part of the major works undertaken for INPEX in 2014.
The reference used by AECOM to
draw their conclusion is therefore
Baggerman has been involved in numerous rock fragmentation projects with
material stronger than that at the Entrance to Newcastle
Harbour, including the
Walker Shoal project undertaken in 2014. The geotechnical data relating to the
Walker Shoal project remains
confidential at the time of writing. As noted in
Section 2.2.1 of Arup’s 12th June report, rock at Walker Shoal was
successfully
dredged with the Athena, a modern Self Propelled JCSD. We therefore
maintain the view that if the Entrance Channel was to be dredged
relatively weaker Newcastle Harbour material could be dredged with a modern Self
Propelled JCSD.
its Draft Determination, the ACCC accepted (at page 51) Arup’s assessment
of rock strengths and proposed work methodology:
... [B]ased on the evidence before it, the Commission
has concluded that Arup’s modelling provides a more robust approach to
estimating the volume and type of material to be dredged. This extends to the
UCS and RQD figures.
The Commission also notes that Arup’s proposed methodology to dredging
is based on what it submits has occurred in practice
on at least one occasion
such that it does [sic, goes] beyond a theoretical exercise. The Commission
considers that these two factors
suggest that the use of more advanced
technology as proposed in Arup’s report is an appropriate assumption for
the purposes
of a DORC valuation for this arbitration. This also informs the
Commission’s consideration of dredging costs
responded to this part of the Draft Determination with reports from Akuna and
Evers Consult explaining why Arup’s proposed
dredging methodology was
impractical. This included material referring to the sea conditions at the Port
which restricted the use
of a CSD for the majority of the year and that the rock
already indicated, Glencore’s response to this new material included
Arup’s report dated 3 September 2018, which provided
data and other
material contradicting Evers Consult and Akuna.
ACCC had regard to the further material and in its Final Determination adopted
PNO’s dredging costs estimate.
so deciding, the ACCC said that:
the rock at the
Entrance Channel was unlikely to be of a type that would allow the use of a
sea conditions
at the Port would limit the ability to use a CSD to dredge hard rock at the
Entrance Channel; and
“insufficient information” provided to establish with confidence the
comparability between Walker Shoal and
the Port to support the use of a
submitted that expert material submitted by PNO did not justify the ACCC’s
decision to reverse its position from the
Draft Determination so as to adopt
PNO’s estimated dredging costs in preference to Glencore’s estimate
without discount.
was submitted that properly analysed, PNO’s expert material contained a
number of unsubstantiated conclusions about important
matters, and contained
information that pointed to the very real probability that the hard rock at the
Entrance Channel to the Port
could be removed using a CSD without drilling and
ACCC considered that PNO’s DORC valuation was more appropriate as it
better reflected what would be required in practice
to construct the channel and
berth at the Port. However, the ACCC considered that PNO’s allowances for
maintenance dredging
and acid sulphate management were not appropriate and
should not be included. In the case of maintenance dredging, the ACCC accepted
the position put by Arup on Glencore’s behalf that maintenance dredging
would ordinarily form part of the capital expenditure
dredging project. In the
case of acid sulphate management, the ACCC considered insufficient information
had been provided by PNO
(and its expert AECOM) to justify its inclusion. The
ACCC therefore accepted PNO’s submitted total construction costs excluding
the allowance for maintenance dredging and acid sulphate management. The result
is total construction costs of $1,038.7 million
(in 2014 dollars), which was
then adjusted to reflect the valuation date adopted by the ACCC.
Tribunal is in a difficult position with conflicting expert views, but
nevertheless must make a determination based upon an assessment
of the material
before it. We have already indicated that the Baggerman Report sought to be
relied upon by Glencore would not advance
our consideration of the issue we need
to determine, even if we were to allow it to be relied upon in this
re-arbitration.
is important to recall that the Port was not constructed using a jumbo CSD.
However, the economic theory behind the DORC methodology
is that users should
not have to pay for the cost of access to the asset if, in a competitive market,
an efficient competitor would
be able to supply equivalent services more cheaply
using the latest technology and an optimised (ie efficient) approach to
construction.
The decision must have proper regard to the legitimate business
interests of the provider and the provider’s investment in
the facility.
The Tribunal is not looking for certainty. The Tribunal looks to see whether
there is some degree of probability
an event will occur. However, the Tribunal
needs to reach a level of satisfaction that the construction method is as a
fact going to be feasible and appropriate.
referred to estimates by its expert, Arup, of the volume and strength of
material to be dredged at the Port. In Arup’s
3 September 2018 report it
estimated that there were 1.05 million m
of total bedrock with a UCS
of between 20 and 50 MPa and 209,000 m
of total bedrock with
strength of more than 50 MPa.
advised that only around 3.5% of the rock at the Entrance Channel had a UCS
greater than 60MPa. In Glencore’s submission,
even if this very small
proportion of rock cannot be reliably fragmented with a jumbo CSD, this should
have no bearing on the method
adopted for weaker rock at that location. The low
average UCS value of rock in the Entrance Channel (around 37MPa), combined with
the very low relative volume of very hard rock, provided a useful indicator it
was submitted that extensive drilling and blasting
was not required.
the Tribunal’s view, the most reliable estimates of the hardness of rock
at the Entrance Channel are those relied on by PNO’s
expert AECOM, which
are based on historical records showing the quantity of rock actually removed
(through drilling and blasting)
during the construction of the Entrance Channel,
and core samples taken from that material, which show the strength and hardness
of the rock material. Based on this material, AECOM’s assessment is that
there are 953,731 m
of total bedrock with UCS of between 20 and 50
MPa and a further 587,379 m
of total bedrock that would require
pre-treatment (by drilling and blasting) before it could be dredged.
the rock strength data from the core samples taken during the Harbour Deepening
dredging works was relied upon by both AECOM
and Arup, only AECOM has relied on
the firm MDA which undertook the relevant Newcastle Harbour Navigation Channels
Replacement Cost
Valuation in 2014 to assess rock composition and strength.
Whilst details of MDA’s methodology and workings have not been
provided we
see no reason not to accept AECOM’s assessment.
previously stated, PNO obtained expert reports from AECOM, Akuna and Evers
Consult, each of which expressed the opinion that CSDs
were unsuitable for
dredging very hard rock (ie rock with an UCS of more than 50 MPa). Glencore
appears to accept that these opinions
reflect the “commonly
accepted” views within the dredging industry , but says:
(1) UCS is only one factor by which the effective
strength of rock (and therefore its dredgability) can be measured, and that the
fragmenting or fracturing of the rock also needs to be considered; and
(2) a newer class of jumbo CSDs have demonstrated an operational capacity beyond
that previously understood to be the case.
Tribunal is mindful of Glencore’s criticism of the approach we are taking
in agreeing with the submissions of PNO.
already stated, Glencore submitted that AECOM’s estimates of the rock
hardness at the Entrance Channel were not reliable.
PNO relied upon the fact
that AECOM’s estimates are based on historical records showing the
quantity of rock actually removed
(through drilling and blasting) and core
samples taken from that material. However, Glencore submitted such historical
is an unreliable source when assessing the need for and extent of any
drilling and blasting using current technology. It was submitted
that there has
been a considerable evolution in the capacity and effectiveness of dredging
technology since the various campaigns
were undertaken at the Port. For
example, the maximum rock strength capable of being directly dredged at the time
of the Harbour
Deepening dredging works was approximately 25MPa. AECOM seemed
to agree that a modern jumbo CSD is now capable of dredging up to
appropriate conditions.
followed then, in Glencore’s submission, that the historical data on the
volumes of rock that were unable to be directly
dredged (and thus required
drilling and blasting) in the Harbour Deepening dredging works would indicate
much higher volumes than
would be the case if the work was carried out today
with modern equipment. It was submitted that it was inevitable that
reliance on these historical records would produce an
overestimation of the volume of rock requiring drilling and blasting today.
claim appears to depend on Arup’s experience with a jumbo CSD at Walker
Shoal in Darwin. However, the information which
is available does not lead the
Tribunal to any degree of satisfaction that the rock (and sea state) conditions
at the Port and at
Walker Shoal are comparable.
data which was before the ACCC and now the Tribunal does not support the claim
that the rock at Walker Shoal is of greater strength
than at the Port. A
geotechnical report by ACER Vaughan dated August 1996 showed that the RQD values
for Walker Shoal were generally
much lower than at the Entrance Channel to the
Port. Further, sea conditions at Walker Shoal, unlike at the Entrance Channel
the Port, are calm and sheltered.
Consult relevantly stated (in its August 2018 report at page 11) that:
EC is of the opinion that observations and comparison
in respect of the materials strengths between Walker Shoal and the Entrance
Newcastle are dissimilar and indicate differences in dredgeability of the two
As demonstrated in Figure 3 (as provided by AECOM to EC and as included in
AECOM’s report dated 17 August 2018), the RQD values
for Walker Shoal are
generally much lower than the RQD values for the PoN Entrance Channel,
indicating that the Walker Shoal material
is generally much more fractured and
can consequently be expected to be much easier to dredge because of this
material difference
in the RQD values present at the two sites.
EC has worked on a few occasions in the general Darwin area and is familiar
with the location and general seastate conditions at Walker
Shoal. Walker Shoal
is located in a completely sheltered part of Darwin Harbour and with the
exception of a cyclone event the waters
in that area are always very calm.
Overall with much more fractured rock and a very benign seastate environment,
dredging at Walker Shoal with a jumbo CSD is entirely
possible but can certainly
not be quoted as similar to dredging at the Entrance of the Port of Newcastle.
Akuna (in its 16 August 2018 report at page 6) stated the following:
The fourth element to be reviewed was the statement
whether the conditions present in the Walker Shoal project (which Arup seeks to
rely on) are comparable to those at the Port of Newcastle with respect to
dredging, or otherwise distinguish such conditions from
the conditions present
at the Port of Newcastle. As detailed in the rock strength assessments in this
advice paper, the Conglomerate
found at Walker Shoal is considerably weaker than
the Conglomerate and Sandstone at the entrance channel of the Port of Newcastle.
The Port of Newcastle entrance channel has a consistently hard rock stratum,
while Walker Shoal has very weak rock in boreholes at
25 to 50 meter from the
harder rock boreholes. Walker Shoal has an irregular rock stratum with
distinctly to extremely weathered
rock in a 200 by 200 meter area. The wave
climate at Walker Shoal is at sheltered waters and favorable to dredge harder
a fairly stable very large modern self-propelled Cutter Suction
Dredger and is not comparable to the wave climate at the entrance
channel of the
Port of Newcastle.
AECOM (in its 16 August 2018 report at page 6) stated:
Arup proposes the use of the CSD Athena to dredge the
rock at Newcastle citing ‘comparable’ projects in Australia and
specifically at Walker Shoal29, to demonstrate that rock up to 70MPa (depending
on RQD) can be removed with a modern cutter suction
dredger. AECOM’s view
is that the rock properties and wave climate at the Walker Shoal are
significantly different to the conditions
at Newcastle and that Arup’s
suggestion that this is a ‘comparable’ project is invalid.
This is clear from a comparison of the rock parameters for the Port of
Newcastle Entrance Channel (sourced from the data provided
under the 1976
Harbour Deepening Contract) with rock parameters at Walker Shoal (sourced from
Acer Vaughan TR 29/96 East Arm Port
Walker Shoal Geotechnical Drilling
Investigation, August 1996).
... In our view the rock at Walker Shoal is not comparable to that at
Newcastle and Arup’s attempted comparison of dredging
methods at these two
sites is therefore invalid.
submitted that PNO’s insistence that a jumbo CSD could not effectively
dredge the hard rock in the Entrance Channel
is underpinned by AECOM’s
premise that a window of at least 12 hours is needed to set up a jumbo CSD,
conduct dredging operations
and demobilise. This premise was said to be
factually incorrect. As explained by Arup (in its September 2018 report), in
at such a conclusion, AECOM was said not to have given any
consideration to the operational configuration of the jumbo CSD, the use
pre-installed quick-release anchors, and modern operational techniques to
fragment the rock. Such factors allow for the rapid
and efficient movement of
dredging vessels from weather exposed areas to more protected areas when
necessary. This was said to allow
the jumbo CSD to work efficiently in
weather-exposed areas on an intermittent basis as conditions allow.
expressed by Arup (in its 3 September 2018 report at page 33):
In their report dated 17th August, AECOM state that
“12 hours is a realistic practical minimum period for a cutter suction
of this size to account for mobilisation time prior to operation”.
In our opinion this is factually incorrect, and in arriving
conclusion, AECOM has not had any regard to the operational configuration of the
JCSD, the use of preinstalled quick release
anchors to support efficient
movement, and the operational techniques to fragment the
dealing with the operational assessment of JCSD, Arup went into considerable
detail of the operational configuration, use of anchors,
operational techniques,
and the operational limitations of self-elevating platforms
’) in the Entrance Channel.
submitted that Arup’s 3 September 2018 report considered the issue in some
detail and noted:
(1) The majority of the historic rock removal in the
weather-exposed areas of Entrance Channel occurred as part of the Harbour
dredging works and the equipment used during this campaign was largely
floated, not elevated on spuds (due to construction delays
with the SEPs).
(2) The historic drilling and blasting (which would have occurred in the harder
rock areas that PNO says need to be pre-treated by
drilling and blasting) was
carried out by the ‘WH Gemini’ (a four-boom catamaran drilling and
blasting barge) which operated
mainly in the Entrance Channel for a period of 88
weeks during the Harbour Deepening dredging works.
(3) The drilling work undertaken by the Gemini was constrained by the vertical
movement caused by the swell, typically limited by
vertical movement of 0.3 to
0.5 metres. This movement is significantly less than the operating conditions
of a jumbo CSD.
(4) During its working period of 88 weeks, the Gemini’s delays due to
swell was less than 5%.
was submitted by Glencore that contrary to the Final Determination and
PNO’s submission, much smaller floating dredging equipment
has been used
successfully at the Port. Even accepting the wave data information relied on by
PNO, Arup has demonstrated that a
jumbo CSD could work within the expected
operational windows in the most swell-exposed areas, moving to more protected
areas as required
with limited, if any, delays due to swell.
ACCC found that the sea conditions at the Port would limit the ability of CSDs
to dredge hard rock at the Entrance Channel. As
AECOM explained, CSDs have
tight limitations on the wave climate in which they can operate efficiently
without damage to the cutter
head, particularly when dredging in hard rock. As
noted, AECOM expressed the opinion that at least 12 hours is needed to set up
CSD on site and undertake dredging and demobilise, and concluded based on sea
condition data that there would be less than 4% of
the year when there was a
window of at least 12 hours with conditions suitable for dredging in >50 MPa
rock and no opportunities
to dredge in >70 MPa rock. Further, the figure of
4% was said to be based on historical reviews of sea conditions – in
practice, dredging operators would be unlikely to be able to predict these
windows with perfect accuracy, meaning the actual window
is likely to be even
our view, Glencore’s challenge to the ACCC’s findings, and the
ACCC’s reliance on the opinions of PNO’s
experts, are without
substance for the following reasons:
(1) the opinions were based on the actual wave
conditions at the Port. The analysis of the sea conditions is found in
16 August 2018 report (at pages 12-18 and at Appendix A, which
contains a review of wave data recorded at the Port from 1989 to 2001
Tremarfon Pty Ltd). Evers Consult refers to AECOM’s analysis of the sea
conditions, including the ‘comprehensive
wave analysis of data by
Tremarfon’; and
(2) the dredging campaigns at the Port that used smaller, allegedly more
susceptible floating equipment, involved dredging in less
exposed areas, and
even in those less exposed areas, the campaigns were constrained by wave
activity. None, to any level of satisfaction,
showed that it is viable to use a
CSD to dredge the Entrance Channel in more exposed locations and for 12 hour
is to be also to be recalled that Akuna has been asked to provide its opinion as
to whether:
based on the
interpretation by Arup of relevant conditions and data, the removal of rock by
CSD, as proposed by Arup, is a feasible
method for dredging at the entrance of
the channel at the Port;
based on the
interpretation by AECOM of relevant conditions and data, the drilling and
blasting method proposed by AECOM is a feasible
and preferred approach to
dredging at the entrance of the channel at the Port;
interpretation of the conditions and data at the Port by Arup is correct;
the conditions
present in the Walker Shoal project (which Arup seeks to rely on) are comparable
to those at the Port with respect
to dredging, or otherwise distinguish such
conditions from the conditions present at the Port; and
drilling and
blasting remains a modern day equivalent method for dredging, and provide any
recent/modern examples of where drilling
and blasting remains relevant.
16 August 2018 Akuna report is, in part, expressly stated to be a review of the
reports and submissions already prepared by AECOM
(on behalf of PNO) and Arup
(on behalf of Glencore) in relation to dredging methodology, with a view to
providing a report on the
most effective and efficient method for removal of
rock at the Entrance Channel. Akuna provided its own opinion about the
feasibility
of direct dredging as opposed to drilling and blasting. This
“CSD direct assessment” is said to be “dependent
holistic assessment of the local circumstances.”
Akuna report accepted that there is no uniform division range, expressed in UCS,
between direct dredging with a CSD and drilling
and blasting. Many rock
characteristic parameters play a role therein. However, the commonly accepted
limits for very large modern
CSDs is that they have an economic direct
dredgability limit of between 40 and 50 MPa.
Akuna report also noted that the data available to it relating to Walker Shoal
was inadequate for it to assess the degree to which
“the ductility of the
[Walker Shoal] Conglomerate differs from the rock found at the entrance channel
of the Port of Newcastle
and the energy required to break the rock.”
However, Akuna nevertheless proffered an opinion on the basis that “an
assessment can still be made as to the similarity or otherwise of the
conditions at the Port of Newcastle and Walker Shoal based
on the data
available.”
Nevertheless,
Akuna (at page 5) came to some definite views:
The first element to be reviewed was the statement
whether, based on the interpretation by Arup of relevant conditions and data,
removal of rock by CSD as proposed by Arup is a feasible method for dredging
at the entrance of the channel at the Port of Newcastle.
Based on the reviewed
and studied information, it can be clearly stated that the conglomerate and
sandstone rock at the entrance
channel of the Port of Newcastle is outside the
operational and economic limits of a modern very large self-propelled Cutter
Dredger. Moreover, the wave conditions at the entrance channel will
further limit the rock dredging capabilities of the CSD.
Then at page 5 the Akuna report continued:
The rock with a medium hardness at the entrance
channel of the Port of Newcastle can partly been dredged by a modern very large
self-propelled
Cutter Suction Dredger of which the rock strength limit at the
wave exposed outer part of the entrance channel will be lower than
strength which could be directly dredged at the moderately sheltered inner
entrance channel area and the Horse Shoe area.
The remaining area, of which the footprint will be reduced to the harder
rock, will require drilling & blasting after which the
removal of the
blasted rock would preferably be executed by a large modern Backhoe Dredger
supported by self-propelled Split Hopper
Then at page 6 of the Akuna report it was said:
The interpretation by Arup of the working environment
at the entrance channel does not take into consideration that the wave climate
is very unfavorable to operate a Cutter Suction Dredger while dredging hard
rock. The interpretation by Arup of the rock strength
by combining the strength
and the degree of weathering is unconventional and does not take into
consideration the amount of energy
and forces required to break the rock into
hydraulically transportable sizes.
The fourth element to be reviewed was the statement whether the conditions
present in the Walker Shoal project (which Arup seeks to
rely on) are comparable
to those at the Port of Newcastle with respect to dredging, or otherwise
distinguish such conditions from
the conditions present at the Port of
As detailed in the rock strength assessments in this advice paper, the
Conglomerate found at Walker Shoal is considerably weaker than
the Conglomerate
and Sandstone at the entrance channel of the Port of Newcastle.
The Port of Newcastle entrance channel has a consistently hard rock stratum,
while Walker Shoal has very weak rock in boreholes at
25 to 50 meter from the
harder rock boreholes. Walker Shoal has an irregular rock stratum with
distinctly to extremely weathered
rock in a 200 by 200 meter area.
The wave climate at Walker Shoal is at sheltered waters and favorable to
dredge harder rock with a fairly stable very large modern
self-propelled Cutter
Suction Dredger and is not comparable to the wave climate at the entrance
channel of the Port of Newcastle.
In the Akuna report, at page 6-7, it was stated:
The statement by Arup that dredging rock with a very
large Cutter Suction Dredger is a modern and more economic methodology to dredge
the hard rock at the entrance channel of the Port of Newcastle shows little
understanding of the rock dredging processes in general.
Rock, till certain strength, can be dredged direct by a CSD depending on the
local circumstances and the detailed characteristics
of the rock.
The harder the rock the lower the production the higher the operational
costs, driven by the pick-point consumption, and hence the
higher the unit rate
for the removal of the rock.
At certain hardness the unit rate of the drilling & blasting operations
will be more economical than the direct dredging by the
CSD. At that stage,
depending on the environmental permit conditions, drilling & blasting would
and could be the dredging methodology
to remove the rock.
make one further observation. We cannot be involved in speculation as to the
future events that may unfold or as to the veracity
of claims about the
capacities of the most recently developed dredging equipment. Even accepting a
modern jumbo CSD could operate
at up to 70 MPa, we are not satisfied to the
level required that the CSD will be able to operate in the manner contended for
by Glencore.
To the suggestion that if say the volume of hard rock was halved
so that theoretically drilling and blasting could be supplemented
dredging techniques, the Tribunal cannot base its decision on this degree of
speculation. The Tribunal is satisfied that
the correct view of the current and
likely future state of the operational configurations and techniques for using
the jumbo CSD
in the construction of the Port is as put forward by PNO and the
ACCC, and the analysis of Arup is sound.
the foregoing reasons, the Final Determination was correct and is our own
IMPORTATION OF RECLAMATION BUNDING MATERIAL
Tribunal can conveniently deal with this issue in the same manner it dealt with
the previous issue.
challenges the ACCC’s acceptance of PNO’s contention that an
additional allowance of $145 million should be included
in DORC valuation for
imported reclamation bunding materials. We do not need to deal with the issue
of user contributions as the
Tribunal has already accepted PNO’s primary
argument that user contributions are not to be taken into account.
was submitted that such an additional allowance was not required as sufficient
material was available from dredging without the
need to import reclamation
bunding materials.
relied upon the 12 June 2018 Arup report which (at page 4) stated:
Properly analysed, no such additional allowance is
required as sufficient material is available from dredging without the need to
import reclamation bunding materials. Arup considers that our dredging and
reclamation methodologies provide for the initial bunds
to be developed as part
of the dredging of the channel, and there is no need for imported material, or
for bunds to be constructed
in a 200mx200m grid.
in reliance on the earlier 28 May 2018 Arup report it was contended that the
only cost allowance should be for the placement
of dredged material:
Costs for material placement and bunding are included
in the dredging rates. Refer to the methodology assumed for material placement
and bunding in Section 2.2.6.
significant factor in determining whether bunding materials were required to be
imported is the suitability of the materials dredged
from the Port. However,
Glencore submitted that the ACCC failed to properly examine the issue and merely
accepted PNO’s dredging
costs without question in this regard, with the
Final Determination stating (at page 81):
The Commission notes the difficulties identified in
relation to assessing the parties’ estimates of the volumes of materials
to be dredged. However, the Commission has accepted PNO’s submitted
position in relation to the type of material to be dredged
(i.e. hardness of
rock), dredging methodology and therefore costs on the basis that AECOM’s
DORC valuation (upon which it relied)
is likely to be more appropriate. Given
this, the Commission considers that PNO’s submitted position that an
additional allowance
of $145 million ($2014) should be included in the DORC
valuation for reclamation bunding materials.
submitted that the answer to the question of dredging methodology says nothing
for reclamation bunding. It was
submitted that bunding is generally constructed from sand and cut conglomerate
rock. The question,
therefore, was whether dredging would produce sufficient
quantities of this material.
took the view that there would be sufficient material. In its 3 September 2018
report it stated (at page 52):
The approach and Entrance Channel contains
approximately 2 million cubic metres of fine, medium to gravelly clean sand
which can be
used in lieu of importing external materials for bund construction
(sufficient to construct up to 60 kms of peripheral bunding -
it is anticipated
that a maximum of 10km of bunding from this source would be
this was accepted by the Tribunal, Glencore argued that this should subsequently
lead to the reduction of the DORC valuation
used in the Final Determination by
the amount included for imported reclamation bunding materials. This equated to
approximately
$145 million.
As we have said, the ACCC’s DORC valuation included $145 million for
reclamation bunding materials. This involved the importation
of materials to
construct an initial bunded area below the river water level (formed with
perimeter bunds or internal bunds) into
which dredged material would be placed
to form the reclaimed area. The ACCC’s estimate consisted of
$65 million to source
and place 700,000 m
of material for the
initial perimeter, and $80 million to form the bunds from material
subsequently obtained from dredging.
submitted that no allowance for importing material was necessary, as sufficient
material would be available from dredging
at the Port to obviate the need to
import reclamation bunding materials. However, the fine material which would be
available from
the early dredging at the Port would be unsuitable to form
underwater perimeter bunds, which must be constructed from coarse or hard
or rock to be stable.
proposed methodology was explained in detail in Arup’s 3 September 2018
report. In summary, it required bunds
(including perimeter bunds but only
limited internal bunds) formed from washed sand won from dredging. Bunds would
be formed to
contain this work and the dispersion of sediment during
reclamation. Following this, reclamation would proceed using a
method, by which layers of dredged material are laid, with
preference given to coarser dredged material. This was detailed in Arup’s
3 September 2018 report (at pages 51-52):
Arup is proposing that limited bunds are required and
can be formed from clean ocean washed sand won from dredging. Bunds would be
formed to contain the work and sediment dispersion during reclamation. Following
this, reclamation would proceed using a pancake
method, whereby layers of dredge
material are laid, with preference given to coarser dredge material such as sand
and cut conglomerate.
In Arup’s method, the washing and sorting of sediment can be
effectively achieved using hopper barge compartments. Claimed material
through compartments in the hopper barge. It is then allowed to settle where the
coarse material settles at the bottom
of the barge and the fine fraction is left
in suspension. The settled coarse sediment is then placed as reclamation
material, allowing
the remaining waters to be transferred offshore for disposal.
Overtopping (i.e. whereby sediments are washed off the barge back into
column) can be effectively controlled by employing suspended sediment
monitoring, and restricting spill rates or halting
works if exceedances of
suspended sediment levels are detected.
page 54, Arup further stated:
Arup is proposing to use coarser sediment, such as
sand and cut conglomerate for reclamation purposes, while disposing of the finer
sediment fraction (mud, clay, siltstone, claystone and shales) offshore due to
its propensity to break down into finely dispersed
materials. Initial perimeter
bunds would be established prior to reclamation
commencing.
the opinion of the Tribunal, Glencore’s method, which involved
“pancaking” the sand material directly onto the
areas to be
reclaimed, without the need for perimeter or internal bunds, will suffer from
two problems as identified by PNO.
without perimeter bunds to contain the dredged material, it is highly likely
that soft marine sediment in the dredged material
(such as mud, clay, siltstone,
claystone and shales) would escape from the bunding, leaving residual deposits
on the riverbed.
the ‘AECOM Response to Section 5 of ACCC Draft Determination 20 July 2018
– Planning Opinion’, the Final
Determination stated (at page 79):
This would not comply with prevailing development
consents in relation to the maintenance of water quality in the Hunter
Comparatively, the Bund Method would pose
a lower potential risk of impact to water quality, ecology and biodiversity
relative to
the Pancake Method due
The smaller
area of excavated material exposed to the water column and connected to areas
outside the port development footprint at
any one time; and
The shorter
duration of excavated material placement activities exposed to the water column
and connected to areas outside the port
development footprint.
On this basis, and notwithstanding its
additional expense, I believe that regulatory authorities would prefer the Bund
Method over
the Pancake Method, as the Bund Method would avoid or minimise
potential impacts on water quality, ecology and biodiversity, consistent
the objects of the
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
regulatory authorities would likely seek to give effect to this preference
through appropriate conditions of approval.
In my opinion, the Pancake Method is unlikely to be approved because it does
not effectively avoid or minimise impacts on water quality,
ecology and
biodiversity and there is a feasible alternative (the Bund Method) which
Glencore submitted that this risk could be avoided through the use of a trailer
suction hopper dredge (which would remove the
overlying soft material, which
would then be disposed of offshore), we consider it is not possible in practice
to remove all of this
material and there are likely to be pockets of fine
material remaining. By contrast, the use of perimeter and internal bunding,
provided for in the Final Determination, allows the containment and management
of this material.
Glencore’s pancake method assumes that there is no fine material in the
remainder of the dredged material that would
be placed in the reclamation.
Inevitably, there would be pockets of fine material or localised variability in
the material which
is unsuitable for use in bunding and reclamation.
the 28 May 2018 Arup report at page 16, the Final Determination stated (at pages
It is standard practice to construct internal bunding
to create several reclamation cells which then allow the management of
material and discharge water. Glencore’s expert, Arup, refers
to examples in Sydney and Brisbane where the pancake method has
been used, but
in neither of these cases was the dredged material pancaked into uncontained
areas (i.e. areas without perimeter bunds)
in the manner Glencore proposes.
the sand, cut conglomerate and the like are unlikely to break down into
quantities significant quantities of sub 100 micron material
containment by bunds. As such Arup have adopted the pancake reclamation method
previously used by PWCS in Newcastle, Sydney
Ports in Botany Bay and at Brisbane
is also a timing problem with Glencore’s suggested approach. Relying only
on material dredged from the Port would require
alteration to the proposed
construction program to ensure that suitable coarse dredged material is
available when it is needed for
bunding. Given the current program has been
designed on a least cost basis, any significant alteration will necessarily lead
increased costs, which have not been factored into Glencore’s
alternative approach. In addition, even if the bunds were constructed
from onsite material, there would still be a significant cost associated with
this task, which has not been considered.
the foregoing reasons, the Final Determination was correct and is our own view.
LENGTH OF CONSTRUCTION PERIOD AND INTEREST COSTS
Tribunal proceeds to address these issues in a similar manner to the last two
Draft Determination proposed to adopt a 12 year whole-of-port construction
program, as submitted by PNO. In its response to the
Draft Determination,
Glencore reiterated its previous submissions for adopting a shorter construction
program for a sub-set of port
assets, whilst also providing an alternative to
PNO’s whole-of-port construction program. In contrast, PNO supported the
Determination and provided additional reasons for why Glencore’s
alternative whole-of-port construction program should not
be adopted.
submitted that a 12 year construction program would be appropriate. This is
based on AECOM’s DORC valuation, which assumes
that the works would be
completed by a selected contractor undertaking a single package of works for the
Port as a whole. AECOM
allows 5.5 years for planning and approvals, and 6.5
years for asset construction. This was detailed in the AECOM report dated 4
September 2017, at page ii:
To evaluate the interest during construction costs, a
detailed port construction schedule has been developed, built up typically from
asset level. This indicates about 5.5 years of planning and approvals, followed
by 6.5 years of construction.
considered that, if the channel were to be constructed as a separate
construction campaign, the remainder of the Port would
also then need to proceed
as a separate construction campaign. AECOM noted that, in this case, the
benefit of using the dredged
material for reclamation and surcharge would be
lost, and AECOM estimated an additional $700 million in materials would be
(although dredging costs would be reduced by around $268 million).
AECOM, as stated in their report dated 28 May 2018 at page 32,
was of the view
that the dredging cost savings are not sufficient to offset the additional
material costs, such that the least cost
method for developing the Port is as a
single campaign:
...if the channel were to be constructed as a
separate construction campaign, with the dredged material disposed offshore, the
of the port development would also then proceed as a separate
construction campaign. The benefit of using the dredged material for
reclamation
and surcharge would be lost and alternative land based sources would be
identified.
Our assessment indicates that about 26. 5 million cubic metres of suitable
fill material would be required to complete the reclamation
of the port lands
from their state at European First Settlement to their present levels of
service. To be most efficient, it is assumed
that this material would also be
used as a rolling surcharge, before finally being incorporated into the works.
Based on a 17m3 typical
road truck capacity,· this volume of material would
require 1.6 million truck movements into Newcastle.
If it’s assumed that the material was sourced from 35km away in the
Hunter Valley, and each truck was able to complete three
trips per day over a
two year period, a fleet of about 1,000 trucks would be required to complete a
total of 110 million truck kilometres.
We estimate the cost of sourcing 26.5million cubic metres of fill material
onshore would be in excess of $700m. In addition, given
the truck movements
involved, it’s probable that a haul road would need to be constructed at
significant additional cost, and
there are likely to be further additional costs
to rectify the damage caused to the existing road network.
We estimate that placing dredged material offshore, even though this may not
be permitted, would offer dredging cost reductions in
the order of $268m
(including savings for bunding). This is not sufficient to off-set the
additional costs of sourcing the material
was also addressed by PNO in its submission to the ACCC in response to the Draft
Determination:
...the timeframe for construction of the channel is
inextricably linked to the construction of the landside facilities. The channel
and associated assets used to provide the declared service will not be
operational and therefore able to generate revenue without
the terminals and the
terminals cannot be constructed prior to completion of the channel dredging
without additional costs for obtaining
suitable construction materials. Further,
the dredged spoil cannot be dumped alongside the channel if the terminals are
already under
construction (or already constructed).
contended that Glencore’s construction program created a timing and cost
issue in that the dredged spoil will need to be
disposed of other than to be
used in constructing the landslide facilities. PNO also stated that it had
reviewed regulatory decisions
cited by Glencore and submitted that it did not
consider them to be relevant or apt to the circumstances in the case.
argued that Glencore’s construction program was not practically feasible
because it failed to take into account spoil disposal
requirements in accordance
with applicable environmental approvals and ignored the fact that landside
facilities must be completed
in order for the Port and the Service to be
operationally functional at the end of the construction period.
set out in the Final Determination at pages 101-102, in its response to the
Draft Determination, PNO submitted that the ACCC should
Glencore’s revised whole-of-port construction program of 9.6 years
for the following key reasons:
[t]he revised proposal by Arup does not
conform with DORC methodology ... as it does not result in the least cost
overall for the
construction of the entire Port and does not replicate the
current level of service
their program will result in artificially and inefficiently shifting
costs from the channel to the landside works and ‘increasing
overall cost of the port development’
[Certain] construction program matters raised by Arup ... contain
material flaws
[Regarding Arup’s] potential saving of 3 months on AECOM’s overall
construction program ... Arup have adopted “techniques
and durations ...
without proper consideration of DORC principles which include that the project
must not be unduly rushed (nor unduly
delayed) and the development cost should
be the most efficient and lower cost overall”
reclamation program has a critical timing flaw [which] ... does not align with
the yield of its dredging strategy and
shows the reclamation and all surcharging
being in place mid-way through year six, but the dredging ... not being
complet[ed] until
the last quarter of year 8 ... Dredging of material needs to
occur prior to the material being required for surcharging reclamation”
... AECOM estimate the construction program ... would need to be extended by 2.5
AECOM submit
that in contrast, its ‘mass balance assessment of the proposed dredging
strategy ... allows for optimal and efficient
use of the material as it becomes
available from the dredging ... so, at any point during the surcharge task ... a
shortfall of material
that would require sour[c]ing alternative fill’ is
avoided ‘and complies with DORC principles’
submit there is a saving to the volume of surcharge material [having] referenced
the techniques and processes in the ... NCIG
CET development ... However in
relying on [this] ... as an indicator for more efficient techniques. Arup have
not considered “that
these techniques are significantly more costly than
those used in AECOM’s DORC and the project specific drivers are
non-existent
in the context of our DORC assessment” ... further, Arup have
incorrectly assumed certain land is vacant
Specifically,
‘NCIG was constructed in a period of high coal demand and prices where
there was a ... commercial imperative for
early completion. The DORC methodology
implicitly assumes long run conditions representative of the middle of the
economic cycle’
work took place in an area where previous land reclamation and stabilisation
work had occurred ... [which was] not in
a pre-European settlement state ...
[t]hus the construction periods are not directly comparable’
‘[r]eclamation and stabilisation of Mayfield 2, 3 and Dockyard areas has
not been included’ by Glencore but PNO submit
that they are not
decommissioned assets, rather ‘the site has been remediated and a large
area ... is currently used for cargo
‘even if the site was vacant’, because the ‘Mayfield site is
not in its pre-European settlement state ...
[a] proper DORC valuation would
seek to replicate that service potential by including works to bring the area to
its current load
baring level’
[Arup’s proposed] .. . alternative surcharging techniques .. . [do] not
properly evaluate the impact of construction costs
... Without such assessment,
Arup are unable to demonstrate that such techniques are more efficient or more
appropriately conform
to DORC principles.
[T]here are ... critical engineering flaws in Arup’s proposed construction
program ... [such that] the program does not represent
a ... program that is
capable of producing an asset able to deliver the Service in the time proposed
‘Arup’ s... total period of 29 weeks to complete the tender process,
award the contract and for the contractor to mobilise
... is an .. . inadequate
duration for these activities’ and ‘correcting this would extend
Arup’s program by at
least 12 week’
‘AECOM’s assessment is based on modern methods that provide the
development at the least cost overall, not necessarily
in the least time. The
techniques proposed (but not evaluated or demonstrated to be more
efficient)’ by Arup ‘may lead
to an accelerated program but come at
a significantly greater cost, or otherwise shift costs to other users (for
example through
increased terminal development costs) and ... would not be the
most efficient overall.’
proposed that shipment of coal is to occur before navaids are operational and
also before the dredging of the Entrance Channel
is complete. This is a critical
operational issue as vessels will be unable to access or navigate the channel
prior to these components
being completed.
‘Arup’s program does not adequately demonstrate the complex
interface relationship between reclamation, wharf construction,
construction and berth box dredging’.
submitted that the ACCC should accept that the 12 year construction program
complies with DORC principles and represents a more
cost-efficient duration to
construct the assets required to provide the Service.
put forth two alternative construction programs – one on a stand-alone
basis (which Glencore stated was without delays
associated with the construction
of assets not required for the provision of the Service), and a whole-of-port
construction program.
sought a further reduction to the DORC on the basis that it challenges the
ACCC’s finding that the cost of interest
during construction
’) should be assessed on a construction period of 12
years. Glencore submitted that it would be possible to devise a shorter
construction program to construct only those assets required for delivery of the
Service. It contended that these assets could be
constructed in 8.25 years
which would reduce the IDC by approximately $322 million, which in turn would
reduce the NSC by approximately
Consideration
Tribunal does not agree with Glencore’s approach. The DORC valuation is
intended to reflect the hypothetical optimised
replacement costs of the Port.
This valuation is calculated using the most efficient construction program. The
most efficient construction
program is a single, integrated project. In theory,
it may be possible to re-arrange the construction schedule to open the Port
business to some customers while it is still under construction. But this would
not represent the most efficient method of construction,
and would inevitably
lead to the incurring of additional construction costs.
Tribunal observes that Glencore has not sought to model the additional costs of
a staged opening. For example, Glencore has not
modelled the increase in
construction costs for an earlier than scheduled construction of landside
facilities or even the practical
possibility of constructing such facilities.
The 12 year whole-of-port construction period is optimised around the time
for the settling of soil under the terminals. Hence, there is strong
possibility that even if the channel were completed after 8.25
years there would
no terminals for the channel to serve. Glencore has also not sought to model
the losses which would be incurred
by the Port by operating on a partial basis
with uncompleted terminals, which would need to be capitalised and added to the
Instead, Glencore’s construction estimate assumes (unrealistically)
that all other construction costs would be held constant.
Glencore’s calculations assume that if the Port was able to start
operating while still under construction, all IDC would
cease to be charged.
But this would only be true in respect of those parts of the Port which have
been completed. Glencore also
assumes in its calculation of IDC that there is
no further expenditure on assets necessary to provide the Service after the 8.25
year period. However, the fact is that the remaining port infrastructure,
including the completion of land reclamation, and the
construction of remaining
wharves, revetments and land based infrastructure, including for other products,
would then be completed
during the Port’s operational phase. At least
some of these works, such as revetments, would be necessary to provide the full
Service. Further construction costs and interest would continue to be incurred
in respect of those parts of the Service yet to be
completed, while
Glencore’s revised DORC fails to reflect this fact.
reaching its Final Determination, the ACCC assessed the cost of IDC in
accordance with a construction period of 12 years, as proposed
by PNO. This was
PNO’s estimate of the time required to construct the entire Port.
Glencore challenged this finding.
is necessary to consider Glencore’s position in more detail.
was submitted by Glencore that the construction period should reflect the time
required for efficient construction of only those
assets required for delivery
of the Service. Contrary to PNO’s “whole-of-port” argument
(which was accepted by
the ACCC), the time required to construct assets
extrinsic to the Service (such as rail facilities, roads, and surcharging (ie
improvement)
of reclaimed land) ought not to be included for the purposes of the
DORC valuation. Glencore’s evidence indicated a construction
time of 8.25
years on this basis.
May 2019 report stated (at page 46):
Recognising that, in practice, the port has been
developed over a long period of time, largely through expansion of an
operating-and
therefore income generating-facility, Synergies considers that the
construction period and cost profile should be assessed based
on a pragmatic
assessment of the time that would be required for the efficient construction of
only those assets required to provide
the declared service. Our view is
supported by regulatory precedent, as outlined below.
refers then to the position of PNO. PNO sought to justify its longer
construction period on the basis that no revenue could
be generated from the
underlying assets of the Service unless and until reclaimed land was surcharged
and all of the other assets
were constructed; and that, therefore, interest
should be capitalised until these other works (and, accordingly, the whole Port)
are completed. This, it is said, is because efficient construction ought to be
undertaken in a single campaign and the interrelationship
of assets means that
generation of revenue from declared Service-related assets (such as the channel)
is dependent upon the completion
of extrinsic of assets (such as reclaimed
land). Glencore accepted that there are significant interrelationships between
the construction
of various assets required for the Port. However, Glencore
says that it does not follow that this means the Port must be constructed
entirety before substantial revenue can be generated from the assets that
provide the Service. Glencore pointed out what
PNO has publicly asserted to the
in its application for revocation of the declaration of the Service,
where PNO discusses the development of a container terminal at
pointed out that export of coal is responsible for over 90% of the Port’s
revenue. Accordingly, it was submitted that
the generation of revenue can be
substantially commenced at the time that the coal terminals and related
infrastructure are developed.
This would include the reclamation and
surcharging of the land required for those assets but would exclude certain
assets contended
for by PNO.
on behalf of Glencore, reported on how the sequencing of construction of the
whole-of-port could be structured to allow completion
of coal terminal
infrastructure as a priority. Arup concluded that it would still require 8.25
years to construct the Service assets
on a stand-alone basis, in which time
construction of coal wharf and land-based infrastructure at Carrington and
Kooragang Island
could be sufficiently completed to commence revenue generating
operations (albeit not necessarily at the full extent of current capacity).
remaining port infrastructure could then be completed whilst the Port is in
was then submitted that capitalising interest only to this point is consistent
with standard regulatory practice that provides
for IDC to be capitalised until
assets are commissioned. Allowance for increasing volumes after this time may
be addressed in pricing.
Tribunal also notes that in response to the ACCC indicating in its Draft
Determination its preference for the whole-of-port approach
taken by PNO,
Glencore proffered an alternative whole-of-port construction program that sees
completion in 9.6 years.
the Tribunal accepts Glencore’s principal position of an 8.25 year
construction period, the IDC determined by the ACCC ought
to be reduced by
around $322 million, which will, in turn, reduce the NSC by around 13%. If
the Tribunal accepted Glencore’s
alternative construction period of 9.6
years, it will reduce the IDC by around $170 million, resulting in a reduction
by about 7%.
then said that PNO’s claim that the whole-of-port construction period of
9.6 years was unrealistic, and the ACCC’s
acceptance of PNO’s
claim, ignored the evidence provided by Glencore that there was no requirement
for the “two stage”
surcharging program. In the absence of a
“two stage” surcharging program, AECOM’s own analysis shows
whole-of-port construction can be completed within nine years.
Glencore submitted that as identified by Arup:
substantially over-estimated the volume of required surcharge material, with the
result that AECOM concluded that there
was insufficient dredged material to
undertake all required surcharging as a single stage. AECOM also concluded that
that either a two stage process was required (where surcharge
material was moved to a second site once surcharging of the first site
complete) or additional material needed to be imported.
over-estimation was evident from the actual expected volume of surcharge
material for the NCIG site (ie 4 million m
as compared to
AECOM’s estimated 10.6 million m
), and from the inclusion of
surcharge material for vacant land (AECOM required 1.8 million m
surcharge material for vacant land at Mayfield).
Correcting for
this over-estimation of surcharge material requirements alone would allow
surcharging to be completed in a single stage
without the need to import
surcharge material, enabling AECOM’s “accelerated” 9 year
construction period to be
achieved without any material increase in cost.
Further, while
Glencore’s “stand-alone” construction program did not seek to
develop an integrated whole-of-port
construction program aligning dredging with
land reclamation for wharf development, its 9.6 year whole-of-port construction
then submitted that it followed that there is no reasonable basis for PNO to now
claim that a 9.6 year construction period
is unrealistic.
went on to explain its position further as follows. Within this 9.6 year
whole-of-port construction period, it would be
expected that an efficient
infrastructure developer would prioritise the construction of the highest
revenue generating assets –
this means prioritising the development of the
coal terminal infrastructure. As Arup explained, this approach does not mean
of the Port construction in such a way as to add to the total cost and
duration of construction, rather it means that the sequencing
of construction
activities would be prioritised to enable the coal sites to become operational
in the most efficient way. It does
not require material changes to the assumed
construction methodology for components of the Port, and therefore would not add
total cost and results in the most efficient construction of the Port,
once account is taken of the opportunity cost of invested
Glencore submitted that PNO has incorrectly claimed that the approach of
capitalising interest costs, until revenue generation
commences, does not give
regard to the remaining works that will require completion. For construction
works occurring beyond this
period, there is no need to capitalise interest, as
the Service assets will be generating revenue and are therefore able to cover
their financing costs. This was addressed in Synergies’ 17 August 2018
report. As that report also points out, accepting
assets into a RAB at their
commissioning date, notwithstanding that there may be some further post
commissioning expenditure, is
also standard regulatory practice for
infrastructure serving the mining sector.
relation to a whole-of-port construction period, the ACCC noted that
Arup’s arguments that all sites could be surcharged
within 4 years were
instructive in terms of where time efficiencies could be achieved. However, the
ACCC claimed that Arup did not
elaborate on the implications of surcharging for
overall construction costs and that Glencore did not evaluate or demonstrate
Arup’s proposed approach would result in the lowest overall cost.
submitted that the following information allows the Tribunal to make this
assessment:
(1) In AECOM’ s original analysis of the 4 year
versus 7 year construction period, the only additional cost that AECOM
to the 4 year program was the cost of imported fill for surcharging
(estimated to be $360 million) and this was compared to the additional
costs associated with a 7 year reclamation program compared to a 4 year program
(estimated additional IDC in DORC value
of $211.4 million), leading to
AECOM estimating a higher cost of the 4 year program of $148.6 million.
(2) However, Arup’s report shows that AECOM had substantially
overestimated the amount of fill required for reclamation and
surcharging, and
showed that the 4 year reclamation program could occur without needing to import
fill (and without needing to incur
the additional $360 million cost).
(3) It followed that the 4 year reclamation program would then be cheaper than
the 7 year program, as it would allow the avoidance
of the additional
$211.4 million interest costs resulting from the 7 year program.
(4) The ACCC’s submission that there was no total construction cost for
Glencore’s whole-of-port construction program
is incorrect. Arup’s
estimated replacement cost is fully aligned with its proposed 9.6 year
whole-of-port construction program.
this stage, it is convenient to refer to the submissions of the ACCC.
the ACCC’s view, separate construction campaigns as submitted by PNO would
be necessary to accommodate the staged commissioning
of assets. The ACCC
considered that, on balance, PNO’s construction program therefore better
reflected the considerations
of an efficient entrant under the DORC framework.
In particular, the ACCC considers that an efficient entrant would not undertake
a staged commissioning of assets because the higher overall costs incurred would
more than offset any cash flows earned from an earlier
revenue stream.
ACCC considered PNO’s proposed 12 year construction program as
appropriate. The ACCC considered that this construction
program provides for an
IDC that contributes to ensuring PNO is able to earn a return on investment
commensurate with the regulatory
and commercial risks involved (ss 44X(l)(h) and
44ZZCA(a)(ii)) which is in the legitimate business interests of PNO (s
44X(l)(a)).
This also ensures that prices reflect efficient costs, which is in
the interests of those who have rights to use the Service (s
44X(l)(c)).
IDC estimate adopted by the ACCC – which the ACCC has determined using a
12 year construction period and calculated as at
the valuation date of 1
January 2018 – was $463.3 million. IDC together with the total
construction cost estimate of $1616.1
million form the commissioning costs
estimate of $2,169.5 million (at 1 January 2018).
ACCC considered, and concluded in making the Final Determination, that the
assumed construction program should allow for the construction
of all assets
required to provide the Service while minimising PNO’s overall
construction costs. An efficient entrant, as
assumed under the DORC framework,
would need to consider a construction program that allowed for the construction
of all assets necessary
to provide the Service and would seek to minimise its
total costs. This would include weighing the potentially higher construction
costs that would be incurred in the earlier commissioning of assets against the
receipt of earlier cash flows. Contrary to Glencore’s
contention,
however, an efficient entrant would adopt a construction program that provides
for the generation of revenue as early
as possible only to the extent that this
minimises overall construction costs (net of cash flows).
respect of Glencore’s 8.25 year stand-alone construction program, the ACCC
considered, and concluded in making the Final
Determination, that:
(1) the construction period should include all assets
that are necessary to provide the Service to the point that revenue can be
from the Service, which would necessarily include the time taken to
construct assets that are neither owned nor leased by PNO. For
example, whereas
Arup’s stand-alone construction program excludes Macquarie Pier, the time
taken to construct Macquarie Pier
should be included in the construction program
because it is necessary for the construction of the southern breakwater;
(2) Arup’s analysis does not consider the potentially higher overall
construction costs that are likely to result from a staged
commissioning of
assets notwithstanding the importance of this given the strong complementarities
in the construction sequence;
(3) while AECOM’s DORC valuation for PNO did not explicitly consider the
cost impact of a staged commissioning, AECOM did estimate
the costs of breaking
the construction sequence in the form of separate construction campaigns;
(4) this demonstrated that separate campaigns for the channel dredging and
landside facilities enable a shorter construction period
but result in
considerably greater total construction costs;
(5) separate construction campaigns would be necessary to accommodate the staged
commissioning of assets proposed by Glencore; and
(6) the staged commissioning of assets proposed by Glencore would involve higher
overall costs that more than offset any cash flows
earned from an earlier
revenue stream and, accordingly, would not be undertaken by an efficient
respect of Glencore’s whole-of-port construction program of 9.6 years, the
ACCC considered that Glencore had not fully considered
the total cost of that
program, and the ACCC could not be satisfied it would minimise total costs as an
efficient entrant would under
the DORC framework. More specifically, the ACCC
considered that:
(1) Glencore’s construction period is shorter than
that of PNO primarily because of differing views on the appropriate land
surcharging program as assessed by Arup and AECOM respectively;
(2) Arup’s arguments to the effect that all sites could be surcharged
within 4 years with no need to import fill material are
instructive in relation
to the issue of where time efficiencies and therefore financing cost
efficiencies could be gained;
(3) however, while surcharging is the cheapest and most direct method of ground
improvement, Arup did not elaborate on the implications
of surcharging for
overall construction costs and Glencore did not evaluate or demonstrate that
Arup’s proposed approach would
result in the lowest overall cost.
Glencore correctly observed that AECOM (on behalf of PNO) did not consider the
cost impact of a staged commissioning of assets,
it does not follow that the
imposition on Glencore of an evidential onus and a burden to establish its case
to a standard that PNO
does not face should lead to a rejection of
Glencore’s whole-of-port construction program of 9.6 years. The Tribunal
that PNO’s construction program better reflects the
considerations of an efficient entrant under the DORC framework than
because there was insufficient evidence of the total
construction cost of Glencore’s program for use in the DORC valuation.
circumstances where Arup and Glencore failed to consider the implications of
surcharging for total construction costs, there
was no total construction cost
for Glencore’s whole-of-port construction program that could be applied
for the purposes of
determining a DORC valuation.
note that if a shorter period of construction were to be adopted, an allowance
for capital expenditure and IDC for assets still
to be constructed would be
Tribunal considers that the submissions of the ACCC and PNO are in accordance
with the practical and efficient realities of a
construction program that is
applicable in the determination of a DORC valuation.
NON-COAL ASSETS
issue addresses Glencore’s contention that the arbitrated charges applied
to coal carrying vessels should not exceed the
stand-alone costs of their
provision. The proposition was initially raised by Glencore in its submissions
to the ACCC’s arbitration.
submissions of both parties to the ACCC in the original arbitration of this
issue, summarised in
Section 6.5
of the Final Determination, addressed the
in-principle reasons a stand-alone pricing test should be applied; the nature of
associated with the provision of navigation and berthing services and
the notional division of those assets between services to coal
and non-coal
submissions of the parties to the Tribunal on this issue covered the same
arguments or materials that had previously been part
of the original arbitration
and included no new grounds. The ACCC’s submissions similarly reflected,
without changes, its
consideration of and responses to submissions in its Draft
Determination and Final Determination.
What the ACCC decided
arbitrated charge applied to coal carrying vessels was an output of a
spreadsheet pricing model based on the PTRM. This was jointly
derived by the
parties and their advisors.
PTRM distributes an estimate of the total cost of the Service across two
categories of Wharfage Charges and four categories of
NSC, both of which charge
adopted the PTRM and varied inputs
such as asset values to reflect its
arbitration, but it did not alter the embedded process for setting the charges
that distributed
the final MAR
ACCC rejected the need for the stand-alone test on the two grounds argued by PNO
in its initial submissions in the arbitration:
the Service does
not distinguish between coal and non-coal users; and
Glencore seeks to exclude from the MAR provide value for both coal and non-coal
users, and therefore should be included
in the MAR.
consequently determined the NSC for coal vessels using the method set out in the
PTRM for distributing the MAR arising from the
inputs decided in other parts of
its Final Reasons.
Submissions to the Tribunal
raised the issue of the treatment of non-coal assets in the context of the
method used in the PTRM to distribute the calculated
MAR between users of the
Service. It’s acceptance of the model was contingent on application of a
stand-alone revenue test.
submitted that coal users should not pay more than the stand-alone cost of
providing the Service to them, as this test is
consistent with the
pricing principles (s 44ZZCA) and with earlier ACCC regulatory decisions in
relation to the Hunter Valley coal network.
position was originally set out in detail in
Section 8.2
of Synergies’ 28
May 2018 report to the ACCC, citing the decision of the Essential Services
Commission of South Australia in
the context of the South Australian rail access
regime and the QCA’s consideration of this issue in the context of
Rail’s Rail Access Undertaking. The consistency of the
stand-alone test with the pricing principles relies on the logic summarised
the ACCC in their submission to the Tribunal:
Pricing between stand-alone and incremental cost is
considered to be efficient as it avoids cross-subsidies. Pricing above
stand-alone
cost is economically inefficient, and gives rise to the threat of an
efficient entrant displacing the Port for the
argument was presented in more detail by the ACCC in its Draft Determination,
although it did not appear in, and was not relied
upon, in the Final
Determination.
submitted that the stand-alone test is consistent with the economically
efficient operation of the facilities required for
the Service as prescribed by
s 44X(1)(g). The pricing principles in s 44ZZCA (required to be considered by
s 44X(1)(h)) specify
that access price structures should allow multi-part
pricing and price discrimination where it aids efficiency.
17 August 2018 response to the Draft Determination argued that a requirement
that coal users (including Glencore)
pay charges for their particular use of the
Service that exceed the stand-alone cost of providing the Service to those users
therefore effectively cross-subsidise the use of non-coal assets by other
parties), is inherently inefficient. That inefficiency
arises because of the
potential for entry by an alternative supplier of the services being charged
above stand-alone cost, which
would inefficiently raise the total costs of
supply. Synergies also referred to what it described as “well established
precedent” in concluding that a price above stand-alone cost
implies inefficient cross-subsidy of other services.
outlined by Synergies, the application of the stand-alone test to services to
coal vessels would limit the revenue from coal vessel
Wharfage Charge and NSC to
the MAR assessed for the whole of the Service, minus only the capital costs
associated with groups of
assets identified by Arup as not required for channel
and berthage services to coal vessels (termed the ‘non-coal
In addition, Synergies claimed, without explanation, that it
... reasonable to assume that all of PNO’s
operating costs will continue to be incurred in providing the declared service
coal vessels on a stand-alone basis.
groups of excluded assets and their relevant valuations were set out in Table 2
of Synergies’ response, reproduced below:
submissions to the Tribunal following hearings Glencore subsequently described
the non-coal assets to be excluded as:
11.8% of dredging costs, $60.0m of revetments and
seawalls and $54.0m of wharves and jetties in 2014$
note that no value was attributed to wharves and jetties assets in the Final
Determination DORC calculations in the PTRM, although
the category
‘revetments under wharves’ was valued at $54.0 million (in 2014
dollars). The Tribunal has proceeded on
the basis these are the last item in
the list of assets meant to be excluded (with nothing in this decision relying
on the assumption).
also specified that the whole of user contributions to channel dredging should
be applied only to coal-related assets. The
final DORC calculations deducted a
value for user contributions that was determined by applying a percentage of the
original replacement
cost to each of the channel assets and riverwalls and
revetments asset categories.
Tribunal has interpreted the effect of Glencore’s approach to mean that
the original dollar value of user contributions
(the user contribution
percentage in the final PTRM, times the whole of the replacement cost of each
asset class) would be deducted
from the smaller, coal-only asset base (with,
again, nothing in this decision relying on the assumption).
demand forecasts and the Wharfage Charge are agreed by the parties, the
application of the stand-alone test sets a specific limit
on the coal vessel
NSC. Glencore submitted that the effect of its adjustments, taking into account
deductions for both user-contributed
assets and non-coal assets, is to limit
PNO’s initial NSC for coal vessels to $0.4938 per gross revenue tonne
’) in 2018. This is $0.1137 per GRT below the
ACCC’s determination of $0.6075 per GRT. Glencore concluded that because
the NSC determined by the ACCC was more than Glencore’s calculated
stand-alone NSC, the Final Determination was inefficient
and inconsistent with
the pricing principles in
on media reports of a proposal by PNO to invest $1.8 billion in a container
terminal at the Port, Glencore raised one new argument
in submissions to the
Tribunal that was not previously put to the ACCC. It submitted that the
whole-of-port approach in the Final
Determination would result in Glencore being
forced to contribute to this capital expenditure through its NSC,
notwithstanding the
fact that the facility would not be used by coal vessels.
Glencore did not argue that this was necessarily inefficient, only that
illustrated the “unfairness” of the Final Determination.
submissions to the Tribunal reflected the case previously made to the ACCC in
arbitration, arguing that stand-alone pricing is
not appropriate for several
related reasons.
PNO submitted that the Port is a single integrated facility, offering one
service. Consequently, unlike other instances where
stand-alone pricing has
sometimes been used to test the pricing of infrastructure, it is not possible to
identify physically discrete
and separate parts of the infrastructure related to
the Service.
PNO argued the Service does not distinguish between coal and non-coal users.
This is the first of the two points accepted
by the ACCC as the basis of its
determination. PNO argued the Service includes the use of shipping channels at
the Port for both
coal and non-coal user access, reflecting the integrated
nature of the facility. Prices should therefore be set at a level which
deter hypothetical entry by a competitor supplying the whole of the declared
service (that is, services to both coal and non-coal
PNO argued the evidence shows that the assets identified by Glencore, as not
being used regularly by coal vessels, were in
fact used to provide value to both
coal and non-coal users. This is the second of the two points accepted by the
ACCC as the basis
of its Final Determination. PNO’s evidence on the use
of Port assets was summarised in the Final Determination.
submitted that there were more berths capable of accommodating coal vessels than
claimed by Glencore. It also identified examples
where coal vessels have in
fact used the parts of the main channel or have been moved to berths within the
Basin, which Glencore
seeks to exclude. PNO provided evidence of the
utilisation of notionally “non-coal” berths by coal vessels for
purposes other than coal loading, such as mooring during repairs and
sheltering from adverse sea conditions.
also argued that the Basin was used to provide a number of services associated
with operation of the Port (such as tug and maintenance
dredging and
navigational aids) that are essential to the provision of the Service to coal
vessels. PNO submitted that these examples,
despite Glencore’s dismissal
of some of them as “isolated”, mean the Port cannot be divided
between coal and non-coal
further argued that the issue of the proposed container terminal at the Port
raised by Glencore was a “red herring”.
As a landside facility at
the Port, the project would be excluded from the regulated asset base used to
deliver the declared service,
just as the coal terminals at the Port are also
excluded from the asset base.
to Glencore’s claim that the project would disadvantage it, PNO argued
that the container terminal would allow the
costs of the Port to be shared
across more users and would allow longer vessels to use the channel, both of
which would potentially
provide benefits to Glencore.
disagreeing with Glencore’s submissions, PNO argued that stand-alone
pricing is not consistent with the relevant statutory
criteria in s 44X(1),
including the pricing principles in s 44ZZCA. Pursuant to s 44X(1)(d), the
ACCC (and the Tribunal) must take
into account the direct costs of providing
access to the Service, which PNO submitted, in this case is a service provided
coal and non-coal users. Stand-alone pricing was not consistent with
s 44X(1)(g) which requires consideration of the “economically
efficient operation of the facility”, because the facility here is the
Port as a whole, not a stand-alone subset of users.
ACCC’s submissions reaffirmed the approach taken in its Draft
Determination and Final Determination. It accepted the two
points made by PNO,
that there are no separate coal and non-coal services and that all
service-related costs are required to serve
all users. Those points together
effectively mean that the stand-alone test has no effect.
submissions to the Tribunal, the ACCC argued Glencore was not correct to say
that it had rejected Glencore’s proposed application
of a stand-alone
test. Rather, as outlined in its Final Determination, the ACCC concluded that
there is no defined and estimated
service increment of “coal
access”, and the smallest defined and estimated service increment included
both coal and non-coal
access to the Service. On the facts before it, the ACCC
therefore concluded that assets comprising the Basin and channels provided
to coal users and, on that basis, the entirety of the assets used to provide the
Service were appropriately included in the
asset base. Consequently, the
stand-alone cost of providing access to coal vessels was not less than, but
corresponded to, the stand-alone
cost of providing the Service.
ACCC submitted that it found that the non-coal assets, that Glencore sought to
exclude, provide value for both coal and non-coal
users and therefore should be
included in the asset base for the purposes of calculating MAR. It also
submitted that this conclusion
was appropriate having regard to the statutory
ACCC submitted that, contrary to Glencore’s claims, the frequency with
which ‘non-coal berths’ have historically
been used to accommodate
coal vessels was not to the point. It argued access to the Service encompasses
a right, or an option, to
use those ‘non-coal berths’ for
non-loading purposes. The ACCC considered this option to have economic value to
users, whether or not they in fact ultimately use those non-coal berths,
and it was therefore appropriate for the costs of those
non-coal berths to be
included in the MAR used in the stand-alone test.
ACCC also agreed with PNO’s arguments, in response to Glencore’s
characterisation of the Final Determination as ‘unfair’,
basis of its claims about the impact of PNO’s proposed $1.8 billion
expenditure for a container terminal at the Port.
In addition, it observed
that, because Glencore’s example relied on a newspaper article which
post-dates the Final Determination,
and was not information the ACCC took into
account in connection with the making that Determination, it does not fall
within s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c).
the ACCC was not aware of a reference to the $1.8 billion figure within the
materials the ACCC did take into account, it acknowledges
that PNO’s long
term plan for a staged container terminal development is referred to in general
terms in those materials.
ACCC submissions disagreed with PNO’s submissions that stand-alone pricing
is inconsistent with the relevant statutory criteria
in s 44X(1). It stated
that pricing between stand-alone and incremental cost is considered to be
efficient, as it avoids cross-subsidies.
Pricing above stand-alone cost is
economically inefficient, and gives rise to the threat of an efficient entrant
displacing the
Port for the Service. However, as the ACCC found that both coal
and non-coal assets should be included in the asset base, the issue
stand-alone pricing is consistent with the statutory criteria did not
The Tribunal’s analysis
ground of review concerns how the MAR is recovered from different classes of
users of the Service. It is useful to review the
approach agreed by the
MAR is calculated using a BBM and relates to the entirety of the Service. The
MAR is based on, among other things, the RAB, which
consists of all the assets
required to provide the declared service, regardless of user. The PTRM, agreed
to by the parties, provides
for the MAR to be recovered from all Port users
through two charges – the NSC and the Wharfage Charge – applying to
categories of users: coal vessels, non-coal vessels other than cruise
ships, and cruise ships. This is despite the fact that the
whole of the
Wharfage Charge does not relate only to the declared Service (see section above
on Scope of the Determination) and that
the Determination applies only to coal
parties have agreed that an initial portion ($0.0746 per Revenue Tonne) of the
Wharfage Charge paid by vessels using the Port
constitutes an efficient charge
for the services associated with berths and berthing boxes.
charges for non-coal vessels and cruise ships are an output of the model in
exactly the same way that the charges for coal vessels
are an output. But they
do not appear in the Final Determination because the arbitration relates only to
Glencore’s application
for the determination of charges.
is required by the Final Determination to levy the charges that were the output
of the model for 2018, with annual reviews in
light of forecast demand for
services. PNO is not limited by the Final Determination as to what charges it
levies on non-coal vessels
or coal vessels other than those covered by the scope
of the Final Determination.
this way, the MAR is a notional figure. It is not actually the maximum revenue
that PNO can earn, but is a regulatory parameter
estimated as part of the
derivation of charges for coal vessels. It notionally applies to all users
because of the way that the
model has been constructed, such as the fact that
the RAB is estimated by reference to all the facilities that are required to
the declared Service to all users. As mentioned, the construction of
the model in this way was agreed to by the parties.
means by which the MAR is shared between categories of users – and the
resulting charges calculated – is set in the
model. The model adopted the
existing relativities between charges and simply applies them without change
into the future. Thus:
The Wharfage
Charge is set at its agreed current level (prior to the taking effect of the
arbitration) and maintained in real terms.
Similarly, the
levels of expected demand for Port access were provided by the parties’
expert advisors and were also agreed.
These were set out in Table 30 of the
Final Determination and comprise the number and average size of vessels in each
of four categories,
all assumed constant each year for the five years in the
The NSC for the
categories of users are initially set at their current levels and then varied by
the same proportion so as to achieve
the recovery – along with the
Wharfage Charge – of the MAR. In the Final Determination this meant that
all the NSC were
decreased by 19.57% from their pre-existing levels.
The relativities
between the NSCs for different categories of vessels consequently remained
constant at their pre-existing levels,
which happened to be that for non-coal
vessels the charge for the first 50,000 GRT is 64.4% of the coal vessel rate,
and the charge
for any GRT above 50,000 is 145.4% of the coal vessel rate; and
the charge for cruise vessels is 75% of the first 50,000 GRT coal
charging structure was agreed between the parties, but with the important caveat
that Glencore sought a checking mechanism: the
stand-alone test. It argued that
if the stand-alone charge for coal vessels was less than the charge resulting
from unmodified use
of the model, then that lower rate should apply to it. We
shall explain this in more detail shortly.
is accepted by all that, should the Tribunal vary the MAR associated with the
Final Determination in light of other grounds of
review, the same charging
structure, ie the same relativities between charges, should apply, subject again
to the caveat that Glencore
seeks to apply a stand-alone test.
stand-alone test sought by Glencore involves modifying the inputs to the model.
So-called non-coal assets are removed from the
asset base, reducing the MAR
accordingly, and that lower MAR is recovered from coal vessels alone. When that
modification is made
in the manner proposed by Glencore, the model output for
the NSC for coal vessels is less than the rate without the modification.
argues that, accordingly, the stand-alone test failed and it should pay the
reduced charge. Effectively, Glencore argues
that it should pay a lower share
of the MAR than set out in the Final Determination. It says that PNO could
forego the revenue involved
or recover it from non-coal vessels.
stand-alone test is well entrenched in economic theory. The ACCC addressed the
test in its Draft Determination, noting:
...while there is no stand-alone cost test in the
pricing principles, the efficiency implications of levying charges above the
stand-alone
cost of a service are unambiguous. Charging above the stand-alone
cost results in economic inefficiency and is counter to the objects
, which is to ‘promote the economically efficient operation of, use of
and investment in the infrastructure by which services
are provided’
(section 44X(1)(aa)). In particular, if charges for coal access are above the
stand-alone cost of the declared
service, and charges for non-coal access are
below the incremental cost, coal customers are a source of a cross-subsidy and
customers are a recipient of a cross-subsidy, which results in
allocative and productive inefficiency.
the Final Determination, the ACCC endorsed (as a matter of principle) use of the
stand-alone test. However, it agreed with PNO
that the smallest defined and
estimated service increment includes both coal and non-coal vessels. The
stand-alone cost of supplying
access to coal vessels is therefore not less than,
but corresponds to, the cost of providing the declared service to all vessels.
It could be said that applying the test therefore has no effect.
first sketch the thinking behind the test.
relevance of the stand-alone test for the efficiency of prices arises from two
propositions.
first proposition relates to the efficiency of production. If prices for a
group of services yield revenue in excess of stand-alone
cost, there is
potential for an entrant to produce only those services at lower prices,
inefficiently causing the total costs of
production of all services to rise.
This follows because the original firm is assumed to have a natural monopoly
cost structure
that ensures joint production of multiple services always has the
lowest cost, an assumption that is also usually part of the rationale
regulatory oversight.
second proposition hinges on two statements that are logically identical in
certain conditions:
no group of
services pays more than its stand-alone cost; and
each group of
services pays at least its incremental cost.
Incremental
cost is the extra cost associated with producing the whole of a group of
services, over the cost of producing the remainder
of the firm’s total
outputs. This is a concept distinct from the marginal costs of the last units
of production that normally
define efficient prices for a group of
link between the statements means that if prices for a group of services does
yield revenue in excess of stand-alone cost, there
must be at least one other
group that pays less than incremental cost. Pricing a group of services to
yield revenue below their
incremental cost (“cross-subsidising”
those services) results in allocative and productive inefficiency.
on these propositions, pricing above stand-alone cost is not only
“unfair”, but inefficient and therefore inconsistent
pricing principles in
Tribunal agrees broadly with the ACCC and Glencore that efficiency
considerations, the application of which is embedded in
, suggest that
the analysis said to justify a stand-alone test is relevant. However, efficient
prices for natural monopoly cost firms
(recalling that these need to include an
element above marginal costs to recover common costs) will, in general,
encompass elements
of both cost and demand conditions, whilst the stand-alone
test focuses solely on costs. Prices that pass a stand-alone test are
not necessarily efficient.
the link between failure of the stand-alone test and inefficient pricing, which
is usually cited as the basis for its use,
relies on assumptions about demand
and cost conditions that will rarely apply in practice.
in checking whether a pricing structure for multiple products or services is
inefficient, it would be necessary to perform
the test on each product and set
of products, and to examine the incremental costs of provision in a similar
economic literature notes that, in practice, this is likely to be exceptionally
difficult. For example, in a multi-product production
process, the whole
process may need to be re-engineered to produce a single product, if that could
be done at all. Sometimes, a
production process unavoidably produces
by-products.
these reasons, the Tribunal is unable to have confidence that a stand-alone
test, as applied by Glencore, could definitively discriminate
between efficient
and inefficient prices. However, the results of the test, as submitted by
Glencore, are stark: they purport to
show that the arbitrated prices are far
higher than could possibly be efficient. In the light of those model results,
the Tribunal
has considered the test further, as follows.
noted above, the ACCC disagreed with PNO that the stand-alone test should not be
applied, but concluded it was of no effect, because
the stand-alone costs of
supplying the declared service to coal vessels are no less than the stand-alone
costs of supplying access
to all-comers. It reached that conclusion on the
basis that:
the Service does
not distinguish between coal and non-coal users; and
Glencore seeks to exclude from the MAR provide value for both coal and non-coal
users, and therefore should be included
in the MAR.
is an immediate difficulty with this conclusion. It would follow that there
would be no inefficiency in charging the full costs
of providing the service to
coal vessels while providing the service free of charge to other vessels.
According the ACCC’s
view of stand-alone costs, the fact that non-coal
vessels are in fact charged is not required to achieve economic efficiency.
could only be true if the incremental cost of providing the service to
non-coal vessels is zero. It is perhaps not immediately obvious
incremental cost is not zero, but it seems likely.
question can usefully be turned around. Presumably, on the thinking of the
ACCC, the stand-alone costs of providing the service
to non-coal vessels is,
likewise, the same as the stand-alone cost of providing the service to all
users. In that case it would
not be inefficient to recover all the costs of
providing the service from non-coal vessels and supply the service to coal
free of charge.
the Tribunal does not agree with the ACCC that the Service not distinguishing
between users is determinative. The fact
that there are different users itself
raises the question whether the pricing of the service to different users causes
inefficiency.
the Tribunal does not agree with the ACCC that – even if the assets sought
to be excluded by Glencore in carrying out
the stand-alone test provide value
for both coal and non-coal users – that circumstance alone would rule out
the exclusion
of some part of the costs of those assets.
is clear that some assets, though able to be used or sometimes used by coal
vessels, would not be fully incorporated in a port
providing stand-alone
services to coal vessels. A stand-alone service for coal vessels would not
require the use of all the assets
in their existing configuration.
another way, the Tribunal believes the evidence shows that, while the assets
Glencore has sought to exclude in applying the stand-alone
test may provide
value to coal vessels, they do not provide a value commensurate with their
costs. It is not necessary to have all
the non-coal berths available for
occasional emergency use by a coal vessel. Some non-coal berths are not large
enough to accommodate
most coal vessels.
the exclusion of all the assets proposed by Glencore also raises problems at
both a conceptual and a practical level. Even
if it were the case that the
assets Glencore seeks to exclude are entirely irrelevant to provision of the
Service to coal vessels,
self-evidently a new entrant seeking to provide
services only to coal vessels would not build the whole Port, as it currently
and then exclude those assets. They could not be excluded from the Port
and leave a working port. One cannot have gaps along a
channel as if the berths
not used by coal vessels were non-existent. It might be said that what is being
excluded is not the assets,
but the value of the assets. But that raises the
question: which assets, and how are they valued? As the test is applied by
there is no relevant distinction to be made by the assets excluded and
the values excluded.
Tribunal is consequently of the view that no confidence can be had that the
test, as applied in this instance, is sufficiently
robust to be of use.
addition, at the practical level, the Tribunal does not accept that the assets
sought to be excluded by Glencore in fact provide
no value to coal vessels at
all; that is, that the Service could be provided to coal vessels if it were
somehow possible to have
those assets cease to exist, or contribute nothing to
the provision of services in the Port.
the ACCC, the Tribunal accepts that there are non-coal berths that can
potentially be used by some coal vessels for non-routine
berthing, though some
such berths could not be used by larger coal vessels. It also accepts that the
Basin, sought to be excluded
in full by Glencore, is used in the provision of a
number of services that are essential to provision of the declared service to
coal vessels.
aside the conceptual difficulties mentioned above, excluding completely the
Basin and parts of the main channel not used by
coal vessels could not be
justified. In fact, Glencore proposed an alternative test where the Basin
assets were not excluded.
Tribunal has found that if the test is run excluding only half of the dredging
costs proposed by Glencore, and not excluding the
Basin, the resulting NSC for
coal vessels alone is not significantly different from that obtained from the
model when no non-coal
assets are excluded and the MAR is recovered from all
vessels, coal and non-coal.
the large uncertainties involved, the Tribunal considers that there is
insufficient evidence to conclude that the stand-alone
test is failed. The
Tribunal does not consider that the NSC should be reduced on the grounds that it
is necessary to ensure that
inefficiency is precluded.
said, the Tribunal has reservations about the efficiency of the arbitrated price
structure, and of the price structure as amended
by the effect of our decision.
We have felt impelled to accept the structure because it was agreed by the
parties, subject only
to Glencore’s ground of review relating to the
stand-alone test, which we have considered and rejected.
CAPEX TRUE-UP
What the ACCC decided
ACCC decided not to include a true-up for the return on actual capital
expenditure compared to the return on forecast capex.
the end of each five-year period, the RAB is rolled forward. Actual capital
expenditure during the period is rolled into the RAB
to form the starting RAB
for the next period.
Submissions by the parties to the ACCC
submitted to the ACCC in the arbitration that there should be a true-up. If
actual capex during the period exceeded capex
as forecast at the beginning of
the period, an amount for the difference in the return (at the WACC) on the
actual capex and the
return on the forecast capex would be added to the RAB. If
the actual capex was less than the forecast, a corresponding amount would
deducted from the RAB.
submitted that there should not be a true-up, as it would not align with an
incentive-based regulation scheme.
The ACCC’s reasoning
ACCC considered that a true-up of this nature would introduce unnecessary
complexity to the five-yearly review process (s 44X(2)).
Further, access
pricing regimes should provide incentives to reduce costs or otherwise improve
productivity (s 44X(1)(h)). In this
regard, the ACCC considered the proposed
true-up mechanism as inappropriate.
Submissions by the parties to the Tribunal
submitted that any over (or under) recovery of the return on capital expenditure
over the previous period should be rolled
forward (at the WACC) and included as
an adjustment to the asset values at the commencement of the next period.
Omission of a capex
true-up creates a significant incentive for PNO to overstate
its capital expenditure forecasts to maximise its revenue. This is
particularly
the case in circumstances where, over the period of the Final Determination to
2031, PNO may incur significant expenditure
in relation to non-coal-related
matters such as the development of the proposed $1.8 billion container
was then submitted that absent an appropriate true-up mechanism, Glencore will
first have to detect any overestimated forecasts,
once actual expenditure is
known, and then have arbitration by the ACCC as its only recourse.
oral submissions on behalf of Glencore, Mr Young QC denied that there is any
complexity in having a true-up. He asked why ‘gaming
of the system’
should be permitted to enable a projection that exceeds capex to earn a return.
He submitted that the absence
of a true-up provides no incentive to make a more
efficient investment; it does the opposite. He further argued that the absence
of a true-up allows PNO the opportunity to recover a return on a notional
projection that they don’t live up to. It was argued
that it was
positively counter to concepts of efficiency.
submitted that this issue is of a much smaller magnitude than the other grounds
of review raised by the parties. Forecast annual
capital expenditure for the
first five-year period (ie from 1 January 2018 to 2022) is approximately
$800,000 to $900,000. The true-up
mechanism would compare the return on the
actual capital expenditure with the return on these forecast figures. Any
discrepancy
between the two is likely to be immaterial in the context of an
asset base in excess of $1 billion.
submitted that the ACCC’s approach conforms to standard regulatory
practice. If PNO spends less than the forecast, it can
keep the benefit until
the end of the five-year period. At the end of the period the benefit is then
passed on to consumers, as
the RAB is updated on the basis of actual
expenditure. Glencore’s true-up, it was said, would eliminate any
incentive to deliver
any capital savings.
reference to the possible new container terminal was described as a ‘red
herring’: the terminal (or
at least that portion which relates to the
channel) is not included in the current forecast capital expenditure, as it is
whether the project will proceed. Among other matters, PNO contended
that the project would be contingent on the success of current
Federal Court
proceedings brought by the ACCC seeking removal of the existing restraint on
competition for container trade between
NSW ports. It was further suggested
that if the project does ultimately proceed within the current five-year period,
forecast capital expenditure will have been significantly
understated, and PNO will have failed to maximise its revenue – that
the reverse of the risk that Glencore submits may arise without a true-up
oral submissions for PNO, Mr Moore SC gave two examples.
If forecast
capex for years 1 to 5 was $1 million but PNO spent only $600,000, it would get
to keep the return on the $1 million.
That would give it an incentive to make
the saving on capex. $600,000 of capex would be rolled forward and customers
the benefit in subsequent years of prices based on the capital base
increased by only $600,000 instead of by $1 million. But under
proposal, it would not receive any benefit from spending less than $1 million.
It might as well spend the whole
$1 million. That promotes gold-plating.
On the other
hand, without a true-up there is an incentive not to overspend, because if PNO
ended up spending $1.5 million, it would
not get any additional return: no
return on the additional $500,000. With a true-up it would have no disincentive
to spending the
$1.5 million. The $1.5 million will then be rolled over and
customers will have to pay prices based on that additional $1.5 million
forward instead of on an additional $1 million. So without the true-up PNO will
get a return from years 6 to 15, but won’t
get a return from years one to
an oral response submission for PNO, Mr Moore SC said that it did not matter
whether there was a true-up or not, but continued
to maintain that it was good
regulatory practice not to have one.
ACCC submitted that cl 8 of the Final Determination provides for a five-yearly
review of the NSC. Clause 8.1 provides that the
NSC is to be reviewed in 2021,
for the reviewed price to take effect on and from 1 January 2022, and in 2026,
for the reviewed price
to take effect on and from 1 January 2027.
the Final Determination the ACCC concluded that a true-up would introduce
unnecessary complexity to the five-yearly review process
and did not provide
incentives to reduce costs or otherwise improve productivity. The ACCC
submitted that its conclusion was appropriate
having regard to the statutory
criteria and the Tribunal should form the same conclusion on review.
ACCC observed that regulatory regimes typically provide incentives for service
providers to incur efficient costs. In connection
with capital expenditure, an
incentive to incur efficient costs is provided where a service provider keeps
the benefit (wears the
cost) of under-spending (over-spending) against a capital
expenditure forecast for the relevant pricing period. That is, the provider
retains the return on capital and return of capital for a pricing period
attributable to the amount of any under-spend of forecast
capital expenditure
for the period. This is reflected in regulated pricing for that period, and
forgoes any return on capital and
return of capital for the pricing period
attributable to any over-spend of the capital expenditure forecast for that
the end of the period, actual expenditure is rolled into the asset
base, and the service provider will then earn a return on, and
return of, that
actual expenditure amount.
ACCC explained that there is a true-up for the difference between the return on
and return of forecast capital expenditure and
the return on and return of
actual capital expenditure for the period, and where (as in the present case)
there is an absence of
any other capital expenditure incentive mechanisms, a
service provider will not be subject to an incentive to incur only efficient
costs – the incentive may in fact be to inefficiently overspend.
ACCC also recognised that not providing for such a true-up may provide a service
provider with an incentive to overstate capital
expenditure forecasts. However,
under a true-up mechanism a provider does not receive any benefit from
out-performing (or incur
any uncompensated cost for overspending) the capex
forecast and is therefore not constrained to incur only efficient capex. In
in circumstances where there is no true-up mechanism, the provider is
encouraged to reduce capex to the efficient level because out-performing
capex forecast (or minimising any over-spend) delivers a financial benefit for
the provider relative to incurring inefficient
capex. As a consequence, where
actual capex is rolled into the RAB at the end of the period, the increase in
the RAB at the end
of the period is constrained to efficient spend and is not
inflated by inefficient spend. This operates to ensure that users only
efficient capex. That is, they only fund, through future depreciation
allowances, efficient spend, and they only provide
the provider with a return on
efficient spend through future return on capital allowances.
Final Determination does not provide for the ACCC to review forecast capital
expenditure for the forthcoming five-year period
(or perform any other function)
in the five-yearly review. This reflects the ACCC’s view that the
five-yearly review should
be self-executing and capable of mechanistic
implementation, and that the ACCC should not be conferred with any function in
or by the Final Determination more generally. In the event there is
a dispute between Glencore and PNO as to forecast capital expenditure,
would be dealt with pursuant to cl 14 of the Final Determination, which provides
(1) first, negotiation in good faith between senior
executives of the parties in an attempt to resolve the dispute;
(2) secondly, if the dispute is not resolved within 15 days after notice was
given of the dispute or within a period otherwise agreed
by the parties, the
dispute is submitted to a mediator;
(3) finally, if the dispute is not resolved within 45 days after notice was
given of the dispute or within a period otherwise agreed
by the parties, the
dispute may be submitted to arbitration by the ACCC pursuant to s
his oral submissions on behalf of the ACCC, Mr Lloyd SC pointed out that
forecast capex for the initial period of the Final Determination
is very small.
If PNO were to spend a great deal more on capex in the period, then with no
true-up they would not get a return on
that additional capex during the
that possibility aside, the only time the issue bites is in the second period.
If PNO asked for an outrageously high level
of capex, then Glencore would
benefit from a true-up by PNO only receiving a return on its actual capex, if
that were less than the
The Tribunal’s analysis
Tribunal notes that, in the end, PNO indicated that it did not care whether
there was a true-up or not. Even if PNO embraced
having a true-up – thus
agreeing with Glencore’s position – the matter would require
consideration against the
relevant provisions of
was some confusion in the submissions as to what incentives are brought into
play by having, or not having, a true-up mechanism.
Is spending more on capex
than is efficient the issue, ie more than is required to provide services
efficiently into the future?
Or is the issue making an overstated forecast of
the efficient level of capex?
the Tribunal’s view, the more important issue is the actual level of
capex. Under this form of price regulation, the intention
is that $1 million of
capex will generate a return of $1 million over the life of the asset. That
would accord with the NPV=0 principle.
Of course, such an expected outcome
– the actual outcome can never be assured – is subject to
assumptions about the
how the regulatory framework operates, eg that the WACC
accurately reflects the firm’s cost of capital. It also depends on
regulatory framework – and indeed the specific pricing methodology –
applying over the life of the asset, which may
not be the case here.
with those qualifications there is a largely unavoidable incentive for
“gold-plating”, ie spending more than the
efficient level of capex,
because once the capex is rolled into the asset base, a return is guaranteed.
One method of dealing with
that incentive is to subject the proposed capex to
prior scrutiny. No such process was provided for during the course of the Final
Determination, and there was apparently no call for one.
there is a true-up or not has little bearing on this incentive to overspend on
capex. The true-up – if there is one
– comes into play only in
relation to the difference between forecast and actual capex. It looks backward
at the end of each
five-year period to the return on capital during that period.
Certainly, the absence of a true-up, as explained by the ACCC and PNO,
provide an incentive to underspend against the forecast. It seems to be assumed
that any underspend is likely to be efficient.
It might be achieved, for
example, by postponing capex by extending the life of an asset and better
maintenance. That would be
a good thing. But it is hard to see why PNO would
go out of its way to spend less than its forecast, given that this would reduce
the return to it for the following period.
incentive for efficiency said to be induced by not having a true-up mechanism
depends, the Tribunal considers, on the capex forecast
being accurate in the
sense of being the best forecast, at the time it is made, of prudent, efficient
capex. If the forecast is
not the best possible, having no true-up still
provides an incentive to underspend against the forecast.
the other hand, with a true-up, PNO could more easily conceal intended
overspending on capex by understating the intention in its
forecast. It would
pay no penalty for that understatement, as the true-up would provide it with a
return, in the period in which
it was made, of the full amount of capex.
the light of these considerations, the Tribunal considers that the absence of a
true-up mechanism better accords with the statutory
provisions referred to by
the ACCC in the Final Determination.
final view of the Tribunal is that the Final Determination is only to be varied
as a result of the Tribunal’s disagreement
with the result of the ACCC on
the scope of the Final Determination and the NSC (and here only because of the
contention relating
to user contributions).
Tribunal provided to the parties a draft of the Tribunal’s Determinations
and the reasons for the sole purpose of checking
confidentiality and the exact
wording of the Determinations so as to properly reflect these reasons. In this
regard, of particular
focus was the scope of the Tribunal’s Determinations
and the appropriate NSC.
Tribunal has decided that no allowance should be made for user contributions in
the calculation of the RAB. This was implemented
in the agreed access pricing
building block model by changing the percentage allowances for user
contributions to zero. No other
changes to the model are required to implement
the Tribunal’s reasons.
new NPV=0 pricing solution in the model requires an initial 2018 Coal Vessel NSC
of $1.0058 per GRT. This replaces the previous
value ($0.6075) in paragraph 6.1
of the Final Determination.
each Application, the Tribunal varies the Final Determination made under
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth) dated 18 September
2018, by deleting Clauses 2.1, 2.2 and 6.1 and replacing them as follows:
2.1 The scope of the determination is confined to the
terms and conditions of access where Glencore owns or, either directly or by
agent, charters a vessel that enters the Port precinct and loads Glencore coal.
2.2 For the avoidance of doubt, the determination does not apply to:
(a) the terms and conditions of access to
apply in respect of vessels carrying coal that are not owned, or have not been
by Glencore;
(b) the terms and conditions of access for vessels other than those calling at
the coal terminals of the Port; and
(c) any charges imposed by PNO other than the Navigation Service Charge and the
Wharfage Charge.
6.1 The Navigation Service Charge payable by Glencore to
PNO in accordance with this determination will be $1.0058 as at 1 January
I certify that the preceding six hundred and
ten (610) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination
of the Honourable Justice Middleton, Mr RF Shogren and Dr D
Dated: 30 October 2019
ANNEXURE ‘A’
ANNEXURE ‘B’
TERMS OF FINAL
DETERMINATION CONTESTED AND NOT CONTESTED FACTS
The parties collated a document which identified the terms of the determination
in dispute and not in dispute before the Tribunal.
Non-contested facts
Wholly stated, the non-contested terms are;
(1.1) Term: that the Final Determination should take effect 21 days after the
date it is made and expires on 7 July 2031.
(1.2) Backdating: that the Navigation Service Charge (
) and Wharfage
Charge apply from the period starting 8 July 2016, as per clause 1.3.
(1.3) Backdating: that the charges to apply during the period of backdating are
to be determined through a deflation of the charges
specified in 5.1 and 6.1
using the Sydney All Groups Consumer Price Index number published by the
Australian Bureau of Statistics
), calculated as the average
of the latest four quarters over the average of the preceding four quarters.
(1.4) Interest on backdated payment: that the Interest is payable on any amount
overpaid to PNO by Glencore within the relevant dates,
being from 8 July 2016
until the date the Final Determination takes effect. The interest rate to be
applied is 3.95%, which is the
June 2016 rate specified in the Large Business
Weighted Average Rate on Credit Outstanding Variable Rate published by the
Bank of Australia. Interest is to be compounded daily.
(3.1) Notification by Glencore: Glencore must provide 48 hours’ prior
written notice of its intention to use the Service under
the terms of this
determination. In the absence of notice the standard terms of access will apply.
This term is waived for the period
of backdating in clause 1.2.
(4.1) Building Block Model: The Building Block Model (
) is to be used
to calculate the maximum allowable revenue that PNO may recover from the
Wharfage Charge and NSC in each relevant
period. The inputs to the BBM and the
charges are reviewable as set out in clauses 5 to 9.
(5.1) Wharfage Charge: the Wharfage Charge payable by Glencore to PNO in
accordance with this determination will be $0.0746 per revenue
tonne as at 1
January 2018.
(5.2) Wharfage Charge: the Wharfage Charge will be indexed on 1 January of each
subsequent year by CPI Sydney determined by reference
to the CPI published for
the September quarter of that year.
(6.2) Navigation Service Charge: the NSC will be reviewed on an annual and
five-yearly basis as set out in clauses 7 and 8.
(7.1) Annual price setting: the NSC is to be reviewed annually as set out in
clause 7.2.
(7.2) Annual price setting: the inputs to the BBM to calculate the NSC that are
reviewable under the annual price setting mechanism
are limited to:
(a) forecast cargo volumes and gross tonnage
coal vessels and non-coal vessels for the year, and
(b) in the event of a Material Change Event, forecast inputs relevant for
determining the addition to the NSC as a result of the
Material Change
(7.3) Annual price setting: PNO will notify Glencore of the NSC at least 60 days
prior to the start of the calendar year in which
the charge is to apply. The
notice will also outline and explain the assumptions on which the updated NSC
has been determined.
(8.1) Five-yearly review: A five-yearly review of the NSC will occur during the
following years:
(a) in 2021, with such reviewed price to
take effect on and from 1 January 2022, and
(b) in 2026, with such reviewed price to take effect on and from 1 January
(9.1) True up: The NSC will be subject to an annual true up consisting
(a) a pass through of the impact on revenue
of actual volumes compared to forecast volumes through a revenue unders and
overs mechanism,
(b) a pass through of costs from Force Majeure Events that have an incremental
cost of in excess of $1 million.
(9.2) True up: Within 60 days of the end of each calendar year PNO shall provide
Glencore a true up reconciliation account setting
(a) for the relevant year, forecast cargo
volumes and gross tonnage of coal and non-coal vessels for the relevant year
(b) for the relevant year, the actual data for cargo volumes and gross tonnage
of coal vessels and non-coal vessels for the year
(c) the variance of the actual data in 9.2.b against the forecast data
identified in 9.2.a
(d) for the relevant year, calculation of the amount of the NSC determined by
the BBM using the actual data in 9.2.b (the Notional
(e) for the relevant year, details of the NSC paid by Glencore under this
determination including the total gross tonnage of vessels
(Glencore Paid
(f) for the relevant year, calculation of the amount of the NSC liability for
Glencore using the Notional NSC (from 9.2.d) and the
Glencore total gross
tonnage of vessels (from 9.2.e) (the Glencore NSC Liability)
(g) identification of the variance of the Glencore Paid NSC against the Glencore
NSC Liability
(h) identification of either:
(i) an over-recovery by PNO of
the NSC (where the Glencore Paid NSC is greater than the Glencore NSC
Liability), or
(ii) an under-recovery by PNO of the NSC (where the Glencore Paid NSC is less
than the Glencore NSC
Liability).
(9.3) True up: within 7 days of PNO delivering to Glencore the true-up
reconciliation account under clause 9.2, Glencore must, in
the event that the
previous years’ price setting regime resulted in an over-recovery by PNO
of the NSC, issue PNO a valid tax
invoice for any amounts to be adjusted, or
(9.4) True up: PNO must, in the event that the previous years’ price
setting regime resulted in an under-recovery by PNO of
the NSC, issue Glencore a
valid tax invoice for any amounts to be adjusted at the same time as delivering
the true-up reconciliation
Non-price terms
(10.1) Invoicing: PNO will issue a valid tax invoice in relation to any Wharfage
Charge arising under the determination within 7
days of receipt from Glencore of
the applicable cargo manifest prescribed by the PMAA.
(10.2) Invoicing: PNO will issue a valid tax invoice to Glencore in relation to
any NSC arising under this determination within 7
days of the vessel entering
(11.1) Payment terms: All amounts due under this determination are payable
within 7 days of delivery by email of a relevant tax invoice.
(12.1) Interest on late payment: Interest on late payment of monies due and
payable under this determination will accrue and be payable
pursuant to section
70 of the PMAA.
(13.1) Termination: The terms of the determination may be terminated in the
following circumstances:
(a) by the parties’ mutual written
(b) PNO may terminate the terms of the determination by written notice to
Glencore where Glencore is in material breach of the terms,
and that breach has
not been remedied by Glencore within 28 days’ notice of the breach by
(c) PNO may terminate the terms of the determination where PNO’s right to
provide access to the Port is terminated or expires
(d) Glencore may terminate the terms of the determination by providing 28 days
written notice to PNO.
(14.1) Dispute resolution: if an issue, dispute or difference between Glencore
and PNO arises out of, or in relation to the terms
of the determination, either
party may give written notice to the other party specifying:
(a) The nature of the dispute
(b) The alleged basis of the dispute
(c) The position which the party issuing the notice considers
(14.2) Dispute resolution: if Glencore and PNO do not agree within 7 days about
the procedure and timetable for dispute resolution,
each party must appoint a
senior executive as its representative to meet or negotiate in good faith in an
attempt to resolve the
(14.3) Dispute resolution: If the dispute has not been resolved within 15 days
after the date on which written notice was given,
or within a period agreed in
writing by the parties, the dispute must be submitted to a mediator in
accordance and subject to the
Resolution Institute Mediation Rules.
(14.4) Dispute resolution: If the dispute has not been resolved within 45 days
after the date on which written notice was given,
or within a period agreed in
writing by the parties, the dispute may be submitted to arbitration by the ACCC
pursuant to section
(14.5) Dispute resolution: The referral to, or undertaking of, a dispute
resolution process does not (subject to any interlocutory
order) suspend the
parties’ obligations under the terms of the agreement.
(15.1) Assignment: Glencore cannot assign or otherwise transfer its rights under
this determination without prior consent of PNO.
Such consent must not be
unreasonably withheld.
Contested Facts
Wholly stated, the contested terms are;
(2.1) Scope: The scope of the determination includes the terms and conditions of
(a) where Glencore, either directly or by
agent, charters a vessel to enter the Port precinct and load Glencore coal,
(b) where Glencore makes a representation to PNO of the kind referred to in
Ports and Maritime Administration Act 1995
PMAA) that it has the functions of the owner of a vessel, or accepts the
obligation to exercise those functions, in order to
enter the Port precinct and
load Glencore Coal.
(2.2) Scope: For the avoidance of doubt, the determination does not apply
(a) the terms and conditions of access to
apply in respect of vessels carrying coal that have not been chartered by
Glencore or in
respect of which Glencore has not made a representation of the
kind referred to in
of the PMAA
(b) terms and conditions of access for vessels other than those calling at the
coal terminals at the Port, and
(c) any charges imposed by PNO other than the NSC and the Wharfage
(6.1) Navigation Service Charge: The NSC payable by Glencore to PNO in
accordance with this determination will be $0.6075 as at 1
January 2018.
(8.2) Five-yearly review: The inputs to the BBM to calculate the NSC that are
reviewable under the five-yearly review are limited
(a) the regulated asset base being rolled
forward, and the roll forward should:
(i) include, at the time of its
commissioning, actual capital expenditure incurred in the current five-year
period excluding any actual
capital expenditure that is provided or funded by
users and including an amount for interest incurred during construction of
(ii) include the forecast inflation used to set prices in the current period,
(iii) be based on forecast depreciation used to set prices in the current
(b) the useful life of assets required to
provide the Service and rates of depreciation (excluding perpetual assets)
(c) the weighted average cost of capital
(d) forecast capital expenditure for the following five-year period excluding
any capital expenditure that is forecast to be provided
or funded by users
(e) forecast operating expenditure for the following five-year period, and
(f) such other inputs that are subject to a Material Change
In agreeing to the document outlining the contested and non-contested terms, the
ACCC’s reserved the right to qualify its position.
The ACCC subsequently did so via email, providing these additional comments
regarding the NSC contained in clause 6.1 of the ACCC’s
determination:
The navigation service charge is a function of many elements:
Valuation date:
This was not contested by the parties before the Tribunal.
Construction
cost estimates: Glencore sought review of the ACCC’s determination in
respect of dredging costs and reclamation
Interest during
construction: This is a function of the construction period/program and WACC.
Glencore sought review of the ACCC’s
determination in respect of the
construction period/program.
Asset lives:
This was not contested by the parties before the Tribunal.
WACC: The ACCC
submits that the Tribunal should consider whether the WACC should be adjusted
(primarily, decreasing the asset beta)
if it includes a true up for the return
on actual capital expenditure compared to the return on forecast capital
expenditure in the
RAB roll forward in the five-yearly review (see cl 8.2 of the
ACCC’s determination) as contended for by Glencore (T383 lines
The ACCC notes that Glencore disputes this submission on the basis that a WACC
is to be determined through the CAPM pricing
model in which only systematic (or
non-diversifiable) risk is compensated through the CAPM and the absence of a
true up has no meaningful
bearing on systematic risk (T474 line 40 to T475 line
User funding:
PNO sought review of the adjustment to the DORC for user contributions. Glencore
contended that (in addition to dredging
and revetments) the estimated costs of
reclamation bunding should take into account user funding of the assets.
Standalone cost
test for coal vessels: Glencore sought review of the treatment of non-coal
assets in determining efficient allocations
of the maximum allowable revenue
between coal and non-coal users.
PNO responded to the ACCC above comments with the following:
material does not respond to the Tribunal’s request for a document
identifying the clauses of the ACCC’s determination
not in dispute before
the Tribunal. PNO considers the Tribunal should not have regard to these
comments in determining the navigation
service charge.
Second, and
alternatively to 1, PNO does not agree that the ACCC’s description of the
matters relevant to the determination
of the navigation service charge is either
exhaustive or correct. For example, the ACCC’s list does not include a
inputs including (without limitation) demand forecasts, operating
expenditure, and regulatory tax allowance, and includes elements
that PNO says
should not be taken into account in determining the navigation service charge.
PNO relies on its previous submissions,
including in relation to the
interrelationship between the model inputs.
In relation to WACC, PNO agrees with Glencore that whether or not there is a
true- up for the return on actual capital expenditure
compared to the return on
forecast capital expenditure in the RAB roll forward in the five-yearly review
does not bear on the appropriate
WACC for the reasons Glencore identifies.
Accordingly, no adjustments to WACC are
RTF format (25.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format