Sunnyhaven Limited [2012] FWAFB 9086 (1 November 2012)
[2012] FWAFB 9086
Download Word Document
The attached document replaces the document previously issued with the above code on 1 November 2012.
The document has been edited to correct typographical errors.
Associate to Senior Deputy President Watson
[2012] FWAFB 9086
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Act 2009
- Appeal of decisions
Sunnyhaven Limited
(C2012/5059)
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT WATSON
DEPUTY PRESIDENT SMITH
COMMISSIONER JONES
SYDNEY, 1 NOVEMBER 2012
Appeal against decision
[2012] FWA 6664
of Commissioner McKenna at Sydney on 16 August 2012 in matter number AG2012/9982 - permission to appeal granted - appeal upheld -
decision quashed - application under
agreement approved with undertakings.
This is an appeal by Sunnyhaven Limited against a decision of Commissioner McKenna on 16 August 2012,
in which she dismissed an application, pursuant to
Fair Work Act 2009
(the Act) for the approval of the
Sunnyhaven Limited Non-Award Covered Enterprise Agreement 2012
(the agreement).
The agreement is unusual in two significant respects:
(a) It would cover and apply only to employees of the company in the position of Chief Executive Officer and/or Accountant who are
not covered by a modern award; and
(b) It is extremely limited in its terms:
(i) Providing that it is read in conjunction with an employee’s individual contract of employment, with the agreement terms
prevailing to the extent of any inconsistency;
(ii) Providing for a period of operation of four years;
(iii) Providing for the cashing out of paid annual leave to the extent permitted by the National Employment Standards (NES) within
of the Act;
(iv) Providing for the cashing out of paid personal/carer’s leave to the extent permitted by the NES within
of the Act;
(v) Purporting to provide for the cashing out of a “particular amount” of paid long service leave;
(vi) The incorporation, by reference to the model flexibility terms - the flexibility term and the consultation terms as required
of the Act;
(vii) A dispute settlement procedure; and
(viii) A no extra claims provision.
Commissioner McKenna dismissed the application for approval
on the following basis:
“If, as the applicant contended, the employees who would be covered by the Agreement are exclusively non-award-covered employees,
then statutory tests for the approval of an enterprise agreement, including those in
s.186(2)(d)
of the Act, cannot appositely arise for consideration. In view of the statutory criteria for the approval of an enterprise agreement,
the Agreement is, thereby, effectively incapable of assessment in terms of the better off overall test. As a corollary, this application
cannot be approved because Fair Work Australia must be satisfied an agreement passes the better off overall test as one of the conditions-precedent
to approval.”
The Commissioner went on to find that, if she was wrong in relation to the conclusion, the agreement is incapable of assessment in
terms of the statutory criteria, she was not satisfied that the better off overall test was met.
The appeal was brought, briefly expressed, on the basis that Commissioner McKenna erred in dismissing the application on the basis
that she could not be satisfied that the agreement passes the better off overall test
(s.186(2)(d)).
Section 193
of the Act - Passing the better off overall test - is in the following terms:
When a non-greenfields agreement passes the better off overall test
(1) An enterprise agreement that is not a greenfields agreement
better off overall test
under this section if FWA is satisfied, as at the test time, that each award covered employee, and each prospective award covered
employee, for the agreement would be better off overall if the agreement applied to the employee than if the relevant modern award
applied to the employee.
FWA must disregard individual flexibility arrangement
(2) If, under the flexibility term in the relevant modern award, an individual flexibility arrangement has been agreed to by an award
covered employee and his or her employer, FWA must disregard the individual flexibility arrangement for the purposes of determining
whether the agreement passes the better off overall test.
When a greenfields agreement passes the better off overall test
(3) A greenfields agreement
better off overall test
under this section if FWA is satisfied, as at the test time, that each prospective award covered employee for the agreement would
be better off overall if the agreement applied to the employee than if the relevant modern award applied to the employee.
Award covered employee
award covered employee
for an enterprise agreement is an employee who:
(a) is covered by the agreement; and
(b) at the test time, is covered by a modern award (the
relevant modern award
(i) is in operation; and
(ii) covers the employee in relation to the work that he or she is to perform under the agreement; and
(iii) covers his or her employer.
Prospective award covered employee
prospective award covered employee
for an enterprise agreement is a person who, if he or she were an employee at the test time of an employer covered by the agreement:
(a) would be covered by the agreement; and
(b) would be covered by a modern award (the
relevant modern award
(i) is in operation; and
(ii) would cover the person in relation to the work that he or she would perform under the agreement; and
(iii) covers the employer.
is the time the application for approval of the agreement by FWA was made under
section 185.
FWA may assume employee better off overall in certain circumstances
(7) For the purposes of determining whether an enterprise agreement passes the better off overall test, if a class of employees to
which a particular employee belongs would be better off if the agreement applied to that class than if the relevant modern award
applied to that class, FWA is entitled to assume, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, that the employee would be better off
overall if the agreement applied to the employee.”
Relevantly, for the purpose of the appeal, the better off overall test provides that Fair Work Australia must be satisfied that each
employee covered by or who might be covered by the agreement, who would be covered by a modern award, would be better off overall
if the agreement applied to the employee than if the relevant modern award applied to the employee.
In the circumstances of the current agreement, which covers and applies to non-modern award covered employees only (and expressly
provides that any employee covered by a modern award shall not be covered by the agreement and it shall not apply to them) the better
off overall test has no application. The better off overall test must be applied, and satisfaction must be reached, only in respect
of award covered employees and prospective award covered employees.
The Act provides for an employer to make an enterprise agreement with the employees who are employed at the time the agreement is
made and who will be covered by the agreement (s.172(2)(a) about permitted matters (s.172(1)). An employee “is defined in the
first Division of each Part (other than Part1-1)”. In
s.170 of Division 1 of Part 2-4 - Enterprise Agreements - employee “means a national system employee”. In s.14 of the
Act a national system employer is, amongst other things, “a constitutional corporation”. Sunnyhaven Limited is a constitutional
corporation (ACN 059 213 946) and is able to make an enterprise agreement with its employees.
Nothing in the Act prevents the making of enterprise agreements which cover, in whole or in part, employees who are not award covered
employees or prospective award covered employees.
Indeed, s.206 of the Act, provides a statutory minimum base rate of pay under an enterprise agreement whilst the agreement provides
for two different base rates: the base rate of pay that would be payable to the employee under the modern award in relation to an
employee covered by a modern award (s.206(1)); and the rate the employee’s employer is required to pay the employee under the
national minimum wage, or a special national minimum wage in relation to an employee not covered by a modern award.
Section 206 of the Act clearly contemplates the coverage of non-modern award employees by enterprise agreements.
Absent any clear statutory indication, there can be no distinction between an agreement covering a mixture of award covered and non-award
covered employees and an agreement covering exclusively non-award covered employees. In the former case, provided Fair Work Australia
is satisfied that each award covered employee and each prospective award covered employee would be better off overall, the agreement
could be approved, notwithstanding the non-application of the better off overall test to the non-award covered employees. The same
position would apply in respect of an agreement covering only non-award employees.
In circumstances where the Act permits the making of an enterprise agreement which covers, in whole or in part, employees not covered
by a modern award, the Commissioner was wrong to find that where the employees to be covered by an agreement are exclusively non-award
covered employees the better off overall test is effectively incapable of application. The correct view, in those circumstances,
is the better off overall test has no application in applying the statutory tests for approval of an agreement of that type. The
better off overall test is directed to protecting the terms and conditions of award covered employees, against the relevant modern
award and has no role to play in relation to non-award covered employees.
For these reasons, we find that the Commissioner erred in her application of the better off overall test.
In that circumstance, we grant permission to appeal, uphold the appeal, quash the decision of Commissioner McKenna and determine
the application for approval of the agreement ourselves. We approved the agreement in
[2012] FWAFB 9399
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
G Boyce for Sunnyhaven Limited.
Hearing details:
September 25.
Final written submissions:
10 October 2012.
[2012] FWA 6664
ibid., at para 21.
ibid., at para 15.
ibid., at paras 16-19.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR530578>
No downloadable files available