Lyons Airconditioning Services (WA) Pty Ltd v Kedron Caravans Pty Ltd [2022] ADO 1 (1 February 2022)
DESIGNS ACT 2003
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE
REGISTRAR OF DESIGNS WITH REASONS
Re: Request for revocation by
Lyons Airconditioning Services (WA) Pty Ltd of Australian design number
201912935 in the name of Kedron
Caravans Pty Ltd
Nicholas Barbey
REPRESENTATION:
Lyons Airconditioning Services (WA) Pty
Kedron Caravans Pty Ltd
Request for revocation of a design under
Designs Act 2003
(Cth) – insufficient evidence that a person
other than the registered owner is an entitled person in relation to Australian
design number 201912935 – registration of design not revoked.
decision concerns a request for revocation of Australian design number 201912935
’) on grounds relating to entitled persons under
Designs Act 2003
Design was filed on 20 May 2019 and registered on 30 June 2019
Application
’). Reproduced below are its relevant
Design number:
Kedron Caravans Pty Ltd (‘
Product name:
Representations:
Statement of Newness and Distinctiveness (‘SoND’):
The newness of this product is the ability to fit / retrofit into a standard
wind-up hatch 14-inch square recess of a caravan or RV
to now pressurise the
internal cabin with an integrated high volume fan to draw air through a flow
tested filter for a positive pressure
to resist dust entry through gas vents,
and the distinctiveness is a complete new unique design that allows the owner to
access the replacement filter via a drop swing door to change out or
wash their air filter when required.
11 July 2019, Lyons Airconditioning Services (WA) Pty Ltd
’) requested revocation of the registration of the
Design based on grounds relating to entitled persons
’). The Requestor claimed that it was an entitled
person in relation to the Design. The Request stated:
application 201912935 submitted by Kedron Caravans, is false as this is a direct
copy of what we have been selling to the
market for approximately the last 2
years. We have evidence of Kedron approaching us earlier in the year looking for
information
regarding our CP700 Carafan Sahara caravan pressuriser. We also have
evidence of a leint [sic] we sold to who took it to Kedron for
installation. They would have seen the unit then and copied it. They submitted
an application to IP Australia under false information
and copy infringement.
Lyons has since sent Kedron a legal warning to “Cease and Desist Copy
Infringement” for the Lyons
Carafan Sahara pressuriser.
Lyons has design documents, marketing material, customer invoices, images and
manufacturing documentation to prove the unit was origianlly
[sic] designed,
invented and distributed [to] the market well before Kedron was aware of the
unit. We can also show evidence that
Kedron approached us for information and
falsely misled IP Australia and the market that the design was unique to them.
We want all
IP entitlements to be revoked and we will pursue legal avenues
should they not abide by our demand to “Cease and Desist Copy
Infringement” letter within 7 days of the date sent (09/07/2019).
Designs Office informed the Owner of the Request and sought clarification as to
whether it would be contested.
response, the Owner advised the Designs Office that it would be contesting the
parties were subsequently invited to file evidence and/or written submissions.
Evidence in Support (‘
’) was filed by the Requestor
followed by Evidence in Answer (‘
’) being filed by the
Owner. In turn, the Requestor filed Evidence in Reply
’). An oral hearing was not requested and neither party
filed written submissions. The matter has been allocated to me for determination
as a delegate of the Registrar of Designs. In doing so I take account of the
above detailed material. This material comprises the
written record.
Legal framework
of the Act relevantly
Revocation of registration
on grounds relating to entitled persons
(1) A person may apply to the Registrar for revocation under
the registration of a design.
of the Act relevantly
Procedures in relation to
application
(1) This section applies if a person makes an application under
for revocation of the registration of a design.
(2) If the Registrar is satisfied that:
a person or persons were entitled persons at the time the design was first
registered, and one or more of
the original registered owners of the design was
not an entitled person at that time; or
(b) each original registered owner of the design was an entitled person
at the time when the design was first
registered, but another person or persons
were also entitled persons at that time;
the Registrar may make a written declaration specifying that a person whom
the Registrar is satisfied was an entitled person at the
time the design was
first registered is an entitled person under this subsection.
of the Act contains the following definition of ‘entitled
“entitled person”
relation to a design, means a person entitled under
to be entered in
the Register as the registered owner of the design.
of the Act provides:
entitled to be registered as the registered owner of a design
(1) A person mentioned in any of the following paragraphs is entitled to
be entered on the Register as the registered
owner of a design that has not yet
been registered:
(a) the person who created the design
(b) if the designer created the design in the course of employment, or
under a contract, with another person--the other person, unless
the designer and
the other person have agreed to the contrary;
(c) a person who derives title to the design from a person mentioned in
paragraph (a) or (b), or by devolution by will or by operation
(d) a person who would, on registration of the design, be entitled to
have the exclusive rights in the design assigned to the person;
(e) the legal personal representative of a deceased person mentioned in
paragraph (a), (b), (c) or (d).
(2) Despite subsection (1), a person is not entitled to be entered on
the Register as the registered owner of a design
that has not yet been
registered if:
the person has assigned all of the person’s rights in the design to
another person; or
(b) the person’s rights in the design have devolved on another
person by operation of law.
(3) To avoid doubt:
more than one person may be entitled to be entered on the Register as the
registered owner of a design; and
(b) unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to the registered
owner of a registered design in this
Act is a reference to each of the
registered owners of the design.
(4) No person other than a person mentioned in paragraph (1)(a), (b),
(c), (d) or (e) is entitled to be entered on the
Register as the registered
owner of a design that has not yet been registered.
following declarations were filed as evidence in this
Declaration made
on 28 November 2019 by Paul Charles David Ballard,
Parts Manager
Requestor, with Exhibits PB-1 to PB-13 (‘
Declaration
Declaration made
on 28 November 2019 by Gavin John Lyons, Director of the Requestor
Lyons Declaration
Declaration made
on 28 November 2019 by Kenneth James Rogers, Airconditioning Technician at the
Requestor (‘
Rogers Declaration
Declaration made
on 28 November 2019 by Arron Iain Smithson, Metalshop Fabricator at the
Requestor, with Exhibits AS-1 to AS-3 (‘
Declaration
Declaration made
on 29 November 2019 by Stuart Malcolm Haley, Metalshop Fabricator at the
Requestor, with Exhibits SH-1 to SH-3 (‘
Declaration
Declaration made
on 2 December 2019 by Emanouel Panayiotis Lardis, General Manager of the
Requestor, with Exhibits EL-1 to EL-48 (‘
Declaration
Declaration made
on 6 April 2020 by Matt McCormick, lawyer for the Owner, with Annexures A to C
McCormick Declaration
Declaration made
on 18 June 2020 by Stephanie Rowland, solicitor for the Requestor
Rowland Declaration
Blanket confidentiality claim
EIS is comprised of six declarations, each of which contains a blanket statement
that their contents are 'strictly confidential’.
Such statements are
clearly incompatible with parts of their declarations which discuss publicly
available records from the Australian
Securities & Investments Commission as
well as publicly accessible information on websites.
the Requestor’s interests in preserving its confidential information is
acknowledged, the Registrar must provide reasons
for her findings. In
discharging this duty, information claimed to be confidential may inevitably
require discussion. This is particularly
relevant when the Requestor has made no
effort to identify the information alleged to be confidential. Accordingly,
where such discussion
is unavoidable and, providing it is possible, broad
non-specific statements will be used to minimise the potential risk of divulging
any commercially sensitive information.
Ballard Declaration outlines the history of the Requestor’s caravan air
pressurisation unit design
which commenced development in 2015. Mr Ballard declares that Bruce Worsley
initially approached the Requestor to build a custom
air pressurisation unit for
his caravan. The Requestor did not fulfil Mr Worsley’s request because it
was not commercially
viable to develop a single custom-built product.
Nevertheless,
Mr Ballard explains that two of the Requestor’s employees, Gavin Lyons and
Arron Smithson, retained a personal
interest in this design project. In 2016,
the pair commenced developing prototypes of a caravan air pressurisation unit
to ‘fit into a standard “maxi-fan” vent
Mr Ballard states
that a ‘Maxxfan’ unit, obtained from an existing supplier, was
eventually ‘used for the dimensional
information for the Carafan
and the prototype
was finalised in early 2017. The Carafan prototype was exhibited at various
shows throughout 2017 and the Requestor
received its first purchase order in
October 2017. Mr Ballard states that the Carafan prototype was further refined
in early 2018
and subsequently supplied to various caravan distributors in the
Ballard declares that Mr Worsley purchased a Carafan from the Requestor in
January 2019 and had it shipped directly to the Owner
for installation. On this
basis, Mr Ballard asserts that the Owner had actual knowledge of, as well as
physical access to, the Carafan
prior to filing the Application. In Mr
Ballard’s view, the Requestor should be recognised as an entitled person
to the Design.
Lardis Declaration details correspondence exchanged between the Requestor and
the Owner. Relevantly, the Requestor sent a cease
and desist letter to the Owner
in July 2019 alleging, among other things, the Design has ‘unlawfully
copied’ the Carafan.
Through its legal representative, the Owner replied
seeking further and better particulars of the various allegations. The Lardis
Declaration does not disclose whether further communication occurred.
Lardis Declaration also discusses the development and commercialisation of the
Carafan. Mr Lardis’ version of events broadly
mirrors those disclosed in
the Ballard Declaration. The Lardis Declaration states that the Requestor
received an online query from
the Owner in October 2018. The query sought
details regarding the Carafan and mentioned that the Owner was contemplating
the product to its clients. In Mr Lardis’ view, it is
‘perplexing’ why the Owner would be seeking to purchase a
given it was supposedly developing its own air pressurisation unit around this
time period.
Lardis Declaration also contains what are essentially submissions regarding the
purported similarities between the Carafan and
the Design. In short, it is
alleged that there are several similarities which are suspicious given the
history between the parties.
Mr Lardis points out that both designs contain a
rectangular angled top lid, 24 cut outs along the edge of the main chassis and a
side view which gives an appearance of four component
The remainder of the Lardis
Declaration discusses the Requestor’s promotion, sales, revenue and
intended future use of the
Lyons Declaration recounts the development of the Carafan and does not deviate
from the timeline provided by Mr Lardis and Mr
Ballard. Mr Lyons declares that
the Owner would have been aware of and had direct access to the Carafan prior to
the lodgement of
the Application. In Mr Lyons’ view, there ‘are
substantial similarities between the design the subject of the Opposed
Application and the Carafan’
and it appears that the Carafan ‘influenced’ some visual features of
the Design.
Hayley, Rogers and Smithson Declarations essentially reiterate the statements
made in the Ballard and Lardis Declarations regarding
the design, manufacture
and commercialisation of the Carafan including the assertion that the Requestor
is an entitled person to
the Design.
McCormick Declaration confirms that the parties are known to each other and
contains submissions addressing what Mr McCormick
perceives to be the new and
distinctive features of the Design when compared to the prior art
Specifically, Mr McCormick
draws attention to the SoND included in the Application as well as the
Design’s ‘drop swing
door’ which he characterises as being its
unique ‘primary visual
Mr McCormick also
claims that at ‘no time during the creation and registration of the
[Owner’s] product was the [Requestor]
identified as the "entitled person"
to the ownership of the
The remainder of
the McCormick Declaration discusses the potential subsistence of copyright in
the Carafan as well as asserting that
the Carafan has been ‘applied
industrially’.
Rowland Declaration responds to claims made within the McCormick Declaration.
Ms Rowland states that the McCormick Declaration
has misconstrued the
nature of the current matter by introducing irrelevant submissions particularly
with respect to issues concerning
evidence has been filed by the Owner in relation to its conception and
development of the
Design. On this basis, Ms Rowland opines that this absence of
documentary evidence lends credence to the possibility that the Owner
conceive of the Design. Finally, Ms Rowland rejects the proposition that the
Design is not substantially similar to the Carafan
and reference is made to
instances of actual confusion between the two designs experienced by the
the outset, the evidence filed reveals the existence of various issues in
dispute between the parties. This includes allegations
concerning potential
is not a registrable design.
the interests of clarity, the only issue for determination in this matter is
whether the Owner was the sole entitled person to
the Design. Questions
concerning the subsistence of copyright in the Carafan and whether the design is
distinctive over the prior
art base are not relevant to the issue at hand. The
Requestor is not required to establish that it was an entitled person to the
exclusion of the Owner nor is it required to establish that the Design is a
registrable design for the Request to be successful.
Instead, the Requestor only
needs to establish on the balance of probabilities that someone other than the
Owner was also an entitled
person, or the Owner was not an entitled person, at
the time the Design was first registered.
of the Act sets out an exhaustive list of who is entitled to be registered as
the owner of a design that has not yet been registered.
The entitled person is
the individual, body corporate or body politic who is entitled to be entered on
the Register of Designs as
the registered owner of a design. The default
position is that the designer, being the person who conceived of the design and
it to some physical form, is the entitled
However, this position
will change if certain conditions, as laid out within the provision, are
satisfied. It has been established
that a designer is the ‘person whose
mind conceives the relevant shape, configuration, pattern or ornamentation
to the article in question and reduces it to visible
the concept of entitlement relates to a design ‘that has not yet been
registered’,
dictates that evidence of entitlement should at least be contemporaneous with
the registration date of the Design. This is
because post-dated evidence is
unlikely to be of assistance in determining who created the visual features of
the Design when it
was first registered. Likewise, evidence establishing
entitlement should relate to
Design and not, for example, to a design
which shares similarity with it.
That is, a request under
of the Act should be confined to determining
issues of entitlement to the design at hand and not matters which are more
appropriately
dealt with via third party
examination.
David Gall has been particularised in the Application as being the designer of
the Design. The Owner’s entitlement therefore
rests on Mr Gall being found
to be the sole designer. The McCormick Declaration is devoid of any evidence or
information regarding
the Design’s development. Nor does it clarify Mr
Gall’s relationship to the
However, this lack of
evidence is not fatal to the Owner’s entitlement and, by itself, does not
merit the revocation of
registration.
As mentioned at
[23] of the decision, it is the Requestor who bears the burden of establishing
another person’s entitlement
to the Design or the Owner’s lack
is common ground that the Carafan existed prior to the Owner filing the
Application. The EIS contains dated evidence which establishes
that the Carafan
was designed by the Requestor’s employees and distributed to market by the
Requestor before May 2019. The
EIA does not dispute this. Indeed, it
acknowledges the Carafan’s prior existence through Mr McCormick’s
statement that
the prior art base specifically includes the
The Requestor’s
entitlement therefore turns on whether the Carafan’s visual appearance
provides a basis to attribute
the Requestor’s employees as being the
designers of the Design. For the reasons that follow, I am not satisfied that
the evidence
provides a cogent basis for this conclusion to be drawn.
main lines of argument were pursued by the Requestor to establish its
entitlement to the Design. First, it contends that the Owner
knowledge of and direct access to the Carafan prior to filing the Application.
As I understand the argument, the implication
is the Owner had the opportunity
to effectively reverse engineer the Carafan and copy its visual appearance.
Second, the Requestor
asserts that the Design is, at the very least,
substantially similar to the Carafan. Taken together, the Requestor asserts that
Owner’s prior knowledge of the Carafan and the visual similarities
between the respective designs means that it is an entitled
person within the
meaning of the Act. It is convenient to consider each argument in turn.
regards to the Owner’s knowledge of the Carafan, I am satisfied that the
Owner had physical access to the Carafan prior to
filing the Application. The
EIS contains documents which establish that the Owner contacted the Requestor
fitted a Carafan to Mr Worsley’s caravan in
early 2019. The EIA does not seek to contradict either event. However, the
of either event does little to advance the Requestor’s
position. It is common ground between the parties that the Carafan formed
of the prior art base. As such, the Carafan was available to the public without
any restrictions as to confidentiality. It follows
that the Owner would have
been able to freely access and procure the Carafan irrespective of contacting
the Requestor or Mr Worsley’s
installation request. Without more, this
line of argument is therefore circumstantial at best.
to the alleged similarities shared by the Carafan and the Design, the Request
states that the Design is a ‘direct copy’
of the Carafan. This is
plainly incorrect. A cursory inspection of each design reveals differences in
their respective visual features.
For example, the pattern that appears on the
fan grill cover in each design substantially differs. As such, the Design is not
copy’ of the Carafan. Sensibly, the Lardis Declaration did
not persist with the assertion that the designs are identical. Rather,
contended that there are ‘substantial similarities’ between the
Design and the Carafan.
my assessment, two main problems arise from Mr Lardis’ contention. The
evidence filed simply does not support the proposition
Requestor’s employees created the Design as it appears in the registered
representations. In addition to the pattern
variation in the fan grill cover,
there are further significant differences in the visual appearance of each
design. This includes
different shaped cut outs along the edges of the main
chassis and different shaped fan boxes including the presence of an internal
drop swing door in the Design and the absence of same in the Carafan.
Additionally, the external lid in each design differs in terms
of the degree of
angularity and the absence of an overhanging edge in the Carafan. Considered in
their entirety, I am satisfied that
these differences extend beyond simply being
an alleged refinement of the Carafan as submitted by Ms
Requestor’s difficulty in establishing entitlement is further compounded
by the fact that it essentially requires me to
mosaic various computer-aided
design drawings and photographs together in order to form a unified
representation of the Carafan.
This is reflected in the comparison undertaken in
the Lardis Declaration wherein the Design is compared with images of the Carafan
in different mediums. In some instances, the images purporting to show the same
part of the Carafan are not even internally consistent
and display different
visual features.
As such, whilst
some images of the Carafan share common visual features with the Design, I
cannot infer from the evidence that these
visual features are uniform across the
different representations of the Carafan supplied by the Requestor.
completeness, even if I were to accept that the Carafan ‘influenced’
the visual appearance of the Design, it does
not follow that the
Requestor’s employees must be the creators of the Design. Put simply, Mr
Gall is free to consider the prior
art base and incorporate different visual
features from existing designs so long as his resultant creation is new and
distinctive
when compared to each individual piece of prior art and not the
prior art base as a whole.
fact that the Carafan and the Design share a degree of visual similarity is not
sufficient to establish entitlement. As discussed
at [25] of this decision,
evidence of entitlement should be in relation to
Design whereas
issues directed towards the distinctiveness of the Design, which appears to be
the case in this matter, should be
pursued via third party
examination.
light of the above, the Requestor has failed to satisfy me that any of its
employees were a designer, or that they were otherwise
entitled to
proprietorship, of the Design.
of the Act relevantly provides:
Procedures in relation to
application
(1) This section applies if a person makes an application under
for revocation of the registration of a design.
(2) If the Registrar is satisfied that:
a person or persons were entitled persons at the time the design was first
registered, and one or more of
the original registered owners of the design was
not an entitled person at that time; or
(b) each original registered owner of the design was an entitled person
at the time when the design was first
registered, but another person or persons
were also entitled persons at that time;
the Registrar may make a written declaration specifying that a person whom
the Registrar is satisfied was an entitled person at the
time the design was
first registered is an entitled person under this subsection.
(3) If the Registrar makes a declaration under subsection (2), the
Registrar must:
(a) notify the relevant parties that the registration of the design is
revoked; and
(b) make an entry in the Register under
section 115.
(4) The Registrar must also publish a notice, in the form prescribed by
the regulations, stating that the registration
of the design has been revoked
and that the design is taken never to have been registered.
(5) The Registrar must not revoke the registration of a design under this
section unless the Registrar has given each
original registered owner a
reasonable opportunity to be heard.
on the evidence before me, I am not satisfied that the Requestor or any persons
other than the Owner were an entitled person
at the time of registration of the
Design. Accordingly, the Request is unsuccessful and I decline to revoke
registration of Australian
design number 201912935.
Nicholas Barbey
Hearing Officer
Delegate of the
Registrar of Designs
Design 201912935
Exhibit EL-4 to Lardis Declaration
Exhibit EL-16 to Lardis Declaration
Exhibit EL-21 to Lardis Declaration
Exhibit EL-24 to Lardis Declaration
Exhibit EL-24 to Lardis Declaration
Exhibit EL-35 to Lardis Declaration
The full set of representations
of the Design are reproduced in Annexure A to this
The Owner was also
notified that examination of the Design had been requested. The correspondence
stated that the examination of
the Design would ‘run concurrently and
independently of the revocation
Representations
of the Carafan are reproduced in Annexure B to this
Ballard Declaration,
Lardis Declaration,
Lyons Declaration,
McCormick Declaration,
See generally Act s 18
that a ‘design is a
registrable design
if the design is new and
distinctive when compared with the prior art base for the design as it existed
before the priority date
Technologies Pty Ltd v Elecspess Pty Ltd
[2008] FCA 1941
, [26] (Gordon J)
citing with approval
Chris Ford Enterprises Pty Ltd v BH & JR Badenhop
(1985) 7 FCR 75
, 80 (Smithers
Australian Fitness
Supplies Pty Ltd v Rasheed Rane
[2013] ADO 6
See Act s 63(1) which
provides that the ‘Registrar must examine a design that has at any time
been a registered design if any
person requests, or a court orders, that the
Registrar examine the
For example,
it may be the case that Mr Gall is an employee of the Owner and the
Owner’s entitlement is derived by operation
of s 13(1)(b) of the Act.
However, no firm conclusions may be drawn because the EIA is silent on this
Act s 118(1) provides
that ‘the Register is prima facie evidence of any particulars entered in
Declaration, [18].
Declaration, [34].
Declaration, [21]. However, this conclusion should not be construed as making
any determination regarding the distinctiveness
Lardis Declaration,
[34]. For example, the images appearing in the item labelled ‘top
view’ show two different fan grill
LED Technologies
Pty Ltd v Elecspess Pty Ltd
[2008] FCA 1941
, [12] (Gordon
I note the Requestor
requested examination of the Design in December 2019 and a certificate of
examination issued on 13 March 2020.
RTF format (8.88 MB)
Signed PDF/A format