Kaylee Wright v Diabetes Australia [2025] FWCFB 236 (22 October 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 236
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
—Appeal of decision
Diabetes Australia
(C2025/8408)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT GRAYSON COMMISSIONER CRAWFORD COMMISSIONER SLOAN
SYDNEY, 22 OCTOBER 2025
Appeal against decision
of Commissioner Mirabella at Melbourne on 18 August 2025 in matter
number C2025/6149 – Permission to appeal refused
Kaylee Wright has lodged an appeal under s.604 of the
’) against a decision of Commissioner
Mirabella issued on 18 August 2025.
decision related to an application that Ms Wright had made under section
365 of the Act seeking that the Commission deal with
a general protections
dispute involving dismissal. The Respondent, Diabetes Australia, had raised a
application, namely that it had not dismissed
Ms Wright, within the meaning of s.386 of the Act. In her decision, the
Commissioner
upheld that objection and dismissed the application.
Ms Wright requires permission to
The matter was listed before the Full
Bench for permission to appeal only. For the reasons that follow, permission to
appeal is refused.
The Background and the Decision
As the reasons for the Commissioner’s decision were given on
transcript and not in a published decision, we will briefly outline
the facts of
the matter.
On 2 April 2024, Ms Wright commenced employment with Diabetes
Victoria. Her employment contract stated that she was employed on a
fixed-term basis until 28 June 2024. Ms Wright subsequently entered into a
second contract with Diabetes Victoria, which was stated
to be for a fixed term
until 30 June 2025.
In approximately February 2025, Diabetes Victoria decided to resign
as a member of Diabetes Australia. The two organisations came
to an arrangement
under which Diabetes Australia would offer employment to certain employees of
Diabetes Victoria, including Ms Wright.
Diabetes Australia made an offer of employment to Ms Wright in a
document titled “Contract of Employment” dated 14 March
’). The Contract provided that Ms Wright would
be engaged as a Customer Services Officer; that her employment with Diabetes
Australia would commence on 22 April 2025 and Ms Wright would be engaged on
a fixed term basis ending on 30 June 2025. The Contract
did not contain an
option for renewal or extension. The Contract provided that Ms Wright’s
prior service with Diabetes Victoria
from 2 April 2024 would be recognised for
the purposes of calculating long service leave accruals, redundancy entitlements
minimum employment period as defined in s.383 of the Act. Ms Wright
executed the Contract online on 20 March 2025.
Ms Wright’s employment with Diabetes Australia came to an
end on 30 June 2025.
Ms Wright commenced proceedings under s.365 of the Act. She
alleged that she had been subjected to adverse action and discrimination
Diabetes Australia, on the basis of a disclosed mental health condition. She
claimed that after expressing a need for support
and reasonable accommodations,
she experienced a series of distressing events and actions that undermined her
mental wellbeing, affected
her performance, and ultimately resulted in the
non-renewal of the Contract under inconsistent and unfair circumstances.
Diabetes Australia denied the allegations. It also raised a
but that her employment came to an end at the expiry of her fixed-term period of
employment.
In her decision, the Commissioner summarised the parties’
evidence and submissions. She found that it was not reasonable in
circumstances for Ms Wright to have expected anything other than that the
Contract would expire with the effluxion of time on
30 June 2025; that the terms
of the Contract were very clear; that there was no evidence of anything that
Diabetes Australia had
done that would have caused Ms Wright to think that
the Contract would be renewed; and, that correspondence close to the termination
date of the Contract also made it clear that the Contract was coming to an end.
Having made those findings, the Commissioner stated
that she was satisfied that
Ms Wright was not dismissed at the initiative of Diabetes Australia and
therefore had not been dismissed
within the meaning of the Act. The Commissioner
dismissed the proceedings.
Permission to appeal – principles
There is no right to appeal. An appeal may only be brought with the
permission of the Commission under s.604(1) of the Act. Without
limiting when
the Commission might grant permission, s.604(2) provides that the Commission
must grant permission to appeal if it
is satisfied that it is in the public
interest to do so.
The task of assessing whether the public interest test is met is a
discretionary one involving a broad value
interest is not satisfied simply by the identification of error or a preference
for a different
Considerations that may attract the public interest include that the matter
raises issues of importance and general application,
that there is a diversity
of decisions at first instance so that guidance from a Full Bench is required,
or that the decision at
first instance reveals an
Where the public interest is not engaged, the Commission may grant
permission to appeal on general discretionary grounds. In determining
whether to grant permission to appeal, it is unnecessary and inappropriate to
conduct a detailed examination of the appeal
However, it
is necessary to engage with the grounds to consider whether they raise an
arguable case of appealable error. An appellant
must ordinarily demonstrate that
there is such a case in order to be granted permission to appeal, as an appeal
cannot succeed in
the absence of
However, an
error by the Member at first instance is not necessarily a sufficient basis for
the grant of permission to appeal.
Application to file new evidence
In her appeal book, Ms Wright included material that had not
been before the Commissioner. That material can be broken down into three
categories: first, statements or similar documents prepared by Ms Wright
that traversed the history of the dispute, the conduct of
the hearing before the
Commissioner and the impact that the dispute has had on her; second, copies of
her contracts with Diabetes
Victoria; and third, two excerpts from her Bank
At the hearing before the Full Bench, Ms Wright agreed that the
documents in the first category should be taken as submissions. She
did not rely
on them to the extent that they traversed what transpired at the hearing before
the Commissioner; the Full Bench could
rely on the transcript in that regard.
The Full Bench reserved its decision as to whether to admit the documents in the
third categories.
Section 607(2) of the Act confers a discretion on the Full Bench to
admit further evidence
take into account any
other information
’ on appeal, however it is by no means a matter of
course that it will do so.
It is well-settled that the principles governing the discretion to
admit new evidence or to consider further material are set down
National Australia Bank
In that case, the New South Wales Supreme Court identified three conditions
which need to be met before fresh evidence can be
“(1) it must be shown that the evidence could not have
been obtained with reasonable diligence for use at the trial;
(2) the evidence must be such that there must be a high degree of probability
that there would be a different verdict; and
(3) the evidence must be credible.”
In considering whether to exercise the discretion in s.607(2), it is
permissible in an appropriate case to depart from the principles
and the principles need not be strictly
it will be rare for fresh evidence to be admitted on appeal where the conditions
are not met.
It appears that at the time of the hearing before the Commissioner,
Ms Wright did not have copies of her contracts with Diabetes Victoria.
the existence of the contracts and the fact that they were both for fixed terms
was not in dispute. We fail to see that the contracts
have such a high degree of
probative value that there is a probability that had they been before the
Commissioner, there would have
been a different result.
The partial excerpts from Ms Wright’s Bank Statements do not
meet any of the conditions in
. The evidence was available to
Ms Wright at the time of the hearing. But more particularly, the evidence
comprises incomplete excerpts
of parts of Ms Wright’s Bank Statements. The
form in which the evidence is presented leads us to conclude that it is unlikely
that it would have made any difference to the Commissioner’s decision, and
also calls into question the credibility of the
For these reasons, we have determined not to admit the new
We observe for completeness that in her appeal book, Ms Wright
made a request that the Commission require Diabetes Australia to produce
documents. At the hearing before us, she confirmed that the documents she sought
were, in her submission, relevant to her
appeal if permission to appeal is
granted. She agreed that the Full Bench did not need to deal with that request
in the context of
considering whether to grant her permission to appeal.
Grounds of appeal
It has required some effort to clarify the grounds of appeal on
which Ms Wright
notice of appeal, she provided four grounds of appeal by way of a
“summary”. These were amplified in the submissions
filed in support of her appeal and in a document titled “Grounds of
Appeal” appearing in the appeal book. The
language that Ms Wright
used to describe her grounds was not always consistent across the documents.
There was also a significant
overlap in the grounds.
Further, a number of the grounds were more directed to the merits of
her substantive application than demonstrating
error in the Commissioner’s
decision. We will deal only with those grounds in the latter category.
Ms Wright’s first appeal ground was that the Commissioner
erred in failing to properly apply the legal test under s.386(1)(a).
that this requires analysis of whether the employer initiated the termination of
the employment relationship, which required
more than looking only at whether an
employment contract had an expiry date. She contended that the
Commissioner’s decision
was contrary to
Khayam v Navitas English Pty
However, in its submissions in the proceedings below, Diabetes
Australia had contended that
had been reversed in
Alouani-Roby
v National Rugby League
reasons, the Commissioner noted Ms Wright’s reliance on
and stated that she had taken all of the parties’ submissions into
account. We can readily infer that the Commissioner preferred
Australia’s submissions. In that context, this ground does no more than
express disagreement with the Commissioner’s
conclusion and a preference
for a different outcome. In any event, we do not consider that the
Commissioner’s application of
the relevant case law was affected by
A second and related appeal ground was that the Commissioner failed
to take into account evidence that on 24 June 2025, while Ms Wright
personal leave, internal emails were exchanged within Diabetes Australia
regarding the cessation of her employment. As she
had not been consulted in
that regard, she submitted that it suggested that Diabetes Australia initiated
the end of the employment
relationship. Ms Wright relied on
George Francis v Volunteer Marine Rescue Assoc Qld Inc
as authority for the proposition that “early notice of non-renewal and
active employer conduct prior to the expiry of the term
may constitute a
dismissal under
s 386(1)(a).”
We do not need to consider whether
stands for the
proposition for which Ms Wright contends. It suffices to observe that in
that case, Commissioner Hunt found that the
Respondent had engaged in conduct
that conveyed an understanding that, notwithstanding a contractual time limit in
the employment
contract, the employment relationship would continue. No such
consideration arises here. The high point of Ms Wright’s evidence
before the Commissioner was that she had an expectation of renewal because
Diabetes Victoria had previously extended her contract.
There was nothing out of the ordinary in Diabetes Australia
preparing the ground for Ms Wright’s expected departure.
has not demonstrated an arguable case that the Commissioner erred
in not having found otherwise.
Two appeal grounds arose from the recognition by Diabetes Australia
of Ms Wright’s service with Diabetes Victoria. First, Ms
contended that her move from Diabetes Victoria to Diabetes Australia was the
result of a transfer of business within the meaning
of s.311 of the Act. As a
result, her employment with Diabetes Australia was “continuous” as
per s.22 of the Act. Ms
Wright seemed to argue that this precluded the
Commissioner from giving effect to the fixed-term provisions of the
During the hearing before the Commissioner, Diabetes Australia
submitted that it and Diabetes Victoria were not associated entities.
Ms Wright asserted otherwise, but led no evidence in that regard. If the
organisations were not associated entities, there is a question
as to whether a
transfer of business occurred. That is because there is no evidence of any other
“connection” between
them within the meaning of s.311(1)(d). But
even if we were to assume that there had been a transfer of business within the
of the Act, it does not necessarily follow that Diabetes Australia was
on that basis alone
from offering Ms Wright a fixed-term
contract and relying on its terms.
Second, Ms Wright contended that as a result of Diabetes
Australia recognising her service with Diabetes Victoria, Diabetes Australia
contravened s.333E of the Act. That is, the Contract was the third consecutive
fixed-term contract that had been offered to her.
As a result, the term in the
Contract stating that it would expire on 30 June 2025 had no effect by virtue of
Firstly, as outlined above at [6], the Contract expressly only
provides for the recognition of prior service in relation to three
matters. Secondly, we have serious doubts as to whether Diabetes Australia can
be taken to have contravened s.333E by entering
into the Contract with
Ms Wright, by virtue of the fact that she had previously been employed by
Diabetes Victoria under two fixed-term
contracts. The effect of
Ms Wright’s argument appears to be that, given that there was an
alleged transfer of business, Diabetes
Australia is to be taken as having been
the entity that entered into the two previous contracts in place of Diabetes
Victoria. We
are not convinced of the correctness of that contention. But this
is not a matter we need to determine in deciding whether to grant
permission to
appeal. We are not satisfied there is an arguable case that the Commissioner
erred in relying on the expiry date identified
in Ms Wright’s fixed term
contract based on the material before the Commissioner and the circumstances of
Another appeal ground on which Ms Wright relied was that the
Commissioner’s conduct was procedurally unfair and denied her natural
justice. This ground was based on a number of contentions.
First, Ms Wright claimed that she was repeatedly interrupted
during the hearing and prevented from presenting key evidence. She stated
that the Commissioner blocked her attempts to refer to relevant documents.
However, this is not borne out by the transcript. While
the Commissioner
adopted an inquisitorial approach to the proceedings, her questions of
Ms Wright, and of the representative for
Diabetes Australia, were directed
towards understanding the arguments that each party was advancing and clarifying
their evidence.
To the extent that the Commissioner prevented
Ms Wright from traversing evidence and submissions, it was to avoid her
the merits of the matter. That was appropriate as the Commissioner
was only considering the question of whether Ms Wright had been
Second, Ms Wright asserted that the Commissioner conducted a
private, unrecorded meeting with Diabetes Australia in her absence. Importantly,
this did not occur during the hearing, but on 24 July 2025, some weeks earlier,
when the Commissioner had listed the matter for conference.
In any event,
Ms Wright did not explain how such a meeting denied her procedural fairness
or impacted on the Commissioner’s
decision. The high point of her case was
that the meeting “raises concerns about transparency and procedural
Third, Ms Wright claimed that the Commissioner made comments to the
effect that Ms Wright was unprofessional during the hearing by
referring to
Ms Wright’s cat and suggesting she should have attended in person.
Ms Wright asserted that these remarks were
inappropriate, caused her
significant anxiety, impaired her ability to present her case, and affected the
fairness of the process.
These assertions are also not borne out by the transcript. The
hearing was conducted remotely via Microsoft Teams. It is clear that
Ms Wright’s cat was in the room with her during the hearing and had
distracted the Commissioner. Ms Wright explained to the
Commissioner that
her cat was in recovery from veterinary treatment, could not leave her side, and
was being “raucous”
and “hitting things.” Ms Wright
offered to, and did, place the cat in another room. The Commissioner cannot be
for seeking to remove distractions from the hearing, and the
transcript reveals nothing inappropriate about the manner in which she
Further, the Commissioner did not suggest that Ms Wright ought to have
attended in person. She simply observed that had the
hearing been in person, no
cats would have been allowed. This was in the context of asking parties to
respect the process, despite
the matter being heard online.
Fourth, Ms Wright submitted that the Commissioner failed to
give her guidance as to the conduct of proceedings. This included the
Commissioner failing to inform Ms Wright of her “right” to
request an adjournment or additional time if she felt her
case “was not
fully heard” and failing to inform her in advance that she could
cross-examine Diabetes Australia’s
witness. Putting to one side whether
Ms Wright had a right to request an adjournment as she contends, the fact
remains that it was
for Ms Wright to familiarise herself with the
Commission’s processes. There is ample information available on the
Commission’s
website that Ms Wright could have accessed. Her material
on appeal reveals that she is no stranger to navigating that website.
Fifth, Ms Wright contended that the Commissioner did not advise
her of her right to appeal the decision. That contention has no bearing
whether the decision itself was affected by error.
In a further appeal ground (or grounds), Ms Wright asserted that the
Commissioner had made significant errors of fact in three respects.
rested on evidence that she was one of four employees of Diabetes Victoria who
had been offered employment with Diabetes
Australia, but the only one whose
contract was not renewed. Ms Wright contended that the Commissioner
“failed to draw appropriate
inferences from the employer’s selective
treatment and lack of transparency.” Ms Wright did not articulate
what the “appropriate
inferences” would have been. But in any event,
the contention rests on an incorrect premise, namely that Diabetes Australia
required to justify why it did not renew the Contract. That was a question that
went to the merits of the application, not to
whether Ms Wright had been
dismissed. It is not the role of the Commission to determine the merits of an
application made under
s.365 of the Act.
The second alleged error was that the Commissioner had failed to
consider whether the non-renewal of the Contract may have been connected
having raised concerns about sick leave and mental health in the month prior to
the cessation of her employment. This contention
rests on the same incorrect
premise as the previous one.
The third alleged error arose from an assertion that Diabetes
Australia breached its obligations under the Contract or the National
Standards to provide her with notice of termination. However, Ms Wright did
not explain how this demonstrates an error
by the Commissioner. Further, this
does not appear to have been an argument advanced before the Commissioner.
Order and disposition
For the reasons given, we do not consider that Ms Wright has
advanced an arguable case that the decision was attended by appealable
The decision appears to us to reflect an orthodox assessment and disposition of
a case of this kind. We are not satisfied
that it is in the public interest to
grant permission to appeal, as the appeal does not raise any genuine issue of
law, principle
or wider application. We do not consider that permission to
appeal should be granted on general discretionary grounds.
Permission to appeal is refused.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
Ms K. Wright
for herself.
Ms H. Gould,
Ms A. March
for the Respondent.
Hearing details:
By video using Microsoft Teams.
Kaylee Wright
v Diabetes Australia
, with the reasons given on transcript on 18 August 2025.
Fair Work Act
O’Sullivan v Farrer (
[1989] HCA 61
1989) 168 CLR 210
, 216-217 per Mason CJ,
Brennan, Dawson and Gaudron JJ, applied in
Hogan v Hinch (
2011) 243 CLR
, [69] per Gummow, Hayne, Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ;
Allied Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler and others
(2011) 192 FCR 78,
Coal & Allied Mining Services Pty Ltd t/as Mt Thorley
Operations/Warkworth
FWAFB 10089
, [28], affirmed on judicial review in
Coal & Allied
Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler
(2011) 192 FCR 78;
Bar Association v Brett McAuliffe
Commonwealth of Australia represented
by the Australian Taxation Office
; 241 IR 177, [28].
GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty Ltd v Makin
, 197 IR 266, [27].
Trustee for
The MTGI Trust v Johnston
[2016] FCAFC 140
Allied Operations Pty Ltd v AIRC
(2000) 203 CLR 194
(1994) 34 NSWLR
JJ Richards
& Sons Pty Ltd v Transport Workers’ Union of Australia
Mermaid Marine Vessel Operations Pty Ltd v Maritime
Union of Australia
(2014) 241 IR 35
C Ozsoy v Monstamac Industries Pty Ltd
, [21]-[25];
Perry v Rio Tinto Shipping Pty Ltd
that our task has not been made easier by Ms Wright citing in support of her
submissions authorities which do not appear
[2024] FCAFC
Diabetes Australia
Appeal Book, pg 26.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (1.73 MB)
Signed PDF/A format