WHAV Pty Ltd v Propel Health Pty [2025] ATMO 222 (31 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Opposition by WHAV Pty Ltd
to application under
Trade Marks Act 1995
Propel Health Pty Ltd to remove trade mark number 1836264 WONDER FOODS (fig)
(class 35) in the name of WHAV Pty Ltd
Oppositions by WHAV Pty Ltd to registration of trade mark
numbers 2356038 WONDER FOODS (class 5) and 2441563 WONDER FOODS (class 32)
in the name of McJenks Investments Pty Ltd
Oppositions by Propel Health Pty Ltd to registration of
trade mark numbers 2393413 WONDER FOODS AUSTRALIA (fig) (class 5) and 2393414
WONDER FOODS AUSTRALIA (class 5) both in the name of WHAV Pty Ltd
Tracey Berger
REPRESENTATION:
WHAV Pty Ltd:
Edward Thompson of Counsel instructed by Progressive
Legal Pty Ltd
Propel Health Pty Ltd/ McJenks Investments Pty Ltd:
2025 ATMO 222
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) – Three opposition proceedings
considered: (i)
opposition to application for removal of registration
1836264 under
ss 92(4)(a)
and (b)- opposition successful – trade mark to
remain on the Register
(ii) Oppositions under
by WHAV Pty Ltd to registration of Australian
trade mark applications 2356038 and 2441563 WONDER FOODS – oppositions
– registration of trade marks refused
(iii) Oppositions by Propel Health Pty Ltd to registration of Australian
trade mark applications 2393413 WONDER FOODS AUSTRALIA (fig)
and 2393414 WONDER
FOODS AUSTRALIA –
considered –
no grounds established – trade marks to proceed to registration
decision concerns the following three related matters:
oppositions by
WHAV Pty Ltd (‘WHAV’) to registration of the trade marks which are
the subject of applications 2356038
and 2441563, both in the name of McJenks
Investments Pty Ltd (‘McJenks’) (‘WHAV Oppositions’);
oppositions by
Propel Health Pty Ltd (‘Propel’) to registration of the trade marks
which are the subject of applications
2393413 and 2393413, both in the name of
WHAV (‘Propel Oppositions’); and
opposition by
WHAV Pty Ltd to an application by Propel under
Trade Marks Act
registration 1836264 on the basis of non-use (‘Removal
Opposition’).
following background is presented in the order the evidence in support was first
filed. For clarity, opposition matters are discussed
by application filing date,
followed by the Removal Opposition.
Background to the Removal Opposition
is the owner of the trade mark registration detailed below:
(‘Challenged Mark’)
1836264 (‘Registration’)
Filing Date:
Specification: Class 35:
Brand creation services (‘Registered
27 March 2024, Propel filed an application under
ss 92(4)(a)
seeking the complete removal of the Registration from the Register of Trade
Marks (‘Removal Application’). In
response, WHAV filed a Notice of
Intention to Oppose the Removal Application and a Statement of Grounds and
Particulars.
Propel subsequently
filed a Notice of Intention to Defend.
parties then filed the following
Declarant and Position
Exhibits/Annexures
Nathan James Bailey, sole director and company secretary of WHAV
(‘Bailey 1’)
NB-01 to NB-26 (including Confidential Annexures NB-02, NB-05, NB-19,
NB-20, NB-22, NB-24, NB-25 and NB-26)
Grant Jenkins, Director of Propel (‘Jenkins’)
GJ-01 to GJ-25 (including Confidential Annexures GJ-07B)
Nathan James Bailey (‘Bailey 2’)
NB-27 to NB-34 (including Confidential Annexures NB-29 and NB-30)
Background to the WHAV Oppositions
matter concerns oppositions by WHAV under
to registration of the trade
marks the subject of the applications detailed below in the name of McJenks
Applications’):
Priority Date
Specification
Endorsement
WONDER FOODS
(‘McJenks Mark’)
Dietetic substances adapted for medical use; vitamins and
vitamin supplements; dietary and nutritional products (meal replacements)
supplements; minerals and mineral supplements; nutritional supplements; herbal
remedies; protein supplements; none of the foregoing
being soap, cleansing milk,
shampoo, fragrances, cosmetics, perfumes, or preparations for the foregoing; all
of the aforementioned
being for dietetic and/or nutritional purposes
Provisions of paragraph 44(3)(b) and/or Reg 4.15A(3)(b) applied.
WONDER FOODS
bottled drinking water; sports drinks; powders used in
the preparation of sports drinks
(collectively the goods of the McJenks Applications are referred to as the
‘McJenks Goods’)
McJenks Applications were examined as required under
and following the
advertisements of acceptance for possible registration, WHAV filed Notices of
Intention to Oppose followed by an
SGP in each case. The Applicant subsequently
filed Notices of Intention to Defend the oppositions.
parties then had the opportunity to file evidence in accordance with the
Regulations. The following evidence was filed:
Opposition to 2356038
Declarant and
Exhibits/Annexures
Evidence in Support
Nathan James Bailey, sole director and company secretary of WHAV
(‘Bailey 3’)
NB-01 to NB-43 (including Confidential Annexures NB-02 to NB-05, NB-19 to
NB-21, NB-24 and NB-41)
Evidence in Answer
GJ-01 to GJ-25 (including Confidential Annexure GJ-07B)
Evidence in Reply
Nathan James Bailey
NB-42 to NB-54 (including Confidential Annexures NB-45 and NB-46)
Opposition to 2441563
Declarant and Position
Exhibits/Annexures
Evidence in Support
Nathan James Bailey, of WHAV
NB-01 to NB-44 (including Confidential Annexures NB-02 to NB-05, NB-19 to
NB-21, NB-24 and NB-41)
Evidence in Answer
Grant Jenkins, Director of Propel (‘Jenkins 2’)
GJ-01 to GJ-19
Evidence in Reply
Nathan James Bailey
NB-42 to NB-53 (including Confidential Annexures NB-45, NB-46 and NB-48 to
Background to the Propel Oppositions
final matter is Propel’s oppositions under
to registration of the
trade marks the subject of the applications detailed below in the name of WHAV
Applications’):
(‘WHAV’s Marks’)
Priority Date
Specification
Endorsement
(‘413 Mark’)
Class 5: Various medical, dietary and nutritional
supplements
Provisions of
subsection 44(4)
and/or Reg 4.15A(5) applied.
WONDER FOODS AUSTRALIA
Provisions of
subsection 44(4)
and/or Reg 4.15A(5) applied.
WHAV Applications were examined in accordance with
and advertised as
accepted for possible registration. In each case, Propel filed a Notice of
Intention to Oppose followed by its
SGP. WHAV then filed Notices of Intention
following evidence was subsequently
Declarant and Position
Exhibits/Annexures
Grant Jenkins, Director of Propel (‘Jenkins 3’)
GJ-1 to GJ-15
Nathan James Bailey,
NB-01 to NB-33 (including Confidential Annexures NB-02 to NB-05, NB-18 to
NB-20, NB-23 and NB-30)
Grant Jenkins
GJ-01 to GJ-26
the evidence stages had ended in each proceeding, the parties were given the
opportunity to request a hearing. Both parties
requested an oral hearing. I am
a delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks (‘Registrar’) and these
matters have been
allocated to me to determine. I heard these matters together
on 4 September 2025. Prior to the hearing, the parties filed written
of their submissions. At the hearing, Edward Thompson of Counsel instructed by
Ian Aldridge, Jacob Grumetza and Seren
Everingham of Progressive Legal Pty Ltd
appeared for WHAV. Mark Metzeling and Jacob Schulz of Macpherson Kelley
(observed by Grant
Jenkins and Elisha McDonald of Propel/McJenks) appeared for
Propel and McJenks. I make my decision based on the aforementioned materials
and oral and written submissions of the parties.
Summary of evidence
of the evidence submitted by both parties overlaps across the proceedings. Where
evidence was filed in only one matter, I consider
it reasonable and appropriate
to have regard to it for all related proceedings in accordance with regulation
21.15(4) which is consistent
with the manner in which the parties treated the
evidence. Some evidence, including key agreements, is confidential. I have
confidentiality where possible, but have discussed essential details
as needed for this decision.
briefly summarise the parties’ positions, WHAV contends that it purchased
the WONDER FOODS business, including the registered
and unregistered marks
containing or consisting of WONDER FOODS, which had been used by the vendor,
Kova Brendale Pty Ltd (formerly
Prema Life Pty Limited, (‘Vendor’)
in Australia for health supplements and related goods for about 40 years. Since
the WONDER FOODS ‘business’, WHAV has carried on the
business in substantially the same way as the Vendor, selling health
and supplements (‘WHAV’s Goods’) under the WONDER FOODS brand.
Shortly after WHAV purchased the marks,
Propel/McJenks (who had also bid on the
Vendor’s WONDER FOODS assets) commenced use of WONDER FOODS, adopting
similar packaging
and get-up to that used by the Vendor and WHAV. WHAV alleges
Propel/McJenks have engaged in various other acts of bad faith including
removal of the vendor’s stock that WHAV purchased and changing the login
for the Vendor’s Facebook account.
Propel/McJenks
claim that the Vendor had abandoned the WONDER FOODS mark and therefore, they
were entitled to apply for registration.
Propel/McJenks do not dispute that
WHAV purchased the Challenged Mark but argue that WHAV did not purchase the
whole of the Vendor’s
WONDER FOODS business and therefore, could not have
purchased the unregistered mark WONDER FOODS for health foods and supplements.
Propel/McJenks deny that they acted in bad faith and attribute most of the
conduct complained of by WHAV to Employee
, a former employee of the Vendor
who Propel subsequently employed, and who was terminated by Propel for
misconduct.
WHAV’s evidence
History and Asset Acquisition
3 declares that the trade mark WONDER FOODS was first used by Mr Glendon Whalley
Gillard in around 1982 for a whey drink he
developed as an alternative to milk,
which is still available today.
2002, Kova Brendale Pty Ltd was incorporated with Mr Gillard and his
appointed as directors at
various times from incorporation. Since then, the Vendor used the WONDER FOODS
mark for its health supplements
business. In addition, the Vendor was also the
contract manufacturer, distributor and seller for a number of other businesses
health products, including SUN RAY, NPM, ROSA NATURAL and BIO
23 February 2023, the Vendor went into receivership and Grant Thornton
(‘Receivers’) were appointed as Receiver managers.
On 2 March 2023,
the Receivers informed Mr Bailey that the Vendor was in receivership but would
continue operating as usual.
Bailey immediately started negotiations with the Receivers to acquire the
Vendor’s assets and on 7 March 2023, signed a
non-disclosure agreement
with the Receivers. In March 2023, Mr Bailey received access to the
Vendor’s data room and inspected
the Vendor’s premises, stock and
equipment. As multiple parties showed interest in the Vendor’s assets,
the Receivers
set a deadline of 5pm on 11 May 2023 for interested parties to
submit final purchase offers for the Vendor’s assets. WHAV
successful bidder and its final offer was accepted on 15 May 2023.
the successful bidder, WHAV claims it acquired the Vendor’s Wonder Foods
business including all associated goodwill, the
unregistered mark WONDER FOODS,
the Challenged Mark, related intellectual property, the website at
www.wonderfoods.com.au (‘Vendor’s
Website’), the social media
accounts at www.facebook.com/wonderfoodsaustralia (‘Vendor’s FB
Account’) and
www.instagram.com/wearewonderfoods and the Vendor’s
WONDER FOODS product formulations, customer and supplier information.
the Asset Sale Agreement signed by the Receivers on behalf of the Vendor and
WHAV dated 15 June 2023 is provided (‘Asset
Agreement’).
2023, WHAV purchased all remaining stock that related to the Vendor’s
Wonder Foods business. The Receivers provided
multiple current
product formulations, ‘under development’ formulations and archived
formulations;
spreadsheet of all raw materials and stock;
costs guidelines
and brand guidelines;
social media
account logins except for the Vendor’s FB Account (which log in had been
changed by the time the logins were provided);
all remaining
(collectively the ‘Purchased Assets’).
assignment of the Challenged Mark to WHAV was recorded by the Trade Marks Office
in July 2023 and a copy of the Confirmatory Assignment
Deed is provided
(‘Assignment
to Bailey 3, the mark WONDER FOODS has been continuously used since 1982 in word
form and in various logo forms as shown
2011 to 2018:
Challenged Mark
(collectively ‘Vendor’s Marks’)
3 attests that to the best of his knowledge, the Vendor legally retained control
over the Vendor’s Marks in relation
to their goods until WHAV acquired the
Purchased Assets. Since then, WHAV has legally retained control over the
Vendor’s Marks
and continuously used and promoted the Vendor’s Marks
for the same goods. Bailey 3 declares that WHAV never relinquished ownership
the marks to McJenks or any other third party, nor were the Vendor’s Marks
abandoned before or after the sale of the Purchased
Goods are sold through over 150 physical stores throughout Australia, online and
through distributors including Go Vita
with over 100 stores throughout Australia
and Chempro with over 100 stores throughout Queensland. Confidential Annexure
Bailey 3 sets out the income generated from sales of WHAV’s Goods
under the Challenged Mark from 2019 to 2024 and approximate
advertising
expenditure for promoting those products from 2020 to 2024. Also annexed to
Bailey 3 are:
invoices for the
sale of WHAV’s Goods from 2017 to 2024;
various examples
of promotional materials from 2014 to 2017 including product catalogues issued
in 2016, 2017 and 2019;
screenshots of
various third party websites and distributors’ websites illustrating
WHAV’s Goods for sale. Annexure NB-10
of Bailey 3 includes screenshots of
distributors’ websites dating from 2011; and
screenshots of
the Vendor’s Website obtained using the Wayback Machine from 2014 to
3 attests that the Vendor’s Marks have been promoted on social media since
2014 Examples of use of WONDER FOODS on a
new Facebook account set-up by WHAV
and the other social media accounts acquired from the Vendor are provided
together with examples
of promotion of WHAV’s Goods on the social media
accounts of its stockists and distributors.
Conflict with McJenks
3 annexes current company extracts from the Australian Securities and
Investments Commission for McJenks and Propel showing:
Andrew Robert McDonald and Ms Elisha Carmen McDonald have been directors of
McJenks since its incorporation on 17 December 2020;
McDonald has also been a director of Propel since its incorporation on 11 May
and Ms McDonald have been the sole directors of McJenks Co Pty Ltd since its
incorporation on 17 December 2020 and that company
has been the sole shareholder
of Propel since 12 September 2024.
11 May 2023, the McJenks Applications were filed and according to WHAV, Propel
started using the mark WONDER FOODS without WHAV’s
authorisation, for
goods which are the same or similar to WHAV’s Goods and using identical or
highly similar get-up and promotional
materials to those of the Vendor and WHAV.
Various examples are annexed to Bailey 3.
3 declares that at some time between the filing of the McJenks Applications and
25 July 2023, Propel obtained access to the
Vendor’s FB Account, renamed
the account and changed the handle to www.facebook.com/wonderfoodsaus. This
account still features
the Vendor’s historical posts. Also, Propel
proceeded to email the Vendor’s contacts and other people in the health
food and health supplement industry with McJenks’ marketing
3 claims that McJenks’ use of the mark WONDER FOODS has led to consumer
confusion and annexes examples.
1 August 2023, WHAV became aware of McJenks’ unauthorised use of the
Purchased Assets. On 9 August 2023, Mr Jenkins
that McJenks and/or Propel had been a competing bidder for the Assets. Details
of that telephone call
as recalled by Mr Bailey are set out in Bailey 2.
23 August 2023, WHAV’s lawyers sent a letter of demand to McJenks’
lawyers and the parties engaged in subsequent correspondence.
18 September 2023, McJenks/Propel’s lawyers sent a letter to many of the
Vendor’s distributors and customers which
Bailey 3 says misrepresents
ownership of the Purchased Assets and makes ‘aggressive and slanderous
remarks’ about WHAV.
Bailey declares that he is still in contact with an ex-employee of the Vendor
who claims that she witnessed her manager ‘walking
out with substantial
WONDER FOODS stock’ on the day that the Receivers’ notice was
received by the Vendor. Bailey 2
details the problems that Mr Bailey had
obtaining the whole of the stock he purchased and attests that he received only
a small proportion
of the stock actually bought, despite the Receivers attempts
to locate the missing stock. Mr Bailey declares that he contacted the
access to the Vendor’s premises in
order to ‘empty the air
conditioner or cool room overflow bucket each day’ and had actively
discouraged other interested
parties from bidding on the Assets.
2 also explains that Mr Bailey initially filed redacted copies of the Asset Sale
Agreement and other documents because of the
‘turbulent history’
between WHAV and Propel/McJenks. Bailey 2 attests that after sharing its
current packaging and brand
guidelines in these proceedings, Propel started to
adopt additional features of WHAV’s packaging and get-up for its own
Use of the Challenged Mark
respect to use of the Challenged Mark, Bailey 1 claims that WHAV purchased the
Challenged Mark in order to promote and provide
the Registered Services.
According to Bailey 1, WHAV has provided the Registered Services under the
Challenged Mark and intends
to continue doing so.
August 2023, WHAV started approaching potential customers on the Vendor’s
customer list to offer the Registered Services.
An example of a follow up email
sent to a potential customer is annexed to Bailey 1. Mr Bailey declares that
WHAV intends to continue
cold calling potential customers of the Vendor who had
expressed interest in contract manufacturing and/or marketing health foods
supplements, in order to provide the Registered Services ‘to a select
number of customers per year’. Mr Bailey attests
that WHAV wants to
become a ‘one-stop shop where a customer provides an idea or a name and
[WHAV] creates the full branding
package, develops and manufactures the
products(s) and uses its fulfilment partners to ship the customer’s
products throughout
Australia. [WHAV’s] customers would only need to
worry about marketing the brand to their customers and followers’.
1 claims that in August 2023, WHAV developed the brand AINA FOODS including a
logo as well as related marketing and advertising
concepts to sell the brand to
a third party. On 13 August 2024, WHAV filed Australian trade mark application
number 2473802
in classes 3, 5, 29, 30 and 32 on 13 August
2024 to ‘further prepare for the sale of this branding
1 declares that he had meetings with a customer throughout August 2023 regarding
the provision of a branding package and signed
an engagement letter with the
customer in early September 2023. In September 2023, WHAV created the brand
WHOLEY MOLEY FOOD CO with
related marketing and advertising concepts for sale to
the customer and filed Australian trade mark application 2404592
in classes 5, 29, 30 and 32 on 10 November 2023. Bailey 1 attests that upon
completion of the sale, all assets including the trade
mark application (or
registration) will be assigned to WHAV’s customer.
to Bailey 1 is the income generated from providing the Registered Services and
advertising expenditure by WHAV for promoting
the Registered Services under the
Challenged Mark.
1 also declares that to the extent that the Challenged Mark was not used during
the relevant three year period, such non-use
was due to the Vendor suffering
financial problems before going into receivership in February 2023.
Propel/McJenks evidence
declares that McJenks owns the trade mark WONDER FOODS and licenses its use to
Propel, which he describes as the ‘trading
arm’ of McJenks.
attests that on about 4 May 2023, he became aware that the Vendor had appointed
external administrators and would be selling
its assets. Having decided to
diversify the fitness business (operated with his wife, Ms McDonald) into
nutritional supplements,
Jenkins declares that he was interested in potentially
acquiring the assets of the Vendor who sold ‘a few different brands
supplement products’.
to Jenkins is a post on the Vendor’s FB Account on 23 April 2023 stating
that ‘Remaining stock has been further
discounted by up to 60% with NVA
continuing to trade to close of business Friday 28
(‘Vendor’s FB Post’).
4 May 2023, Elisha McDonald of McJenks exchanged emails with the Receivers and
Mr Driscoll of the Receivers asked Ms McDonald to
declares that McJenks engaged Macpherson Kelley (‘MK’) to assist and
advise them in negotiating with the Receivers
and evaluation of the intellectual
property of the Vendor.
around 4 or 5 May 2023, Ms McDonald spoke with Mr Driscoll of the Receivers and
Ms McDonald sent a follow up email summarising
the conversation in which she
I would just like to explore the options available for
I understand the business has now closed and there’s no
value left in the name. (‘McDonald Statement’).
Driscoll promptly responded to Ms McDonald but made no comment about the
McDonald Statement. Jenkins attests that later that day,
Ms McDonald sent a
further email to Mr Driscoll seeking to purchase ‘physical company assets
and registered intellectual property,
subject to conducting due diligence re
10 May 2023, McJenks submitted its offer to the Receivers and their lawyers,
Minter Ellison (‘ME’), to purchase the
Vendor’s business,
relevant assets and common law rights. The next day this offer was withdrawn
and immediately replaced with
a corrected offer including extra intellectual
property such as customer lists, recipes, suppliers, ordering platforms and
and additional physical assets.
declares that later on 11 May 2023, he was advised by MK in a phone call
(a) Considering GT’s representations, as the
administrator of Kova, as at 11 May 2023 Kova had abandoned its common law
i. if the common law rights still existed there must still be
value in the name in respect of goodwill, but GT had said there was
left in the name; and
ii. to transfer the common law rights, the business
must be sold as a going concern, but GT had said the business has ceased trading
and was not for sale (only the assets of the business), which means the business
at common law had ceased to exist.
(b) Given the Kova Registration was registered in relation to irrelevant
services, and Kova had expressly represented it had abandoned
its common law
rights, this meant that at latest on 11 May 2023 (and more likely earlier),
there was no longer a first common law
Accordingly, the first entity to commence using the trade mark or in the
alternative to file an application for a registered trade
mark would become the
true owner of the trade mark and be the only entity entitled to use it.
(c) The status of the Kova Registration was publicly available and the status
of the common law rights of Kova, could be confirmed
by any interested third
party by way of due diligence into the validity and enforceability of
Kova’s intellectual property.
(d) As at 11 May 2023, McJenks could file a trade mark application for WONDER
FOODS seeking registration in relation to goods and
services of a similar kind
to the Kova Products and Services, and that any such application would be made
in good faith.
on the above advice, McJenks filed the McJenks Applications and proceeded to
incorporate Propel.
McDonald had also received an email on 5 May 2023 from a former employee of the
Vendor confirming the date that the business ceased
trading. On 12 May 2023,
McJenks received a response to its offer from ME in which ME advised ‘That
business [h]as ceased
trading’ (‘ME Response’).
declares that he became aware in early June 2023 that a third party had acquired
the Vendor’s assets. On 19 July 2023,
Ms McDonald received an email from
Mr Bidwell of the Receivers in response to her enquiries about the possible
purchase of plant,
equipment and stock from another of the Vendor’s
premises which advised that ‘for the avoidance of any doubt, the sale
entered into by the Receivers and Managers was a sale of specific assets and not
the business of the Company as a whole (this sale
did include some intellectual
property, namely the Wonder Foods Brand)’ (‘Receiver’s July
Email’). These
emails are exhibited to Jenkins.
attests that he did not wish the Vendor’s employees to be unemployed and
because McJenks could utilise their knowledge
of the supplements industry, in
May 2023, he employed Employee 1
and seven other former employees.
to McJenks, on 5 May 2023, Employee 1 messaged Ms McDonald to advise that Ms
Blake of the Receivers had told Employee 1
that ‘all that can be done is
an offer for the IP and left over inventory’. In July 2023, Employee 1
claimed she had
purchased Wonder Foods products which she sold to Propel.
Propel created a Shopify website to sell that stock.
declares that Employee 1’s employment contract was subsequently terminated
for misconduct and that Mr Jenkins had called
the Receivers on 5 April 2024 to
advise that as a result of Employee 1’s actions, he believed McJenks was
in possession of
property belonging to the Vendor. Jenkins sent an email
confirming the conversation but heard nothing further from the Receivers.
some point Propel became aware of the WHAV Applications and obtained written
advice from MK on 4 August 2023. A redacted copy
of that advice is exhibited to
Jenkins (‘MK’s
On 9 August
2023, Mr Jenkins telephoned Mr Bailey to try to resolve the matter. Jenkins
details his recollection of that conversation.
relation to whether the Vendor had an intention to use the Challenged Mark,
Jenkins exhibits 4 letters from various people previously
employed by or
connected to the Vendor claiming the Vendor never had an intention to use the
Challenged Mark for the Registered Services.
2 outlines why Propel/McJenks holds the view that WHAV did not purchase the
unregistered WONDER FOODS mark.
Discussion – WHAV Oppositions
its SGP, WHAV nominates grounds of opposition under ss 42(b), 58, 59, 60 and
62A. The s 59 ground of opposition was not pressed
at the hearing.
date at which the rights of the parties are to be determined is the filing date
of 11 May 2023 (‘Relevant Date’) which
is also the priority date for
the purposes of s 60.
as the opponent, bears the onus of establishing at least one of the grounds of
opposition.
The standard of
proof is the ordinary civil standard of the balance of
probabilities.
58 allows opposition to a trade mark registration if the applicant is not the
true owner. Ownership is determined by first
use or first application in
Australia. To succeed, WHAV must show:
the McJenks Mark
is identical or substantially identical to WHAV’s marks;
the goods are
the same or similar;
someone other
than McJenks (here, WHAV or its predecessor) used the mark first in
relies on the Vendor’s use of the Vendor’s Marks since 1982. It is
not in dispute that the McJenks Mark is identical
or substantially identical to
each of the Vendor’s Marks.
claims that the Vendor used the Vendor’s Marks for all of the McJenks
Goods, or the same kind of thing, except for ‘bottled
water’. In support of this claim, the evidence relied on by WHAV
Extracts from
the Vendor’s website obtained using the Wayback
dating from 2013, 2014,
2016, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021 illustrating use of WONDER FOODS for dietary,
nutritional and mineral supplements,
herbal remedies such as alfalfa powder,
ground bee pollen, brewers yeast, L-Glutamine, wheatgrass, ocean minerals with
castor oil, epsom salts and slippery elm powder; and powders for
making beverages such as FigaFibre (for weight management/meal replacement),
Flex-Greens (for alkaline balance and energy) and Wonder Whey (low allergenic
milk alternative), NicerWeigh (high protein, fibre
rich drink powder) and Tangy
Vitamin C (citrus tasting drink powder).
Invoices issued
by the Vendor to customers from 2017 to
for a range of goods
including stevia drops and powder, castor oil, CranAloe (described as
‘antioxidant fruit punch’),
Tangy Vitamin C, Inulin (fibre powder
which functions as a prebiotic), bee pollen, Vegan Protein Supreme, Wonder Whey,
Orotate, Mircodistilled Aloe Vera, Wonder Vitamin B, cholorophyll,
Multiplex Minerals, Green Barley Grass Powder, FigaFibre, Partially
guar gum (a soluble dietary fibre)
Wonder Foods
Product Catalogues
, April 2017 and September
2019 illustrating the aforementioned products and Sprint ‘amino active
anti-oxidant sports and superfood’,
Stamina Blend & Joint Food
‘to assist in the fitness, stamina and recovery of athletes and sports
active people’
and protein powders.
promotional flyers
showing use
of the Challenged Mark (which Bailey attests was used from 2011 to 2018) for
stevia drops, Wonder Whey, FigaFibre, Tangy
Vitamin C, various protein powders,
Charcoal Max (for digestive health) and Hesperidin & Mineral Powder and the
for various nutritional, dietary and mineral supplements; and
social media
posts of the Vendor and third party retailers before the Relevant
relation to whether goods are ‘the same kind of thing’, the goods in
relation to which the earlier mark has been used
must be ‘essentially the
same’ as the applicant’s goods, though they may differ in size,
shape and name.
my view, it is clear that the Vendor used the Vendor’s Marks before the
Relevant Date for goods which are the same as the
class 5 goods of
McJenks’ application number 2356038. In addition to the above materials
clearly establishing use of the Vendor’s
Marks over a decade before the
Relevant Date, many of those materials also refer to Mr Gillard and the Vendor
having distributed
WONDER FOODS whey drinks and Tangy C Vitamin supplements
since the 1980s and 1990s.
relation to the class 32 goods of McJenks application 2441563, I consider that
WHAV’s protein powders and whey powders for
making drinks, as well as
products such as Sprint and Stamina Blend & Joint Food are all powders used
in the preparation of sports
drinks or the same kind of thing.
Accordingly,
I am satisfied that the Vendor’s Marks were used by the Vendor before the
Relevant Date for goods which are the
same or the same kind of thing as the
McJenks Goods except ‘bottled drinking water’.
is no evidence that McJenks used the mark WONDER FOODS before the Relevant Date.
As noted above, the Vendor was the first to
use the Vendor’s Marks before
the filing of the McJenks Applications. However, McJenks claims that the
Vendor’s use
of WONDER FOODS was not continuous and/or that the Vendor had
abandoned the Trade Mark.
argues that abandonment of a trade mark is not established by mere non-use or a
temporary suspension of trading activities but
rather evidence of intentional
abandonment is required.
WHAV’s submission, it ‘is impossible to see’ how the Vendor or
Receivers could have had an intention to abandon
the Vendor’s longstanding
rights in the absence of any evidence that they had such an intention and in the
face of evidence
both before and after the Relevant Date indicating a clear
intention on the part of the Vendor/Receiver to sell and assign those
Abandonment of the Vendor’s rights in the Vendor’s Marks would be
inconsistent with the Receivers’ role
to realise value in the
Vendor’s assets. Further, the Receivers sold WHAV the remaining WONDER
FOODS stock for a reasonable
amount of money as evidenced by an invoice dated 16
which WHAV argues is a
commercial dealing by reference to the WONDER FOODS mark.
acknowledges that the Vendor used the Vendor’s Marks until 28 April 2023
but alleges that after that date, the Vendor’s
Marks were abandoned.
McJenks relies on a social media post and the McDonald Statement that on 5 May
2023, Mr Driscoll of the Receivers
confirmed that the Vendor’s business
had closed and there was no value left in the name. Further, the Applicant
claims that
subsequent correspondence after the Relevant Date from ME to MK
confirms this. Also, MK’s Advice refers to MK having
‘correspondence
from the liquidator confirming that the business and
common law rights were abandoned before any sale of the registered trade mark
occurred’ and that WHAV was unable ‘to acquire the real business
and/or the common law rights relating to this trade
mark [WONDER FOODS] as the
liquidators/receivers confirmed they were unable to sell this, as it no longer
social media post relied on by McJenks is shown
post makes no mention of WONDER FOODS but instead refers to the closing of NVA
(which I understand to be a reference to the
Queensland business Natural
Vitality Australia), a separate business to WONDER FOODS. In any event, even if
the WONDER FOODS business
ceased taking orders on 28 April 2023, a period of
to amount to abandonment. Moreover, any orders received before 28 April 2023
still had to be fulfilled after that date.
the email exchange between Ms McDonald and Mr Driscoll of the Receivers, McJenks
alleges that because WHAV did not dispute
McJenks’ claim that Mr Driscoll
had confirmed the Kova business had closed and there is no value left in the
name, that I should
treat that evidence as accepted under the principles in
Jones v Dunkel
view, there was no need for WHAV to dispute this claim because McJenks’
own evidence shows that contrary to McJenks’
claim in evidence and the
submissions, the Receivers never stated that ‘there’s no value left
in the name’ and
did not confirm the McDonald Statement. Ms McDonald made
the McDonald Statement and the Receivers did not reply to that statement.
Instead, the Receivers only responded to Ms McDonald’s interest in
purchasing the remaining inventory, stating they needed
to conduct a stocktake
and informing her that they would soon offer the French Avenue property for
sale. I do not share McJenks’
view that the failure by the Receivers to
comment on or correct the McDonald Statement means that they shared Ms
view that there was no value left in the name. It is not even
clear from the McDonald Statement which name Ms McDonald is referring
that her email refers to the Prema Life business generally which was comprised a
number of businesses operating under different
brands. Further, in response to
Mr Driscoll’s reply, Ms McDonald made an offer on the Vendor’s
Intellectual Property
as well as certain warehouse items. If MK or
McJenks/Propel have other correspondence confirming an intention to abandon the
Mark, as claimed in the MK Advice, it is not in evidence.
both Ms McDonald and WHAV were dealing with the same person at the Receivers, it
is assumed (and the most logical explanation)
that Ms McDonald received the same
information as WHAV namely that because there were multiple interested parties
in various parts
of the Vendor’s business, the Receivers required final
offers to purchase the Vendor’s assets by 5 pm on 11 May 2023.
explains the subsequent offers submitted on behalf of McJenks on 10 and 11 May
Applicant argues that no one wanted to buy the Vendor’s business as a
whole, so the Receivers were selling the assets separately.
The Vendor’s
business included not only the WONDER FOODS business but also at least four
other businesses under different
marks and multiple premises. It is unclear
whether the Receivers initially hoped to sell the entire Vendor’s business
all its brands but the evidence suggests that the Receivers decided to sell
the assets of the different businesses separately and
separately from the
premises. However, this does not mean that a bidder could not submit an offer
for the entire WONDER FOODS business
and/or any of the Vendor’s other
businesses. Ms McDonald’s offer of 10 May 2023 is an offer to purchase
multiple brands,
businesses, and premises, including those of other related
companies. In ME’s Response, advising that the Vendor’s business
ceased, it was made clear to Ms McDonald that she would need to engage with the
Receivers if she wished to purchase any part
or premises of the WONDER FOODS
business. The ME Response made it clear that they ‘were not currently
appointed to Wonder Foods
Retail Pty Ltd’. Presumably, ME was not aware
that the Receivers’ deadline for final offers on the Vendor’s
had closed the previous day.
evidence shows that sales of WONDER FOODS products continued up until at least
19 April 2023.
The fact that
the Vendor had ceased trading shortly before the tender process closed is not
evidence that the Receivers (who were
responsible for the business at the time
and not the Vendor) had abandoned the Vendor’s Marks. Due to the
requirement that
a business not trade whilst insolvent, it is common for a
business to cease trading before being sold. Furthermore, as Burchett
Rael Marcus v Sabra International Pty Ltd
It is not the
law that all rights with respect to a trade mark vanish at once upon a mere
discontinuance of its use. The connection
in the course of trade denoted by it
will not immediately be
after a period of non-use of a trade mark, goodwill associated with the trade
mark, and hence ownership of the mark. may still
Moreover, as pointed out
Shanahan’s Australian Law of Trade Marks & Passing Off,
company does not abandon a trade mark simply by going into liquidation as there
may be residual goodwill even after
liquidation.
As noted by the
delegate in
Clifftop Retreats Pty Ltd v Clifftop at Hepburn Pty
‘[A]bandonment of
property is effective it if can be objectively shown the former owner of that
property has executed some
act of abandonment, while having an intention to
abandon’. In my view, McJenks/Propel have produced no evidence of a
act of abandonment by the Vendor or Receivers.
attests that it purchased the remaining WONDER FOODS stock from the
Vendor/Receivers and provides an invoice dated 16 June 2023
with a schedule of
the stock purchased. WHAV claims that this sale is a dealing in the relevant
goods by reference to the Vendor’s
Marks. McJenks claims that there is no
evidence that the purchased stock bears the WONDER FOODS mark and argues that
the Full Federal
Court found in
Fanatics LLC v FanFirm Pty
’) that use of a mark on an invoice is not use
in the course of trade of the mark for the goods. Firstly, I note that
is not authority for that proposition, which is also contrary to
s 9, but rather the court held that use of a trade mark on goods
or invoices for
the sale of goods does not constitute use of the mark for retail services.
Secondly, there seems to be no sound
basis for doubting Mr Bailey’s
assertion that he purchased the remaining stock of WONDER FOODS products. The
schedule to the
invoice, being a list of the stock sold to WHAV, includes
descriptions that are consistent with a number of the WONDER FOODS products
FigaFibre) shown in other annexures to the various declarations of Mr Bailey.
Vendor has used the WONDER FOODS mark for decades in relation to the goods
covered by the McJenks Applications, and there is no
logical basis for the
Receivers to abandon the goodwill built up in the WONDER FOODS mark. The Vendor
ceasing trading shortly before
the tender process closed does not prove that the
Receivers, who were responsible for the business at the time, had abandoned the
Vendor’s Marks. In my view, the Receivers remained in control of the
Vendor’s business and assets at the Relevant Date.
At the time the McJenks
Applications were filed, the Receivers were actively engaged in trying to sell
the Vendor’s business
(including the intellectual property, property,
plant, and equipment), which included the WONDER FOODS brand as well as
operated under different brands, and the premises from which those
businesses had operated. There is no evidence that either the
Vendor or the
Receivers had an intention to abandon the WONDER FOODS brand.
Vendor was still in existence and after 40 years use of the WONDER FOODS mark, I
am satisfied that goodwill existed in that mark
at the Relevant Date and that
the Vendor was the owner of the WONDER FOODS mark at that time. Neither the
Vendor nor the Receivers
had abandoned the WONDER FOODS mark. Accordingly,
McJenks was not the owner of the McJenks Mark at the time of filing the McJenks
Applications and WHAV has established a ground of opposition under s 58 in
respect of all of the goods claimed in the McJenks Applications
‘bottled drinking water’.
Discussion – Propel oppositions
its SGP, Propel nominates grounds of opposition under ss 42(b), 44, 58, 58A, 60
and 62A. The s 60 ground of opposition was not
date at which the rights of the parties are to be determined is the filing date
of 3 October 2023. For the purposes of [81] to
[128] of this decision, any
reference to the ‘Relevant Date’ is a reference to 3 October 2023.
bears the onus of establishing at least one of the grounds of
on the balance of
probabilities.
dealt with the issue of whether the Vendor had abandoned its rights in the
Vendor’s Marks, in my assessment of the Propel
Oppositions, in order to
succeed in these oppositions, Propel must first establish that WHAV did not
acquire rights in the unregistered
Vendor’s Marks.
Transfer of Unregistered Vendor’s Marks
parties agree that the law in Australia is that an unregistered trade mark
cannot be assigned unless it is transferred with the
goodwill of the underlying
business of the assignor which had used the unregistered
However, there is a
difference of opinion on what constitutes the underlying business.
argues that WHAV did not purchase the Vendor’s business which was no
longer a ‘going concern’. In this regard,
Propel refers to the
following comment of the majority of the High Court in
Commissioner of State
Revenue (WA) v Place Dome Inc
Going concern value, on the other
hand, is the ability of a business to generate income without interruption even
where there has
been a change in
support of its contention that the Wonder Foods business was not sold as a going
concern, Propel relies on the McDonald Statement
and Receiver’s reply to
that email, ME’s Response to Propel/McJenks’ offers of 10 and 11 May
2023 and the Receivers’
July Email. I reiterate that I do not consider
the Receiver’s failure to comment on the McDonald Statement to be evidence
of abandonment of the WONDER FOODS mark nor do I regard that email exchange as
evidence that the WONDER FOODS’ business was
not available for sale.
I do not agree with Propel’s interpretation of ME’s Response which
Propel argues is evidence that there was no
goodwill which could be transferred
because the business had ceased trading. Firstly, ME makes it clear that
aspects of Propel/McJenks’
offer required clarification because it related
to assets of different entities and businesses. Secondly, it is apparent that
Receivers, and not ME, were handling the sale of assets related to WONDER
FOODS. Thirdly, the statement that the Kova business (ie.
Vendor) has ceased
trading cannot be interpreted as indicating that the business is not available
for sale in circumstances where
ME makes it clear that this is the
responsibility of the Receivers and when the deadline for submitting bids to
purchase the Wonder
Foods assets to the Receivers had closed.
relation to the Receiver’s July Email, I consider that Propel has
misinterpreted the statement: ‘[for] the avoidance
of any doubt, the sale
entered into by the Receivers and Managers was a sale of specific assets and not
the business of the Company
as a whole (this sale did include some intellectual
property, namely the Wonder foods brand)’. In my opinion, the reference
to the ‘business of the Company’ is a reference to the business of
the Vendor. I believe this indicates that the Vendor,
which consisted of a
number of businesses operating under different brands, was not sold as a whole.
The statement simply informs
Propel that the assets of the Wonder Foods
business, including the Wonder Foods brand, were sold but not the other
businesses of
the Vendor such as SUN RAY, NPM, ROSA NATURA and BIO RESEARCH.
This interpretation is consistent with the terms of the Asset Sale
Agreement as
discussed below.
relevant definitions in the Asset Sale Agreement are:
means the Vendor IP properly corresponding to the Business, but does not include
the Excluded Assets.
means the health food business that was conducted by the
Vendor known as Wonder Foods.
Excluded Assets
(a) the Confidential Information
(b) the businesses conducted by the Vendor known as: (i) Natural Vitality
Australia; (ii) Bio Research; (iii) Sun Ray; and (iv) NPM,
and the associated
intellectual property including related registered and unregistered trade marks,
product and customer information;
(c) the Vendor's cash in hand, on deposit or at bank;
(d) the assets of the Business other than the Assets;
(e) any right of action against the directors or other officers of any
company comprising the Vendor or any proceeds or recoveries
arising from any
such right of action;
(f) any Insurance Policy and the benefit of any claim arising under such an
Insurance Policy;
(g) any assets used in the Business not owned by the Vendor and other
equipment on the Premises not owned by the Vendor; and
(h) anything else specifically excluded by this agreement. Trade Marks means
the registered and unregistered trade marks used by the
Vendor in the Business.
The parties acknowledge and agree that the only registered trade mark used in
the Business is 1836264 (Wonder
Foods). It includes drawings, logos, designs,
design rights, copyright and similar industrial or intellectual property
(a) the Trade Marks;
(b) the Websites;
(c) the product information sold under the brand Wonder Foods including
formulations of the products known to the Vendor; and
(d) the Vendor's customer and supplier information held and assignable by the
Vendor, and all associated goodwill.
means the Vendor's interest in the website
(www.wonderfoods.com.au) and facebook and instagram pages used by the Vendor in
with the Business www.facebook.com/wonderfoodsaustralia and
www.instagram.com/wearewonderfoods)
submits that it is clear from the terms of the Asset Sale Agreement that WHAV
only purchased the ‘Assets’ and ‘the
mere fact that the
definition of Excluded Assets excludes other assets of the
Business...demonstrates that the whole of the Business
wasn’t purchased.
This is further reinforced by the absence of plant and equipment, know how,
employees, ingredients, the
premises, etc’.
notes that:
factual level, the goodwill and assets of a business will take ‘take on
different shapes and have different dimensions
depending on the nature of the
business’. It may consist of ‘multiple sources, each being
identifiable assets of the
business, which contribute to bringing customers back
to the business.’
a company conducts several business, it is not necessary for the whole of the
business to be assigned. It is only necessary
that for the goodwill in the
relevant business to be assigned for the transfer to be
argues that whether the WONDER FOODS business was sold is a question of
construction of the terms of the relevant agreement and
rights and liabilities of parties under a provision of a contract are determined
objectively, by reference to its text, context
(the entire text of the contract
as well as any contract, document or statutory provision referred to in the text
of the contract)
and purpose.
In determining the meaning of the terms of a commercial contract, it is
necessary to ask what a reasonable businessperson would have
understood those
terms to mean. That inquiry will require consideration of the language used by
the parties in the contract, the
circumstances addressed by the contract and the
commercial purpose or objects to be secured by the contract.
Ordinarily, this process of construction is possible by reference to the
contract alone. Indeed, if an expression in a contract is
unambiguous or
susceptible of only one meaning, evidence of
surrounding
circumstances
(events, circumstances and things external to the contract) cannot be adduced to
contradict its plain
to the submission by Propel, WHAV submits that the court in
Kraft Foods
did not hold that an unregistered trade mark can only be assigned through
the purchase of the whole of a business but rather ‘as
a matter of
Australian law, rights in relation to an unregistered trade mark can only be
assigned as an assignment of the goodwill
of the underlying business.’
Further, there is no finding in
Kraft Foods
that the agreement must take
any particular form.
agree with WHAV that the question is to be answered by reference to the terms of
the relevant documents purporting to transfer rights
in an unregistered mark and
it is not relevant whether those documents are called a business sale agreement,
asset sale agreement
or by some other name.
submissions further point out that ‘a purchase of goodwill will often
times receive less than the entirety of a
business, particularly on a sale from
the liquidator or trustee in
bankruptcy.’
of this proposition, WHAV refers to
Hammond & Co v Malcolm Brunker &
which concerned a
transfer of trade mark rights and associated goodwill as a result of the
assignor entering into bankruptcy which
involved a transfer instrument and Deed
of Assignment executed by the trustee transferring goodwill in a specific
department of the
assignor’s business. In this case, the court dismissed
an argument that there was no longer any goodwill capable of being
because the trade mark owner had ceased business at the time of the assignment
and found that the trade mark relating to
the particular part of the business
which was purchased was validly assigned.
contends that the terms of the Asset Sale Agreement make it clear that the
Vendor sold WHAV a range of IP and other business
assets associated with its
Wonder Foods business including all registered and unregistered marks used in
connection with that business,
other business assets and rights used in
connection with the business such as websites, product formulations, customer
and supplier
details, and all associated goodwill. The Deed of Assignment
confirms that it was the intention of the parties for the Vendor to
WHAV, amongst other things, all unregistered WONDER FOODS trade marks, with the
associated goodwill, relating to the Wonder
Foods business. The Deed confirmed
that effective 22 June 2023, the Vendor assigned the Assets (as defined in the
Asset Sale Agreement)
and all right, title and interest in the Intellectual
Property including the goodwill in the Trade Marks, and Intellectual Property
Rights to WHAV. The term ‘Intellectual Property’ is defined as
including ‘Business Names, Trade Marks, the Domain
Name, the Social Media
Handles, Works, all designs whether registered or not, inventions, labels,
promotional material, packaging,
manufacturing processes, formulae, trade
secrets, know-how, Confidential Information, and all other information,
documents or materials
in whatever format relating to the Wonder Foods
brand’ and Intellectual Property Rights means ‘all industrial and
intellectual
property rights of whatever nature in the Intellectual Property
throughout the world conferred under statute, common law or equity,
existing now or at any time in the future, and includes rights in respect of or
in connection with copyright, inventions,
patents, trade marks including the
Trade Marks, designs, the right to keep Confidential Information confidential,
and similar industrial
and intellectual property rights, whether or not
registrable and includes the right to apply for or renew the registration of
rights.’ The Deed of Assignment also included a schedule of the
unregistered marks which included the Vendor’s Marks.
Moreover, the Deed
of Assignment included a further clause that to the extent that the Asset Sale
Agreement did not already assign
the relevant rights and goodwill in the
Vendor’s Marks to WHAV then the Deed of Assignment provides a further and
assignment of any Intellectual Property (including unregistered trade
marks rights) or other Residual IP (such as ‘inventions,
promotional material, packaging, manufacturing processes, formulae, trade
secrets, know-how ... relating to the Wonder Foods
brand’) to WHAV with
effect from 14 December 2023.
In WHAV’s submission, it is evident from the language of the terms of both
the Asset Sale Agreement and Deed of Assignment
that the intention of the
parties, and what indeed occurred, was an assignment of the Vendor’s
common law trade mark rights
and associated goodwill in the Vendor’s
WONDER FOODS business.
concur with WHAV that the Asset Sale Agreement and Deed of Assignment
transferred all right, title and interest in the Vendor’s
Marks to WHAV
effective 22 June 2023. Propel’s argument that there has not been an
effective transfer of the rights because
WHAV did not acquire the whole of the
Vendor’s business is inconsistent with the Full Federal Court’s
decision in
Kraft Foods
which rejected this proposition in
Where a company carries on several discrete businesses (as
in the present case, based on the approach taken by the primary judge),
not see any reason why these principles should not apply to each separate
business, such that an unregistered trade mark may
be assigned together with the
goodwill of the related business, rather than the business as a
is clear that any reference by the Receivers (or any other third party) to the
whole of the Vendor’s business not being sold
was a reference to the
assets of the businesses associated with Natural Vitality Australia; Bio
Research; Sun Ray; and NPM as noted
in the ‘Excluded Assets’ of the
Asset Sale Agreement and not a reference to the WONDER FOODS business.
am satisfied that WHAV purchased all rights, title and interest in the assets
and intellectual property of the WONDER FOODS business
which were necessary for
WHAV to carry on that business ‘in substantially the same way and by
substantially the same
as the Vendor.
WHAV acquired current and past product formulations; the Vendor’s customer
materials and branding guidelines;
websites and social media accounts; inventory, stock lists and raw materials;
cost guidelines;
branding guidelines and remaining stock. The fact that WHAV
did not purchase the relevant premises, any equipment owned by the Vendor
retain the employees does not mean that the WONDER FOODS business was not
purchased by WHAV. It is apparent from WHAV’s
evidence that it acquired
the necessary assets to continue the WONDER FOODS business in substantially the
same manner as the Vendor.
WHAV’s evidence shows that immediately
following the acquisition, it was promoting WONDER FOODS products and using
FOODS on the website, social media accounts and invoices. WHAV’s
evidence also includes proof of sale of WONDER FOODS products
in July 2023, only
weeks after acquiring the WONDER FOODS business.
am satisfied that WHAV acquired all rights, title and interest in the
Vendor’s Marks and associated goodwill of the Wonder
Foods business
effective 22 June 2023 and I now turn to the grounds of opposition.
refer to [61] above where I have outlined the general principles regarding this
ground of opposition.
have found at [80] that McJenks was not the owner of the mark WONDER FOODS as at
11 May 2023 but rather the Vendor was the owner
of the WONDER FOODS mark and had
not abandoned its rights, and at [102] that WHAV acquired rights in the
Vendor’s Marks effective
22 June 2023. Accordingly, Propel’s
opposition under s 58 fails.
Section 58A
58A provides:
(1) This section applies to a trade mark
section 44 trade mark
) the application for registration of
which has been accepted because of:
(a) subsection 44(4); or
(b) a similar provision of the regulations made for the purposes
of Part 17A.
(2) The registration of the section 44 trade mark may be
opposed on the ground that the owner of the substantially identical or
deceptively
similar trade mark (
similar trade mark
predecessor in title:
(a) first used the similar trade mark in respect of:
(i) similar goods or closely related services; or
(ii) similar services or closely related goods;
before the owner of the section 44 trade mark or the
predecessor in title in relation to the section 44 trade mark first used
section 44 trade mark; and
(b) has continuously used the similar trade mark in respect of those
goods or services since that first use.
Propel nor McJenks has established use of WONDER FOODS before the first use of
that mark by the Vendor, whom I have found
assigned its rights in the
unregistered mark WONDER FOODS to WHAV with the goodwill in the Wonder Foods
brand and business. Further,
as I have found WHAV’s opposition to the
McJenks Applications to be successful, the provisions of s 44(4) do not apply.
ground of opposition fails.
44 provides for opposition by the owner of a prior registration or application
for a substantially identical or deceptively
similar mark to that under
opposition, covering the same or similar goods or services.
support of this ground of opposition, Propel relies on application 2356038. As
I have found that WHAV’s Oppositions to the
McJenks Applications is
successful under s 58, application 2356038 no longer supports this ground of
opposition. Consequently, the
s 44 ground of opposition is not
established.
Section 42(b)
Section 42(b) provides that an application for registration of a trade mark must
be rejected if its use would be contrary to law.
as the opponent, bears the onus of establishing that use of the Trade Mark would
(rather than could) be contrary to
its SGPs, Propel claims that use of WHAV’s Marks would breach the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
’ and constitute passing off.
its written submissions, Propel argues that use of WHAV’s Marks would
of the Australian Consumer Law (‘ACL’), being
Schedule 2 of the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth), constitute
passing off and amount to false representations regarding trade marks in breach
of s 151 of the Act.
makes no mention of s 151 of the Act in its SGP and given it has not pleaded
this in its SGPs, I consider that it is not appropriate
to have regard to this
relation to
of the ACL, Propel submits that use of WHAV’s Marks would
mislead consumers into believing that Propel is the source of origin
elements of passing off are:
in the relevant mark;
misrepresentation
leading to deception; and
or likelihood of damage, to the goodwill of the business relating to the
relevant mark.
Accordingly,
to succeed on this ground of opposition on the basis that use of WHAV’s
Marks will contravene
of the ACL and/or constitute passing off, Propel must
establish a reputation in the mark WONDER FOODS. Propel’s evidence does
not demonstrate a pre-existing reputation in WONDER FOODS such that consumers
would understand WHAV’s WONDER FOODS products
to be those of Propel,
rather than related to the Vendor. Any reputation in the WONDER FOODS mark
resides with the Vendor, and then
WHAV as its successor in title. In the
circumstances, I am not satisfied that use of WHAV’s Marks would
of the ACL or constitute passing off.
ground of opposition fails.
Section 62(b)
Pursuant to s 62(b) registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the basis
that the Registrar accepted the application for registration
on the basis of
evidence or representations that were false in material particulars.
particularised this ground of opposition as follows:
The Registrar
accepted the application for registration on the basis of evidence or
representations that were false in material particulars.
The Applicant has filed
evidence of use in relation to Trade Mark No. 2393413 [and 2393414], which is
not evidence of use of the
trade mark by the Applicant.
submissions on this ground are directed to the examination of the WHAV
Applications and the evidence filed by WHAV
to secure acceptance of those
applications under
Neither party has put into evidence the examination
reports, evidence filed under
or any other documents pertaining to
prosecution of the WHAV Applications. It is not appropriate for Propel to make
submissions
on these matters without putting them in evidence. Propel bears the
onus of establishing that the WHAV Applications were accepted
on the basis of
evidence or representations that were false in material particulars and it has
done nothing to discharge this onus.
any event, I have found that WHAV properly acquired the Vendor’s Marks and
associated goodwill in the Wonder Foods business
and hence it was entitled to
rely on the Vendor’s use of the Vendor’s Marks in support of the
WHAV Applications.
s 62(b) ground of opposition is unsuccessful.
Section 62A
Section 62A provides for the opposition to registration of a trade mark on the
ground that the application was made in bad faith.
have been two Federal Court decisions that substantively considered s 62A:
Fry Consulting v Sports Warehouse Inc (No
DC Comics v
Cheqout Pty Ltd
’). The following propositions emerge from each of
these two decisions relevant to the present opposition:
(a) Bad faith for the purposes of s 62A must be [as at the priority date] and
must relate to the making of the subject of the
application:
(b) Section 62A does not require the opponent to establish that the trade
mark’s use would result in deception or confusion.
However, evidence to
that effect may be persuasive in considering whether the application to register
a mark was in bad faith:
(c) The onus of proving bad faith rests upon the
(d) All of the circumstances surrounding the application to register the mark
are relevant:
(e) The registration of a trade mark is designed to enable bona fide proprietors
to protect their proprietary rights without having
to prove unfair
(f) While the seriousness of an allegation of bad faith that “impugns the
character of an individual or collective character
of a business” requires
correspondingly cogent evidence, the standard of proof is the balance of
probabilities, rather than
that of beyond reasonable
(g) Conduct which falls “short of the standards of acceptable commercial
behaviour observed by reasonable and experienced men
in the particular
area” is sufficient. Dishonesty is not required. Bad faith requires both
subjective and objective elements;
it is a combined
(h) Subjective naivety does not exclude a determination of bad faith for the
purposes of s 62A.
its SGP, Propel states:
• On 11 May 2023, being 5 months prior
to the filing of the Applicant’s trade mark application, Trade Mark No.
was filed by the Opponent’s licensor, and shortly thereafter, the
use of it was licensed to the Opponent.
• In or about late May 2023 and on several occasions later (still prior
to the priority date of the opposed trade mark), the
Opponent, via its
solicitor, notified the Applicant of the Opponent’s use of Trade Mark No.
2356038 in relation to the subject
goods, including Dietetic substances adapted
for medical use; vitamins and vitamin supplements; dietary and nutritional
(meal replacements) and supplements; minerals and mineral supplements;
nutritional supplements; herbal remedies; protein supplements.
• The Applicant, being wholly aware of the Opponent’s
Licensor’s trade mark rights, and the considerable use of
Trade Mark No.
2356038, the Applicant proceeded to file the current trade mark application on 3
October 2023 for a much wider set
of goods, which wholly encompasses the goods
of the Trade Mark No. 2356038.
• It is the Opponent’s belief that the current trade mark
application was filed in an attempt by the Applicant to attain
registration
without the Opponent being aware of same (i.e. to deceive the Opponent and usurp
its trade mark rights).
• The Applicant has also filed evidence of use in relation to Trade
Mark No. 2393414, which is not evidence of use of the trade
mark by the
Applicant. The reliance on false evidence, and the attempted misleading of the
Australian Trade Marks office is conduct
that is well below the standards of
ordinary business practice, and also well below standards of acceptable
commercial behaviour
observed by reasonable and experienced persons in the
supplements industry.
again relies on the argument that the Vendor ceased trading, abandoned its
rights in the Vendor’s Marks and did not assign
any rights in the
unregistered Vendor’s Marks. Further, WHAV was aware at the time of
filing the WHAV Applications that Propel/McJenks
were using the WONDER FOODS
mark and McJenks owned an accepted application for WONDER FOODS in class 5.
Accordingly, Propel claims
that the WHAV Applications were filed in bad
have already found that the Vendor/Receivers did not abandon the Vendor’s
Marks and validly assigned rights in those marks
to WHAV. Regardless, WHAV
believed that they had acquired rights in the Vendor’s Marks and were
entitled to apply for registration.
Such conduct is not underhanded or
unscrupulous but in accordance with ordinary commercial standards of
am satisfied that the WHAV Applications were not filed in bad faith and the s
62A ground of opposition fails.
Discussion- WHAV’s opposition to the Removal
Application
of the Act governs the removal of trade marks from the Register for non-use.
The Removal Application nominated grounds for removal
ss 92(4)(a)
relevantly provides:
(4) An application under subsection (1) or (3) (
application
) may be made on either or both of the following grounds, and
on no other grounds:
(a) that, on the day on which the application for the registration of the
trade mark was filed, the applicant
for registration had no intention in good
to use the trade mark in Australia; or
(ii) to authorise the use of the trade mark in Australia; or
(iii) to assign the trade mark to a body corporate for use by the body
corporate in Australia;
in relation to the goods and/or services to which the non‑use application
relates and that the registered
(iv) has not used the trade mark in Australia; or
has not used the trade mark in good faith in Australia;
in relation to those goods and/or services at any time before the period of one
month ending on the day
on which the non‑use application is filed;
(b) that the trade mark has remained registered for a continuous period of
3 years ending one month before the
day on which the non‑use application
is filed, and, at no time during that period, the person who was then the
registered owner:
used the trade mark in Australia; or
(ii) used the trade mark in good faith in Australia;
in relation to the goods and/or services to which the application relates.
(4)(b) provide distinct and alternative grounds for removal. Due
to the specifics of these provisions, paragraph (a) is considered
to effectively
merge with paragraph (b) once a trade mark has been registered for five
As the Challenged Mark
has been registered for more than five years as at the filing date of the
Removal Application, I need only
consider the application for removal under
s 92(4)(b).
the purposes of
, the relevant period is the three year period ending
on 27 February 2024 (‘Relevant Period’).
bears the onus of rebutting an allegation made under
on the balance of
probabilities.
Woolly Bull Enterprises Pty Ltd v
observed that the expression ‘use in good faith’ has a well
understood meaning in terms of
, namely it is ‘real, as opposed to
token, use in a commercial sense’. Provided the use is in good faith,
bona fide use of the mark’ may be enough to rebut an
allegation of non-use.
weight is to be given to assertions of use which are not supported by
documentary evidence.
Nodoz Trade Mark
, Wilberforce J said that if a registered owner relies on
one single act of use of the trade mark, then that single act ought to be
established by ‘if not conclusive proof, at any rate overwhelmingly
convincing proof’.
, if the grounds for partial removal are established, I may decide to remove
or partially remove the Trade Marks from the Register
in respect of any or all
of the services identified in the Removal Application, or if satisfied it is
reasonable to do so, decide
not to remove the Trade Mark from the Register.
argues that it, or the Vendor, used the Challenged Mark in Australia for the
Registered Services during the Relevant Period.
If there was any non-use, WHAV
attributes this to the Vendor’s financial difficulties before WHAV
acquired the mark. WHAV also
submits that, given it purchased the mark to use
for these services, discretion should be exercised not to remove the
registration.
support of its claim to have used the Challenged Mark, Mr Bailey declares in
Bailey 1 that he telephoned existing WHAV customers
to offer the Registered
Services. He also provides advertising expenditure and revenue figures for the
Registered Services provided
by reference to the Challenged Mark. Further, WHAV
points to the following instances of use of the Challenged Mark (or a mark with
additions or alterations not substantially affecting the identity of the
Challenged Mark) for the Registered Services:
of 31 August 2023 from WHAV to a potential client (sent to two Gmail accounts
with details redacted) with the subject heading
‘Brand Development’
which refers to ‘creating a brand and range of health food products for
you’ and an attachment
outlining the process and timeframe and seeking the
client’s confirmation it wishes to
of Engagement signed on 4 September 2023 for branding and marketing services
from 7 September 2023 to 7 March 2024 to create
the WHOLEY MOLEY Food Co brand
(with the customer details
progress invoice dated 7 September 2023 in respect of the brand creation of
WHOLEY MOLEY Food Co (with customer details redacted)
Development
claims that because the aforementioned materials are redacted, it is impossible
to verify the existence of an actual customer
or customers. Further, based on
the revenue figures and amount outlined in the Letter of Engagement, WHAV
appears to have been paid
in full but trade mark registration 2404592 for WHOLEY
MOLEY Food Co. (fig) remains in the name of WHAV despite the Letter of
providing that it would be assigned to the customer on completion.
Bailey 2, Mr Bailey confirms that the 31 August email was sent to an existing
customer who then engaged WHAV to provide the Registered
Servies and signed the
Letter of Engagement on 4 September 2023 leading to the progress invoice being
issued on 7 September 2023.
Mr Bailey declares that the customer asked for its
identifiable personal details to be redacted. Further, Bailey 2 continues to
explain that documents have been redacted because WHAV believes that Propel has
inappropriately used some of the confidential information
and evidence shared by
WHAV in the proceedings and Bailey 2 provides examples.
I note that WHAV’s evidence shows use of the 413 Mark rather than the
Challenged Mark. In my opinion, the 413 Mark
is substantially identical to the
Challenged Mark. Neither the 413 Mark nor the Challenged Mark have a colour
limitation and accordingly,
the only difference between the two marks is
inclusion of the non-distinctive word ‘australia’ in the 413 Mark
minor difference in the device element which appears in two colours in the
Challenged Mark and only one colour in the 413 Mark.
These differences are
additions or alterations not substantially affecting the identity of the
Challenged Mark.
find WHAV’s evidence to be credible. It is common for customer details to
be redacted in evidence particularly in opposition
proceedings where` the
parties are offering competitive products. Hence, it is understandable that
WHAV would not wish to share
these details with Propel. This explanation is
more plausible than WHAV fabricating its evidence.
relation to Propel’s submission that the WHOLEY MOLEY mark is still in the
name of WHAV, whilst Propel has commented in its
evidence on the AINA FOODS Logo
being registered in the name of WHAV, it makes no such comment in relation to
the WHOLEY MOLEY mark.
Hence Mr Bailey has not explained in his evidence the
delay in assigning the mark to the customer. However, in response to
submissions on this point at the hearing, WHAV argued that there
could be any number of reasons for the delay. Bailey 2 also explains
has delayed promoting and more actively pursuing use of WONDER FOODS for the
Registered Services because of these proceedings.
considered the above, I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that WHAV
used the Challenged Mark (or a mark with additions
or alterations not
substantially affecting the identity of the mark) in good faith for the
Registered Services during the Relevant
WHAV Oppositions to the McJenks Applications
have found that WHAV has established a ground of opposition under s 58 for all
of the goods covered by the McJenks Applications
except ‘bottled drinking
Apple Inc v Registrar of Trade Marks
, Yates J stated that:
My finding that the application for registration of APP STORE for
the designated services in Class 35 must be rejected determines
the fate of the
application as a whole. This is because there are no separate applications for
registration of the mark for the designated
services Classes 38 and 42. There is
but one application covering registration of the mark for all the services that
have been specified.
If the application fails in one respect, it fails as a
whole. In these circumstances, is not necessary for me to proceed to determine
the registrability of APP STORE for the designated services in Class 38 or Class
the principles outlined above, the Registrar may proceed to reject an
application in its entirety where an opposition has been
established for some
but not all of an applicant’s goods or services, but also has a discretion
to offer an amendment to an
applicant, allowing it to remove the goods and
services for which a ground of opposition has been established.
this case, WHAV has established a ground of opposition for all of the claimed
goods except for one item. In all the circumstances,
I do not consider it
appropriate to offer McJenks an opportunity to amend the goods of application
2441563 to ‘bottled drinking
Accordingly,
I refuse to register applications 2356038 and 2441563.
parties have sought an award of costs. As costs generally follow the event, I
award costs against McJenks in the opposition
to application 2356038 under s 221
in accordance with the amounts specified in Schedule 8 of the Regulations. In
relation to the
opposition to application 2441563, I award costs against McJenks
to be taxed in the same manner as indicated in
Hume Industries
(Malaysia) Berhad v James Hardie & Coy Pty Ltd
Propel Oppositions to the WHAV Applications
has failed to establish any of the nominated grounds of opposition it pursued.
I direct that applications 2393413 and 2393414
may proceed to registration not
less than one month from the date of this decision.
award costs against Propel for the opposition to application 2393413 under s 221
in accordance with Schedule 8 of the Regulations.
In relation to the opposition
to application 2393414, I award costs against Propel to be taxed in the
same manner as indicated in
WHAV’s opposition to the Removal
Application
have found that WHAV has used the Challenged Mark, or a mark with additions or
alterations not substantially affecting the identity
of the Challenged Mark,
during the Relevant Period for the Registered Services. Accordingly, I refuse
to remove registration 1836264
and the Challenged Mark may remain on the
award costs against Propel under s 221 in accordance with Schedule 8 of the
Regulations.
the Registrar is served with a notice of appeal in any of the aforementioned
matters within one month from the date of this decision,
I direct that the
disposition of the applications and registration of the Challenged Mark be in
accordance with the court’s
direction or order.
Tracey Berger
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and Hearings
Trade Marks and Designs
Goods of WHAV’s Applications
Application 2393413
Acai powder dietary supplements; Albumin dietary
supplements; Alginate dietary supplements; Antibiotic food supplements for
Antioxidant supplements; Antioxidants (dietary supplements); Bee glue
(propolis) dietary supplements; Brewer's yeast dietary supplements;
Carbohydrate
based dietary supplements; Casein dietary supplements; Collagen based medicated
supplements; Colostrum supplements;
Dietary food supplements; Dietary
nutritional supplements; Dietary protein supplements; Dietary supplements;
Dietary supplements
for animals; Dietary supplements for human beings; Dietary
supplements for infants; Dietary supplements with a cosmetic effect; Dietetic
food supplements adapted for medical purposes; Edible fish oil (cod liver oil)
being dietary supplements; Enzyme dietary supplements;
Fibre supplements;
Flavonoid substances for use as a dietary supplement; Food supplements (dietary
supplements); Food supplements
for animals (minerals); Food supplements for
animals (trace elements); Food supplements for animals (vitamins); Food
supplements
for medical purposes; Ginseng (dietary supplements); Ginseng
capsules (dietary supplements); Ginseng extract (dietary supplements);
dietary supplements; Herbal dietary supplements; Lactose (nutritional
supplement); Lecithin dietary supplements; Linseed
dietary supplements; Linseed
oil dietary supplements; Maltodextrins (nutritional supplements); Medicated food
supplements; Medicated
preparations for use as supplements for food; Medicated
supplements for animal feedstuffs; Medicated supplements for food; Medicated
supplements for foodstuffs for animals; Medicated supplements for foodstuffs for
human consumption; Medicinal food supplements; Medicinal
food supplements for
animals; Milk calcium concentrate (nutritional supplement); Milk sugar
(nutritional supplement); Mineral dietary
supplements; Mineral dietary
supplements for animals; Mineral dietary supplements for humans; Mineral
preparations for use as supplements
to drinking water; Non-carbohydrate dietary
supplements; Nutritional animal feed supplements; Nutritional drinks being
dietary food
supplements; Nutritional feed supplements for animals; Nutritional
supplement energy bars; Nutritional supplement protein bars; Nutritional
supplements; Nutritional supplements for animal feed; Nutritional supplements
for animals; Nutritional supplements for medical use;
Plant compounds for use as
dietary supplements (medicinal); Plant compounds for use as dietary supplements
(veterinary); Plant extracts
(dietary supplements); Pollen (dietary supplement);
Pollen dietary supplements; Powdered whey protein being dietary supplements;
Powdered whey protein being nutritional supplements; Probiotic bacterial dietary
supplements; Propolis dietary supplements; Protein
dietary supplements; Protein
supplements for animals; Protein supplements for humans; Royal jelly
(nutritional supplement); Royal
jelly dietary supplements; Supplements (trace
element) for foodstuffs for animals; Supplements (trace element) for foodstuffs
human consumption; Vitamin preparations in the nature of food supplements;
Vitamin supplement patches; Vitamin supplements; Vitamin
supplements for
animals; Vitamin supplements for foodstuffs for animals; Vitamin supplements for
foodstuffs for human consumption;
Vitamin supplements for use by lactating
women; Vitamin supplements for use by pregnant women; Wheat germ dietary
supplements; Whey
protein being dietary supplements; Whey protein being
nutritional supplements; Whey protein concentrates being dietary supplements;
Whey protein concentrates being nutritional supplements; Whey protein dietary
supplements; Whey protein isolates being dietary supplements;
Whey protein
isolates being nutritional supplements; Yeast dietary supplements; Vitamin C
preparations
Application 2393414
Acai powder dietary supplements; Albumin dietary
supplements; Alginate dietary supplements; Antibiotic food supplements for
Antioxidant supplements; Antioxidants (dietary supplements); Bee glue
(propolis) dietary supplements; Brewer's yeast dietary supplements;
Carbohydrate
based dietary supplements; Casein dietary supplements; Collagen based medicated
supplements; Colostrum supplements;
Dietary food supplements; Dietary
nutritional supplements; Dietary protein supplements; Dietary supplements;
Dietary supplements
for animals; Dietary supplements for human beings; Dietary
supplements for infants; Dietary supplements with a cosmetic effect; Dietetic
food supplements adapted for medical purposes; Edible fish oil (cod liver oil)
being dietary supplements; Enzyme dietary supplements;
Fibre supplements;
Flavonoid substances for use as a dietary supplement; Food supplements (dietary
supplements); Food supplements
for animals (minerals); Food supplements for
animals (trace elements); Food supplements for animals (vitamins); Food
supplements
for medical purposes; Ginseng (dietary supplements); Ginseng
capsules (dietary supplements); Ginseng extract (dietary supplements);
dietary supplements; Herbal dietary supplements; Lactose (nutritional
supplement); Lecithin dietary supplements; Linseed
dietary supplements; Linseed
oil dietary supplements; Maltodextrins (nutritional supplements); Medicated food
supplements; Medicated
preparations for use as supplements for food; Medicated
supplements for animal feedstuffs; Medicated supplements for food; Medicated
supplements for foodstuffs for animals; Medicated supplements for foodstuffs for
human consumption; Medicinal food supplements; Medicinal
food supplements for
animals; Milk calcium concentrate (nutritional supplement); Milk sugar
(nutritional supplement); Mineral dietary
supplements; Mineral dietary
supplements for animals; Mineral dietary supplements for humans; Mineral
preparations for use as supplements
to drinking water; Non-carbohydrate dietary
supplements; Nutritional animal feed supplements; Nutritional drinks being
dietary food
supplements; Nutritional feed supplements for animals; Nutritional
supplement energy bars; Nutritional supplement protein bars; Nutritional
supplements; Nutritional supplements for animal feed; Nutritional supplements
for animals; Nutritional supplements for medical use;
Plant compounds for use as
dietary supplements (medicinal); Plant compounds for use as dietary supplements
(veterinary); Plant extracts
(dietary supplements); Pollen (dietary supplement);
Pollen dietary supplements; Powdered whey protein being dietary supplements;
Powdered whey protein being nutritional supplements; Probiotic bacterial dietary
supplements; Propolis dietary supplements; Protein
dietary supplements; Protein
supplements for animals; Protein supplements for humans; Royal jelly
(nutritional supplement); Royal
jelly dietary supplements; Supplements (trace
element) for foodstuffs for animals; Supplements (trace element) for foodstuffs
human consumption; Vitamin preparations in the nature of food supplements;
Vitamin supplement patches; Vitamin supplements; Vitamin
supplements for
animals; Vitamin supplements for foodstuffs for animals; Vitamin supplements for
foodstuffs for human consumption;
Vitamin supplements for use by lactating
women; Vitamin supplements for use by pregnant women; Wheat germ dietary
supplements; Whey
protein being dietary supplements; Whey protein being
nutritional supplements; Whey protein concentrates being dietary supplements;
Whey protein concentrates being nutritional supplements; Whey protein dietary
supplements; Whey protein isolates being dietary supplements;
Whey protein
isolates being nutritional supplements; Yeast dietary supplements
Unless otherwise indicated, any
references to sections or regulations in this decision are references to
sections or regulations
Trade Marks Act 1995
(‘Act’) or the
Trade Marks Regulations 1995
(‘Regulations’), respectively.
Hereinafter a Statement of
Grounds and Particulars is referred to as an ‘SGP’.
The declaration made by Grant
Jenkins, director of Propel, filed in the opposition to application 2356038 and
the Removal Application
are the same.
This declaration is
substantially identical to Bailey 3.
The full specification of
goods for applications 2393413 and 2393414 is shown in Annexure A to this
Name redacted.
Bailey 3 refers to the Vendor
being incorporated by Mr Gillard and his wife but Bailey 2 clarifies that this
was not correct and
the Vendor was incorporated by Mr Gillard and his
Bailey 2, [79].
Bailey 3, Annexure NB-22.
A redacted copy is provided
as Confidential Annexure NB-02 to Bailey 3 and an unredacted copy is
Confidential Annexure NB-29 of Bailey
A redacted copy is provided
as Confidential Annexure NB-03 to Bailey 3 and an unredacted copy is
Confidential Annexure NB-30 of Bailey
Employee 1’s
employment contract was not signed until 19 June 2023.
Jenkins, Exhibit GJ-10.
Food Channel Network Pty
Ltd v Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC 58
, [32] (Keane CJ, Stone and
Jagot JJ) (‘
Food Channel
Telstra Corporation Ltd v
Phone Directories Co Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
, [133] (Besanko, Jagot and
Edelman JJ) (‘
Carnival Cruise Lines Inc
v Sitmar Cruises Limited
[1994] FCA 936
, [62] (Gummow J).
Re Hicks’s Trade
[1897] VicLawRp 118
(1897) 22 VLR 636
, 640 (Holroyd J).
Settef SpA v Riv-Oland
Marble Co (Vic) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 IPR 402
, 413 (McGarvie J).
Bailey 3, Exhibit NB-12.
Bailey 3, Exhibit NB-05.
Bailey 3, Exhibit NB-06.
This catalogue is not
Bailey 3, Annexure
Bailey 3, Annexure NB-14 to
Colorado Group Limited v
Strandbags Group Pty Limited
[2007] FCAFC 184
, [14] (Kenny J).
Cantarella Bros Pty Ltd v
Lavazza Australia Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2023] FCA 1258
, [582] (Yates J);
Riv-Oland Marble Co (Vic) Pty Ltd v Settef SpA
[1988] FCA 553 (Bowen
Bailey 3, Annexure
Jenkins, Exhibit GJ-02A.
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR
, 321-322 (Windeyer J).
Although I note in
Propel’s submissions on the Propel oppositions that Propel disputes it
made an offer to purchase goodwill
relating to the WONDER FOODS brand. The issue
of goodwill in the WONDER FOODS brans is discussed further below under the
‘Discussion- Propel Oppositions’.
Bailey 3, Annexure
[1995] FCA 35.
Ad-Lib Club Ltd v
(1972) 22 RPC 673 (Pennycuick VC);
Hoath v Connect Internet
Services Pty Ltd
[2006] NSWSC 158
(2006) 69 IPR 62 (White
J) (NSW SC).
M Davison, I
Shanahan’s Australian Law of Trade Marks and Passing
(Lawbook Co, online 7
edition, 2022) [10.1510].
[2025] ATMO 64
(Hearing Officer A. Makrigiorgos).
[2025] FCAFC 87 (Burley
Jackson and Downes JJ).
Food Channel
Kraft Foods Group Brands
LLC v Bega Cheese Ltd
[2020] FCAFC 65
, [128] (Foster, Moshinsky and
O’Bryan JJ) (‘
Kraft Foods’
Kraft Foods Group
Brands LLC v Bega Cheese Ltd (No 8)
[2019] FCA 593
, [168 (O’Callaghan
[2018] HCA 59
, [98] (Keifer
CJ, Bell, Gageler, Nettle and Gordon JJ).
Kraft Foods
[123]-[124].
Ibid, [128].
Mount Bruce Mining Pty
Ltd v Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 37
, [46]-[48] (French CJ, Nettle
and Gordon JJ).
Mark Davison and Ian Horak,
Shanahan’s Australian Law of Trade Marks and Passing Off
Co, online 7
ed, 2022), [75.510].
(1892) 9 RPC 301 (Chitty
Kraft Foods
Ibid, [117(b)]. See also,
JT International SA v Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 43 (French
CJ, Gummow,
Hayne, Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
Advantage-Rent-A-Car Inc
v Advantage Car Rental Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 683
, [28] (Madgwick J).
Reckitt & Colman
Products Limited v Borden Inc
[1990] UKHL 12
(1990) 17 IPR 1
[2012] FCA 81
(‘Dodds-Streeton J) (‘
Fry Consulting
[2013] FCA 478 (Bennett
Fry Consulting
51), [145].
Fry Consulting
51), [145].
Fry Consulting
51). [145].
Ibid [147], [148] and
Mark Davison and Ian Horak,
Australian Law of Trade Marks and Passing Off
(Thomson Reuters,
ed, 2016), [70.510].
Act s 100(1).
albeit in respect of an action opposing registration rather than removal.
[2001] FCA 261
Great White Shark
Enterprises Inc v Joose Apparel Pty Ltd
[1998] ATMO 8 (Hearing
[1962] RPC 1
Bailey 1, Exhibit NB-19.
Bailey 1, Exhibit NB-24.
[2014] FCA 1034
[2001] ATMO 78
Officer T. Williams).
RTF format (4.32 MB)
Signed PDF/A format