voestalpine Rail Technology GmbH v Nippon Steel Corporation [2025] APO 28 (28 August 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT
voestalpine Rail Technology GmbH v Nippon Steel
Corporation
[2025] APO 28
Patent Application: 2020240203
Title: Rail
Patent Applicant: Nippon Steel Corporation
Opponent: voestalpine Rail Technology GmbH
Delegate: M. Umehara
Decision Date: 28 August 2025
Hearing Date: Written submissions completed on 7 August 2025
Catchwords:
– opposition under section 104 –
amendments do not comply with s 102(2)(a) – claims as proposed to be
not in substance fall within the scope of the claims before amendment
– s 102(2)(b) – claims as proposed to be amended
are clear and
supported – costs awarded
Representation: Patent attorney for the applicant: Spruson &
Counsel for the opponent: Ian P. Horak KC
Patent attorney for the opponent: Madderns Patent & Trade Mark
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Patent Application: 2020240203
Title: Rail
Patent Applicant: Nippon Steel Corporation
Date of Decision: 28 August 2025
The amendments do not comply with s102(2)(a). The
opposition is successful. I refuse the amendment request of 20 June
This decision constitutes advice that the amendments are not
allowable. Evidence in reply in the section 59 matter is due in
from the date of this decision.
I award costs according to Schedule 8 against the applicant, Nippon Steel
Corporation.
REASONS FOR DECISION
present matter relates to Australian application 2020240203 (the
application
) in the name of Nippon Steel Corporation (the
) and an opposition to an amendment under
Patents Act
) by voestalpine Rail
Technology GmbH (the
application was filed as International Patent Application PCT/JP2020/008606
filed on 15 March 2019 and published as WO 2020/189232
on 24 September 2020.
The application entered the national phase in Australia on 12 August 2021. The
application was advertised
as accepted on 6 July 2023. The opponent filed a
notice of opposition to the grant of the patent under
of the Act on 6
October 2023 (the
applicant filed a request to amend the specification on 20 June 2024 (the
). The Commissioner’s letter of 12 July 2024 made the
following directions:
1. That the opposition to this application under
of the Act is stayed
until two weeks after the Commissioner advises the parties that the amendments
are allowed (following the opposition
period), refused or withdrawn as the case
may be. at which point the evidence in reply would be due.
2. Evidence in reply is due to be filed
two (2) months
date of this letter or upon the expiry of the stay outlined in direction 1
above, whichever expires later.
to amend was granted and the application for amendment was advertised for
opposition on 22 August 2024. A notice of opposition
to the amendment was filed
by the opponent on 22 October 2024 (the
present determination relates to the
opposition.
statement of grounds and particulars (
was filed on 22 November 2024. The
SGP identifies, as grounds of
opposition to the amendments, failure to comply with
ss 102(2)(a)
(1)(a). Both parties filed evidence in the
opposition.
Evidence in support was completed on 13 February 2025 and consisted of a
declaration by Dr Norbert Frank dated 7 February
2025 including Exhibits NF-1 to
in answer was completed on 25 March 2025 and consisted of a declaration by Dr
Matthew Stewart dated 25 March 2025 and exhibit
MBS-1, importing the declaration
by Dr Alan Keith Hellier dated 8 July 2024 and exhibits AH-1 to AH-22
) filed during the
opposition proceedings. No evidence in
reply was filed.
hearing was conducted by way of written submissions filed by both parties. The
opponent presses the following grounds:
(1) Ground 1:
section 102(2)(a)
Patents Act
Proposed Amendments are not allowable in circumstances where, as a result of the
Proposed Amendments, a claim of the specification
would not in substance fall
within the scope of the claims of the specification before amendment.
(2) Ground 2:
section 102(1)(a)
Patents Act
: the Proposed
Amendments are not allowable because, as a result of the Proposed Amendments,
the specification would claim or disclose
matter that extends beyond that
disclosed in the specification as originally filed.
(3) Ground 3:
section 102(1)(b)
[sic] of the
Patents Act
the Proposed Amendments are not allowable because the claims, as a result of the
Amendments, would not comply with
section 40(3)
Patents Act
in that the
claims would not be clear.
(4) Ground 4:
section 102(2)(b)
Patents Act
: the Proposed
Amendments are not allowance [sic] because the claims, as a result of the
Proposed Amendments, would not comply with
Patents Act
the claims would not be supported by matter disclosed in the
specification.”
note that ground 3 should identify
section 102(2)(b)
of the Act instead.
Specification
specification is directed to a rail for freight
For context, Figure 4 is
a schematic view of a cross section of a rail:
rail is described with reference to Figure 4 as follows:
“When a cross section vertical to a length direction of the rail is
viewed, a portion of the rail which is constricted in width
is present at the
center in a height direction of the rail. The constricted portion is referred
to as the rail web portion
. A portion which has a width larger than
the width of the constricted portion and is located below the constricted
portion is referred
to as the rail foot portion
, and a portion located
above the constricted portion is referred to as the rail head portion
The rail web portion
is a region interposed between the rail head
and the rail foot portion
to the specification, a correlation between the cross-sectional hardness of the
web portion and the fatigue damage of the
Importantly, the initiation
of a crack was found to result from strain being concentrated in the cross
section of the web portion
due to the cross-sectional hardness significantly
being non-uniform.
analysis identified that when the difference between the maximum value and the
minimum value of the cross-sectional hardness
was Hv 40 or less, a crack did not
initiate until the number of repetitions of load fluctuation reached 2
range of embodiments are discussed but, for the present purposes, it is
sufficient to note that the invention relates to a rail
that has a steel
composition including, by mass: 0.75-1.20% C; 0.10-2.00% Si; 0.10-2.00% Mn;
0-2.00% Cr; 0-0.50% Mo; 0-1.00% Co;
0-0.0050% B; 0-1.00% Cu; 0-1.00% Ni; 0-0.50%
V; 0-0.050% Nb; 0-0.0500% Ti; 0-0.0200% Mg; 0-0.0200% Ca; 0-0.0500% REM;
0-0.0200% Zr;
0-0.0200% N; 0-1.00% Al; 0.0250% or less P; 0.0250% or less S; and
the remainder consisting of Fe and impurities, in which 90 area%
or greater of a
metallographic structure in a cross section of a rail web portion is a pearlite
structure, a minimum value of a hardness
in the cross section of the rail web
portion is Hv 300 or greater, and a difference between a maximum value and the
minimum value
of the hardness in the cross section of the rail web portion is Hv
40 or less.
fatigue damage test for simulating a curved track to evaluate prototype rails
found that, during the passing of a train, stress
towards the outside of the
curved track is applied to the rail head portion
, which was transferred
to the rail web portion
as a bending
The relationship between
the cross-sectional hardness of the rail web portion
and the fatigue
damage resistance was
investigated.
relevance to the present matter, the cross-sectional hardness of the rail web
was measured in the following manner:
“• Measurement Device and Method
Device: Vickers hardness meter (load of 98 N)
Collection of test piece for measurement: a sample was cut out from a cross
section of the rail web portion
Pre-processing: the cross section was polished with a diamond grit having an
average grain size of 1 µm
Measurement method: the hardness was measured according to JIS Z 2244:
• Measurement Position
The measurement position was in a cross section in a range of ± 15 mm in
an upward and downward direction of the rail from a
middle line between a rail
bottom portion and a rail top portion (refer to FIG. 1).
Indentations were continuously made in a thickness direction of the web
portion in a row at a pitch of 1.0 mm in which the starting
point of the
continuous indentation is the position of a depth of 1.0 mm from the outer
surface of the web portion, and the hardness
distribution was measured. The
measurement of the hardness was performed on at least five lines.
Incidentally, in order to eliminate the mutual influences of the
indentations, an interval of 1.0 mm or greater was provided between
measurement lines.
• Method for Organizing Hardness
The minimum value and the maximum value of the measured hardness were defined
as the minimum value and the maximum value of the cross-sectional
hardness of
each of the rail web
1 provides a view showing the measurement of positions of the hardness of in a
cross section of a rail web portion:
the specification, the same test is described wherever the cross-sectional
hardness of the rail web portion
The relevant law
substantive amendments to the Act brought about by the
Intellectual Property
Laws Amendment (Raising the Bar) Act 2012
(Cth) apply to the present case.
The standard of proof in opposition proceedings, including oppositions under
s104(4), is the balance
of probabilities. The opponent bears the onus of
to s104(5), the Commissioner must not allow an amendment that is not allowable
under s102. S102(1) and s102(2) of the Act
as they apply to the present
application are as follows:
(1) An amendment of a complete specification is not allowable if, as a
result of the amendment, the specification would claim or disclose
matter that
extends beyond that disclosed in the following documents taken together:
(a) the complete specification as filed;
(b) other prescribed documents (if any).
(2) An amendment of a complete specification is not allowable after the
relevant time if, as a result of the amendment:
(a) a claim of the specification would not in substance fall within the scope
of the claims of the specification before amendment;
(b) the specification would not comply with subsection 40(2), (3) or
the legislation requires that the failure to meet the requirements of s102(1)
and s102(2) must be
the result of the amendment
, with the relevant point
in time in this case being the accepted application.
s102(1) – claim or disclose matter that extends
beyond that disclosed at filing
J considered s102(1) and noted the following:
“First, as has been pointed out, the test is a strict one.
Second, subject matter will be impermissibly added unless the matter is
clearly and unambiguously disclosed in the application as
Third, the required disclosure may be express or implied, but on any view
must be clearly and unambiguously so. In this regard, a
patent applicant is not
permitted to add by amendment matter simply because it would have been obvious
to the skilled person.
Fourth, context is important. A patent applicant cannot extract features
disclosed in one context and introduce them into a specification
stripped of
that context. So, the concept of intermediate generalisation as discussed in
the UK authorities applies to s 102(1)
in its construction and
application.”
the correct approach when considering whether an amendment would result in the
specification claiming or disclosing new matter
is to ask whether the person
skilled in the art would, on looking at the specification as proposed to be
amended, learn anything
directly derive from the complete specification as
s102(2)(a) – claim would not in substance
fall within the scope of the claims before amendment
useful test for the allowability of amendments was suggested in relation to
s31(1) of the
Patents Act 1949
(UK) as “would the amendment make anything
an infringement which would not have been an infringement before the
amendment?”
Although the
wording of s102(2)(a) differs from the wording of the then s31(1) of the British
Act, this approach was adopted by
Commissioner
and the Federal
Court has also accepted the continuing relevance of this
– specification would not comply with subsection 40(2), (3) or
the opponent pressed that the specification does not comply with s40(3) with
respect to lack of clarity and support, it is necessary
to set out the
principles associated with these parts of the Act. However, it is not before me
to determine whether the complete
specification provides sufficient disclosure,
or whether the present claims lack support. Instead, I must simply determine if
amendment gives rise to issues under s102 of the
s40(3) – claim(s) must be clear
J discussed the correct approach to the construction of claims:
“the words in a claim should be read through the eyes of the skilled
addressee in the context in which they appear ... while
the claims define the
monopoly claimed in the words of the patentee's choosing, the specification
should be read as a whole ... it
is not permissible to read into a claim an
additional integer or limitation to vary or qualify the claim by reference to
of the specification ... terms in the claim which are unclear may be
defined or clarified by reference to the body of the
specification”
requirement for clarity will be satisfied if there would be “no difficulty
in a third party ascertaining whether or not
what he proposes to do falls within
the ambit of the claim.”
Further, “Lack of precise definition in claims is not fatal to their
validity, so long as they provide a workable standard
suitable to their intended
– claim(s) must be supported by matter disclosed in the
specification
J discussed the requirements for support:
CSR Building Products Ltd v United States Gypsum Company
[2015] APO 72
, Dr S D Barker adopted the summary provided by Aldous J in
Schering Biotech
at 252 – 253, which has been often followed in the
United Kingdom (emphasis added):
...to decide whether the claims are supported by the description it is
necessary to ascertain what is the invention which is specified
in the claims
and then compare that with the invention which has been described in the
specification. Thereafter the court’s
task is to decide whether the
invention in the claims is supported by the description. I do not believe that
the mere mention in
the specification of features appearing in the claim will
necessarily be a sufficient support. The word ‘support’ means
than that and requires the description to be the base which can fairly entitle
the patentee to a monopoly of the width claimed.
That approach encapsulates broadly the claim support obligation under s
40(3). To it may be added the requirement that the technical
contribution to the
art must be ascertained. Where it is a product, it is that which must be
supported in the sense that the technical
contribution to the art disclosed by
the specification must justify the breath of the monopoly
is therefore the case that, under s40(3), the matter in a claim of a
specification must be supported by an enabling disclosure
in the description and
any drawings, graphics, photographs and sequence listing (i.e., the body of the
specification).
The amendment
1 as currently proposed to be amended on 20 June 2024, with amendments indicated
by underlining (added) and strikethrough (deleted),
1. A rail comprising steel composition comprising, by mass%:
C: 0.75 to 1.20%;
Si: 0.10 to 2.00%;
Mn: 0.10 to 2.00%;
Cr: 0 to 2.00%;
Mo: 0 to 0.50%;
Co: 0 to 1.00%;
B: 0 to 0.0050%;
Cu: 0 to 1.00%;
Ni: 0 to 1.00%;
V: 0 to 0.50%;
Nb: 0 to 0.050%;
Ti: 0 to 0.0500%;
Mg: 0 to 0.0200%;
Ca: 0 to 0.0200%;
REM: 0 to 0.0500%;
Zr: 0 to 0.0200%;
N: 0 to 0.0200%;
Al: 0 to 1.00%;
P: 0.0250% or less;
S: 0.0250% or less; and
a remainder consisting of Fe and impurities,
wherein 90 area% or greater of a metallographic structure in a cross
section of a rail web portion is a pearlite structure,
a minimum value of a hardness in the cross section of the rail web portion
is Hv 300 or greater
when measurement positions for the hardness are in a
cross section in a range of ±15 mm in an upward and downward direction of
the rail from a middle line between a rail bottom portion and a rail top
a difference between a maximum value and the minimum value of the hardness
in the cross section of the rail web portion is Hv 40 or
less wherein the
minimum value of the hardness and the difference between a maximum value and a
minimum value of the hardness are
to JIS Z 2244:2009 with a load of 98 N as defined in the
description
Vickers hardness meter, in which a load is 98 N, by continuously making
indentations in a thickness direction of the rail
web portion in a row at a
pitch of 1.0 mm in which a starting point of the indentations is a position of a
depth of 1.0 mm from an
outer surface of the rail web portion, in which
measurement of the hardness is performed on at least five measurement lines with
an interval of 1.0 mm or greater provided between the measurement
same amendment has been made to the consistory clause in the description at
[0016a]. No amendment was made to dependent claims
2 and 3. For the sake of
brevity, I will refer to the amendments with regard to the claims. However, the
same considerations with
regard to scope and disclosure would apply to the
amendments proposed with respect to the consistory clause at
Consideration
s102(2)(a) – Does the scope of the claims after amendment fall
outside the scope of the claims before amendment?
opponent raised two central issues with the proposed amendments, which are said
to result in a different claim scope to that prior
to the amendment:
Measurement Range
: The proposed amendment to delete
the words “as defined in the description” which is to be understood
in conjunction
with introduction of language specifying the relevant measurement
position in relation to the minimum value of hardness only.
Measurement according to the Standard
: The amendment to
delete the words “according to JIS Z 2244:2009 with a load of 98N”
from the claims and replacement
of that testing requirement with a requirement
to test using a Vickers hardness meter by continuously making indentations as
in the claim after the Proposed
Amendments.”
Measurement
range/positions
parties agree that the subset of the cross-section where the hardness values are
measured fall within ±15 mm of the midline
of the rail with regard to the
minimum hardness value.
However, the parties disagree on whether the range of measurement positions
applies only to the minimum hardness value or to all
sampled hardness values.
applicant submitted that they had “simply proposed to recite the
Measurement Range
limitation from the description in Amended Claim 1 by
explicitly defining the measurement positions for the hardness in a
cross-section
of rail rather than relying on a definition from the
description.”
particular, the applicant noted Dr Hellier’s comments regarding the
amendments, where he simply stated that “claim
1 now includes an explicit
definition of the sampling location of the rail..., and a prescriptive testing
method, including specific
locations and spacings of the
indentations.”
to the amendment, the hardness measures were defined by reference to JIS Z
2244:2009 with a load of 98 N
as defined in the description
. The JIS Z
2244:2009 standard itself does not prescribe where measurements are taken.
Instead, it is the
description
which provides details on the relevant
measurement positions, being in a cross section of the rail web portion in a
range of ±15
mm from the mid-line between the rail bottom portion and the
opponent submitted that claim 1 as proposed to be amended is silent on the
location where the maximum value of hardness is measured
and therefore
“the largest difference in hardness can be both outside as well as inside
the Measurement Range.”
the other hand, the applicant submitted that a purposive construction of the
proposed claims should take the measurement positions
mentioned in respect of
the minimum hardness value as requiring all hardness measurement to be taken in
the same range of measurement
The applicant
pointed to the use of the explicit article in the phrase
hardness in
cross section of
rail web portion
respect to a difference between maximum and minimum hardness values as referring
to an internal antecedence to the measurement
range defined with respect to the
minimum value of hardness.
note that the proposed amendment also refers to a cross section of a rail web
portion with regard to its metallographic structure.
This feature in the
claims, before and after amendment, is not limited to any sub-range of the cross
section of the rail web portion.
The applicant does not explain how this cross
section of the rail web portion influences
cross section of
rail web portion in relation to the hardness measurements.
proposed amendments lack a distinct feature specifying relevant measurement
positions within the cross section of the rail web
portion. As proposed to be
amended, a measurement range is prescribed in the context of the required
minimum hardness value
those hardness measurements are taken in the
specified area of the cross section of the rail web portion. The proposed
do not mention any range within the cross section of the rail web
portion in relation to the metallographic structure or hardness
measurements
other than the range associated with measuring the minimum value of hardness.
Where a range of measurement positions
within the cross section of the rail web
portion is specified with respect to only one feature, it cannot be applied to
features. Consequently, I disagree with the applicant that there is
an internal antecedent for the cross section of the rail web
portion in respect
of the hardness measures.
opponent sought to demonstrate the practical effect of the proposed amendment on
the scope of the claims by using a model rail
Dr Frank showed
that when hardness measures were taken in a range at ±10 mm and ±16 mm
of the midline, the difference
between the minimum and maximum values were less
than Hv 40 but the differences in the minimum and maximum values at ±28 mm
and across the whole web portion area were Hv 41 and Hv 57,
respectively.
Frank appears to have read the feature defining the difference between the
minimum and maximum hardness values in isolation, as
the measurements taken in
his experiment span the entire indicated range, where the minimum value of
hardness was taken outside of
the ±15 mm range of the mid-point. I believe
his point still stands, whether the maximum value of hardness is measured across
the whole web portion or within the ±15 mm range of the mid-point, since
the difference between the minimum and maximum values
in Rail Piece 7020A102
would still exceed Hv 40.
exercise shows that rather than expanding the scope of the claims, the proposed
amendments have the effect of narrowing the scope.
Insofar as the proposed
amendment still requires the difference between the minimum and maximum value of
hardness to be Hv 40 or
less, allowing for hardness measurements across a larger
area enforces a greater uniformity of cross-sectional hardness in the web
portion. The requirement for uniformity of the hardness of the rail web portion
is extended to the entire cross section, not just
within the range of ±15
mm of the mid-line.
amendment is not allowable under s102(2)(a) where the amendment would make
something an infringement which would not have been
an infringement before the
proposed amendment would have the opposite effect: it turns something which
would have been an infringement before the amendment
into something would not be
an infringement. As demonstrated by Dr Frank, in the absence of a measurement
range for the hardness
difference, Rail Piece 7020A102, which was shown to have
a hardness profile within the scope of the claims prior to amendment, may
longer fall within the scope of the claims as proposed to be
Measurement according to the standard as
opponent submitted that claim 1 as proposed to be amended no longer requires any
testing to comply with the JIS Z 2244:2009
According to the
opponent, “The deletion of the reference to the Standard now leaves it
open to the presence of hardness being
tested by a different method (albeit it
might use a Vickers hardness meter, use 98N of force and have similar
measurements) which
does not inevitably comply with the previously stated
Similarly, Dr
Frank noted that the JIS Z 2244:2009 standard is “quite prescriptive and
is a lot more flexibility when measuring the hardness according to the Amended
Claim compared to the method of measuring
the hardness according to the Accepted
applicant submitted that the proposed amendments result in a more prescriptive
method than the claims prior to
The applicant
further submitted that “standards between countries or organisations are
largely interchangeable and, if a Vickers
hardness test measurement was required
but did not state a standard, the skilled person would still conduct the testing
in accordance
with a suitable testing
a person skilled in the art would, in performing the invention, refer to a
standard or not is not the correct question. Prior
to the proposed amendment,
the hardness measurement was limited to the JIS Z 2244:2009 standard, with a
fixed practice. Determining
the hardness characteristics of the rail web
portion by an alternative means would impact on the assessment of rails as
falling within
or outside the scope of the claims.
as the proposed amendments remove reference to the JIS Z 2244:2009 standard as
prima facie
, the scope of the claims after amendment would
include matter falling outside the scope of the claims before amendment. The
amendments require the hardness to be measured under the following
conditions:
“using a Vickers hardness meter, in which a load is 98 N, by
continuously making indentations in a thickness direction of the
portion in a row at a pitch of 1.0 mm in which a starting point of the
indentations is a position of a depth of 1.0 mm from
an outer surface of the
rail web portion, in which measurement of the hardness is performed on at least
five measurement lines with
an interval of 1.0 mm or greater provided between
the measurement lines”
proposed amendment does not explicitly refer to a Vickers hardness test. The
nature of the hardness test is only inferred from
the use of a Vickers hardness
meter and the hardness values being given in units of Hv. The proposed
amendment is also silent on
the basic conditions for carrying out the hardness
tests. In contrast, the JIS Z 2244:2009 standard sets out basic testing
and the description defines further requirements, such as the
collection of the test piece and pre-processing. Therefore, defining
test machine, load and measurement intervals does not make the process for
measuring hardness more prescriptive as suggested
respect to various hardness tests, according to Dr Hellier, “The
Vicker’s hardness test is perhaps the mostly [sic]
commonly used as it has
a broad scale and can be used for all metal
For example, Dr
Hellier pointed to a different standard for the Vickers hardness test, ASTM
having similar basic
conditions to those specified in JIS Z
Although both
standards relate to the Vickers hardness test, they are not identical. In this
regard, Dr Frank noted that measurement
methods, devices and standard change
over time and in the absence of all the same conditions being specified in the
claim, the type
of rail that falls within or outside the scope of the claims may
proposed amendments have not specified the other conditions defined in the JIS Z
2244:2009 standard for a Vickers hardness test
as described in the opposed
application. Moreover, the proposed amendment is not limited to any standard.
I have no evidence on
the extent of common practice imposed by the choice of
using a Vickers hardness test to measure hardness. However, the existence
numerous standards in the art and their evolution over time strongly points to
variations in testing conditions leading to different
outcomes. Insofar as the
proposed amendments leaving the test conditions open, I conclude that the scope
of the claims after amendment
necessarily include matter falling outside the
scope of the claims before amendment.
Conclusion on
am satisfied that the scope of the claims after amendment includes matter
falling outside the scope of the claims before amendment.
The opposition is
successful on this ground.
s102(1) – claim or disclose matter that extends beyond that
disclosed at filing
parties relied on their interpretation of the scope of the claims before and
after amendment to support their position on whether
the opposed application as
proposed to be amended would claim or disclose matter that extends beyond that
disclosed at filing.
discussed above, there are differences in scope between the claims before and
after amendment. Whether these differences lead
to matter extending beyond that
disclosed at filing will be considered.
regard to the measurement range, the specification explains that the hardness
measurements being taken within the ±15 mm
range of the mid-point was to
ensure that the rail had uniform cross-sectional hardness in the rail web
There is no
explanation as to whether the ±15 mm range of the mid-point is particularly
prone to variability, particularly
representative of the hardness of the rail
web portion or simply a convenient sample to prepare. In any event, it is clear
uniform hardness in the rail web portion is important.
consider that taking hardness measurements outside of the range ±15 mm of
the midpoint within the web portion still serves
the same purpose of ensuring
hardness uniformity within the rail web portion.
regard to the measurement method, the specification correlates the
cross-sectional hardness of the web portion and the fatigue
damage when a rail
includes a pearlite structure.
All measurements of hardness are expressed in units of Hv throughout the
specification. The specification only describes one method
of measuring
hardness, based on the JIS Z 2244:2009 standard, with specified load and
measurement locations. Other than being the
standard used, there is no
indication in the specification that the JIS Z 2244:2009 standard was selected
for any particular reason.
noted by Dr Hellier, the Vickers hardness test is a commonly used
As a person skilled in
the art reading the specification, Dr Hellier stated:
“Whilst I am not familiar with Japanese standards, I assume that it is
related to other international standards, as testing
methods do not often differ
greatly between countries or
organisations.”
Hellier’s preferred standard for a Vickers hardness test is ASTM
His evidence was not
specific to any particular standard of the Vickers hardness test. Similarly,
although expressing concerns
of changes over time even within the same standard,
the hardness testing of Rail Piece 7020A102 ordered by Dr Frank was conducted
accordance with the Vickers hardness test as set out in the JIS Z
2244-1:2020.
consider that that a person skilled in the art does not learn anything new by
considering the hardness of the rail web portion more
broadly under the umbrella
of Vickers hardness test. It is merely indicative of the threshold for hardness
above which the rail
is less likely to suffer fatigue damage.
Consequently,
the proposed amendments do not claim or disclose matter that extends beyond that
disclosed at filing. The opponent
has not established this ground of
opposition.
s102(2)(b) – Does the amendment introduce an issue of lack of
similar reasons as above, the proposed amendments do not introduce an issue of
lack of support. The evidence from both parties
point to the Vickers hardness
test being a widely used test. With the test machine, load and measurement
intervals defined, the
specification provides an enabling disclosure of the
Vickers hardness test for a person skilled in the art to perform in order to
identify suitable rails.
amendment does not introduce an issue of lack of support. The opponent has not
established this ground of opposition.
s102(2)(b) – Does the amendment
introduce an issue of lack of clarity?
opponent submitted that, as a result of the amendment to the measurement feature
for the minimum hardness in the cross section
of the rail web portion, it was
unclear whether the microstructure analysis and hardness testing were to be made
in the same area
or different cross sections of the rail web portion are to be
tested depending on the
to the amendment, claim 1 defined that “wherein 90 area% or greater of a
metallographic structure in a cross section of
a rail web portion is a pearlite
structure” and “the minimum value of the hardness and the difference
between a maximum
value and a minimum value of the hardness are measured
according to JIS Z 2244:2009 with a load of 98 N as defined in the
description.”
With regard to these features appearing in the claims, the
specification indicates the following measurement ranges:
“Incidentally, the ‘metallographic structure in the cross section
of the rail web portion’ indicates a metallographic
structure in a range
of ± 15 mm in the upward and downward direction of the rail from the middle
line between the rail bottom
portion and the rail top portion in the cross
section of the web
“Incidentally, the ‘minimum value of the hardness in the cross
section of the rail web portion’ indicates the minimum
value of the
hardness in a range of ± 15 mm in the upward and downward direction of the
rail from the middle line between the
rail bottom portion and the rail top
portion in the cross section of the web
“Incidentally, the ‘difference between the maximum value and the
minimum value of the hardness in the cross section of
the rail web
portion’ indicates a difference between the maximum value and the minimum
value of the hardness in a range of
± 15 mm in the upward and downward
direction of the rail from the middle line between the rail bottom portion and
the rail top
portion in the cross section of the web
Separately,
the specification describes the method for measuring the cross-sectional
hardness of the rail web portion is described
in the context of the JIS Z
2244:2009 with a load of 98 N as follows:
“The measurement position was in a cross section in a range of ±
15 mm in an upward and downward direction of the rail
from a middle line between
a rail bottom portion and a rail top portion (refer to FIG. 1).
Indentations were continuously made in a
thickness direction of the web portion in a row at a pitch of 1.0 mm in which
the starting
point of the continuous indentation is the position of a depth of
1.0 mm from the outer surface of the web portion, and the hardness
distribution
was measured. The measurement of the hardness was performed on at least five
Incidentally, in order to eliminate the mutual influences of the
indentations, an interval of 1.0 mm or greater was provided between
measurement
claim 1 as proposed amended, the measurement for minimum hardness of the
cross-section of the rail web portion is Hv 300 or less
when taken from “a
cross section in a range of ±15 mm in an upward and downward direction of
the rail from a middle line
between a rail bottom portion and a rail top
portion” and the minimum value of the hardness and the difference between
maximum and minimum values of the hardness are measured “by
continuously making indentations in a thickness direction of the
portion in a row at a pitch of 1.0 mm in which a starting point of the
indentations is a position of a depth of 1.0 mm from
an outer surface of the
rail web portion, in which measurement of the hardness is performed on at least
five measurement lines with
an interval of 1.0 mm or greater provided between
the measurement lines.” No amendment was made with respect to the
metallographic
structure in a cross section of a rail web portion.
Consequently,
although the reference to the hardness measurement being taken “according
to JIS Z 2244:2009 with a load of 98
N as defined in the description” had
disguised the issue, I consider that the possibility of multiple cross sections
rail web portion existed prior to the proposed amendment.
amendment does not introduce an issue of lack of clarity. The opponent has not
established this ground of opposition.
opposition is successful on the grounds of s102(2)(a). I am satisfied that the
scope of the claims after amendment includes matter
falling outside the scope of
the claims before amendment. The opposition fails on the other grounds of
s102(1) and s102(2)(b) –
the proposed amendments do not claim or disclose
matter that extends beyond that disclosed at filing or introduce issues of
or clarity.
refuse the amendment.
generally follow the event. I see no reason to depart from that approach. I
therefore award costs according to Schedule 8
against the applicant, Nippon
Steel Corporation.
Delegate of the Commissioner of Patents
Dr Frank had filed earlier
declarations in the S59 opposition. I have included these in the present
numbering of declarations as
Frank 1, Frank 2, Frank 3 and Frank 4.
Opponent submissions in
support at [25].
Specification
Specification at
Specification at
Specification at
Specification at
Specification at
Specification at
Specification at
Specification at
Specification at
[0066] and [0091].
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation v BASF Plant
Science GmbH
[2020] FCA 328
Distillers Co. Ld.'s Application
(1953) 70 RPC 221
W.J. Voit Rubber
Corp.'s Application
(1965) AOJP 1752
Ingelheim International GmbH v Commissioner
H Lundbeck A/S v
Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2009] FCAFC 70
Monsanto Co
v Commissioner of Patents
(1974) 48 ALJR
Flexible Steel Lacing
Co v Beltreco Ltd
[2000] FCA 890
Merck Sharp &
Dohme Corporation v Wyeth LLC (No 3)
[2020] FCA 1477
submissions in support at
Opponent submissions
in support at [29] and applicant submissions in answer at
Applicant submissions
in answer at [42] (emphasis in original).
Hellier at [146].
Specification at [0025],
[0065] and [0091].
submissions in support at [39].
Applicant submissions in
answer at [43] and [59].
Applicant submissions in answer at [41] (emphasis in
submissions in support at
The Distillers
Co. Ld.'s Application
(1953) 70 RPC 221
Frank 5 at [25].
Opponent submissions in
support at [50].
submissions in support at [54].
Applicant submissions
in answer at [54].
Applicant submissions in answer at [55].
Hellier at [40].
Opponent submissions
in support at [60] and [65]-[67]; Applicant submissions in answer at [61] and
Specification at
[0027] and [0064].
Specification at [0019].
Hellier at [40].
Opponent submissions
in support at [48].
Specification at [0056].
Specification at [0061].
Specification at [0063].
Specification at [0025], [0066] and [0091].
RTF format (2.12 MB)
Signed PDF/A format