URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1957/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sophron v Nominal Defendant [1957] HCA 27; (1957) 96 CLR 469 (3 May 1957)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SOPHRON v. THE NOMINAL DEFENDANT
[1957] HCA 27
; (1957) 96 CLR 469
High Court of Australia
Dixon C.J.(1), McTiernan(1), Fullagar(1) and Taylor(1) JJ.
Negligence - Motor vehicles - Third party insurance - Bodily injury - Caused
by unidentified motor vehicle - Claim against nominal
defendant - Notice of
intended claim - Failure to give within prescribed period - Reasons for
failure - Omission on part of claimant's
solicitor - Application to extend
time for giving notice - "Sufficient cause" - Motor Vehicles (Third Party
Insurance) Act 1942-1951
(N.S.W.) (No. 15 of 1942 - No. 59 of 1951), s. 30 (2)
Sydney, 1957, April 9, 10; May 3. 3:5:1957
APPEAL from the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
THE COURT delivered the following written judgment: -
This appeal was instituted as of right from an order of the Full Court of
30 (2) (b) (ii) of the Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance)
Act 1942-1951
(N.S.W.) to extend the period for suing the nominal defendant. The appellant,
after giving notice of appeal, proceeded,
in anticipation of his right of
appeal being questioned, to apply ex parte for special leave to appeal from
the order. The court
stood over that application to the hearing of the appeal.
2. The application for an extension of time under s. 30 (2) (b) (ii) was made
by the appellant in the first instance in chambers
in accordance with the
Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance) Act - Extension of Time - Rules of the
Supreme Court, and it was dealt
with by the prothonotary as in pursuance of
the Prothonotary (Chamber Work) Rules of that court. The prothonotary granted
the appellant's
application, whereupon the nominal defendant, the respondent,
filed a request under r. 9 of the last-mentioned rules that the matter
referred to a judge. One would suppose that under r. 17 the judge would decide
the matter referred as if it were before him, not
by way of appeal, but as an
original application. He would, of course, decide it on the evidence taken by
the prothonotary, unless
the judge for some reason ordered fresh evidence to
be taken (see r. 16). But he would, nonethless, decide it as an original
The parties joined in requesting the judge to refer the matter to the
Full Court and he accordingly did so, under what provision
we have not been
told. No doubt the Full Court should be treated as occupying the position of
the judge in chambers. This would mean
that the Full Court might have
exercised an original power to decide the application under s. 30 (2) (b) (ii)
of the Motor Vehicles
(Third Party Insurance) Act. In the Full Court, however,
the matter was treated rather as an appeal from the prothonotary whose
of discretion would stand unless it were shown to have miscarried,
that is to say on the footing that the primary question was whether
taken into account extraneous considerations or had failed to take into
account relevant considerations or had otherwise mistaken
the proper grounds
on which he should act. The decision of the Full Court (Owen J. and Manning
J., Herron J. dissenting) was that
the appellant's application for an
extension of time should be refused (1957) SR (NSW) 59; 74 WN 55 . (at p472)
3. Section 30 (2) (a) provides that where the death of or bodily injury to
any person is caused by or arises out of the use of a
motor vehicle but the
identity of the motor vehicle cannot after due inquiry and search be
established, any person who could have
enforced a claim for damages against
the owner or driver of the motor vehicle in respect of the death or bodily
injury may enforce
against the nominal defendant the claim which he could have
enforced against the owner or driver of the motor vehicle. Paragraph
30 (2), so far as material, provides that no action to enforce any such claim
shall lie against the nominal defendant unless
notice of intention to make a
claim is given by the claimant to the nominal defendant - . . . (ii) . . .
within a period of three
months after the occurrence out of which the claim
arose or within such further period as the court, upon sufficient cause being
shown, may allow. (at p473)
4. The facts which the appellant put forward in support of his application
may be stated briefly. Early in April 1954 the appellant,
a resident of
Melbourne, rode a motor cycle from Melbourne on a journey to Sydney. He was
accompanied by a woman riding pillion.
At about five o'clock in the evening of
a day which he fixes as Tuesday, 6th April, while he was riding towards Bega
he says that
a small greenish car travelling in the opposite direction forced
him off the road and actually touched his machine. As a result he
came to the
ground and suffered injuries which included a broken collar bone. The greenish
car did not stop and he cannot identify
the car or the driver. The appellant
proceeded to Bega where for a day or two he was treated at the hospital. His
companion at once
reported the accident to the police there and before he left
Bega he made and signed a statement at the police station. The couple
went on to Sydney. There he instructed his solicitors. After a few weeks in
Sydney he and his companion returned by ship to
Melbourne. There he was an
out-patient of a hospital for three or four months undergoing some treatment
or procedure to which he
applied the word "plastic". Four or five months after
the accident he sent a communication to the police at Bega, who seem to have
replied that they could not assist him. It was on 13th April 1954, that is a
week after the accident, that he instructed a firm of
solicitors in Sydney. In
the affidavit of the partner whom he saw the instructions are described as
being "to commence an action
against the nominal defendant claiming damages".
Statements were taken from the appellant and his companion and at the same
he was advised to see the police at Bega, presumably on the assumption
that he would return by road. From them he was to ascertain
whether they had
obtained more information about the accident. The partner handed the matter
over to an articled clerk then in his
final year. The latter gathered from the
file of papers that the appellant was to return through Bega and attempt to
obtain further
information with a view to suing the driver of the small green
car and also was to supply information as to the expense to which
he had been
put. On 24th May 1954 the firm received a letter from the appellant from which
the articled clerk inferred that the appellant
had obtained no further
information. He therefore turned his attention to the Motor Vehicles (Third
Party Insurance) Act 1942-1951.
Although it is par. (a) of s. 30 (2) that
gives the right of action against the nominal defendant, the articled clerk
failed to note
that by par. (b) a notice of the claim must be given within
three months, that is, of course, unless the period is enlarged by the
On 3rd August 1954 the appellant wrote again to his solicitors in Sydney
giving an account of his medical treatment. Hearing
nothing further the
articled clerk early in October turned again to the Act. He then saw the
requirement that notice of the claim
must be given within three months. On
21st October 1954 a letter giving a notice, sufficient in contents, was sent
to the nominal
defendant. The letter requested the nominal defendant "to
consent to this application being out of time". Needless to say the request
was not fruitful; a waiver of due notice was refused by a letter from the
defendant's solicitors dated 5th November 1954. Nothing
further was done on
the appellant's behalf until a summons was issued on 31st October 1955
applying for an extension of time under
s. 30 (2) (b) (ii). The summons sought
an extension to 22nd October 1954, the day after the date of the letter. (at
5. In the materials before the Supreme Court no details were given of the
injuries or of the loss sustained by the appellant, but
in the affidavit in
this Court filed with the notice of appeal it is stated that the solicitors
were instructed to sue for 5,000
pounds, that the medical and other expenses
amounted to 107 pounds and the loss of wages to 500 pounds. That, however,
affects nothing
but the amount involved in the order from which it is sought
to appeal. (at p474)
6. When the application was before the prothonotary he appears to have
adopted the view that a fixed general rule existed that when
the failure to
give notice within time could not be ascribed to the fault of the claimant but
was attributable entirely to fault
on the part of his solicitor, that
necessarily amounted to sufficient cause within the meaning of s. 30 (2) (b)
(ii). Such a view
is opposed to the principles laid down by Walsh J. in Martin
v. Nominal Defendant (1954) 74 WN (NSW) 121 and it gained no support
Full Court in the present case. No one, of course, doubts that such a
consideration as the blamelessness of the claimant and
the responsibility of
his solicitor is very material. But every case must be determined on its own
facts. Fixed formulae cannot be
substituted for the wide words of the
sub-section, viz. "or within such further period as the court, upon sufficient
cause being
shown, may allow". There is apparently no definition of the word
"court". "The court" must mean the court in which the action is,
in the event,
commenced. It has been commonly treated in the Supreme Court as including, if
not meaning, an extension granted by
the court before the actual commencement
of the action, and there is nothing to require us to depart from the
well-settled practice
based on that assumption. The expression "upon
sufficient cause shown" does, of course, connote that the facts amounting to
cause must be made positively to appear. It connotes too that the
"cause" must in any given case suffice to authorise the allowance
particular "further period" for which the court does in fact extend the time.
7. But it is a mistake to attempt to reduce the expression "sufficient cause"
to a closer or more rigid definition than the legislature
has chosen to
provide. The words no doubt are concerned with the justice of the case. There
must be some positive reason for concluding
that as between the parties it
would be just to extend the period for giving notice. Fault on the part of the
claimant in failing
to give notice within three months must be an element
affecting the justice of extending the time and so on the other side must be
the prejudice which the nominal defendant has or may have suffered because of
that failure. The justice of extending the time may
be affected too by what
happened after the expiration of the three months. You cannot leave entirely
out of account the time which
has been allowed to pass in addition to that
period. The form of s. 30 (2) (b) (ii) is quite different from that on which
v. Thomas Firth & Sons (1921) 1 KB 655 was decided, a case that is not
in point. (at p475)
8. The power which the Supreme Court was called upon to exercise is one
involving the formation of a judgment into which a measure
of discretion must
enter. The majority of the court formed a judgment against extending the time.
We ought not to interfere with
their conclusion unless we are able to perceive
in the reasons upon which their Honours proceeded or may be taken to have
some error of principle, as for example the entry of some
inadmissible consideration into the decision of the matter, the failure
take into account a material consideration of possibly decisive importance, or
some other misconception of the manner in which
the discretionary judgment
must be formed. We ought not, as an appellate court, simply to reach a
discretionary determination of
the matter anew. Our duty is to correct such a
judgment of the Supreme Court only if we are satisfied that error occurred in
manner in which it was arrived at. No such error in fact appears. (at
9. The majority of the Supreme Court were dissatisfied, not unnaturally, with
the explanations placed before them of some of the
circumstances of the case.
Two examples were given in their Honour's reasons, but they were no more than
examples. One example concerned
the failure of the solicitor himself to
explain why he did not direct notice to be given. Another example was the
absence of any
explanation of the subsequent delay. In fact the record leaves
untouched a number of detailed facts which should have been dealt
and precisely in the evidence offered in support of an application under s. 30
(2) (b) (ii). For instance it does not
appear whether the solicitors made any
attempt to ascertain from the police what had been reported to them and what
they had done.
It does not appear what light the pillion rider would or could
throw on the course of events. The letters, if any, passing between
solicitors and their client are not enumerated or offered for examination or
consideration. In short, it is a plain enough inference
that the question of
pursuing the claim of the appellant fell into suspense and no complete or
entirely satisfactory reason for this
is forthcoming. The allowance of a
further period of time under s. 30 (2) (b) (ii) is not a thing to be done
lightly or on facts
that may be guessed at. "Sufficient cause" must be
"shown". In the present case there is no good reason for saying that the
of the Full Court took an unsound view in deciding that sufficient
cause was not shown. Assuming, therefore, that an appeal lies
as of right it
should be dismissed. But, assuming without deciding that the order under
appeal is final and not interlocutory, it
does not follow that an appeal does
lie as of right. For it to do so, it must appear that at least 1,500 pounds,
to put it shortly,
is involved in the order of the Supreme Court. No process
or proceeding before the Court claims such an amount. What the claimant
instructed his solicitor cannot matter. There is a paucity of evidence about
the appellant's injuries and it cannot be said to be
established that 1,500
pounds is really involved. Either it would be necessary, therefore, to produce
further evidence of the real
prejudice to the appellant which the order works
or else for the appellant to obtain special leave to appeal. It is not,
a case for special leave. But since the appeal was instituted as of
right and inasmuch as we think that it should be dismissed on
the substantial
grounds, the proper order is, appeal dismissed with costs. (at p476)
Appeal dismissed with costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter