CPM19 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FedCFamC2G 1858 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
CPM19 v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1858
File number:
SYG 1643 of 2019
Judgment of:
JUDGE KAUR-BAINS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– application for judicial
review of decision of Administrative Appeals Tribunal – Protection (Class
XA) (Subclass 866)
visa – whether the Tribunal was biased – whether
the Tribunal failed to consider the applicants’ claims –
Legislation:
Australian Citizenship Act 2007
Migration Act 1958
ss 36(2)(aa)
Cases cited:
BGZ15 v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2017] FCA 1095
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
Hamod v New South Wales
[2011] NSWCA 375
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZLSP
(2010) 187 FCR 362
[2010] FCAFC 108
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng
(2001) 205 CLR 507
SZGIZ v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
(2013) 212 FCR
SZRUR v Minister Immigration and Border Protection
[2013] FCAFC 146
(2013) 216 FCR
General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Applicants:
First Applicant appeared in person on behalf of
the Applicants
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Mr T Qian of Mills Oakley
Second Respondent:
Submitted appearance save as to costs
SYG 1643 of 2019
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
Second Applicant
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
Second Respondent
JUDGE KAUR-BAINS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
application is dismissed.
First and Second Applicants pay the First Respondent’s costs fixed in the
amount of $5,400.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or order to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors (r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 24.04
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal
Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE KAUR-BAINS
applicants seek judicial review of the decision of the Administrative Appeals
) dated 4 June 2019. The Tribunal affirmed a decision
of a delegate of the Minister not to grant the applicants a Protection (Class
XA) (Subclass 866) visa (
protection visa
). This Court has
Migration Act 1958
first applicant is a citizen of China. The second applicant is also a citizen of
China and the first applicant’s partner.
The third and fourth applicants
are the children of the first and second applicants, who were born in Australia
on 14 September 2011
and 23 March 2015 respectively. The third and fourth
applicants are now 14 and 10 years of age.
Section 12(1)(b)
Australian Citizenship Act 2007
(Cth) provides that “A person born
in Australia is an Australian citizen if and only if...the person is ordinarily
in Australia throughout the period of 10 years beginning on the day the
person is born”. Accordingly, the third and fourth
applicants are now
Australian citizens, and at the request of the Minister, orders were made to
remove them as parties to these proceedings.
first and second applicants sought to impugn the Tribunal’s reasons and
findings on the grounds set out at [20] of this
judgment. For the reasons set
out below, I find the first and second applicants have not demonstrated
dismiss the application.
First applicant
4 September 2006, the first applicant arrived in Australia on a student visa
([9] of the Tribunal’s reasons). The first applicant’s
student visa
ceased on 15 March 2009, but he remained unlawfully in Australia until June 2011
when he applied for a protection visa
2011 protection visa
application
). The first applicant’s June 2011 protection visa
application was refused, after which time he unsuccessfully appealed to a
differently constituted Tribunal (
previous Tribunal
). He then sought
Ministerial intervention, which was refused. The first applicant remained
unlawfully in Australia after his bridging
visa ceased until being detained by
the Department of Immigration and Citizenship (
) in April 2014.
On 1 May 2014, the first applicant was granted another bridging visa.
15 May 2014, the first applicant lodged a second protection visa application
(Court Book (
) 45 to 61). This application was allowed as a result of
the Full Federal Court decision of
SZGIZ v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
(2013) 212 FCR 235 dated 3 July 2013, which allowed a further
protection visa application to be made under the complementary protection
criterion in
s 36(2)(aa)
of the Act if the prior protection visa application was
made and refused prior to the commencement of the complementary protection
criterion on 24 March 2012. The first applicant’s second
protection visa application relates only to the complementary protection
criterion in
s 36(2)(aa).
Second applicant
10 September 2006, the second applicant first arrived in Australia on a student
visa ([12] of the Tribunal’s reasons). The
second applicant’s
student visa ceased on 30 September 2010, but she remained unlawfully in
Australia until being granted a
bridging visa on the condition that she would
make a substantive visa application. The second applicant was included in the
applicant’s June 2011 protection visa application as a member of his
family unit, but also made separate claims that she was
a Christian. The second
applicant’s protection visa application was refused, after which she
unsuccessfully appealed to the
previous Tribunal. She then sought Ministerial
intervention, which was refused. The second applicant remained unlawfully in
after her bridging visa ceased, until she was granted another bridging
visa on 30 April 2014.
16 May 2014, the second applicant also submitted a second protection visa
application (CB 62 to 77). The second applicant’s
second protection visa
application relates only to the complementary protection criterion in
TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
4 June 2019, the first and second applicants attended the Tribunal hearing with
the assistance of an interpreter in the Mandarin
and English languages (CB 481
Tribunal summarised the first and second applicants’ claims being that
they alleged they were at risk of harm on return
to China because they belonged
to the Local Church and the Chinese Consulate in Sydney had failed to issue them
with travel documents
([21] of its reasons). The Tribunal also noted that in
submissions to the Department, the first and second applicants claimed they
at risk of harm because of China’s family planning regulations.
Relevantly,
the Tribunal summarised the first and second applicants’ evidence provided
to the Department at [23] to [52] of
its reasons. At [54] to [84] of its
reasons, the Tribunal summarised the first and second applicants’ evidence
provided to
the Tribunal concerning their fear of harm in China.
Claims relating to religion – first applicant
Tribunal accepted that the first applicant attended Local Church services in
Australia sporadically prior to 2012, however for
the following reasons it did
not accept that the first applicant was a genuine Christian, or a member of the
Local Church ([88] of
its reasons):
(a) Despite the first applicant’s claims that he had come to Australia in
2006 to avoid harm because of his faith so that he
could practise his religion
freely, the Tribunal found that the applicant failed to apply for a protection
visa until nearly five
years after he arrived and more than two years after his
student visa expired. The Tribunal found that the first applicant’s
failure to apply for protection visa earlier was a strong indication that he did
not come to Australia to avoid problems in China
or to practise his religion
freely. The Tribunal also found that this was a strong indication that he was
not a member of the Local
Church prior to arriving in Australia ([89] of its
(b) The Tribunal also found the first applicant’s evidence regarding his
attendance at church in Australia to be unconvincing.
The Tribunal noted the
first applicant’s evidence that he ceased attending church because many of
the other people of the church
were not committed members, and he was hiding
from the Department. The Tribunal did not accept that explanation and found that
the first applicant was genuinely committed to the church, he would have
continued to attend or at least have some associations with
other genuine
followers of the faith. The Tribunal also noted that the first applicant failed
to attend services after he was located
by the Department and granted a bridging
visa in May 2014 ([91] of its reasons).
(c) Further, the first applicant’s response was “vague’ and
“confused” when the Tribunal asked about
his faith, and the
applicant failed to demonstrate the level of understanding of Christianity or
the Local Church expected from someone
who was committed to the faith ([93] of
its reasons).
(d) The Tribunal noted that it had regard to the supporting letters and other
documents provided by the first applicant in support
of his claim. The Tribunal
found that to the extent the letters purported to corroborate claims made by the
first applicant, the
Tribunal gave the letters little weight as the first
applicant’s claims had been found to lack credibility. The Tribunal also
noted that it did not have a copy of the DVDs provided by the applicant to the
previous Tribunal, but informed the first applicant
at the hearing that based on
the previous Tribunal’s summary of the relevant content of the DVDs, the
contents of the DVDs
did not provide convincing evidence that the first
applicant or his family were involved in the Local Church ([95] of its reasons).
(e) The Tribunal also considered whether the first applicant would be imputed to
be a follower of the Local Church if he returned
to China because of his
attendance at gatherings of the Church in Australia. The Tribunal found that as
the first applicant had only
attended the Church occasionally and had not
attended at all for over six years, the Tribunal was not satisfied that the
authorities would view him as a Christian or a follower of the Local
Church if he returned to China ([97] of its reasons).
Claims relating to religion – second applicant
Tribunal noted that the second applicant’s claims for fear of returning to
China was because she was a follower of the Local
Church and whilst she had not
attended church since 2012, she would attend future gatherings if her husband
returned to the Church
([98] of its reasons).
Tribunal accepted that the second applicant was baptised in 2011 or 2012 and
briefly attended services at the Local Church following
her baptism. However,
the Tribunal found that since the second applicant had not attended church
services or participated in any
religious activities since 2012, it did not
accept that she was a genuine Christian or a committed member of the Local
Church ([99]
of its reasons).
Tribunal was also not satisfied that the second applicant would be imputed as a
follower of the Local Church if she returned to
China, because she only attended
Church for a short period of time and never attended at all in six years ([100]
of its reasons).
Denial of passports and cancellation of the second
applicant’s household registration
Tribunal had regard to country information about household registration
) in China, as well as the issuing, cancellation and refusal of
passports for Chinese nationals in and outside of China. The Tribunal
regard to the fact that existing country information could not verify the
treatment of failed asylum seekers who returned
to China, but there was no
information that suggested individuals were targeted solely because of having
sought asylum abroad ([101]
to [104] of its reasons).
Tribunal was not satisfied that the first applicant or the second applicant had
been denied passports by the Chinese authorities,
or that the second
applicant’s hukou was cancelled in 2012 ([105] to [110] of its reasons).
The Tribunal considered the first
applicant’s evidence at the Tribunal
hearing that it was not uncommon for failed asylum seekers to be granted new
in Australia. The Tribunal found this was a strong indicator that
Chinese citizens were not denied passports only because their circumstances
suggested they might have sought protection. Accordingly, it was not satisfied
that the first and second applicants were denied Chinese
travel documents
because they had or were suspected of seeking asylum ([111] of its reasons), and
it was not satisfied that the second
applicant’s hukou was cancelled given
the first and second applicants’ “general lack of credibility”
of its reasons).
Claims relating to China’s family planning
regulations
Tribunal had regard to country information about family planning regulations in
China. This included the implementation of a new
“two child” policy
in 2016, the abolition of forced contraception and the lifting of the
requirement to pay a social
compensation fee before accepting an application for
household registration due to non-compliance with the family planning
regulations
([114] and [115] of its reasons). Country information also indicated
that Hubei and Fujian provinces had banned denying registration
to children born
outside of family planning regulations if the registration fee had not been paid
([116] of its reasons). While the
amount of fees varied, the local authorities
had “considerable discretion” when setting fees. In some instances,
had been waived, but in other areas fees were “high” ([117] of
its reasons).
Tribunal was not satisfied that the first and second applicants genuinely feared
harm based on family planning regulations, as
they would have made this claim
earlier than May 2015 given the “universal” or “near
universal” knowledge
of the family planning regulations in China ([121] of
its reasons). Further, the first and second applicants also had nothing to
when the Tribunal invited them to make comments and give evidence about the
problems their children may face in relation to China’s
family planning
regulations, and whether there were any other issues relating to family planning
regulations they wished the Tribunal
to consider ([122] of its reasons).
into account the country information, the Tribunal was not satisfied there was a
real chance that the first and second applicants
would face serious harm or
significant harm if they returned to China for any reason linked to or
associated with China’s family
planning regulations ([124] and [125] of
its reasons).
GROUNDS IN THE APPLICATION
3 July 2019, the applicants filed an application for judicial review of the
Tribunal’s decision. The application contained
the following grounds (as
per original):
The Grounds of the Application are:
1, I am a Chinese citizen and a member of local church who has strong fears of
being persecuted by Chinese government.
2, My family cannot go back to China since we are very scared to be
3, My children will be facing challenge and social biases. Administrative
Appeals Tribunal's failed to consider the reality that
both my children and my
family will be denied by the society
Orders sought by Applicant
l, 1 disagree with Immigration and Administrative Appeals Tribunal's decision.
They did not consider that my children and I will
be in danger if we return.
2, Administrative Appeals Tribunal did not consider that I will be persecuted
and in big trouble if I return home.
3, Administrative Appeals Tribunal member failed to consider my fears and
concerns about my faith in particular my children's future
if return. They did
not trusted me and have prejedous (sic) attitude to my application.
Administrative Appeals Tribunal should grant
my application.
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THIS COURT
first applicant appeared at the hearing before me as a litigant in person on his
own behalf and on behalf of the second applicant,
assisted by an interpreter in
the Mandarin and English languages. Mr Qian appeared for the Minister. Mindful
of the Court’s
duty to unrepresented litigants (
Hamod v New South
[2011] NSWCA 375
SZRUR v Minister Immigration
and Border Protection
[2013] FCAFC 146
(2013) 216 FCR 445
), I explained to the first
applicant the role of the Court in undertaking judicial review. I ensured the
first applicant was in possession
of all relevant documents, namely the Court
Book, application and supporting affidavit of the applicants dated 3 July 2019
Minister’s written submissions dated 4 August 2025. The evidence
before the Court comprised of the Court Book tendered by the
Minister, which was
marked “Exhibit 1”.
first and second applicants did not file any written submissions. The first
applicant was invited to make oral submissions on
his own behalf and that of the
second applicant in support of the judicial review grounds.
CONSIDERATION
Prejudice or bias
first applicant claimed the Tribunal member did not consider his concerns about
his faith or his children's future if they returned
to China. Further, the first
applicant alleged that the Tribunal member did not trust the first applicant and
had a prejudiced attitude
to his application for review of the delegate’s
note that actual bias requires prejudgment in a manner so committed to a
conclusion that it is “incapable of alteration”,
regardless of
arguments or evidence:
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v
(2001) 205 CLR 507 (
) at [72] per Gleeson
CJ and Gummow J. Apprehended bias is similarly difficult to establish. It
requires that a “fair-minded
lay observer might reasonably
apprehend” that a decision-maker “might not bring an impartial
mind” to determination
of the matter:
Ebner v Official Trustee in
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
per Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow and
Hayne JJ. Serious allegations of this nature must be distinctly made and clearly
the hearing before me, I invited the first applicant to explain why he said the
Tribunal was prejudiced against the applicants.
The first applicant contended
that the Tribunal’s prejudice was demonstrated by the fact that the
Tribunal made “vague”
comments as to the contents of the DVDs.
note that the Tribunal at [75] of its reasons stated the first applicant had
provided several DVDs to the previous Tribunal, which
were not provided to the
current Tribunal. However, I agree with the Minister’s oral submissions
that the current Tribunal
noted it had read the previous Tribunal’s
summary of the contents of the DVDs, which did not appear to provide convincing
in relation to the first applicant’s family religion ([75] of its
reasons). I find that it was open to the Tribunal to make
findings that the said
evidence was unconvincing in proving the first applicant’s family’s
affiliation with Christianity.
find there is no evidence before me to substantiate the first applicant’s
complaint of actual or apprehended bias. As said,
the suggestion of bias is a
serious issue, which when raised should be supported by evidence as establishing
a legal basis for the
allegation. On my reading of the Tribunal’s reasons
there is no evidence to support the serious allegation made by the first
Accordingly,
I find that there is no jurisdictional error disclosed.
Failure to consider claims
first applicant argued that the Tribunal failed to consider that the first and
second applicants and their children would be in
danger and face persecution if
they returned to China, and the reality that both they and their children would
be denied by society.
I find that the Tribunal did consider each of the
applicants’ claims, and I also accept the Minister’s submissions
the Tribunal’s decision did not demonstrate it relied on the premise
that “every believer or follower of [a religion]
must have certain
knowledge or provide certain answers concerning aspects of that religion”
when assessing the first applicant’s
claim to be a Christian and a member
of the Local Church:
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZLSP
(2010) 187 FCR 362
[2010] FCAFC 108
per Kenny, Rares and Buchanan JJ.
Rather, the Tribunal’s decision reveals that the first applicant’s
changing evidence
Tribunal doubted his claim to be a Christian. Therefore, I find that no
Merits review
applicants’ grounds also seek a review of the merits of the
Tribunal’s decision, which I do not have power to engage
in and in that
respect no jurisdictional error is disclosed.
New ground raised at the hearing – deletion and/or
modification of the recording of the first applicant’s Department
first applicant also alleged that the recording of the Department interview
) was partially deleted and modified. The first applicant said
that the Tribunal did not conduct any investigation regarding this
point and did
not show much concern. When I asked the first applicant why he did not mention
this issue in his application for judicial
review, the first applicant said his
application was lodged by Song Bai Immigration Service and he was only asked to
put his signature
on the document, although he acknowledged he was aware of the
grounds that were referred to in his judicial review application.
Minister submitted that the first applicant was raising this new ground for the
first time. The Minister directed me to [71] of
the Tribunal reasons, which was
as follows:
I advised applicant A that I had listened to the evidence he had provided
regarding his religious beliefs during his interviews with
the delegates and the
previous Tribunal and he did not appear to be very knowledgeable about
Christianity or the Local Church which
caused me doubt that was a genuine
follower of the religion. He said that he had been concerned that the
interviewers would be upset
if their religion was different from his.
Minister contended that there was nothing in the reasons of the Tribunal’s
decision that the first applicant had in fact
raised the issue that the
recording was partially deleted and/or modified. I find that there is also no
evidence before the Court
that the first applicant had in fact raised this as an
issue before the Tribunal.
first applicant has had ample opportunity to raise this issue before the Court.
The application for judicial review was filed
on 3 July 2019 and the first
applicant said he was assisted by Song Bai Immigration Services. Further, orders
were made on 11 March
2025 giving the first and second applicants an opportunity
to amend their application for judicial review and file any affidavit
and written submissions, but no such documents were filed.
onus is on the applicants in judicial review proceedings to demonstrate
have been given
sufficient opportunity to file any evidence in support of this judicial review
application. They also failed to file
a transcript of the Tribunal hearing. I
find that there is no evidence the recording was partially deleted and/or
modified, or that
the first applicant told the Tribunal he believed the
recording was partially deleted and/or modified. Accordingly, there is no basis
on which to find there is jurisdictional error on the part of the Tribunal in
failing to make further enquiries as to the deletion
or modification of the
Self-evident jurisdictional error
the first and second applicants were self-represented, I reviewed the reasons of
the Tribunal to determine whether there was
any self-evident jurisdictional
BGZ15 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
per Flick J at [11]. I have not identified any such jurisdictional
no jurisdictional error has been disclosed, the application must be
Minister sought costs in the sum of $5,400, which the Minister submitted was
below the scale. Given the work undertaken by the
first respondent in preparing
the Court Book, written submissions, preparation for this hearing and appearing
at the hearing, I find
the costs in the sum of $5,400 fair and reasonable and I
order that the first and second applicants pay this sum as costs and
disbursements
to the first respondent.
I certify that the preceding thirty-eight (38)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 13 November 2025
RTF format (422 KB)
Signed PDF/A format