SZGIZ v Minister for Immigration [2013] FMCA 215 (3 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SZGIZ v MINISTER FOR
IMMIGRATION
[2013] FMCA 215
MIGRATION – Application for review of
decision by an officer of the respondent Minister’s department –
complementary
protection – whether applicant ‘barred’ by s.48A
of the Migration Act from making an application for a protection
visa following
the commencement of the complementary protection amendments to s.36 and s.48A
where the applicant had previously made
an application for a protection visa on
refugees grounds and been refused – s.48A still applicable – no
application dismissed.
Migration Act 1958
Migration Amendment
(Complementary Protection) Act 2011
(Cth), Sch.1
Acts Interpretation
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
Western Australia v Tickner
(1994) 49 FCR 507
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v St Hubert’s Island Pty Ltd (In Liq)
[1978] HCA 10;
138 CLR 210
SZGME v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
alma Elizabeth Buck v Comcare
[1996] FCA 1485
; (1996) 66 FCR
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Haneef
[2007] FCAFC
(2007) 160 CLR 414
NBGM v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
[2006] HCA 54
(2006) 231 ALR 380
(2006) 231 CLR 52
Coal Mine v Victorian Coal Miners’ Association
(1908) 6 CLR 309
Plaintiff M70/2011 v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship; Plaintiff M106 of 2011 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2011] HCA 32
(2011) 244 CLR 144
Applicant NAGM of 2002 v Minister
for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2002] FCAFC
Kolotau v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2002] FCA 1145
SZAAM v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2003] FCA 917
Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship v SZQRB
2013] FCAFC 33
United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
for signature 28 July
1951, 189 UNTS 137
(entered into force 22 April 1954)
Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees
, opened for signature 31
1967, 606 UNTS 267
(entered into force 4 October 1967)
Respondent:
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP
File Number:
SYG 2530 of 2012
Judgment of:
Nicholls FM
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Mr SEJ Prince
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Parish Patience Immigration Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr G Kennett SC with Mr P Knowles
Solicitors for the Respondent:
(1) The application made on 11 October 2012 is
(2) The hearing of the Minister’s application for costs in this matter is
adjourned to 10 April 2013 at
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYG 2530 of
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION &
CITIZENSHIP
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
application before the Court, made on 11 October 2012, under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) (“the Act”) is in relation to the
decision made by an officer of the department (“the departmental
of the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
(“the Minister”), made on 10 October 2012, that an application
protection visa, lodged by the applicant on 10 October 2012, was not a
valid application because the applicant was “barred”
the Act from making a further application for a protection visa.
question raised in this case is whether
of the Act, and with reference
s.48A(2)(aa)
as inserted by item 16 of Sch.1 to the
Migration Amendment
(Complementary Protection) Act 2011
(Act No.121 of 2011)
(“the Amending Act”) applied in respect of an application for a
protection visa made prior to the
commencement of the Amending
Relevant Background
applicant is a national of Bangladesh. He arrived in Australia on
24 January 1996 (Court Book – “CB” –
CB 210.3) as a
visitor (CB 13.3). On 11 March 2005 he applied for a protection visa
(CB 1 to CB 24). He gave his address in Australia
at that time as
“Villawood Immigration Detention” (CB 12.6).
claims to protection were set out in an attached statement (CB 25 to CB 32). He
gave as his reason ([1] at CB 25):
...religious discriminatory ground. I am a newly converted Christian. Because of
my conversion (from Islam to Christianity)
background, I have lost everything in
my country Bangladesh and now fear of my life.”
application was refused by a delegate of the respondent Minister on 18 March
2005 (CB 35 to CB 38). The delegate disregarded the
applicant’s conduct in
Australia (his claimed conversion to Christianity) pursuant to s.91R(3) of the
Act. The delegate found
that, in the absence of any other claims to fear
persecutory harm, he was not satisfied that there was a real chance of Refugees
persecution if the applicant were to return to Bangladesh (CB 38).
no application to the Refugee Review Tribunal (“the Tribunal”) is
reproduced in the Court Book, it would appear,
given the subsequent Tribunal
decision record (CB 40 to CB 59), that the applicant applied for review to the
Tribunal on 21 March
2005 (CB 41).
Tribunal found that the applicant (CB 58.7):
never been subject to past persecution in Bangladesh or Australia, for reason of
his religion, political opinion or
for any other reason. It does not have before
it any credible material to indicate that he faces a real chance of being
persecution for these or any other reasons in Bangladesh. The
Tribunal is therefore not satisfied that he has a well-founded fear
Convention-related persecution in the reasonably foreseeable future if he
returns to Bangladesh. It is not satisfied he is
material in the Court Book reveals that the applicant sought the favourable
intervention of the Minister pursuant to either, or
both, s.417 and s.48B of the
Act on a number of occasions:
August 2005 (CB 60 to CB 63)
October 2006 (CB 130 to CB 133)
October 2007 (CB 135 to CB 138)
December 2007 (CB 140 to CB 142)
May 2008 (CB 144 to CB 156)
March 2010 (CB 158 to CB 162)
January 2012 (CB180 to CB 183)
of the responses (unfavourable to the applicant) to these requests was
February 2006 (CB 129)
March 2007 (CB 134)
November 2007 (CB 139)
May 2008 (CB 143)
June 2008 (CB 157)
December 2011 (CB 178 to CB 179)
March 2012 (CB 191 to CB 192)
[I note the applicant
formally objected to these parts of the Court Book set out at [8] – [9]
being put before the Court –
see further below.]
24 March 2012 Sch.1 of the Amending Act commenced operation (see further
10 October 2012 the applicant lodged, what his representatives (who continue to
act for the applicant in these proceedings) described
as, an “Application
for a Complementary Protection Visa under Section 36 (2) (aa)” (CB 193 to
10 October 2012 the applicant was advised by the departmental officer that
“...the application for this visa...was not a
valid application” (CB
The Application to the Court
sole ground of the application to the Court is:
The application for a Protection Visa was not invalid because the applicant was
not prevented by
Migration Act 1958
from lodging a Protection Visa
application.
Particulars
application was expressly made in reliance only on the grounds in s 36(2)(aa) of
the Act (the ‘complementary protection
grounds’). No previous
application relying on these grounds has been made by the applicant. An
‘application for a protection
visa’ is defined in subsection 48A(2)
as an application for a visa a criterion for which is mentioned in paragraph
(aa), (b) or (c). The applicant has never before applied for a
protection visa in reliance on the complementary protection grounds.
The correct
interpretation of s 48A(2) is that it does not prevent an application being made
now in reliance on the complementary
protection grounds if a prior application
was made and finalised before those grounds were available for
consideration.”
Relevant Legislation
to the commencement of item 16 of Sch.1 to the Amending Act, s.48A of the Act
(on 23 March 2012) was in the following terms:
Non-citizen refused a protection visa may not make further application for
protection visa
Subject to section 48B, a non-citizen who, while in the migration zone, has
application for a protection visa, where the grant of the visa has been refused
(whether or not the application has been finally
determined); or
applications for protection visas, where the grants of the visas have been
refused (whether or not the applications have been
determined);
make a further application for a protection visa while in the migration
the purposes of this section, a non-citizen who:
been removed from the migration zone under section 198; and
again in the migration zone as a result of travel to Australia that is covered
by paragraph 42(2A)(d) or
is taken to have been
continuously in the migration zone despite the removal referred to in
paragraph (a).
Note: Paragraphs 42(2A)(d) and (e) cover limited situations where people
are returned to Australia despite their removal under section
(1B) Subject to section 48B, a non-citizen in the migration
zone who held a protection visa that was cancelled may not make a further
application for a protection visa while in the migration zone.
(2) In this section:
application for a protection visa
(aa) an application for a visa, a criterion for which is that the
applicant is a non-citizen in Australia to whom Australia has
obligations under the Refugees Convention as amended by the Refugees Protocol;
(ab) an application for a visa, a criterion for which is that the
applicant is a non-citizen in Australia who is a member of the
same family unit
as a non-citizen in Australia:
(i) to whom
Australia has protection obligations under the Refugees Convention as amended by
the Refugees Protocol; and
(ii) who holds a protection visa; and
(a) an application for a visa, or entry permit (within the meaning
of this Act as in force immediately before 1 September 1994),
a criterion
for which is that the applicant is a non-citizen who has been determined to be a
refugee under the Refugees Convention
as amended by the Refugees Protocol;
(b) an application for a decision that a non-citizen is a refugee
under the Refugees Convention as amended by the Refugees Protocol;
(c) an application covered by paragraph (a) or (b) that is also
Migration Reform Act 1992
48A(2)(aa) and (ab) was repealed by item 16 of Sch.1 to the Amending Act, which
commenced on 24 March 2012 and which substituted
s.48A(2)(aa) into the Act. Item 16 of Sch.1 to the Amending Act is in the
following terms:
Subsection 48A(2) (paragraphs (aa) and (ab) of the definition of application for
a protection visa)
paragraphs, substitute:
application for a visa, a criterion for which is mentioned in paragraph
36(2)(a), (aa), (b) or (c); and”
48A, following the commencement of the Amending Act and at the time the
applicant lodged his application for a protection
visa on 10 October 2012,
was in the following terms:
Non-citizen refused a protection visa may not make further application for
protection visa
Subject to section 48B, a non-citizen who, while in the migration zone, has
application for a protection visa, where the grant of the visa has been refused
(whether or not the application has been finally
determined); or
(b) applications
for protection visas, where the grants of the visas have been refused (whether
or not the applications have been
finally determined);
make a further application for a protection visa while in the migration
the purposes of this section, a non-citizen who:
been removed from the migration zone under section 198; and
again in the migration zone as a result of travel to Australia that is covered
by paragraph 42(2A)(d) or (e);
is taken to
have been continuously in the migration zone despite the removal referred to in
paragraph (a).
Paragraphs 42(2A)(d) and (e) cover limited situations where people are returned
to Australia despite their removal under section
Subject to section 48B, a non-citizen in the migration zone who held a
protection visa that was cancelled may not make a further
application for a
protection visa while in the migration zone.
this section:
application for a protection visa
(aa) an application for a
visa, a criterion for which is mentioned in paragraph 36(2)(a), (aa), (b) or
(a) an application for a visa, or entry permit (within the meaning of
this Act as in force immediately before 1 September 1994),
a criterion for which
is that the applicant is a non-citizen who has been determined to be a refugee
under the Refugees Convention
as amended by the Refugees Protocol; and
(b) an application for a decision that a non-citizen is a refugee under
the Refugees Convention as amended by the Refugees Protocol;
(c) an application covered by paragraph (a) or (b) that is also covered
Migration Reform Act 1992
Sub-Sections
36(1) and (2) of the Act, prior to the commencement of the Amending Act and at
the time the applicant lodged his first
application for a protection visa, were
in the following terms:
Protection visas
is a class of visas to be known as protection visas.
also Subdivision AL.
criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant for the visa
non-citizen in Australia to whom the Minister is satisfied Australia has
protection obligations under the Refugees Convention
as amended by the Refugees
Protocol; or
non-citizen in Australia who is a member of the same family unit as a
non-citizen who:
mentioned in paragraph (a); and
(ii) holds a protection visa.”
12 and 13 of Sch.1 to the amending Act amended s.36(2) of the Act. They were in
the following terms:
After paragraph 36(2)(a)
non-citizen in Australia (other than a non-citizen mentioned in paragraph (a))
to whom the Minister is satisfied Australia
has protection obligations because
the Minister has substantial grounds for believing that, as a necessary and
foreseeable consequence
of the non-citizen being removed from Australia to a
receiving country, there is a real risk that the non-citizen will suffer
significant
the end of subsection 36(2)
non-citizen in Australia who is a member of the same family unit as a
non-citizen who:
mentioned in paragraph (aa); and
(ii) holds a protection visa.”
the commencement of the Amending Act, and at the time the applicant purportedly
lodged an application for a protection visa,
s.36(1) and (2) of the Act were in
following terms:
is a class of visas to be known as protection visas.
also Subdivision AL.
criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant for the visa
non-citizen in Australia to whom the Minister is satisfied Australia has
protection obligations under the Refugees Convention
as amended by the Refugees
Protocol; or
non-citizen in Australia (other than a non-citizen mentioned in paragraph (a))
to whom the Minister is satisfied Australia
has protection obligations because
the Minister has substantial grounds for believing that, as a necessary and
foreseeable consequence
of the non-citizen being removed from Australia to a
receiving country, there is a real risk that the non-citizen will suffer
significant
non-citizen in Australia who is a member of the same family unit as a
non-citizen who:
(i) is mentioned in
paragraph (a); and
(ii) holds a protection visa; or
(c) a non-citizen in Australia who is a member of the same family unit as
a non-citizen who:
(i) is mentioned in paragraph (aa); and
(ii) holds a protection visa.”
item 35 of Sch.1 to the Amending Act is as follows:
Application
amendments made by this Schedule apply in relation to an application for a
protection visa (within the meaning of the
Migration Act
(a) that is made on or after the
day on which this item commences; or
(b) that is not finally determined (within the meaning of
subsection 5(9)
of that Act) before the day on which this item commences.”
Before the Court
issue requiring determination in this matter is whether s.48A(2)(aa), as
inserted by the Amending Act and in operation at the
time that the applicant
lodged the application for a protection visa on 10 October 2012, operates to
render not valid a protection
visa application made after the commencement of
the Amending Act, where the applicant has previously applied for a protection
prior to the commencement of the Amending Act and that application was
following can be relevantly ascertained from the material before the Court.
the applicant applied for, and was refused, and as affirmed by the Tribunal, a
protection visa considered under the version
of the Act in force in 2005. That
consideration involved an assessment of the applicant’s claims under the
Refugees Convention.
the applicant was in the “migration zone” (see s.5 of the Act for
the meaning of “migration zone”
and s.48A(1) and (1A) of the Act as
it then was) when he made, and was refused, his application for a protection
visa in 2005. He
was in the migration zone when he lodged his application in
2012. There is no suggestion, let alone evidence (with reference to the
Book), that the applicant left and
re-entered the migration zone in the
intervening period.
in the previous versions of s.48A and s.36(2) of the Act a criterion for a
protection visa was said to be, relevantly, the
satisfaction of the Minister
that Australia had protection obligations toward an applicant under the Refugees
Convention.
the current version that criterion is retained. However, relevant to our current
purpose, a further criterion was added such that
a visa must be granted (s.65 of
the Act) where the Minister is satisfied that Australia has protection
obligations to the applicant
because there are substantial grounds for the
Minister to form a belief that a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the
non-citizen
being removed from Australia is that there would be a real risk that
the applicant would suffer “significant harm”.
criterion is described and defined in s.36(2A) of the Act. There was no dispute
between the parties that the insertion of this
criterion, in addition to the
obligation under the Refugees Convention, was done to give statutory effect to
Australia’s protection
obligations arising under other international
treaties to which Australia is a signatory. These are (with reference to the
Explanatory
Memorandum at pg.1):
International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(“ICCPR”), including the
Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty.
on the Rights of the Child
Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
before the Court, the applicant “formally” objected to the Court
taking into evidence CB 60 to CB 192. These pages
refer to the applicant’s
various requests for Ministerial intervention (see as set out at [8] – [9]
above). The basis
of the objection was relevance. The Minister pressed these
documents for the “very limited purpose”, said to be, that
relevant to “practices that have existed in the past”.
understood, therefore, the Minister’s argument as to relevance to be that
these practices, in the past and presumably relevant
to the period when the
applicant made his various Ministerial intervention requests, would have
included some assessment, or consideration,
of Australia’s international
protection obligations or, more precisely, “non-refoulement
obligations” (pg.1 of
the Explanatory Memorandum) as they arise from these
treaties. That is, the matters now generally referred to as “complementary
protection”.
admitted these pages (CB 60 to CB 192) into evidence. However, it is convenient
at this stage to note that they are of limited assistance
to the Minister, even
for the “limited” purpose stated. Apart from evidencing that the
applicant wrote to the Minister
on seven occasions seeking he exercise his
powers to intervene, the documents say nothing about what, if any, consideration
by the Minister, or officers of his department, to the matters
relevant to these proceedings.
various correspondence (see [8] – [9] above) from the Minister’s
department to the applicant makes reference to an
assessment in accordance with
what are described as the “Minister’s instructions” or the
“Minister’s
guidelines”. There is nothing in the
correspondence to show whether those “instructions” or
“guidelines”
involved any reference to complementary protection.
Nor, importantly in this regard, has the Minister put these
“instructions”
or “guidelines” before the Court to allow
any comparison to be made.
some of the applicant’s correspondence to the Minister makes reference to
some of the matters that may be relevant here
(for example, see CB 160.1:
“4. Minister’s Guidelines page 7: Circumstances that may bring
Australia’s obligations
as a party to the International Covenant on civil
and Political rights (ICCPR) into consideration”), there is nothing in the
Minister’s correspondence in reply to show that it was considered (for
example, see the particular correspondence in reply
at CB 178).
in these circumstances, the best that can be said for the Minister now is that
this material shows that the applicant wrote
to the Minister, sometimes raising
matters that may fall within what is now referred to as complementary
protection. However, there
is insufficient evidence to show that complementary
protection was considered, such that it may be said that the applicant has had
the consideration of matters relevant to complementary protection which he now
even if there had been some such relevant consideration it would not answer the
applicant’s current charge. In effect,
there is a distinction to be made
between any such consideration in an administrative context and consideration
under statute.
The Language of the Statute
is trite to state that the starting point of consideration must be the text of
the statute (
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
per Hayne, Crennan and
Kiefel JJ and see
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth)) (see further below). In the current case, s.48A(2)(aa) of the Act,
as inserted by the Amending Act. There was no dispute between
the parties that
the primary focus must be on the current version of s.48A(2)(aa) or, more
specifically, the version current at the
time of the application made on 10
October 2012.
set out above, s.48A(2)(aa) of the Act, following the commencement of the
Amending Act and at the time the applicant attempted
to lodge his application
for a protection visa in 2012, was as follows:
In this section:
application for a protection visa
application for a visa, a criterion for which is mentioned in paragraph
36(2)(a), (aa), (b) or (c); and”
s.36(2)(a) and (aa) of the Act, following the commencement of the Amending Act
and at the time the applicant lodged his 2012
application for a protection visa,
were as follow:
A criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant for the visa
non-citizen in Australia to whom the Minister is satisfied Australia has
protection obligations under the Refugees Convention
as amended by the Refugees
Protocol; or
non-citizen in Australia (other than a non-citizen mentioned in paragraph (a))
to whom the Minister is satisfied Australia
has protection obligations because
the Minister has substantial grounds for believing that, as a necessary and
foreseeable consequence
of the non-citizen being removed from Australia to a
receiving country, there is a real risk that the non-citizen will suffer
significant
The Submissions Revealed
each case before this Court must be considered and determined individually in
light of the evidence and arguments put before
it. However, I am aware that
there are well over one hundred cases before this Court, pending consideration,
with similar factual
scenarios and the identical legal argument. [There are over
twenty in my docket alone.] In these circumstances, it is of benefit
the parties’ submissions and arguments in this case in greater detail than
may otherwise have been required.
The Applicant’s Construction
applicant contends that, since the Amending Act repealed the “old”
s.48A(2)(aa) (that is, s.48A(2)(aa) as it stood
prior to the commencement of the
Amending Act), then the reference in the “new” s.48A(2) to s.36
could only be to s.36
as amended by the Amending Act.
those circumstances, it was the applicant’s submission that he had never
applied for a protection visa, as that term is understood
with reference to the
amended s.36 of the Act. In particular, that when the applicant had applied for
a protection visa in March
2005, the relevant “criterion” for a
protection visa was that the applicant for the visa was (s.36(2)(a) as it stood
prior to the commencement of the Amending Act):
a non-citizen in Australia to whom the Minister is satisfied Australia has
protection obligations under the Refugees
Convention as amended by the Refugees
Protocol; or.”
at the time that the applicant applied for a protection visa in 2012, the
“a criterion” for a protection visa
was, either, relevantly
(s.36(2)(a) and (aa) of the Act as amended by the Amending Act) (it is not
necessary in the current case
to focus on members of the family unit –
s.36(2)(b) and (c) of the Act):
a non-citizen in Australia to whom the Minister is satisfied Australia has
protection obligations under the Refugees
Convention as amended by the Refugees
Protocol; or
non-citizen in Australia (other than a non-citizen mentioned in paragraph (a))
to whom the Minister is satisfied Australia
has protection obligations because
the Minister has substantial grounds for believing that, as a necessary and
foreseeable consequence
of the non-citizen being removed from Australia to a
receiving country, there is a real risk that the non-citizen will suffer
significant
harm; or...”
essence, the applicant submitted that, s.36(2) described the
“criterion” for the class of visa. Specifically, a protection
The amendment to s.36(2) to include s.36(2)(aa) meant that, in the
applicant’s submission, the criteria for a protection
“fundamentally different” and, in broadening the scope of the visa,
it was a protection visa of “a different
species” to that previously
applied for by, and refused to, the applicant.
a result, s.48A, as amended, did not bar the applicant from applying for a
protection visa as the applicant had never applied for
a protection visa of the
of the Act (but for the application
lodged on 12 October 2012, which was said by
the departmental officer to be not valid). Further, the applicant contended
that, since
s.48A(2)(aa) of the Act did not make express reference to previous
applications under previous incantations of the Act, it provided
contextual basis for suggesting that the Australian Parliament did not intend
s.48A(2)(aa) to apply to applications made
for different, or earlier, species of
protection visas.
applicant contended that his construction would mean that individuals who had
previously applied for a protection visa and had
those claims assessed against
the Refugees Convention grounds would be eligible to apply for a protection visa
not only on complementary
protection grounds, but also on Refugees Convention
The Construction Advanced by the Minister
in written submissions the Minister did not accept that the reference in
s.48A(2) of the Act was to s.36 as amended (see [21]
of the Minister’s
written submissions), before the Court the Minister agreed that the reference in
s.48A was to s.36 of the
Act as it stood following the commencement of the
Amending Act.
despite accepting that s.48A(2)(aa) referred to s.36 as amended, the Minister
contended that the applicant had still applied
for a protection visa in 2005. In
particular, that the Amending Act, contrary to the applicant’s submission,
had not created
a “new species” of protection visa. It has simply
added additional criteria to a protection visa. A protection visa in
following the commencement of the Amending Act, was still “a protection
the Minister submitted that the applicant had still applied for a protection
visa a “criterion for which is
in” s.36(2) (a),
(aa), (b) and (c) (emphasis added). Specifically, that the use of the phrase
“mentioned in”, as
opposed to, for example, “under”,
indicated that s.36(2)(a), (aa), (b) and (c) of the Act were only referred to in
of the Act to designate “types of criteria” which, if
applicable to a prior application, brought that application within
the coverage
of s.48A and therefore prevented the applicant from lodging subsequent, or
further, applications for protection visas.
the Minister’s position was simply that, in March 2005, the applicant had
applied for a protection visa, a criterion
for which was that that applicant
“be a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister has
protection obligations
under the Refugees Conventions as amended by the Refugees
Protocol”. That criterion for a protection visa was “mentioned
in” s.36(2) as amended and, therefore, the applicant in the current case
was precluded, by the operation of s.48A(2)(aa) of
the Act, from applying,
again, for a protection visa.
Minister submitted that, even if the construction of s.48A(2)(aa) set out above
(surrounding the use of the word “mentioned”)
was not accepted by
the Court, the applicant was still precluded under s.48A of the Act from
applying for a protection visa because
the definition of an “application
for a protection visa” in s.48A(2) was expansive, rather than exhaustive.
Section 48A(2)
provides that an “application for a protection visa
” (emphasis added). That is, the use of the word
“includes” is expansive (with reference to
Douglas & Western
Australia v Tickner
(1994) 49 FCR 507
at 519 per Carr J and
Commissioner of Taxation v St Hubert’s Island Pty Ltd (In Liq)
(1978) 138 CLR 210
St Hubert’s Island
216 per Stephen J).
a result, the Minister submitted that, even if the applicant’s previous
visa application did not satisfy any of the criteria
(or “examples”)
given in s.48A(2), it would still be an “application for a protection
visa” as that term
is understood in s.48A(2) of the Act. That is, that the
“examples” in s.48A(2) of the Act expanded, rather than confined,
the ordinary meaning of the phrase “protection visa application” and
the applicant’s previous application, even
if not within one of the
enumerated “examples”, was a “protection visa
application” as that term is ordinarily
understood (with reference also to
s.36 of the Act).
Minister noted that the construction of s.48A propounded by the applicant would
have the effect that the applicant was not limited
to bring a protection visa
application with respect to claims only under complementary protection. The
applicant would be able to
bring an application that made claims both under the
Refugees Convention and on complementary protection grounds. The Minister
that that would be a “perverse consequence” of the
applicant’s construction. Further that that “perverse
consequence” strongly argued against the construction of s.48A of the Act
advanced by the applicant.
respondent also asserted that the applicant’s submissions deviated from
the ground of review as particularised. While the
application to the Court, as
particularised, restricted the applicant’s case to applications made only
on complementary protection
grounds, the Minister submitted that, in written and
oral submissions, the applicant asserted that s.48A does not prevent any person
who had a protection visa application considered, and refused, prior to the
commencement of the Amending Act from making a fresh
application ([9] of the
respondent’s written submissions).
response, the applicant submitted that, contrary to the Minister’s
submissions, the construction advanced by the applicant
in his oral and written
submissions did not reflect an abandonment of the particularised ground. Rather,
the particularisation in
the application to the Court was a smaller subset of
the construction propounded by the applicant.
The Applicant’s Reply to the Minister’s Construction and Arguments
Advanced by the Applicant in Support of his “Narrower”
Construction
of s.48A of the Act
oral submissions before the Court, the applicant argued that the construction
advanced by the Minister, with its emphasis on “
”, was predicated on viewing s.48A of the Act in
a way that, although “possibly suitable to the Minister’s
department”,
did not reflect Parliament’s intention. That is, the
Minister’s construction was advanced simply on the policy consideration
“administrative convenience”. Further, it was predicated on the
argument that the applicant’s construction could
not be correct as it
would result in the Minister’s department being required to consider a
large number of “additional”
applications.
applicant submitted that s.48A of the Act was not designed to preclude people
from having their claims considered and to ensure
“administrative
convenience”. Rather, its purpose was to prevent multiple applications, on
the same basis, being lodged
on multiple occasions. That is, to prevent a
“mischief”, or an abuse of process in that sense.
applicant in the current case had never had his claims considered under
s.36(2)(aa) of the Act. In that sense, the applicant submitted
that there was no
“mischief” to be resolved by s.48A of the Act. That is, the
applicant was not attempting to make a
further application on the same basis as
his previous application.
the Court, and in response to what he termed the Minister’s
“floodgates argument” the applicant submitted
that s.48A was not the
only “dam wall” in the Act. In particular, that s.50 of the Act
operates to effectively provide
a mechanism to ensure that the construction
advanced by the applicant would not suffer from the “perverse
consequence”,
or vice, suggested by the respondent.
50 relevantly provides:
new information to be considered in later protection visa
applications
non-citizen who has made:
application for a protection visa, where the grant of the visa has been refused
and the application has been finally determined;
applications for protection visas, where the grants of the visas have been
refused and the applications have been finally determined;
further application for a protection visa, the Minister, in considering the
further application:
required to reconsider any information considered in the earlier application or
an earlier application; and
may have regard to, and take to be correct, any decision that the Minister made
Note: Section 48A prevents repeat applications for protection visas in
most circumstances where the applicant is in the migration
the applicant submitted that the Parliamentary intention expressed in the
current regime of the Act was to give effect to
Australia’s international
obligations through the implementation of a fair and measured process for
assessing whether Australia
would give people an “available right”.
That “right”, the right to be granted a protection visa, is
to a person who comes within the meaning of the Act. In that context,
particularly because s.48A operates to take away a right, the
submitted that s.48A of the Act should be read narrowly. To do otherwise would
be to make the whole of the section, and
the consistency of the Act, a
“slave to the word ‘mentioned’”.
support of his “narrower” construction the applicant referred the
SZGME v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2008] FCAFC 91
”) at [18]. It was the applicant’s submission
that, in that case, their Honours’ approach to s.48A was, in contrast
the approach urged by the Minister now, “far more narrow and
precise”. While recognising that the form of s.48A in
that case was
different to s.48A as it is in the current case, the applicant submitted that
the approach taken by the Federal Court
in that case was
“instructive” as to the approach that should be adopted in
interpreting s.48A(2)(aa). That is, a “narrow
and precise”
the applicant submitted that to take a wide, or broad, approach would be
inconsistent with the view that has consistently
been taken to statutory
construction of provisions that confer valuable legal rights on people. That is,
the common law principle
of legality. Specifically, that the valuable legal
right here is the right to apply for a visa under s.36 of the Act and that s.48A
derogates from that right and, as a result, should be construed narrowly. In
support of this the applicant took the Court to
Valma Elizabeth Buck v
[1996] FCA 1485
; (1996) 66 FCR 358 (“
”) at 364 per Finn J. In particular that:
courts should favour an interpretation which safeguards the individual. To
confine our interpretative safeguards to
the protection of ‘fundamental
common law rights’ is to ignore that we live in an age of statutes and
that it is statute
which, more often than not, provides the rights necessary to
secure the basic amenities of life in modern society.”
the applicant took the Court to
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v
[2007] FCAFC 203
(2007) 160 CLR 414
[105] – [113] per Black CJ, French and Weinberg JJ. In particular,
(at [107]):
is an important principle that Acts should be construed, where constructional
choices are open, so as not to encroach upon
common law rights and
freedoms...”
response to the Minister’s argument surrounding the use of the word
“includes”, before the Court, the applicant
submitted that s.36 of
the Act was the only point in the Act where a protection visa
“exists”. That is, s.36 of the Act
was the relevant part of the Act
that described a protection visa. Therefore, to say that a protection visa, as
referred to in s.48A,
was broader than that enumerated in s.36 of the Act, would
render s.48A(2)(a), (b) and (c) otiose. That is, that the respondent’s
construction was predicated on any visa, the criterion for which in some way
coincides with, or is similar to, the type of criterion
set out in s.36(2)(a),
(aa), (b) or (c) of the Act, being captured by s.48A of the Act. Further, that
if “application for a
protection visa” in s.48A(2)(aa) of the Act
meant something broader than those criteria “mentioned” in s.36(a),
(aa), (a), (b) or (c) of the Act, what did “application for a protection
visa” therefore mean?
the applicant submitted that the Minister’s reliance on
St Hubert’s Island
was misplaced on three bases. First, that
that case was not concerned with “anybody’s liberty” or any
international
treaty obligations. It was concerned with stamp duty applicable to
a transaction involving the development of an island. Second,
the terms of the
Act in that case were broad. In particular, the term “trading stock”
was broad and there were questions
Finally, the Act in that case stipulated that “trading stock”
anything” and, while s.48A(2)(aa) of the Act uses the word
“includes”, much was made in
St Hubert’s Island
the use of the word “anything”. That word (“anything”)
is not present in s.48A(2)(aa) of the Act as amended.
The Minister’s Reply to the Applicant’s Oral Arguments
oral submissions in reply, the Minister made clear that he did not adopt the
phrase “administrative convenience”, nor
was his argument an appeal
to the Court’s “sympathy for embattled bureaucrats”. The
Minister accepted that s.50
of the Act would, if the applicant’s
construction of s.48A was adopted, operate to reduce the burden on “the
Department”
as a result of individuals, like the applicant, being entitled
to make fresh applications.
while s.50 of the Act would “truncate” the findings that would need
to be made, the Minister submitted that the
Refugees Convention claims would
still need to be considered and findings made in order to reach the point where
complementary protection
was considered. That was said to be a natural result,
or what followed, from the way s.36 is constructed.
Australia’s International Obligations
cornerstone of the applicant’s argument was that s.48A of the Act needed
to be read in the context of the Act implementing
Australia’s relevant
international obligations. Further, that the purpose of the Amending Act was to
ensure that Australia
implemented its obligations with respect to the ICCPR, CAT
and CROC. In particular, that the Parliamentary intention of the Amending
was to “take away from the executive fiat of the Minister” the
responsibility for dealing with such claims and to
create a codified statutory
regime to ensure Australia met its international obligations.
that context, the applicant submitted that what the Parliament had done through
the Amending Act was to codify and include in the
Act terms on which the
Executive is compelled, and directed, to issue a visa. Further, that there was
nothing to indicate that Parliament
intended that such a
“fundamental” change in how Australia met its obligations under
ICCPR, CAT and CROC, would not apply
to individuals who had, “by
chance”, had their claims with respect to the Refugees Conventions
considered prior to the
implementation of the statutory regime to consider
claims on complementary protection grounds. Even further, that there was nothing
in the Act, nor the extrinsic materials, to suggest that that had been the
Parliament’s intention.
the Minister did accept that, “at a level of generality” ([35] of
the respondent’s written submissions), legislation
should be construed,
where possible, in a manner consistent with Australia’s international
obligations, that “rule”,
or principle, had limited application in
the current case. Four bases where put forward by the Minister for that
submission.
that the applicant’s construction achieved what the applicant submitted
was compliance with Australia’s international
obligations only as an
“incidental aspect of a much broader liberalisation”.
that in circumstances where the legislation in question is putting into effect
Parliament’s judgment as to the extent,
and manner, in which
Australia’s international obligations should be implemented in domestic
law, then little weight can be
afforded to the principle that statutes are to be
construed in such a way so as not to be inconsistent with international law
reference to
NBGM v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
[2006] HCA 54
(2006) 231 ALR 380
(2006) 231 CLR 52
[69] per Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ). Where Parliament is giving specific
attention to international obligations and making
a conscious, and weighted,
decision about how, and the extent, to incorporate international obligations
into domestic law, then there
is “very little room” for the
presumption that Parliament intends to comply with international law and to what
the construction advanced by the Minister is not contrary to Australia’s
international obligations. That is, an applicant
(such as the applicant in the
current case) who is prevented, by the operation of s.48A of the Act, from
having their claims in relation
to complementary protection considered through
the statutory regime still has available to them the mechanism of Ministerial
intervention
(pursuant to s.417 and s.48B of the Act).
that “mechanism” does not afford the applicant the same protections
as the statutory regime implemented and codified
by the Amending Act, there was
no evidence that it did not accord with, or was contrary to, Australia’s
international obligations.
Further, the general presumption is that (
Coal Mine v Victorian Coal Miners’ Association
(1908) 6 CLR 309
at 363 per O’Connor J):
“...every Statute is to be so interpreted and applied as far as its
language admits so as not to be inconsistent with the
comity of nations or with
established rules of international law”
is, the Court is to seek compliance with international law in its construction
of statutes, not to seek to maximise compliance
with international law or the
like. It was the latter that the respondent submitted the applicant’s
construction sought to
the Minister submitted, citing
Plaintiff M70/2011 v Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship; Plaintiff M106 of 2011 v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2011] HCA 32
(2011) 244 CLR 144
per Kiefel J,
that (at [35](c) of the respondent’s written submissions):
it is not possible to construe a statute comfortably with international law
rules, the provisions of the statute must
be enforced even if they amount to a
contravention of accepted principles of international
Extrinsic Material
parties referred the Court to extrinsic material. The applicant’s position
was that, due to the ambiguity in the wording
of the Act itself, it was
necessary to have regard to extrinsic material
(s.15AB(1)(b)(i)
Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth)). The Minister’s position was that there
was no ambiguity, but regard should, and could, be had to the extrinsic material
to “...confirm the ordinary meaning conveyed by the text of the provision
taking into account its context in the Act and the
purpose or object underlying
(s.15AB(1)(a)
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
extrinsic material was said to be:
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Migration Amendment (Complementary Protection)
, circulated by authority of the then Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship, the Hon. Chris Bowen MP (the “Explanatory
Memorandum”).
Second Reading Speech to the
Migration Amendment (Complementary Protection)
, delivered on 24 February 2011 by “Bowen, Chris, MP”
(the “Second Reading Speech”).
The Applicant’s Reliance on Extrinsic Material
applicant relied on the extrinsic material to support his construction. In
particular that Parliament had not intended that the
“new” s.48A
would operate to prevent a class of persons from being able to have their
complementary protection claims
assessed under the statutory scheme implemented
by the Amending Act. The applicant submitted that, had Parliament had such an
then there would have been, at the least, an “indication”
of that in the extrinsic material. Further, with reference
to the Second Reading
Speech, the applicant submitted that there was nothing to suggest that it was
Parliament’s intention
to exclude a class of persons, such as the
applicant, from accessing the new regime.
Minister’s Second Reading Speech was said, by the applicant, to reveal
that the intention of the Amending Act was to “...align
[Australia’s] protection visa process with our existing international
obligations and practices” (pg.1356 of the Minister’s
Second Reading
Speech). That is, that the purpose of the Amending Act was to eliminate a
“significant administrative hole”
in Australia’s protection
visa obligations. In particular, the Amending Act sought to take away from the
Minister the responsibility
for meeting Australia’s international
obligations, noting that (pg.1356 of the Minister’s Second Reading
things stand, the decision to grant a visa in such cases may only be made by the
minister personally. The minister cannot
be compelled to exercise this power;
there is no requirement to provide reasons if the minister does not exercise the
there is no merits review of the minister’s
The Respondent’s Reliance on Extrinsic Materials
respondent submitted that the terms of the Explanatory Memorandum confirmed that
the “new” s.48A was not intended
to “relax” the bar
imposed by earlier iterations of s.48A of the Act ([30] of the Minister’s
written submissions).
Rather, the purpose of item 16 of the Amending Act was, in
the Minister’s submission, to expand the scope of s.48A of the Act
prevent a person who has already made a protection visa application, even if
that application was based only a claim under the
Refugees Convention, from
making subsequent applications. In particular that (at [105] of the Explanatory
Memorandum):
effect is that, for the purposes of section 48A, a non-citizen who, while in the
migration zone, has made an
application for a protection visa
Refugees Convention grounds, or complementary protection grounds) where the
grant(s) of the visa(s) has or have been refused,
may not make a further
application for a protection visa
while in the migration
[Emphasis in
the original.]
Minister submitted that the absence of any reference to a time period (for
example, when the past application for a protection
visa was made) and the
presence of the word “or” (“...on Refugees Convention grounds,
complementary protection grounds” [emphasis added]), meant that
the “new” s.48A was intended to ensure that people
who had applied
for a protection visa under the “old” regime continued to be covered
by the “bar” in s.48A,
while people who applied under the amended,
or “new”, regime would also be captured by the “bar” in
the future.
Minister submitted that there was nothing in the extrinsic material,
specifically the Minister’s Second Reading Speech,
to support the
applicant’s contention that the “new” s.48A was not intended
to exclude persons in the position
of the applicant from having their
complementary protection claims determined.
while the construction advanced by the applicant would ensure that individuals
in the same class as the applicant would not
be excluded from advancing fresh
claims under the new regime, individuals who were captured by s.48A(2)(a), (b)
and (c), who had
only ever had Refugees Convention claims considered previously,
would still be barred from having their claims reconsidered. That
would be an “inconsistency in treatment” as between different
cohorts. Further, that that “surprising
reform” would have been made
with some clarity and would have been addressed in the extrinsic material. In
the Minister’s
submission, it was not.
the construction propounded by the applicant would allow him, and others like
him, to make subsequent applications unconfined
to claims for complementary
protection. That is, to have a second opportunity to make claims for refugee
status. Given that “perverse
consequence” of the applicant’s
construction ([32] of the respondent’s written submissions and as referred
at [51]), the Minister submitted that there would likely be an express
statement in the extrinsic material. No such express statement
was present in
either the Second Reading Speech or the Explanatory Memorandum.
the Minister noted that the applicant had sought to emphasise, and rely on,
“broad statements” in the Second
Reading Speech about the overall
purpose of the legislation. The Minister submitted that while the Second Reading
Speech was replete
with references to s.36 of the Act, it did not mention s.48A
of the Act. That is, the Second Reading Speech was focused on s.36 of
and what was sought to be achieved by way of the amendments to that section. In
particular, the liberalisation of the Act
to include complementary protection
provisions. However, s.48A, the focus of current consideration, was not a
section that affected
that liberalisation. Rather, s.48A made express
reservation about the capacity of persons to apply for a protection visa. That
it qualified the liberalisation that was to be effected by s.36 of the Act
and that was the subject of the “broad statements”
Minister’s Second Reading Speech.
Additional Arguments
following additional submissions were made by the parties during the course of
the hearing. Given what is set out above at [38]
above, it is important to note
them prior to setting out consideration in the matter. However, given what is
set out below and at
“Consideration”, their assistance in the
disposition of this matter is limited at best.
The “Ethereal Bar” Matter
applicant submitted that the Minister’s construction of s.48A misconstrued
that provision as creating an “ethereal
bar” that exists, and
continued to exist, until a person leaves the jurisdiction. The applicant
submitted that such a construction
was misconstrued as s.48A simply determined
whether or not an application for a protection visa was a valid application at
in time when the application was made. Further, the bar in s.48A did
not attach to the person, “designating them persona non-grata”,
attached to the application.
oral submissions, the Minister submitted that there was no, nor was there
intended to be implied an, “ethereal bar”.
Section 48A, on the
Minister’s view (and in agreement with the applicant), applied only so
long as it was in force and only
in the form that it took from time to time. The
Minister made clear that there was no suggestion by him that s.48A (as it was)
repeal by the Amending Act, nor that an applicant is “forever
stamped” by the bar in s.48A regardless of future amendments
The Distinction Between “Repeal” and “Amend”
applicant posited that the distinction between “repeal” and
“amend” (as it appears in the Amending Act)
was significant.
However, that that significance was diminished given the Minister’s
acceptance that only the “new”
s.48A and s.36 were the relevant
sections to the proceedings before the Court.
the applicant submitted that the distinction between “repeal” and
“amend” was one of substance, and
not simply form, as the
“repeal” of the “old” s.48A of the Act, as opposed to
its amendment, meant that the
bar that previously existed in the
“old” s.48A, which had applied to the applicant, no longer existed.
In that way, there
was no continuing bar. Rather, the “new” s.48A
inserted by the Amending Act imposed a “new” bar (following
commencement of the Amending Act). It was that bar that the applicant
asserted that he was not caught by, given that he had only
application for a protection visa since the commencement of the Amending
Minister submitted that the Court could “put to one side” the
difference between an “amendment” and a
“repeal” because
the Minister agreed with the applicant that, save for one qualification relating
to the transitional
provision (item 35 of Sch.1 to the Amending Act), the only
provisions the Court needed to construe and apply were the “current”
versions of s.36 and s.48A of the Act. That is, s.36 and s.48A of the Act as
they stand following the commencement of the Amending
Act. Further, that the
only significance between a repeal and an amendment is that the arguments
advanced before the Court in the
current case would be, as the applicant
submitted, different and therefore, in those circumstances, no further attention
was required
to be given to the distinction between “repeal” and
Item 35 of Schedule 1 to the Amending Act
was the applicant’s contention that item 35 of Sch.1 to the Amending Act
(see [20] above) was not a “commencement”
provision, but rather an
“application” provision. That is, item 35 provides guidance as to
the scope and impact of the
Amending Act. In those circumstances, s.48A of the
Act, as inserted by the Amending Act, only operates in circumstances where there
has been an application for a protection visa “under” the amended
provisions.
respondent submitted that item 35 of Sch.1 to the Amending Act was only a
“transitional provision” and did not form
part of the Act as
amended. That is, it simply controlled whether the “new” or
“old” version of the Act applied
to a particular case. Further, that
it would be “strange” if, in the future, regard was required to be
had to a transitional
provision in order to understand the meaning of s.48A(2)
of the Act.
Minister also submitted the following (at [37](b) of written
submissions):
item 35 did somehow exclude the application of new s 48A in the present case, it
would do so by way of providing that ‘the
amendments made by this
Schedule’ did not apply. The consequence would be that the validity of the
Applicant’s new visa
application would need to be assessed under the old s
48A. That would not assist the
Applicant.”
Consideration
I. Law and Policy
must be said that the applicant’s arguments before the Court are, in one
sense, attractive, if not compelling. That Australia
should give domestic
expression to its international obligations by way of statutory prescription,
rather than executive disposition,
would be said by some to be an appealing
outcome. (Sections 48B and 417 of the Act, are
non-compellable powers:
Applicant NAGM of 2002 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs
[2002] FCAFC 395
per Sackville, Allsop and
Jacobson JJ,
Kolotau v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs
[2002] FCA 1145
per Hely J,
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
per Emmett J.) Even if for no other reason than that the
resultant transparency provides the potential to enhance Australia’s
international reputation and allows the Australian community insight into the
workings of the Executive government.
what is missing in the applicant’s approach is that the proceedings before
this Court cannot be concerned with what
Parliament ought to have done, should
have done, or even might have hoped to have done. This Court can only be
concerned in these
proceedings with what Parliament has actually done (and, in a
certain “secondary” sense, what was said to have been intended
expressed in any extrinsic material – see [76] – [85] above).
this light, many aspects of the applicant’s submissions, even with the
attractive and the powerful manner with which they
were delivered, fall away.
The applicant’s interpretation of the relevant legislation has at its core
an argument of his view
of compelling policy, rather than the language of the
relevant statute as to what Parliament meant. The applicant argues that the
relevant legislation says what he asserts because Parliament would have meant to
have given proper expression to Australia’s
international obligations and
to seek to maximise that expression in domestic law.
is here that I specifically agree with the Minister’s submission that
while this Court should approach the construction of
the relevant parts of the
Act in a way that allows compliance, or comity, with international law, it is
not the role of this Court
to construe the legislation such as to maximise
compliance with Australia’s international obligations. It is trite to say
the quality, or extent, of such compliance, where the statutory language is
clear, is for Parliament and not this Court.
disposition of the application therefore falls to:
Consideration
of the statutory context in which s.36 and s.48A of the Act exist and the
language of the statute and the impact of
the Amending Act.
Understanding
the importance of the way the applicant initially framed his application to the
Court, which was consistent with what
his lawyer put to the Minister’s
department in 2012 but different to the way the case was argued before the
views of the statutory language.
role of relevant extrinsic material.
II. The Statutory Context and the Language Used
was said before the Court about the entire relevant statutory regime surrounding
the concept of a visa. It is the case that
one class of visa is the subject of
the application that sits at the heart of s.48A and s.36(2). That is, an
“application for
a protection visa” (s.48A(2) of the Act).
“visa” is defined in s.5 of the Act as “having the meaning
given by s.29” of the Act. This immediately directs
attention to Div.3 of
the Act, in particular, sub-division A. Section 29 of the Act gives meaning to a
visa as permission granted
by the Minister to a “non-citizen”,
relevantly to remain in Australia. In the current context, the applicant is a
“non-citizen”
(see s.5 of the Act - “a person who is not an
Australian citizen”) who, by his application of 10 October 2012, applied
for permission from the Minister to remain in Australia. That is, he applied for
basis of his application (in the sense as ultimately explained before the Court
and not the “limited” application
stated by his representative in
2012 - see CB 196 and see later at [122] – [132]) is for a particular
class of visa. The concept
of “classes of visas” is introduced at
s.31 of the Act (also in Div.3 of the Act).
are said to be of two “species”. The first “prescribed classes
of visas” (s.31(1) of the Act) need not
trouble us further for the
purposes of this judgment. The second are “the classes provided for”
by, amongst others, s.36
of the Act (s.31(2) of the Act).
the “logic” presented by the relevant statutory framework, s.36
(noting yet again the focus on the current, and not
earlier, version) provides
for “a class of visas to be known as protection visas” (s.36(1) of
Sub-section
36(2) of the Act then sets out “a criterion” for this class of visa.
That is, a protection visa. These are,
relevantly, either the Minister’s
satisfaction in the context of the Refugees Convention or, separately and
dependent on the
non-satisfaction in relation to the first, the Minister’s
satisfaction in the context of complementary protection.
my view, having regard to the language of the Amending Act (see also further
below regarding “repeal” and “amend”)
the insertion of
s.36(2)(aa) into the Act did not create a different “species” of
protection visas. The distinction between
the concepts of “classes of
visas” and criteria relevant to separate classes of visa is
first, relevant to the current circumstances, derives from s.31 of the Act. The
second concept relates to the different criteria
set out in s.36(2) of the Act.
The applicant’s argument essentially here is that the essence of a
protection visa, as a statutory
concept, is to be derived predominantly from
s.36(2) of the Act. His argument is that the change in the criterion for a
visa, or the bases on which a protection visa may be granted, meant
that a new species of visa was created by the Amending Act. That
is, because of
the change it is a “different” visa.
do not agree with the applicant. His argument, or construction, would have no
distinction between the concept of a class of visa
and the criteria relevant to
a class of visa. That conflation would render s.31 of the Act otiose. [As set
out above, s.31 provides
that there are to be “prescribed classes of
visas” (s.31(1) of the Act) and that, “as well as the prescribed
there are the classes provided for by sections...36...” (s.31(2)
of the Act).]
the language of s.36 of the Act is not directed to the making of an application.
As is plain, s.36(1) of the Act creates
a class of visa known as the protection
visa. That pronouncement is identical in both the pre-amendment and
post-amendment (current)
version of s.36 of the Act. Notwithstanding the
applicant’s reliance now on such words as “repeal” and
it remains that Parliament used the same words in both
versions (that is, Parliament did not change the wording in the current
This emphasises the distinction to be drawn between the concept of a
class of visa and the criteria, or bases, on which it must be
even if Parliament had not used the same language, and focussing only on the
language used in the current version, the distinction
between the concepts is
still plain. That is, there is a class of visa, known as a protection visa, the
criteria relevant to satisfy
the Minister such that the protection visa will be
granted remain conceptually separate. That “formal” formulation (of
a class of visa), that idea, stands separately on its own. What follows at
s.36(2) of the Act are the distinct bases for the grant
of a protection visa
(with reference, given the use of the words “Minister is satisfied”,
to the grant of a visa, to
s.65 of the Act). The term “a criterion”,
as referred to at s.36(2) of the Act, can only derive meaning as being a
for the grant of a visa.
is with sub-division AA of Div.3 of the Act that the concept of
“applications for visas” is introduced into the Act.
(Noting, again,
our focus on the current, not any pre-amendment, version).
45 of the Act provides that “a non-citizen who wants a visa must apply for
a visa of a particular class”. Two
things are of relevant note here.
First, the applicant fits the description of a non-citizen. Second, he has made
an application,
on 10 October 2012, for a protection visa of a “particular
“particular class” of visa is a protection visa seen in light of
what is set out above in relation to sub-division
A. A large part of this
sub-division deals with the elements that contribute, or otherwise, to the
validity of the application for the visa.
must not be forgotten that what the applicant challenges in these proceedings is
the efficacy of the decision, made on 10 October
2012, by the departmental
officer. The basis for that decision was the application of s.48A of the Act.
The relevant language of
that section prohibits a non-citizen who has been
refused a protection visa from making a further application for a protection
(noting, of course, the provision of s.48B of the Act).
term “application for a protection visa” is defined in s.48A (see
s.48A(2) of the Act). It is said to include: “(aa)
an application for a
visa, a criterion for which is mentioned in paragraph 36(2)(a), (aa), (b) or
again, in my view, the conceptual distinction between a protection visa (as a
class of visa), the application for that class
of visa, and “a
criterion” relevant to that class of visa is maintained.
there is, relevantly, no additional basis (or “mentioned”) in
relation to this visa does not alter the concept of
this particular class of
visa. What has changed with the Amending Act is that another element relevant to
“a criterion”
for this visa has been added, not that the character
of the visa itself has changed such that it can be said that, in 2012, the
applied for a different species of visa. That character is still
directed to providing protection to non-citizens. The Amending Act
expanded the
statutory scope within which the Minister can consider whether to grant
protection in the form of a protection visa.
is important here to focus on the words “a criterion” as they appear
both in s.36(2) (as in “a criterion for
a protection visa”) and
reference to s.36(2) in s.48A (as in “a criterion for which is mentioned
in paragraph 36(2)(a),
(aa), (b) or (c)....”).
words “a criterion” imply a singular entity. However, when this term
is applied as across each of the items in s.36(2)
(that is, (a), (aa), (b) or
(c)), it is clear that these are separate bases, or grounds, relevant to the
consideration and grant
of a protection visa.
this context, an important part of s.36(2) of the Act was touched on in the
Minister’s submissions. What is contained in
the parentheses at
s.36(2)(aa) (“other than a non-citizen mentioned in paragraph (a)”)
makes plain that an application
for a protection visa must first be assessed as
against the Refugees Convention. (That is, the item, or “criterion”
s.36(2)(a) of the Act.) (Since the hearing the Full Federal Court handed down
judgment in
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZQRB
– see in this regard at [67] – [71] per Lander and Gordon
JJ.) It follows therefore that the criterion at s.36(2)(aa)
(the complementary
protection criterion) only requires attention by the Minister, or those charged
with making decisions on applications
for protection visas (his delegates or the
Refugee Review Tribunal), if the non-citizen who has made the application for
the protection
visa is found not to have met the criterion at s.36(2)(a) of the
Act. That is, any applicant who is determined not to be a refugee
pursuant to
the Refugees Convention.
immediately exposes the difficulty with the ground as pleaded in the application
to the Court, and reveals a basis for dismissing
the application to the Court.
Noting that no application was made to amend the ground, and while submissions
proceeded on a different
basis (see [52] – [53] above and also [122]
– [132] below), the submissions proceeding on a different basis cannot be
said to explain the ground as actually asserted.
III. The Applicant’s Different Complaints
ground before the Court asserts that “the application [plainly the
application lodged on 10 October 2012] was expressly
made in reliance only on
the grounds in s.36(2)(aa) of the Act (the ‘complementary protection
grounds’)”. If that
was the case, and it is otherwise said by the
applicant to be the case (see below), then the only application for a
protection visa
made in relation to the Refugees Convention criterion
(s.36(2)(a)) was the application made in 2005.
these circumstances, the applicant’s relevant statutory construction, as
put in submissions to the Court, would have him
never to have applied for a
protection visa on the Refugees Convention criterion (because, since the
commencement of the Amending
Act, it is said to be a new, or different,
“species” of protection visa). It is therefore difficult, if not
impossible,
to see how the application made in 2012, only on complementary
protection grounds, could ever have been considered and finalised.
consequence of what is asserted in the ground of the application before the
Court ignores the plain relationship between the criterion
at s.36(2)(a) and the
criterion at s.36(2)(aa) of the Act. That is, that the latter only becomes
relevant for consideration if there
has been an application which included the
matter relevant to the former and the application was refused in relation to the
Otherwise, the words in parenthesis in s.36(2)(aa) of the Act would have
no meaning.
the only way that the application of 2012 could lead to consideration of
complementary protection would be if the applicant
had also applied for a
protection visa which included a criterion in s.36(2)(a) of the Act. At the time
of application in 2012 the
applicant, given that he expressly said he was not
applying in relation to the s.36(2)(a) criterion, would have had to rely on the
application he lodged in 2005. That is, to fulfil what is the current statutory
requirement that he had applied for, and been refused,
a protection visa on the
Refugees Convention basis before consideration under the complementary
protection criterion. This plainly
argues against the applicant’s
construction that that application was of a different species. At the very least
there is an
inconsistency in what the applicant said to the Minister’s
department in 2012 in this regard, and what he now puts to this
relevant material in the Court Book reveals a factual consistency with what is
expressly asserted in the ground before the Court,
not with what has been
submitted to the Court (see CB 193 to CB 195). The application is said to
be “for a Complementary Protection
Visa under Section 36 (2) (aa)”
(CB 193.4). This is emphasised in the applicant’s covering letter to the
2012 application,
signed by his lawyer (“We submit that the application
now being lodged is
expressly made in reliance only
on s36(2)(aa)”
at CB 194.7 [emphasis added]).
the applicant were to now accept the Minister’s construction (that is,
that an application for a protection visa is an application
for a protection
visa both before and after the commencement of the Amending Act), then it may be
said (if regard is had only to
s.36(2)) that his application of 2012 could
proceed to consideration of the complementary protection criterion if the
Minister were
to agree to act pursuant to s.48B of the Act and
“lift” the bar. However, in accepting the Minister’s
construction
in this regard, the applicant would go a significant way to
conceding the Minister’s entire argument. That is, that the application
2005 was an application for a protection visa recognised under the current
version of the Act and, therefore, s.48A now operates
to bar him from making an
application for a protection visa in 2012.
the Court, the applicant sought to explain this difficulty in the following way.
The applicant would bring an application for
a protection visa. While he would,
necessarily, have his claims to protection under the Refugees Convention
considered (as the Act
requires that to be done such that the applicant can be
considered on complementary protection grounds), those claims could be dealt
with “effectively” given s.50 of the Act, which provides that, in
considering further applications, the Minister is “not
required to
reconsider any information considered in the earlier application..”
(s.50(c)) and “...may have regard to,
and take to be correct, any decision
that the Minister made about or because of that information” (s.50(d)).
That is, the applicant
says that s.48A was not the only “dam wall”
to prevent a flood of applications that would otherwise require reconsideration
under the Refugees Convention.
argument is a diversion. For example, I have some difficulty in accepting that
s.50 of the Act would assist in the circumstances
of this case such that any
such consideration would be done “effectively”. Given the passage of
time between the two
applications (some seven years) much could have changed in
the relevant circumstances in the applicant’s country of claimed
persecution, as much may also have changed in the applicant’s personal
circumstances relevant to the question of protection.
and in any event, even if those latter points were not the case, that still does
not explain the inconsistency between what the
applicant explained as the basis
of his application in 2012 (the subject of the decision now under review) and
the construction and
intent that he now seeks to give to s.36(2) and s.48A of
applicant said that, in 2012, he applied for a protection visa only on
complementary protection grounds. Plainly, implicit in
this is that he did not
purport to apply, in 2012, on Refugees Convention grounds. Given the
relationship between s.36(2)(a) and
(aa) of the Act, to engage s.36(2)(aa) would
require prior consideration of the matter in s.36(2)(a). The only time the
acted to engage the matter substantively set out in the current
version of s.36(2)(a) of the Act was with the application of 2005.
application was for a different species of visa as the applicant now claims,
then why did the applicant not apply for a protection
visa on Refugees
Convention grounds in 2012, given that it was a necessary precursor to the
consideration on complementary grounds.
This was not satisfactorily explained.
That the “instructing solicitor” was said, in 2012, to be
“more conscious”
of the effect of s.50 is not supported by what is
in the lawyer’s letter and does not in any event explain the
applicant’s
actions in light of the clear statutory relationship between
s.36(2)(a) and (aa) of the Act.
there may be some appeal in further pursuing the contortions presented by the
applicant’s positions as at 10 October 2012
and now, for the purposes of
this judgment, the applicant’s construction, as “amended” by
his submissions, does
not succeed also for the reasons that follow. Noting again
that what must be retained from what is immediately above is that the
“current” legislative regime established a priority relationship
between s.36(2)(a) and (aa) such that consideration
of the latter is dependant
on the consideration, and “refusal”, of the former and, by
necessity, application for the
understand the words “a criterion”, as they appear in s.48A(2)(aa)
of the Act (“...a criterion for which is mentioned...”),
immediately referrable to the visa, and not necessarily to the form of the
application for a visa. (That is a criterion for
the visa which is mentioned in
s.36(2) of the Act.)
and in the context of the scheme of the Act set out above, the definition, for
the purposes of s.48A of the Act, of “application
for a protection
visa”, “includes” an application for a visa, a criterion for
that visa being mentioned in s.36(2)
of the Act. The different criteria (that
is, each of “a criterion”) are, relevantly, s.36(2)(a) or (aa) of
is here that the use of the word “or”, as it appears at both
s.48(2)(aa) and s.36(2) of the Act, is important. The
matter mentioned in
s.36(2)(a) (as referred to in s.48A(2)(aa) of the Act) is the Minister’s
satisfaction derived from the
Refugees Convention, and which therefore fulfils
the “criterion” for the protection visa. This basis for meeting the
relevant criterion was not altered by the Amending Act. The language
pre-amendment and post-amendment is identical (see also items 12 to 16 of
Sch.1 to the Amending Act).
word “or”, as it appears at s.36(2) between (a) and (aa) and in the
reference to s.36(2)(a), (aa) as it appears in
s.48A(2)(aa) of the Act [noting
that “or” between s.36(2)(b) and (c) (in s.48A(2) of the Act) means
in between each of the subparagraphs], makes it clear that the
current version of s.36(2) of the Act has an additional way in which
criterion” for the protection visa may now be met. That is, with the
Minister’s satisfaction in relation to
complementary protection (only in
circumstances where the other criterion at s.36(2)(a) is not successful). The
Amending Act has
created an additional way in which “a criterion”
for a protection visa may be fulfilled. That is, the focus is on the
amendment was done to expand the ways in which “a criterion” can be
fulfilled, not to alter the nature of the character
of a protection visa. That
character remains to provide protection to those non-citizens in need of
Australia’s protection
and, importantly, not to “refoul” those
in need of protection. That the scope of the bases for that obligation has been
statutorily expanded does not mean that the nature of the protection visa itself
has changed. That is, the protection offered by
in my view, the language of s.48A of the Act (as it is now) is clear. A
“non-citizen” who has been refused
a protection visa “may not
make a further application for a protection visa”. It is important to note
here that the emphasis
is not on an application for a protection visa, but on a
application for a protection visa. The first part of the section
talks not of a non-citizen who had previously applied for a protection
one who has been refused a protection visa.
plainly the section then proceeds to talk of a person who “has made an
application for a protection visa” (s.48A(a)),
in my view, that is a
reflection of the logical consequence that a person would need to have made an
application before being refused.
The important point to note here is that the
heading of the section “Non-citizen refused a protection visa may not make
application for protection visa” reflects the emphasis that the
legislation intended
(s.13(2)(d)
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth)). That is, a prior refusal for a protection visa bars a further
application for a protection visa being made.
my view, this is reinforced with the language of s.48A(2)(aa) of the
application
for a protection visa
application for a visa, the criterion for which is mentioned in paragraph
36(2)(a), (aa), (b) or (c)...”
is plainly a separation, or distinction, between “a criterion” for a
visa and the various methods by which “a
criterion” for the visa
applied for (the protection visa) may be informed. Again, contrary to the
applicant’s position,
the legislation has not created a separate species
of application for a visa by the inclusion of s.36(2)(aa) of the Act. Rather,
the application for the visa, as a legislative concept, remains the same. All
that has changed is that there is now an additional
way of satisfying the
relevant “criterion” for the visa.
concept of the “application for a protection visa” therefore remains
unchanged by the Amending Act. The applicant
in the current case is a
“non-citizen” who has already applied for a protection visa. He was
found not to have satisfied
the relevant criterion at that time, and was refused
the protection visa on that basis. The subsequent expansion of the bases on
which “a criterion” for a protection visa may be fulfilled does not
alter the fact that the applicant is a person, in
the migration zone, who has
made a second, or further, application for a protection visa. Such an
application, given s.48A of the
Act, is not valid. The departmental officer was
correct to so find.
IV. Different Views of the Statutory Language
applicant attacked the Minister’s reliance on the words
“mentioned” and “includes” as they appear
in s.48A of
the Act (see [47] – [49] and [54] above). It must be said that I did
not see how this description of this aspect
of the Minister’s submissions
as being done for “administrative convenience”, and so that
bureaucrats could avoid
further work, could arise only from this part of the
submissions. It either relates to the entire scheme of the applicant’s
attack, or nothing.
my view this was plainly a colourful submission that the applicant felt he could
make, possibly for dramatic effect. Plainly, this
Court cannot properly be
concerned in these proceedings with the impact on bureaucrats. If the Parliament
intended there to be an
impact on bureaucrats, then so be it. This then becomes
a matter for the Executive arm of government.
agree with the Minister that there is nothing in the relevant language to allow
this submission to be properly made. The applicant’s
attack in this regard
therefore could not just relate to this one aspect of the Minister’s
various submissions. Plainly, if
the Court were to accept the Minister’s
construction of the statute on whatever basis then, in that circumstance, there
be no need for the bureaucrats to consider “additional”
protection visa applications.
if the applicant sought to make this submission for the purpose of highlighting
the consequence of accepting the Minister’s
submissions, or not accepting
his construction, then the applicant’s attack is wasted. One way or the
other, the Court cannot
allow any concern for bureaucrats (or otherwise) (or
even the Minister’s personal workload) to colour its consideration.
should note that the applicant submitted that the Minister’s construction
of s.48A misconstrued that provision as imposing
an “ethereal bar”
(set out at [87] above). I did not see this as an accurate description of the
Minister’s position.
I agree with the Minister’s submissions in this
regard (see [88] above).
argument ensued between the parties as to the use in s.48A of the words
“includes” and “mentioned”. Further,
whether the
appropriate approach to the relevant statutory construction, and given it
includes reference to these words, required
a “narrow” or
“broad” interpretation (see [60] – [63] above).
this debate, I did not see that the applicant’s reliance on
was of direct assistance to him on this point. I accept the applicant’s
submission that, in that case, the approach to statutory
construction adopted,
with respect, by the Full Federal Court was “precise”. That is, I
respectfully understood the Court
to be saying that proper attention must be
given to the scheme and language of the relevant parts of the statute.
that case, dealing with an earlier form of s.48A of the Act, the Court
emphasised that when regard was had to the nature of the
review undertaken by
the Refugee Review Tribunal, in that case under Pt.7 of the Act, that to
describe the Tribunal’s task
as making a finding as to whether the
applicant was a refugee was not correct. Rather, the task of the Tribunal was to
not reach, the requisite level of satisfaction as to whether Australia
had protection obligations towards the applicant (see, in
particular, s.414 and
s.65 and Pt.7 of the Act –
at [18]). In this sense, the Court
certainly called for precision in the attention to be paid to the scheme,
structure and language
of the relevant legislation.
words “narrower” or “broader” in this context are really
descriptors of how far the legislative interpretation
stays with the language
and schema of the statute as opposed to a reading which seeks to encompass
matters possibly alluded to, but
not specifically mentioned, in the
example is the Minister’s suggestion that the word “includes”
as it appears in s.48A(2) of the Act, is meant
to convey that what follows is
non-exhaustive. The applicant would say that it should be read as if it is
exhaustive and that the
use of the word “includes” creates ambiguity
with the consequences set out earlier in this judgment (see [63] above and
also at [155] – [158] below).
should note that the applicant’s reliance on
did not add to, or further advance, his argument. Rather,
I saw these references as another expression of the applicant’s point
this regard. The reference to
Buck v Comcare
emphasised the importance of
precise construction, not only in terms of public policy but also the
safeguarding of an individual’s
right. In this regard, those rights, said
to derive from international treaties to which Australia is a signatory, have
expression to the extent, or the shape, given to them by the
legislature. This immediately refers to the discussion above about the
of the statute and Parliament’s intention.
applicant’s reference to
seeks to emphasise the importance
of common law rights and freedoms. However, that should be understood in light
of the “qualification”
to be found at [107] of
such an emphasis on statutory construction is “where constructional
choices are open”. For the reasons set out above
in this judgment, I do
not agree in the current circumstances that such choices are open to this Court
given the language, scheme
and structure of the relevant legislation.
ultimately agree with the Minister that close attention must be paid to the
language of s.48A(2)(aa) of the Act. The use of the
“mentioned” and “includes” cannot be ignored. After all,
they are part of the language actually used
in the statute and, importantly, in
s.48A of the Act.
the Minister proposes, the words used were not directed to an application for a
protection visa as set out, or referred to, in
the current, or amended, version
of s.36(2) of the Act. Rather, attention is directed to “a
criterion” “mentioned”
in s.36(2) and all its constituent
parts. Noting, again, that each of these parts, relevantly as between (a) and
(aa), is expressed
in the alternative with the use of the word “or”
as it appears between (a) and (aa) of s.36(2) of the Act (and for that
(b) and (c) of s.36(2)). The point here is that the word “includes”
directs attention to, it emphasises, the substance,
and the description, of each
of those matters set out individually at s.36(2) of the Act (namely, each
constituent part – (a),
(aa), (b) and (c)), rather than the mere existence
of the actual paragraph itself as an entity. This is an example of where the
constituent
parts have a life of their own given they are directed to different
subjects, as opposed to the description of, or reference to,
the entirety of the
sub-section as a whole. If some other word had been used, say
“means” or “is” (as in
“application for a
protection visa...” means or is), then such words would have altered the
is an important distinction. The placement of the focus on the substance of what
is contained in each paragraph avoids any temporal
limitation that may have been
created with the use of such words as “means” or “is”.
That is, what is meant
by “an application for a protection visa”
(post the commencement of the Amending Act) is that the meaning, or definition,
of that term is “inclusive” of a concept (that is, each of the
concepts set out there) rather than the creation of some
prescriptive list. That is, a concept that in relation to the Refugees
Convention criterion had a statutory life
before the commencement of the
Amending Act and plainly continues to be “included” after.
the extent that the Minister’s submissions may also have implied that
“includes” was designed to create some
non-exhaustive list as
meeting the relevant definition, and to the extent that the applicant says this
is an explicit consequence
of the Minister’s submissions, then such a
notion must be rejected.
this were the case then the applicant’s argument as to
“precision”, “narrow” and “broad”
interpretation, would be plainly available. The legislation should not be
interpreted in such a way as to give license to any infinite
number of elements
to be imported into the meaning of “application for a protection
visa” as set out in s.48A(2) of the
the view that I have taken of the meaning and use to which
“includes” has been put here is devoid of ambiguity
and supports the
precise, and even “narrow”, approach to understanding the meaning of
the statute that the applicant
says should be used.
of those “parts” of s.36(2) of the Act, namely (a), is in identical
terms to a part of “a criterion” as
it existed prior to the
commencement of the Amending Act. The current version of s.36(2) of the Act and
as it is referred to in (the
current version of) s.48A, means that an applicant
who has made an application for a protection visa at any time, which can be
as “an application for a visa, a criterion for which is
mentioned in s.36(2)(a)...” (the current version) nonetheless
is caught by
the description in s.48A(2)(aa) because the “criterion” (its
substance) is in identical terms. That is,
it is the same criterion. The
application, therefore, made by the applicant in 2005 is “an application
for a visa, a criterion
for which is [still or, even, also] mentioned in
paragraph 36(2)(a)...” in its current (post-amendment) form. His
application
in 2012 is a further application for a protection visa and therefore
“barred” by s.48A(1) of the Act.
the extent, also, that the applicant sought to focus attention on the words
“repeal” and ‘amend” in the
Amending Act, such
submissions divert attention away from the language of s.48A(2) as it exists
post the commencement of the Amending
Act. A criterion “mentioned”,
with its focus on the description of the substance of each of the constituent
that criterion, is not limited by a repeal or amendment of s.36(2) as
it was. That is because the focus is not necessarily on s.36(2)
of the Act per
se as it existed, but rather on a criterion characterised by its mention, or as
described, in s.36(2) of the Act as
it now exists. In the current case, the
applicant did make an application for a visa a criterion for which is mentioned
in the current
version of s.36(2). That he made it prior to the commencement of
the Amending Act does not alter the fact that his conduct in the
meets that descriptor.
V. The Role of Relevant Extrinsic Material
the Court the applicant submitted that there was, at least, ambiguity in the
language of the relevant parts of the statute.
He pointed to his own
construction and what he said were two constructions proposed by the Minister.
Therefore, in these circumstances,
he said that recourse to extrinsic material
was available, or necessary, to resolve the ambiguity.
things may be said immediately. First, it does not follow that simply because a
number of constructions are proposed, or propounded,
that it is the result of
any ambiguity. Any such contrary construction may simply be the result of
fertile minds, or inventive argument.
there is a difference between ambiguity and complexity. Any complexity arising
in the current circumstances may not necessarily
be due to an ambiguity of
language. Rather, it may be due to a particular construction of language
designed to cover, or encompass,
a number of situations (e.g. applications for
protection visas made before and after the commencement of the Amending Act) and
accommodate the various elements constituting the scheme of applying for a
visa and, in this case, a particular class of visa, the
protection visa.
to extrinsic material may be had to resolve any ambiguity in the statutory
(s.15AB(1)(b)(i)
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
However, it may also be of value in confirming the view taken of the meaning of
relevant statutory language
(s.15AB(1)(a)
Acts Interpretation Act
(Cth)). In this latter regard, the following supports the construction
set out above and in support of the Minister’s position.
applicant’s reliance on extrinsic material is set out at [78] – [79]
above. It must be said that, for the large part,
the applicant’s reliance
on the extrinsic material was not dependent on what is to be found there, but
rather what the applicant
says is not in the extrinsic material. Further, where
he did make reference to the material in the Minister’s Second Reading
Speech, it was to comment on the “liberalisation”, or expansion, of
, not s.48A of the Act.
applicant’s position is that, had Parliament intended to exclude persons
such as the applicant from accessing the “new”
regime, then, given
the importance of such a matter, it would be expected that such an intention
would have resulted in some express
statement to that effect in either the
Second Reading Speech or the Explanatory Memorandum.
prefer the Minister’s position with its primary reliance (although not
exclusively) on what is actually to be found in those
documents. While also
relying on the absence of references (albeit to a smaller degree), nonetheless
the Minister did point to some
parts of the documents to support his
construction of the statute under consideration.
applicant’s reference to the Minister’s Second Reading Speech (see
at [79] above) does not assist his construction.
The applicant’s
construction, in effect, seeks to draw a line between the “old” and
“new” versions
of the Act. To that extent, there is no argument with
his position as a general proposition. For current purposes we are focussed
the legislative version post the Amending Act.
in drawing that line, the applicant also seeks to draw a line, an impervious
line, between actions taken before the commencement
of the Amending Act and what
is legislatively available after the commencement of the Amending Act (see, in
particular, the discussion
above on “includes”).
Amending Act did not, in my view, seek to “wipe the slate clean” in
the sense of denying, or forgiving, what had occurred
prior to its commencement.
The repeal, or amendment, of an Act does not necessarily, and simply of itself,
repeal or amend what has
actually been done in the past unless some such
intention can be discerned.
agree with the Minister that item 35 of Sch.1 to the Amending Act operated to
make clear in the transition from the “old”
to the “new”
version of the Act that the “new” version of the Act applied to
applications made after commencement
of the Amending Act and to applications
made prior, but not determined. In the absence of anything further, it therefore
that, amongst other matters, relevantly, complementary protection
considerations do not apply “retrospectively” to applications
protection visa finalised before the commencement of the Amending Act. I cannot
see that the language of item 35 confines the
operation of s.48A (as amended) to
relate only to events post-amendment.
light of my finding above, it is not necessary to proceed to consider the effect
of the applicant’s construction of item
35, as submitted by the Minister
(see [94] above).
the applicant’s reliance on the Minister’s explanation (in the
extrinsic material) that one of the reasons for
the amendment of the Act was to
take the disposition of certain decisions on visa grants away from the Minister
acting personally
and to place it in a statutorily regulated regime, says
nothing about ignoring what has occurred in the past. At most, what is in
Second Reading Speech is an explanation of the reasons for changing, or more
precisely expanding, the statutory regime for the
future. (Again, noting the
discussion above as to the distinction between “a criterion” per se,
that is the criteria
collectively, and the distinctive and different substance
of each criterion.)
“significant administrative hole” referred to by the Minister in the
Second Reading Speech (at pg.1356) was not filled
by denying the past. Rather,
the thrust of the Second Reading Speech was to explain, amongst other things,
the reasons and mechanisms
(e.g. “[t]he bill establishes new criteria for
the grant of a protection visa...” see at
pg. 1357) for the
set out at pg.1358 of the Second Reading Speech:
once this bill comes into effect, assessments under the protection obligations
determination process for offshore
entry persons will
account complementary protection.”
does not give license to the applicant to argue that the intention of the Bill,
at least as explained by the Minister in his
speech, was to ignore the
provisions of s.48A of the Act. Where the Minister talks of
“assessment
under the protection obligation
[emphasis added] (noting the plural) this refers to applications for a
protection visa validly made after the commencement
of the Amending Act. It does
not serve to validate an application made after that time, by ignoring the fact
that a valid application
for a protection visa had been made, and refused, under
the “old” statutory regime.
any event, the Explanatory Memorandum to the Amending Bill (as it then was),
with its specific reference to s.48A of the Act, provides
greater insight to
what was intended to be wrought by the Amending Act in this regard.
the Court, the Minister drew attention to the note about item 16 of Sch.1 to the
Amending Act dealing with s.48A(2) (see the
Explanatory Memorandum: “Notes
on Individual Clauses” at pg.16). That is, the definition of
“application for a
protection visa”. In particular, what is noted
Explanatory
Memorandum at pg.17):
effect is that, for the purposes of section 48A, a non-citizen who, while in the
migration zone, has made an
application for a protection visa
Refugees Conventions grounds, or complementary protection grounds) where the
grant(s) of the visa(s) has or have been refused,
may not make a further
application for a protection visa
while in the migration
[Emphasis in the original.]
things, at least, may be said about this “note”. That is, in its
entirety of the “note” on item 16 in
the Explanatory Memorandum
([101] at pg.16 to [105] at pg.17), not just that part extracted above at [179].
First, there is nothing
here to suggest that those who have applied for a
protection visa once on Refugees Convention grounds are entitled to, or can
a second time for, a protection visa either on complementary protection
grounds or Refugees Convention grounds, or both.
and far more importantly, is that the plain language of the extract, and when
read in the context of the entire note on item
16, supports the Minister’s
relevant statutory construction. The note in its entirety records that item 16
repeals the “existing”
(now “old”) s.48A(2)(aa) and (ab)
and substitutes a new paragraph, s.48A(2)(aa). The very paragraph under
consideration
set out above, there was some discussion before the Court about the import of
the words “repeals” and “amend”
as used in the Amending
Act. The applicant sought to derive some advantage to his argument in relation
to his preferred construction
by saying that the repeal of a statutory
provision, at least, implied some break with the past such that an application
for a protection
visa on Refugees Convention grounds was not an application for
a protection visa of the “species” created by the Amending
my view a “break”, or change, in what constituted the basis for the
grant of a visa does not, unless some specific
reference is made to the
contrary, provide for a denial of what actually occurred in the past.
explanation is provided as to how these various terms were meant to apply in the
Amending Act by the Explanatory Memorandum.
I note that (at [103] of the
Explanatory Memorandum at pg.16):
subsection 48A(2) does not currently mention that an application for a
protection visa includes an application for
a protection visa on complementary
protection grounds. The purpose of the substituted provision is to provide for
applicants for
a protection visa on the basis of a claim for complementary
protection.”
reference to [104] of the Explanatory Memorandum (at pg.16), the
“effect” of s.48A(2)(aa), which is described as
“substituted paragraph 48A(2)(aa)”, is that an “application
for a protection visa includes”:
an application for a visa, a criterion for which is mentioned in new paragraph
36(2)(a) or (b) (
which retains the intention of existing paragraph 48A(2)(aa)
[Emphasis added.]
[In context, “existing paragraph” is a reference to the now
“old” statutory provision.]
therefore, the intention of Parliament was not to draw a line with events in the
past. The current version of the definition
of “application for a
protection visa” “retains” that part of the “old”
version that related
to the Refugees Convention.
the effect of the “new” s.48A(2)(aa) is to retain that part of the
“old” definition that relates
to the Refugees Convention and to now
“include” a criterion “mentioned” in the new s.36(2)(aa)
(the complementary
protection claims) (see the second dot point at [104] of the
Explanatory Memorandum (at pg.16)).
appears at [105] of the Explanatory Memorandum (at pg.17) must also be read in
the context of the explanation that precedes it.
This “summary” of
the “effect” of the Amending Act for the purposes of s.48A is that a
non-citizen who has
made an application for a protection visa, with specific
reference to either a Refugees Convention ground, or complementary protection
ground, may not make a further application for a protection visa (on any of the
grounds otherwise available).
is no temporal limitation as to when the application must have been made to be
caught by this provision. The reference to “either
....or” leaves
the situation, as with the construction previously set out above, as being that
the effect of the “new”
provision is that, amongst other things, a
non-citizen (such as the applicant) who has applied for a protection visa on
Convention grounds (one of the alternatives now available) cannot make
a further application.
the “alternative” (complementary protection) ground was not
available to the applicant at the time he made his application
for a protection
visa does not detract from the fact that this explanation of the effect of the
purpose of s.48A was to preclude
persons who had already applied for a
protection visa on Refugees Convention grounds from making further applications,
on any grounds now available.
summary, I accept the Minister’s construction of the relevant legislation.
The applicant is a non-citizen caught by the prohibition
in s.48A from making a
further application for a protection visa while in the migration zone. The
officer of the Minister’s
department was not in error in applying this
understanding to the relevant legislation and in deciding that the application
on 10 October 2012 was not valid. The sole ground of the application to the
Court, whether as stated or as subsequently argued in
submissions, is not made
out. Accordingly, I will make an order dismissing the
application.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and ninety
(190) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of Nicholls
Date: 3 April 2013
United Nations
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
, opened for signature 28 July
1951, 189 UNTS 137
(entered into force 22 April 1954) and the
Relating to the Status of Refugees
, opened for signature 31 January
606 UNTS 267
(entered into force 4 October 1967) (“ Refugees Convention
RTF format (437 KB)
Signed PDF/A format