URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1990/59.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Latoudis v Casey [1990] HCA 59; (1990) 170 CLR 534 (20 December 1990)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
LATOUDIS v. CASEY
[1990] HCA 59
; (1990) 170 CLR 534
F.C. 90/054
High Court of Australia
Mason C.J.(1), Brennan(2), Dawson(3), Toohey(4) and McHugh(5) JJ.
Costs - Magistrates' courts - Information - Dismissal - Discretion to award
costs to defendant - Relevant considerations -
Magistrates
Proceedings) Act 1975
(Vict.), s.97(b).
1990, May 29; December 20. 20:12:1990
APPEAL from the Supreme Court of Victoria.
MASON C.J. The question for decision in this appeal is what, if any, are the
criteria to be applied by a court of summary jurisdiction
in exercising a
statutory discretion to award costs in criminal proceedings which have
terminated in favour of a defendant. At the
time of these proceedings, the
relevant discretion was conferred by s.97(b) of the
Magistrates (Summary
Proceedings) Act 1975
") which is in terms similar to
counterpart provisions in New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, South
Australia, the Australian
Territory and the Northern Territory.
Section 97(b) authorizes the court, when it dismisses an information or
an order in favour of a defendant, to order the informant
or complainant to pay to the defendant such costs as the court
thinks just
reasonable. Separate provision is made by s.97(a) in similar terms authorizing
the award of costs in favour of an
informant or
complainant when the defendant
is convicted or an order is made against the defendant. The fact that
separate provision
for the two situations may well indicate a
legislative appreciation that the exercise of each discretion may call for an
examination
of different considerations.
2. The old rule was that the Crown neither receives nor pays costs
(Attorney-General of Queensland v. Holland
[1912] HCA 26
at p 49; Ex parte
Hivis; Re Michaelis (1933) 50 WN (NSW) 90, at p 92), notably in criminal
proceedings. That
been displaced.
Indeed, it could not survive once
courts of summary jurisdiction were given a statutory discretion to award
in criminal proceedings.
3. It emerges from the comprehensive review of the cases made by Dawson J. in
his reasons for judgment that the Australian authorities
now provide support
for two distinct approaches to the exercise of the statutory discretion.
Initially in New South Wales, the Full
Court of the Supreme Court adopted the
rule in summary police prosecutions that costs ought generally not to be
awarded to the successful
defendant: see Ex parte Jones (1906) 6 SR (N.S.W.)
313. It would seem that this rule applied to other summary prosecutions
by public officers in the public interest. In Ex parte Jones,
Darley C.J. based the rule largely on the proposition that it was
the duty of
the police, once they saw that a prima facie case existed, to bring it before
the court, rather than to make careful
inquiry into the circumstances with a
view to determining whether the defendant was guilty or not. His Honour
observed, at p 316:
"(I)f the police find that they run the risk of being
ordered to pay costs, they may hesitate to bring cases
before the Court".
4. Subsequently, it was recognized that, in modern times, a police officer is
generally indemnified against an adverse order for
costs so that an order for
costs against such an officer is not a significant deterrent to the
performance of his or her public duty:
Ex parte Hivis, at p 92. In that case
it was held that the discretion to award the costs of proceedings for
prohibition against
a police officer was unfettered and that its exercise must
depend on the particular circumstances of the case. More recently, a
approach was adopted in Barton v. Berman (1980) 1 NSWLR 63 where the New South
Wales Court of Appeal, in considering whether
a successful defendant in
committal proceedings should get his costs, held that the possibility of
deterring the police from bringing
proceedings is an irrelevant consideration.
Hope J.A. (with whom Glass J.A. agreed) said, at p 74:
"But the question which the magistrate has to decide is
whether to make or not to make an order for costs; it is not
simply whether, for some reason, he should decline to make
an order. The fact that the defendant has been discharged
gives the Court jurisdiction. That the defendant has
qualified to make the application is, of course, a relevant
circumstance, but it does not give rise to any presumption
that he should get an order."
These remarks reflect the current approach in New South Wales (see Acuthan v.
Coates (1986) 6 NSWLR 472, at pp 479-480) and it is
indicative of the first of
the two distinct approaches which have been taken to the question now under
consideration.
5. As recently as 1985, in Lewis v. Utting (1985) 1 Qd R 423, the Full Court
of the Supreme Court of Queensland adopted the same
approach, subject to the
qualification that it held that the fact that the police officer is exercising
a public duty in bringing
the prosecution is a consideration relevant to the
exercise of the discretion: see at p 442. Carter J. (with whom Campbell C.J.
and Matthews J. agreed generally) rejected the notion that matters relevant to
the exercise of the discretion should be identified
on the ground that to do
so might fetter what was an unfettered discretion. His Honour continued (at p
"It seems to me with great respect to those who express
it that a rule which states that the discretion is to be
exercised in the same way as in a civil case or that an
unsuccessful defendant shall have his costs unless he
has disqualified himself by particular conduct will as
effectively fetter the discretion as will any attempt to
list the relevant criteria. That is not to say that the
fact that the proceedings are of a criminal nature and that
they are instituted by a police officer in the execution of
his duty is the decisive consideration."
6. The unfettered nature of the discretion had been emphasized in the earlier
Victorian decision of Puddy v. Borg
[1973] VicRp 61
; (1973) VR 626.
That case decided that
there is no prima facie rule one way or the other and that the discretion is
to be exercised
in each case
according to its own circumstances, this being
the principle which now prevails in Victoria. The judgment of Winneke
and Menhennitt JJ. states the position in these terms (at p 628):
"The discretion is one to be exercised in each case
according to its own circumstances. Beyond limiting
the power to such costs as to the court seems just and
reasonable, the sub-section does not otherwise circumscribe
the discretion conferred. No doubt it must be exercised
judicially so as to achieve what is fair and just between
the parties according to the circumstances of the particular
case, and its exercise is open to challenge according to
the well-established rules which govern the exercise of
discretionary powers."
7. In treating the discretion to award costs as relevantly unconfined, the
Full Court of the Supreme Court of Victoria took a course
which was followed
in New South Wales and Queensland. In the present case, Kaye J. quoted this
statement and cited it as a reason
for refusing to adopt the second approach,
to which I shall now refer, on the ground that it would confine the broad
discretion which
the legislature intended to confer on the courts.
8. The second approach, which is currently followed in South Australia, the
Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory,
is that costs ought
generally to be awarded to a successful defendant. In Hamdorf v. Riddle
(1971) SASR 398, Bray C.J., Hogarth
J. and Sangster AJ. held (at p 402) that,
in awarding costs in summary proceedings which terminated in favour of a
defendant, courts
should, "in a general way", exercise their discretion as
they do in civil cases. Their Honours rejected the then established practice
in South Australia as erroneous. According to that practice, costs were
awarded against unsuccessful defendants virtually as a matter
though costs were awarded against unsuccessful police prosecutors only in
unusual cases. In McEwen v. Siely (1972) 21
FLR 131, the Supreme Court of the
Australian Capital Territory (Fox, Blackburn and Connor JJ.) agreed in
substance with what was
said in Hamdorf v. Riddle, but preferred to express
the principle in this way (at p 136):
"generally an acquitted defendant should have his costs
unless he has by his conduct brought the proceedings or
their continuation upon himself or unless some other
consideration is present which makes it unjust to award him
And in Cilli v. Abbott
[1981] FCA 70
; (1981) 53 FLR 108, the Federal Court (Keely, Toohey and
Fisher JJ.), on appeal from an order of the Supreme
Court of the Northern
Territory dismissing an appeal from the refusal of a magistrate to award costs
in favour of a successful defendant,
followed McEwen
9. It remains for me to refer to the position in Tasmania where a relevant
statutory provision,
Costs in Criminal Cases
prescribes a number of relevant considerations, though they are not expressed
to be exhaustive. It has been held
statute does not abrogate the
principles (a) that criminal trials are not to be equated with contests
between civil litigants,
(b) that acquitted persons are not entitled to
costs: see Reg. v. Freshney (1977) Tas SR 126. In that case, Cosgrove J.
"There must be some circumstance, other than acquittal
which, whether or not it be based on error, inefficiency,
or irregularity, gives the applicant a just claim on the
community for payment of his costs."
See also Bradley v. Lawson (1978) Tas SR 213. However, the rule that has been
applied in Tasmania is the product of judicial interpretation
of a Tasmanian
statute which prescribes relevant factors to be taken into account. For that
reason I do not regard the Tasmanian
approach as an authoritative or
influential guide to the manner in which a general discretion, unconfined
except by reference to
its subject-matter and the scope and purpose of the
statute, should be exercised.
10. In referring to the approaches that have been taken in various States and
Territories to the award of costs to a successful
defendant, I have not taken
the trouble to set out the relevant statutory provisions. That is because,
with the exception of Tasmania,
the courts have been given a general statutory
discretion which has not been constrained, even by prescription of relevant
considerations
or criteria. Thus, as in Puddy v. Borg, the courts have been
correct to emphasize the unconfined nature of the discretion. But
it does not
follow that any attempt to formulate a principle or a guideline according to
which the discretion should be exercised
would constitute a fetter upon the
discretion not intended by the legislature. Indeed, a refusal to formulate a
principle or guideline
can only lead to exercises of discretion which are seen
to be inconsistent, a result which would not have been contemplated by the
legislature with any degree of equanimity. I venture to repeat the comments
made by Deane J. and myself in Norbis v. Norbis
161 CLR 513, at p 519:
"The point of preserving the width of the discretion
which Parliament has created is that it maximizes the
possibility of doing justice in every case. But the need
for consistency in judicial adjudication, which is the
antithesis of arbitrary and capricious decision-making,
provides an important countervailing consideration
supporting the giving of guidance by appellate courts,
whether in the form of principles or guidelines."
11. By conferring on courts of summary jurisdiction a power to award costs
when proceedings terminate in favour of the defendant,
the legislature must be
taken to have intended to abrogate the traditional rule that costs are not
awarded against the Crown. Yet
in Victoria and Queensland, the emphasis given
by the courts to the unfettered nature of the discretion to award or withhold
has resulted in practice in costs not being generally awarded against a
police officer who is an informant, a result which could
scarcely have been
intended by the legislature when it enacted s.97(b) of the
. Once that
proposition is accepted, as in my view
it must be, there is no sound basis for
drawing a distinction in relation to the
award of costs against an
unsuccessful informant
between summary proceedings instituted by a police or
other public officer and those
instituted by a private citizen. In the case
of proceedings commenced by a private prosecutor which terminate in favour of
the defendant,
the private prosecutor should in ordinary
circumstances be
ordered to pay the costs, even if he or she initiates the proceedings
public rather than a private purpose.
12. In ordinary circumstances it would not be just or reasonable to deprive a
defendant who has secured the dismissal of a criminal
charge brought against
him or her of an order for costs. To burden a successful defendant with the
entire payment of the costs of
defending the proceedings is in effect to
expose the defendant to a financial burden which may be substantial, perhaps
by reason of the bringing of a criminal charge which, in the event,
should not have been brought. It is inequitable that the defendant
expected to bear the financial burden of exculpating himself or herself,
though the circumstances of a particular case
may be such as to make it just
and reasonable to refuse an order for costs or to make a qualified order for
costs. As the Report
of Committee on Costs in Criminal Cases (N.Z.), (1966),
par.30, stated:
"Because we cannot wholly prevent placing innocent persons
in jeopardy that does not mean that we should not as far as
is practicable mitigate the consequences."
13. It will be seen from what I have already said that, in exercising its
discretion to award or refuse costs, a court should look
at the matter
primarily from the perspective of the defendant. To do so conforms to
fundamental principle. If one thing is clear
in the realm of costs, it is
that, in criminal as well as civil proceedings, costs are not awarded by way
of punishment of the unsuccessful
party. They are compensatory in the sense
that they are awarded to indemnify the successful party against the expense to
or she has been put by reason of the legal proceedings: Cilli v.
Abbott, at p 111. Most of the arguments which seek to counter
an award of
costs against an informant fail to recognize this principle and treat an order
for costs against an informant as if it
amounted to the imposition of a
penalty or punishment. But these arguments only have force if costs are
awarded by reason of misconduct
or default on the part of the prosecutor.
Once the principle is established that costs are generally awarded by way of
to a successful defendant, the making of an order for costs against
a prosecutor is no more a mark of disapproval of the prosecution
dismissal of the proceedings.
14. The argument that police and other public officers charged with the
enforcement of the criminal laws will be discouraged by
the apprehension of
adverse orders for costs from prosecuting cases which should be brought is
without substance and is no longer
accepted by the courts: see Ex parte
Hivis; Hamdorf v. Riddle; Puddy v. Borg; Barton v. Berman. The courts have
rightly recognized
that the Executive's practice of indemnifying police
officers against payment of costs ordered against them undermines the argument
which found favour so long ago in Ex parte Jones.
15. The availability of legal aid might be regarded as a possible reason for
refusing to award costs. But no court can assume that
a particular defendant
is entitled to, or is in receipt of, legal aid and it would not be right to
draw a distinction between defendants
based on receipt of legal aid. In any
event the courts have traditionally made orders for costs without regard to
considerations
of that kind.
16. I am not persuaded that there is a complete analogy between the
discretion to award costs in summary proceedings and the power
to award costs
in civil proceedings. For that reason I would not be prepared to accept that
in summary proceedings there should
be a general rule that costs follow the
event. As I have noted, the making of separate provision in s.97(a) and (b)
is not without
significance. The differences between criminal and civil
proceedings are substantial, not least of them being the absence of pleadings,
the different onus of proof, the defendant's inability in criminal proceedings
to enter into a compromise and the possibility that
the charge, if proved, may
affect the defendant's livelihood and reputation. These differences may
possibly provide grounds in the
circumstances of particular cases for refusing
to order costs in favour of a successful informant which would have no
application
in civil proceedings.
17. Nevertheless, I am persuaded that, in ordinary circumstances, an order
for costs should be made in favour of a successful defendant.
However, there
will be cases in which, when regard is had to the particular circumstances, it
would not be just and reasonable to
order costs against the prosecutor or to
order payment of all the defendant's costs. If, for example, the defendant,
by his or her
conduct after the events constituting the commission of the
alleged offence, brought the prosecution upon himself or herself, then
would not be just and reasonable to award costs against the prosecutor.
18. I agree with Toohey J. that, if a defendant has been given an opportunity
of explaining his or her version of events before
a charge is laid and
declines to take up that opportunity, it may be just and reasonable to refuse
costs. Likewise, if a defendant
conducts his or her defence in such a way as
to prolong the proceedings unreasonably, it would be just and reasonable to
award for a proportion of the defendant's costs.
19. However, I have come to the conclusion that the magistrate's exercise of
discretion in the present case was flawed. In focussing
on the reasonableness
of the informant's conduct in instituting the proceedings, the magistrate
erred in principle. In relying upon
the defendant's failure to seek proof of
identity of the owner or proof of ownership of the goods, thereby causing
suspicion to fall
upon him, the magistrate again took into account matters
going to the reasonableness of the informant's action in instituting the
proceedings. It would have been different had the magistrate relied upon
conduct of the defendant in the course of the police investigation
case. But that was not so. The magistrate based his decision in this respect
solely on the defendant's participation in
the transaction which gave rise to
the offence alleged. For the reasons given by McHugh J., the magistrate erred
as well in this
respect and the appeal should be allowed.
20. I agree with the orders proposed by McHugh J.
BRENNAN J. I agree with Dawson J. that the appeal should be dismissed. It
is unnecessary to reiterate his Honour's reasons with
which I am in agreement
but, having regard to the practical importance of this case, I would add an
observation upon one factor which,
it seems to me, carries some weight. A
police officer who, in the ordinary course of his duties, commences a
prosecution against
a defendant is serving the public interest, not his own.
Yet he is the defendant's adversary in the prosecution and an order for
payment of the defendant's costs must be made against him personally, or not
at all. If the court's practice is generally to refuse
a successful defendant
his costs, it is the defendant whose purse defrays the costs of the
proceedings taken in the public interest;
if the court's practice is generally
to allow a successful defendant his costs, it is the police officer whose
purse defrays the
costs incurred by him in the public interest. The injustice
is manifest: whichever practice is adopted, the public interest is served
the public purse is not made to bear the burden of the service; the burden is
made to rest either on the police officer or on
the acquitted defendant. True
it is that, if costs are ordered against a police officer, an ex gratia
payment may be made by the
Treasury by way of indemnity but the discretion of
the Treasury cannot properly be taken into account in deciding whether an
for costs should be made. The injustice inherent in the system can be
avoided only by legislation which commits public funds to defray
the costs of
unsuccessful prosecutions. If governments decline to make the necessary funds
available, the courts are left with the
unenviable task of deciding whether
the interests of justice are better served by adopting one unjust practice
rather than another.
The question is nicely balanced. The long-standing
practice which attracts the support of Dawson J. seems to me to give better
assurance of the due administration of the law, the submission of appropriate
cases to the courts for determination, and the speedy
disposition of summary
proceedings. That practice seems to me to serve better the interests of
justice. I would dismiss the appeal.
DAWSON J. Three informations against the appellant were dismissed in the
Magistrates' Court at Oakleigh in Victoria. The appellant
applied for, but
was refused, an order for costs against the informant. The appellant obtained
an order nisi to review the magistrate's
refusal to order costs. Kaye J.
discharged the order nisi and the appellant now appeals by special leave
against his decision.
2. Upon the first information the appellant was charged with the theft of a
red Ford GT sedan. Upon the second information the
appellant was charged with
receiving stolen goods in the form of two black front car seats, one black
rear seat, four black door
trims, four interior door handles and two window
winders. Upon the third information the appellant was charged with unlawful
of the same goods. The first two informations were for indictable
offences and the appellant elected to have them dealt with summarily.
pleaded not guilty to all three charges.
3. The police prosecutor led no evidence upon the charge of theft and that
information was forthwith dismissed by the magistrate.
On the hearing of the
other two charges, the prosecution called as a witness the owner of the red
Ford GT sedan. He gave evidence
that his vehicle had been stolen and
subsequently found in a stripped condition. He later identified at the
Oakleigh Police Station
certain seats and door trim as having been taken from
his car. The prosecution called as its other witness the police informant
said that she had visited the appellant's home where she observed a yellow
Ford GT sedan with a black interior. She said that
some of the items in the
interior of the car appeared to match the items which the owner of the red
Ford GT sedan had reported stolen
from his car. She said that she formed the
suspicion that the items in the appellant's car were stolen. Later those
removed from the appellant's car and taken to the Oakleigh Police
Station. The witness said that she conducted an interview with
the appellant.
A typed record of that interview was tendered in evidence.
4. In the recorded answers, the appellant said that he bought the car seats
and door trim found in his car from a man he "met" on
the C.B. radio named
"Peter". He said that he paid a reasonable price for them. He said that he
did not know that the articles were
5. The solicitor appearing for the appellant before the magistrate submitted
that the appellant had no case to answer upon the two
remaining charges. The
magistrate upheld that submission upon the charge of receiving and dismissed
that information. He held that
the appellant should give an account of his
possession of the articles in question on the charge of unlawful possession.
6. The appellant gave evidence in accordance with his record of interview
that he bought the car seats and door trim from a man
with the call-sign of
"Peter" who had been in contact with him on the C.B. radio. The appellant
said that he paid $350 for the articles,
which he considered to be a fair
price. He said that he did not suspect the articles to have been stolen.
7. The magistrate found that the appellant had successfully accounted for his
possession of the goods and dismissed the remaining
information. In refusing
the appellant's application for an order for costs, the magistrate said that
the informant had acted reasonably
and that the appellant had caused a
significant suspicion to fall upon him by failing to seek proof of ownership
of the goods at
the time he purchased them, notwithstanding that his account
of his possession was accepted by the court as satisfactory.
8. In discharging the order nisi, Kaye J. relied upon the decision of the
Victorian Supreme Court (Winneke C.J., Smith and Menhennitt
JJ.) in Puddy v.
[1973] VicRp 61
; (1973) VR 626. In that case, the defendant had unsuccessfully applied
for an order for costs against the informant
upon the dismissal
information for a summary offence. The magistrate in refusing the application
said that to award costs
might act as a deterrent
to police in laying
informations in courts of summary jurisdiction.
9. The Full Court pointed to the unfettered discretion vested in a
magistrates' court (at that time by s.105 of the
Justices Act
(Vict.)) to
order an informant, upon the dismissal of an information, to pay to the
defendant such costs as to the court seemed
and reasonable. The Court
said, at p 629:
"the consideration actuating the magistrate's refusal to
award costs was a policy reason of a general nature which
would be applicable to all cases in which the information
was laid by a police officer, and which if so applied would
inhibit, except in most exceptional circumstances, the
exercise in such cases of the general discretion conferred
by the section.
In our opinion, the consideration which actuated the
magistrate in refusing to order costs against the informant
was, for the reasons we have given, a consideration
extraneous or irrelevant to the proper exercise of the
discretion under the section, and he was, we think, in error
in allowing the exercise of his discretion to be influenced
10. The power of a magistrates' court to award costs was at the time relevant
to these proceedings to be found in s.97(a) and (b)
Magistrates
(Summary Proceedings) Act 1975
(Vict.) (see now
Magistrates'
Court Act 1989
(Vict.) to a similar effect) which is as follows:
"(a) Where the Court makes a conviction or order in favour
of an informant or complainant, the Court may order
the defendant to pay to the informant or complainant
such costs as the Court thinks just and reasonable;
(b) Where the Court dismisses the information or
complaint, or makes an order in favour of the
defendant the Court may order the informant or the
complainant to pay to the defendant such costs as the
Court thinks just and reasonable".
That provision is not significantly different from s.105 of the
Justices Act
which was the applicable section in Puddy v. Borg.
11. In the present case Kaye J. was asked to follow decisions of the Supreme
Court of South Australia and of the Federal Court holding
that, as a general
rule, costs follow the event in proceedings involving summary offences as in
civil proceedings. He declined to
do so upon the basis that the discretion
conferred by the legislation ought not be so confined. He referred to a
passage in the
judgment in Puddy v. Borg, at p 628, where it was said:
"The discretion is one to be exercised in each case
according to its own circumstances. Beyond limiting the
power to such costs as to the court seems just and
reasonable, the sub-section does not otherwise circumscribe
the discretion conferred. No doubt it must be exercised
judicially so as to achieve what is fair and just between
the parties according to the circumstances of the particular
case, and its exercise is open to challenge according to
the well-established rules which govern the exercise of
discretionary powers."
12. The approach adopted towards awarding costs to successful defendants in
proceedings involving summary offences is not uniform
throughout Australia.
In Hamdorf v. Riddle (1971) SASR 398, the Supreme Court of South Australia
(Bray C.J., Hogarth J. and Sangster
AJ.) held that, in determining whether
costs should be awarded to a successful defendant in a prosecution for a
summary offence,
courts should exercise their discretion in the same manner as
in civil actions. The provision in the Justices Act 1921 (S.A.) (s.77)
courts of summary jurisdiction power to award costs in South Australia is not
dissimilar to the Victorian provision to which
I have referred. The Court
observed (at pp 399-400) that a practice had grown up whereby costs were
awarded against unsuccessful
defendants almost as a matter of course, while
costs were ordered against police complainants only in unusual circumstances,
example, where they acted unreasonably in laying or proceeding with the
complaint. The Court thought the practice to be wrong in
principle and said,
"We think then, without attempting to fetter the discretion
of courts of summary jurisdiction, that they should, in a
general way, exercise their discretion as to costs in the
way in which it is exercised in the trial of a civil action,
but without discriminating between the costs of successful
complainants and successful defendants at least to any
greater extent than the civil courts distinguish between the
costs of successful plaintiffs and successful defendants.
In those courts, indeed, a successful defendant is less
often deprived of his costs than a successful plaintiff
because he did not initiate the proceedings and was brought
to the court irrespective of his will, and in most cases
against it."
13. In McEwen v. Siely (1972) 21 FLR 131 the Supreme Court of the Australian
Capital Territory (Fox, Blackburn and Connor JJ.) thought
that the passage
which I have cited from Hamdorf v. Riddle may have been too loosely expressed.
Nevertheless they agreed with the
thrust of that decision, saying of a
provision comparable to that in South Australia (Court of Petty Sessions
Ordinance 1930 (A.C.T.),
s.244(1)), at p 136:
"we think that generally an acquitted defendant should
have his costs unless he has by his conduct brought the
proceedings or their continuation upon himself or unless
some other consideration is present which makes it unjust to
award him costs."
14. In Cilli v. Abbott
[1981] FCA 70
; (1981) 53 FLR 108, the Federal Court (Keely, Toohey
and Fisher JJ.), sitting on appeal from a decision of
the Supreme Court of the
Northern Territory dismissing an appeal from the refusal of a magistrate to
order costs in favour of a successful
defendant, followed
the decision in
McEwen v. Siely, although it should be noted that counsel for the respondent
did not contest
the statement of principle
in the latter case.
15. The decision in Puddy v. Borg, whilst it does not go as far in favour of
a defendant as does Hamdorf v. Riddle, rejects the
view that costs should not
be awarded against an informant, at all events a police informant, unless he
acted vindictively or unreasonably
in laying or pursuing the information. The
view rejected in Puddy v. Borg is reflected in the comment of Darley C.J. in
Jones (1906) 6 SR (NSW) 313, at pp 315-316:
"it is said that the police should make careful enquiry into
the circumstances before instituting proceedings. I think
it would be dangerous to the public welfare if we laid upon
the police any such duty, and held that they were bound to
make enquiries before commencing a prosecution. In making
such enquiries they might easily be deceived. The proper
course for the police to pursue, is, if they see that a
prim facie case exists, to bring it before the Court which
has jurisdiction to decide it. It is the duty of the
magistrate to decide the case upon the evidence, and not
of the police to determine whether the accused is guilty or
not. In some countries the police have this duty charged
upon them of making enquiries, and exercising quasi judicial
functions, but that is not our system. Our system is that
if there is apparently good ground to suspect that an
offence has been committed, it is the duty of the police to
lay a complaint and bring the accused before the magistrate.
I have no doubt that the inspector in the present case did
his duty in preferring the charge, and if the police find
that they run the risk of being ordered to pay costs, they
may hesitate to bring cases before the Court."
16. That view was also rejected by Mann J. in Victoria in Anstee v. Jennings
[1935] VicLawRp 27
; (1935) VLR 144, at p 148. In New South Wales in Ex
parte Hivis; Re Michaelis
(1933) 50 WN (N.S.W.) 90, Halse Rogers J. expressed
the opinion, at p 92,
"The old rule that the Crown neither receives nor pays costs
has been displaced and costs of prohibition proceedings are
in the discretion of the Court or Judge. That discretion is
unfettered and the grant or refusal of costs must depend on
the circumstances of the particular case. It is sometimes
urged that an order for costs against a police officer
would discourage the police from doing their duty in
bringing offenders before the Courts. But in these days
the liability of the police officer can scarcely be
regarded as personal and I think the proper view is
expressed by Wright, J., in Rex v. Archbishop of Canterbury
((1902) 2 KB at p 572). He said: ' ... as incidental to
departmental administration, there must often be litigation
which does not affect any prerogative of the Crown, and as
to which no good reason can be assigned for the denial of
costs to the successful party, and the case of Moore v.
Smith (1 El and El 597
[1859] EngR 276
; (120 ER 1034)) supports this view.'
Cases often occur in which prohibition goes on some merely
technical ground and speaking for myself I should be
disinclined to allow costs in such a case. But in my
opinion the present is one of the cases in which 'no good
reason can be assigned for the denial of costs to the
successful party.'"
And in Ex parte Justelius; Re Lucas (1970) 2 NSWR 610, at p 611; (1970) 92 WN
(N.S.W.) 455, at p 456, Jacobs J.A., with whom Holmes
and Manning J.J.A.
agreed, said:
"The Court, of course, has a jurisdiction to award costs.
It is also true that in the past the Court has on many
occasions seen fit not to award costs where the unsuccessful
party before it is an officer under the Crown, provided that
he has proceeded bona fide and reasonably. ... I am not
sure that past practice has ever been quite consistent on
the subject, and I am not sure that modern times require the
same principles to be applied, particularly when account is
taken of legislation of recent times which allows costs of
criminal matters to be obtained, in proper circumstances, by
an accused person who is found innocent."
These cases were considered by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in Barton
v. Berman (1980) 1 NSWLR 63 in relation to committal
proceedings when a
submission was made, in reliance on Hamdorf v. Riddle, that a successful
defendant should normally be awarded
costs against the informant or that a
successful defendant should get his costs unless there are special
circumstances. Hope J.A.,
with whom Glass J.A. agreed, accepted the view
expressed in Puddy v. Borg that the possibility of deterring the police from
proceedings is an irrelevant or extraneous consideration in
determining whether an order for costs should be made against an informant.
He continued, at p 74:
"But the question which the magistrate has to decide is
whether to make or not to make an order for costs; it is not
simply whether, for some reason, he should decline to make
an order. The fact that the defendant has been discharged
gives the Court jurisdiction. That the defendant has
qualified to make the application is, of course, a relevant
circumstance, but it does not give rise to any presumption
that he should get an order. Nor do I think that the proper
approach, or the relevant considerations, would be the same
in respect of applications under s 41A (of the
Justices Act
1902 (N.S.W.)) as apply in civil cases."
See also Acuthan v. Coates (1986) 6 NSWLR 472, at pp 479-480.
17. The statutory provision in Queensland relating to costs in summary
proceedings is comparable to those found in the Justices
Acts of the other
States: see
Justices Act 1886
However, in Queensland in Lewis
v. Utting (1985) 1 Qd R 423, Carter J., with whom Campbell C.J. and Matthews
J. agreed generally,
appears to embrace the view expressed by Darley C.J. in
Ex parte Jones. He rejected the view that the possibility that an award
costs might operate as a deterrent to police informants is a decisive
consideration in determining whether to order costs against
an informant, but
he thought that "the fact that the proceedings before justices are instituted
by a police officer in the course
of performing a public duty and that as a
matter of obligation alleged breaches of the peace or of a statute are brought
by him before
a court is not an irrelevant or extraneous consideration in
determining whether costs ought to be awarded against him if the prosecution
fails" (at p 444). Moreover, after pointing to several decisions in Victoria
(Liu v. Caughey, unreported, Supreme Court of Victoria,
18 December 1979;
Heddich v. Dike (1981) 3 A Crim R 139) which suggest that, notwithstanding the
decision in Puddy v. Borg, the practice
in that State is not to award costs
against a police informant save in special circumstances, Carter J. observed
(at p 441) that,
at least until recently, the practice in Queensland, "both
long-standing and well established", was the same. He went on, at pp
to reject the approach adopted in Hamdorf v. Riddle, saying that costs in
summary proceedings were a matter within the discretion
of the magistrate. He
"Any attempt to list precisely the matters which will be
relevant to the proper exercise of the discretion is likely
to be counterproductive since there is a real risk that such
a list might be seen to be comprehensive and exhaustive and
therefore may in fact convert what is in truth an unfettered
discretion into a fettered one. It seems to me with great
respect to those who express it that a rule which states
that the discretion is to be exercised in the same way as
in a civil case or that an unsuccessful defendant shall have
his costs unless he has disqualified himself by particular
conduct will as effectively fetter the discretion as will
any attempt to list the relevant criteria. That is not to
say that the fact that the proceedings are of a criminal
nature and that they are instituted by a police officer in
the execution of his duty is the decisive consideration.
The content of the so called rule of practice has to be
considered in the proper context along with the other
considerations which emerge from the circumstances of the
particular case. I need hardly add that the question
whether the successful complainant should have his costs is
similarly a matter for the discretion of the magistrate."
18. The reference by Jacobs J.A. in Ex parte Justelius; Re Lucas to recent
legislation which allows costs to be recovered, in proper
circumstances, by a
person acquitted of a crime is, it would seem, a reference to the
Criminal Cases Act 1967
That Act, which applies in relation to both
indictable offences and offences punishable summarily, provides that, where
after a hearing on the merits is acquitted or discharged as to an
information, the court may grant a certificate. The
certificate
is to state
that, in the opinion of the court, if the prosecution had, before the
proceedings were instituted, been in
of all the relevant facts, it
would not have been reasonable to institute the proceedings and that any act
or omission
of the defendant
that contributed, or might have contributed, to
the institution or continuation of the proceedings was reasonable
circumstances.
The certificate may also specify an amount for costs. A
person to whom a certificate has been granted may
make application to the
Under Secretary of the Department of the Attorney General and of Justice who
may furnish a statement to the
Treasurer specifying
the appropriate amount of
costs, either the amount specified in the certificate or, where no amount has
so specified, the amount
which the Under Secretary believes would have
been reasonably incurred. After receiving the statement,
the Treasurer may,
considers a payment is justified, pay the applicant his costs or such
part thereof as he may determine.
19. In Tasmania,
Justices Act 1959
(Tas.) confers a discretion
upon a court to award costs in summary proceedings in favour of a complainant
or defendant. The provision
is in familiar form but it is expressed in
sub-s.(8) not to prejudice the operation of the
Costs in Criminal Cases Act
The latter Act provides in s.4 that, where a defendant is
discharged from proceedings in respect of an offence, including
acquittal, the court may order that he be paid in respect of his defence such
costs as it thinks just and reasonable.
The section
"(2) The court, in deciding whether to grant costs and
the amount of any costs granted, shall have regard to all
relevant circumstances and in particular to the following:
(a) Whether the proceedings were brought and continued
in good faith;
(b) Whether proper steps were taken to investigate any
matter coming to, or within, the knowledge of any
person responsible for bringing or continuing the
proceedings;
(c) Whether the investigation into the offence was
conducted in a reasonable and proper manner;
(d) Whether the evidence as a whole would support a
finding of guilt but the defendant is discharged
from the proceedings on a technical point;
(e) Whether the defendant is discharged from the
proceedings because he established (either by the
evidence of witnesses called by him or by cross
examination of witnesses for the prosecution or
otherwise) that he was not guilty.
(3) No defendant shall be granted costs by reason
only of the fact that he is acquitted of an offence, the
complaint charging him with an offence is dismissed or
withdrawn, or he is discharged upon an indictment.
(4) No defendant shall be refused costs by reason only
of the fact that the proceedings were properly brought and
(5) No defendant shall be refused costs by reason only
of the fact that in the investigation of the offence with
which he had been charged he remained silent or refused to
assist in respect thereof."
20. In Reg. v. Freshney (1977) Tas SR 126 Cosgrove J. held that the
discretion conferred by the section was an unfettered discretion
and that none
of the considerations in sub-s.(2) was conclusive. He observed, at p 128, that
the statute did not "in terms refute
or abrogate the long-standing principles
of public policy that (a) criminal trials are for many reasons not to be
equiparated with
contests between civil litigants, and (b) that acquitted
persons are not entitled to costs". He concluded that:
"There must be some circumstance, other than acquittal
which, whether or not it be based on error, inefficiency,
or irregularity, gives the applicant a just claim on the
community for payment of his costs. This interpretation
seems to me to be not inconsistent with the construction
placed upon a similar statute by Chilwell J. of the Supreme
Court of New Zealand in Reg. v. A.B. ((1974) 2 NZLR 425)."
In Bradley v. Lawson (1978) Tas SR 213, Green C.J. expressed his agreement
with the conclusion reached by Cosgrove J.
21. In Western Australia, ss.151 and 152 of the Justices Act 1902 (W.A.)
provide for costs in summary proceedings to be awarded,
in the discretion of
the court, in favour of the complainant or the
defendant. In addition, the
Official Prosecutions (Defendants'
Costs) Act 1973 (W.A.) provides that a
successful defendant in summary proceedings who is charged with an offence in
an official
prosecution is,
subject to the Act, entitled to his costs: s.5.
An official prosecution includes proceedings by way of complaint
by a public
and the term "public official" includes a member of the police force:
s.4. Where costs are awarded under the
Act and the public
official is one of
a number of specified officials, including a police complainant, they are
payable out of consolidated
s.9. An order that a defendant is
entitled to his costs is not made against a police complainant. The court may
that a successful
defendant is not entitled to his costs if the charge
is disposed of under certain specified statutory provisions
or if he has
unreasonably
contributed to the institution or the continuation of the
proceedings or has behaved in a way calculated
to prolong the proceedings
unnecessarily or to cause unnecessary expense: s.6.
22. In England, there has for many years been statutory provision for the
payment of costs in criminal cases: see, e.g., Costs
in Criminal Cases Act
1908. The current legislation, which contains the principal statutory
provisions governing costs in criminal
proceedings, is Pt II of the
Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 (U.K.). Whilst previously there had been
provision for a court, upon
the summary dismissal of an information, to order
the prosecution to pay costs to the accused (see Costs in Criminal Cases Act
(U.K.), s.2), there had been no power to order that costs be paid to the
accused out of central funds, that is, money provided by
Parliament, as there
was where an accused was acquitted after trial upon indictment or where an
indictable offence was dealt with
summarily and dismissed. Now, under s.16(1)
of the Prosecution of Offences Act, costs awarded in favour of an accused upon
the summary
dismissal of an information are to be paid out of central funds.
Under s.19 the Lord Chancellor may by regulation make provision
magistrates' courts and other courts, in any case where the court is satisfied
that one party to criminal proceedings
has incurred costs as a result of an
unnecessary or improper act or omission by another party to the proceedings,
to make an order
as to the payment of those costs. Such a regulation is
contained in Costs in Criminal Cases (General) Regulations 1986 (U.K.), reg.3.
As with earlier legislation, s.16(1) of the Prosecution of Offences Act says
nothing about the manner in which the discretion which
it confers should be
exercised. From time to time, practice directions have been issued. One such
direction was that issued by
the Court of Criminal Appeal in 1959, (1959) 1
WLR 1090; (1959) 3 All ER 471, in relation to the then current legislation,
in Criminal Cases Act 1952 (U.K.). In speaking on behalf of the
Court, Lord Parker C.J. said:
"The court's attention has been drawn to the difficult
question as to the lines on which the discretion to award
costs to an acquitted person should be exercised. ... The
discretion is in terms completely unfettered, and there is
no presumption one way or the other as to the manner of its
In a statement issued on March 24, 1952 ((1952) 1 TLR
1131; 36 CrAppR 13), this court, while emphasising that
every case should be considered on its merits, said that it
was only in exceptional cases that costs should be awarded.
... While no attempt was there made to catalogue the
exceptional cases in which costs might be awarded, such
illustrations as were given were cases where the prosecution
could be said to be in some way at fault. On the other
hand, a suggestion has been canvassed that the mere fact of
an acquittal should carry with it the expectation that the
discretion would be exercised in favour of the acquitted
Were either of these views correct, the effect would
be to impose a fetter upon the exercise of the absolute
discretion conferred by the statute. As we have said, there
is no presumption one way or the other as to its exercise.
Each case must be considered on its own facts as a whole,
and costs may and should be awarded in all cases where the
court thinks it right to do so."
23. Shortly thereafter in Reg. v. Sansbury (1959) 1 WLR 1091, at p 1092;
(1959) 3 All ER 472, at p 472, Devlin J. said:
"The recent pronouncement by Lord Parker C.J. in the
Court of Criminal Appeal on this subject has not, I think,
laid down any new law, but it has perhaps made it clear that
the judge's discretion to award costs is rather wider than
has hitherto been thought; and, in particular, I think it
has now been made quite clear that the notion, which was
very generally entertained, that an award of costs against
the prosecution necessarily involved some reflection on the
conduct of the prosecution or on the propriety of its being
brought is quite wrong."
But in Berry v. British Transport Commission (1962) 1 QB 306, Devlin L.J.
said, at p 327:
"A plaintiff brings an action for his own ends and to
benefit himself; it is therefore just that if he loses he
should pay the costs. A prosecutor brings proceedings
in the public interest, and so should be treated more
24. Perhaps not surprisingly, it seems that courts in England, including
magistrates' courts, continued to be somewhat sparing in
making orders for
costs in favour of successful defendants. In a subsequent practice note,
Practice Note (Justices: Defendant's
Costs) (1982) 1 WLR 1447; (1982) 3 All
ER 1152, the Court of Appeal said that further guidance was needed. Although
the guidance
was primarily in relation to the dismissal of an indictable
offence dealt with summarily, it was expressed in terms which were generally
applicable to magistrates' courts. The court emphasized the unfettered
discretion conferred, but said that it should be accepted
as normal practice
that an order for costs should be made in favour of a successful defendant
unless there were positive reasons
for making a different order. Three
specific instances which may provide a positive reason were cited: where the
defendant's own
conduct has brought suspicion on himself and has misled the
prosecution into thinking the case against him is stronger than it is;
there is ample evidence to support a conviction, but the defendant is
acquitted on a technicality which has no merit; and where
the defendant is
acquitted on one charge but is convicted on another. Somewhat inexplicably,
the 1982 direction was withdrawn by
a further practice note, Practice
Direction (Crime: Costs) (1989) 1 WLR 625; (1989) 2 All ER 604, dealing with
the discretion to
award costs in courts other than magistrates' courts. It
seems, however, that the spirit of the 1982 Practice Direction still applies:
Harris (Gibson ed.), The Criminal Jurisdiction of Magistrates, 11th ed.
(1988), par.9.02, p 607.
25. In Giles v. Samuels (1972) 3 SASR 307, at p 313, Bray C.J. repeated the
view, which he said the Full Court had made clear in
Hamdorf v. Riddle, that
"the discretion of courts of summary jurisdiction on the question of whether
costs should be awarded against
the police does not depend on whether the
police were at fault, but is to be exercised in the same way as on the trial
action". But to put it that way is to conceal the difficulties,
for a criminal proceeding is not the same as a civil proceeding
and the very
difference may be that which dictates a different approach to costs in
criminal cases.
26. In a helpful judgment in Schaftenaar v. Samuels (1975) 11 SASR 266, Wells
J. recognized this, although he was, of course, bound
by Hamdorf v. Riddle.
Historically, in criminal proceedings the basic common law principle that the
Crown neither pays nor receives
costs applied: Attorney-General of Queensland
[1912] HCA 26
; (1912) 15 CLR 46, at p 49. In equity from an early date,
fullest power to order a defeated party to pay costs, but
it was only
gradually, and by statute, that any such power
found its way
into the common
law: see, e.g., the Statute of Marlborough
1267 (U.K.) (52 Henry III c.6) and
the Statute of Gloucester
1278 (U.K.)
(6 Edward I c.1); Holdsworth, A History
of English Law,
3rd ed. (1945), vol.IV, pp 536-537. After the Judicature
were within the discretion of the court. By rule it was
provided in England that in civil jury trials costs followed the
event unless
the court should for good cause order otherwise. In
non-jury cases the costs
were left to the discretion of the court.
discretion was absolute
and unfettered, it was to
be exercised judicially, that is to say, not by
reference to irrelevant
or extraneous
considerations, but upon facts connected
or leading up to the litigation. A successful party in a non-jury case
had, in the
absence of special circumstances, a reasonable
expectation of
obtaining an order for costs in his favour, but no right
until he obtained
order; nevertheless, it was said that
a court should not exercise the
discretion against a successful party
"except for some reason
connected with
the case": Donald Campbell
and Co. v. Pollak (1927) AC 732, per Viscount Cave
811-812. See now in the
U.K., O.62, r.3(3) of the Rules of the
Court 1965.
27. Different considerations arise in criminal proceedings which are brought,
not for private ends, but for public purposes. It
will be necessary to turn
to those considerations in a moment, but it is immediately apparent that more
than one view is tenable
upon the question of whether costs in summary
proceedings should, in the ordinary course, be awarded in favour of a
successful defendant
against a police informant. There are arguments of
substance on either side which lead to different conclusions. But I do not
the question can simply be left in the air by saying, as the Full Court
did in Puddy v. Borg, at p 628, that the discretion conferred
by the relevant
section "is one to be exercised in each case according to its own
circumstances". Nor does it advance matters much
to say, as is undoubtedly
true, that the discretion must be "exercised judicially so as to achieve what
is fair and just between
the parties according to the circumstances of the
particular case". The Full Court appears to have been fearful that, in giving
any indication of the manner in which the discretion should be exercised, they
might place fetters upon the discretion when the legislature
intended it to be
unqualified. But the failure to provide any indication of the proper approach
is likely, on the one hand, merely
to entrench the existing practice (as
appears to have happened) or, on the other, to produce inconsistent and
confusing decisions.
Where a statute confers an unqualified discretion, an
appellate court should not lay down rules which require that discretion to
exercised in a rigid or mechanical fashion. But it can and should point out
those considerations which ought to guide the exercise
of the discretion in
the ordinary case so that, as far as possible, like cases will be decided in a
like manner.
28. In Norbis v. Norbis
[1986] HCA 17
; (1986) 161 CLR 513, at pp 518-519, Mason and Deane
JJ. discuss the provision of guidance
for the exercise
of an unfettered
discretion.
They point out that the development of appropriate principles or
guidelines promotes
consistency in
decision-making and diminishes
the risk of
arbitrary and capricious adjudication. They continue:
"The point of preserving the width of the discretion
which Parliament has created is that it maximizes the
possibility of doing justice in every case. But the need
for consistency in judicial adjudication, which is the
antithesis of arbitrary and capricious decision-making,
provides an important countervailing consideration
supporting the giving of guidance by appellate courts,
whether in the form of principles or guidelines."
29. Apart from anything else, the lack of any uniform approach throughout
Australia upon the question of costs in summary proceedings
in criminal cases,
despite substantially similar legislation, makes it desirable for this Court
to identify those considerations
which should be borne in mind in the exercise
of the judicial discretion. As I have said, this is appropriately an appellate
but the provision of guidance does not result in a rule of law from
which courts of first instance cannot depart where the circumstances
departure. An exercise of the discretion which appears to disregard a
guideline may miscarry, but by no means does that
necessarily follow. The
existence of an error, whether of law or fact, remains an indispensable
condition of a successful appeal
against the exercise of a discretion. As
Mason and Deane JJ. point out in Norbis v. Norbis, at p 520:
"A failure to apply a guideline does not of itself amount
to error, for it may appear that the case is one in which
it is inappropriate to invoke the guideline or that,
notwithstanding the failure to apply it, the decision is
the product of a sound discretionary judgment. The failure
to apply a legitimate guideline to a situation to which it
is applicable may, however, throw a question mark over the
trial judge's decision and ease the appellant's burden of
showing that it is wrong. However, in the ultimate analysis
and in the absence of any identifiable error of fact or
positive law, the appellate court must be persuaded that the
order stands outside the limits of a sound discretionary
judgment before it intervenes."
30. In Victoria, little assistance upon the question of costs is to be gained
from a comparison of summary prosecutions with civil
proceedings. The more
obvious comparison is with prosecutions for indictable offences where, in the
absence of some special statutory
provision, costs are awarded to neither
side. True it is that upon summary conviction a defendant may be ordered to
pay the informant's
costs, but, in the case of a police informant, these do
not ordinarily include professional costs. A police informant brings summary
proceedings in his own name but he does so in the performance of a public duty
in the same manner as the Crown prosecutes indictable
offences. Nevertheless,
if costs are awarded against him he is liable to pay them. Normally costs
awarded against a police informant
are met out of the public purse but in
Victoria any such payment is made ex gratia and an informant may not be
indemnified if those
in authority consider that he has misconducted himself in
relation to the prosecution.
31. It was as long ago as 1935 that Mann J. observed in Anstee v. Jennings
that "the order for costs in a Court of Petty Sessions
... should have nothing
to do with the reasonableness of the informant's action. It is a matter of
giving proper indemnity to a
successful defendant for costs to which he has
been put without lawful justification" (at p 148). Nevertheless, the cases
to by Carter J. in Lewis v. Utting and, indeed, the decision of the
magistrate in this case would suggest that Mann J.'s observation
and similar
remarks in other jurisdictions have not significantly weakened a
long-established practice on the part of magistrates
in Victoria not to award
costs against police informants who have acted reasonably. Plainly, an
important justification for that
practice is the fact that a police informant
is performing a public duty. And it seems to me to be a quite legitimate
consideration
in determining whether costs should be awarded to a successful
defendant that a police informant might be deterred from doing his
duty by the
prospect of costs being awarded against him, indemnification being a matter of
discretion and not of right. It may not,
as Carter J. observed in Lewis v.
Utting, be a decisive consideration, but it is certainly not without
significance. It may be noted
that the legislation in Western Australia, in
making provision for the payment of costs to successful defendants, avoids
making of an order for costs against a police informant, even though
any costs awarded to a successful defendant are paid from public
32. These matters are not the only justification for what appears to be the
present practice in Victoria. In summary proceedings
no less than in other
criminal proceedings, the prosecution must prove its case beyond reasonable
doubt. In many cases defendants
quite properly escape conviction without
having positively established their innocence. However, to differentiate
cases of that
kind from those in which a defendant has established his
innocence, and not merely raised a doubt, by making an order for costs against
the informant in the one case but not the other, would be invidious and
inconsistent with the presumption of innocence. Moreover,
to award costs to a
defendant against whom a charge has been proved on the balance of
probabilities (but not beyond reasonable doubt)
does not seem to be an
appropriate exercise of discretion. Such a practice might subtly erode the
standard of proof in criminal cases
in order to avoid the granting of costs to
a defendant who is probably guilty.
33. Clearly, where there is statutory provision for costs awarded to a
successful defendant to be met out of public funds, it is
a matter to be taken
into account and may, depending upon the nature of the provision, be a
determinative factor in the exercise
of the discretion. But there is no such
provision in Victoria, merely a practice which, although ordinarily followed,
is not binding.
It is because a police informant remains personally liable as
a matter of law to pay any costs awarded against him that an order
may be, and commonly is, regarded as a means of penalizing or discouraging any
improper or unreasonable behaviour on an
informant's part in the conduct of
the proceedings. Matters such as the failure properly to investigate a
matter, lack of good faith
in bringing the proceedings, or the failure to
prosecute the proceedings in a proper manner may warrant the making of an
costs against a police informant.
34. For all of these reasons, a successful defendant in summary proceedings
for an offence can, in my view, have no expectation
as a general rule, unlike
a successful party in civil proceedings, that costs will be awarded in his
favour. The discretion conferred
by s.97(b) of the
Magistrates (Summary
Proceedings) Act
was unfettered, but the considerations which a magistrate
ought to take into
account in criminal proceedings require a particular
approach. All other things being equal, the mere acquittal of a defendant
not to result in an order for costs being made in
his favour against a
police informant. Thus, the magistrate in this case was entitled,
exercise of his discretion, to refuse
to award costs in favour of the
appellant. The appeal should be dismissed.
TOOHEY J. The judgment of Dawson J. recites the facts and statutory
provisions relevant to this appeal. It also refers to decisions
of courts, in
Australia and England, in which the question of awarding costs against an
informant in summary proceedings has been
considered.
2. Those facts and those decisions lead Dawson J. to a conclusion that the
appeal should be dismissed. As will appear, I have come
to a different
conclusion. It is therefore necessary that I state my own view as to the
approach that should have guided the magistrate
in this case.
3. While the power of the Magistrates' Court in Victoria was, at the relevant
time, to order the payment of "such costs as the Court
thinks just and
reasonable", it does not follow that the discretion thereby vested in the
magistrate was at large. Of course it
must be exercised judicially but that
is the beginning, not the end, of the trail.
4. The approach taken by the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Victoria in
Puddy v. Borg
[1973] VicRp 61
; (1973) VR 626 results in little guidance
to magistrates in the
exercise of the discretion conferred by what was at that time s.105(1)
Justices Act 1958
was at the time of these proceedings s.97(a)
and (b) of the
Magistrates (Summary Proceedings) Act 1975
(Vic.); and is now
Magistrates' Court Act 1989
5. In the present case Kaye J., before whom the order nisi was returned,
relied upon the following passage in Puddy v. Borg, at
"The discretion is one to be exercised in each case
according to its own circumstances. Beyond limiting
the power to such costs as to the court seems just and
reasonable, the sub-section does not otherwise circumscribe
the discretion conferred. No doubt it must be exercised
judicially so as to achieve what is fair and just between
the parties according to the circumstances of the
particular case, and its exercise is open to challenge
according to the well-established rules which govern the
exercise of discretionary powers."
However, it is one thing for an appellate court to refrain from fettering the
discretion of the magistrate unduly. It is quite another
thing for such a
court to refrain from giving guidance, "whether in the form of principles or
guidelines": Norbis v. Norbis
161 CLR 513, at p 519. Without such
guidance, it is hard for those exercising the discretion to achieve
consistency
avoid arbitrariness
in decision-making.
6. Dawson J. has classified the various strands of authority. I do not wish
to add greatly to what has been said in that regard,
except to point out that
perhaps too much should not be made of the judgment of the Federal Court in
Cilli v. Abbott
[1981] FCA 70
; (1981) 53 FLR
108 because the respondent in that case
expressly accepted the statement of principle in McEwen v. Siely (1972) 21
sought to uphold the magistrate's departure from the general rule by
reference only to a consideration which was said
unjust to award
the defendant his costs": at p 111. Still, the Court in Cilli v. Abbott saw
nothing untoward in giving
the concession and must be taken to have
endorsed what had been said in Hamdorf v. Riddle (1971) SASR 398 and in McEwen
7. The decisions referred to by Dawson J. show that the trend of Australian
authority, certainly as found in decisions of the Federal
Court of Australia,
the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory and the Supreme Court of
South Australia, favours an award
of costs to a successful defendant in
summary proceedings unless the defendant's own actions have precipitated the
prosecution (for
instance, refusal to give an account to the police when it
would be reasonable to do so, or failure to tell the police of a witness
could support the defendant's account of the incident); or the defendant has
prolonged the proceedings unnecessarily by his or
her approach to the conduct
of the litigation; or some other relevant consideration is present which makes
it unjust to award costs
to him or her. To what extent those decisions
constitute a statement of principles or guidelines for magistrates is a matter
has to be considered.
8. What has emerged from a number of decisions is recognition that costs are
awarded by way of indemnity to the successful party
and, expressly or
impliedly, that they are not by way of punishment of the unsuccessful party.
Puddy v. Borg is to that effect:
see at p 629. So too are Anstee v. Jennings
[1935] VicLawRp 27
; (1935) VLR 144, at p 148; Ex parte Hivis; Re Michaelis (1933) 50 WN (NSW) 90,
Cilli v. Abbott, at p 111; Barton v. Berman
(1980) 1 NSWLR 63, at p
74. In particular, those decisions reject or lend no countenance
to the view
that costs should not be awarded
to a successful defendant in summary
proceedings because to do so would discourage police
officers from bringing
prosecutions. The
point was made succinctly by Mann J. in Anstee v. Jennings,
" It may be worth while to point out that the order
for costs in a Court of Petty Sessions or other costs
should have nothing to do with the reasonableness of
the informant's action. It is a matter of giving proper
indemnity to a successful defendant for costs to which he
has been put without lawful justification."
9. Yet, consideration of the reasonableness of the informant's action seems
to underlie the practice in Victoria of not awarding
costs against the police,
although we were told by the Solicitor-General for Victoria, who appeared for
the respondent, that "the
Court can assume that almost invariably the police
will be indemnified out of the public purse". It appears that a similar
exists throughout Australia. However, under the same legislative
charter, courts of summary jurisdiction regularly award costs against
unsuccessful defendants. It is true that ordinarily those costs do not
include the fees of solicitors or counsel but that is because
prosecutions are usually conducted by police officers. However, an award of
costs against a defendant will involve not only
court fees, but the fees of
witnesses, including professional witnesses, and the costs involved in
obtaining scientific evidence
such as a blood sample. The absence of a
"professional" prosecutor can hardly explain, let alone justify, the
differences in practice
that exist.
10. Furthermore, while existing practice should not be ignored, if it is
based on a misapprehension of legal principle it cannot
dictate what the law
should be. According to an affidavit filed in support of the application for
an order to review the magistrate's
decision, the magistrate refused to make
an award of costs in favour of the appellant, because:
"(i) It was reasonable for the Informant to have sworn the
information, given that she had a reasonable suspicion
that the Defendant was in possession of stolen goods -
some of which were in fact now conceded to have been
stolen albeit not by the Defendant.
(ii) He did not propose to award costs to a Defendant in
circumstances where a Defendant had failed to seek
proof of identity or proof of ownership of goods at
the time of purchase, thereby causing a significant
suspicion to fall upon him and, notwithstanding that
his account of possession was accepted by the Court as
being satisfactory."
The first of these considerations is, in the light of the authorities,
irrelevant. As to the second, views may differ as to the conduct
appellant in buying car parts from someone known only by his call-sign of
"Peter", whose address was apparently neither sought
nor given, and in not
seeking a receipt or evidence of ownership. But that was conduct which had
necessarily taken place before
any question of a prosecution arose. It was
not conduct in the course of the police investigation. Furthermore, the
appellant's
explanation of his possession of the goods seems to have been
accepted by the magistrate and there was nothing in the conduct of
the defence
which warranted an exercise of discretion against the appellant. Accordingly,
the magistrate wrongly exercised his discretion
by relying upon either of the
two considerations mentioned above as a reason for refusing to award costs to
the appellant.
11. The question still remains - are there principles or guidelines to be
applied by magistrates in deciding whether or not to award
successful defendant? Once the reasonableness of the prosecution and the risk
of deterring police officers from launching
prosecutions are put to one side,
the way is open to expressing in more positive terms what shall guide the
magistrate in his or
her decision. To borrow some lines from Justice Cardozo,
The Nature of the Judicial Process, (1949), pp 10-11, quoted by Wells J.
Schaftenaar v. Samuels (1975) 11 SASR 266, at pp 267-268:
"There, before us, is the brew. ... Some principle,
however unavowed and inarticulate and subconscious, has
regulated the infusion."
12. The judgment of Wells J., at pp 274-275, spells out a number of
principles which, his Honour suggests, may be invoked as a guide
by a court of
summary jurisdiction. It is unnecessary to refer to those principles in any
detail, save to endorse the notion that
there is no necessity for a court of
summary jurisdiction to make a particular finding as a condition precedent to
the existence
of the court's discretion as to costs. The relevant statutory
provision, in the present case s.97(a) and (b) of the
Magistrates
Proceedings) Act
, confers the discretion; the task for the magistrate is to
exercise it. And the discretion may be exercised
in favour of a successful
defendant or against a successful defendant; but the court must not simply
apply an inflexible rule.
13. If a prosecution has failed, it would ordinarily be just and reasonable
to award the defendant costs, because the defendant
has incurred expense,
perhaps very considerable expense, in defending the charge. What Kirby P said
in Acuthan v. Coates (1986)
6 NSWLR 472, at p 480, of defendants to committal
proceedings is apposite:
"The section recognises that persons accused of criminal
offences can be put to a great deal of expense in defending
themselves. Unlike civil litigation, they cannot simply
compromise the matter. Their liberty, reputation and
pocket are, or may be, at risk."
It is unnecessary to speak in terms of a presumption; it is enough to say that
ordinarily it would be just and reasonable that the
defendant against whom a
prosecution has failed should not be out of pocket.
14. Now, in a particular case there may be good reasons connected with the
prosecution such that it would not be unjust or unreasonable
successful defendant should bear his or her own costs or, at any rate, a
proportion of them. To return to the examples
given earlier in this judgment,
if a defendant has been given the opportunity of explaining his or her version
of events before a
charge is laid and refuses the opportunity, and it later
appears that an explanation could have avoided a prosecution, it may well
just and reasonable to refuse costs: see, by way of illustration, The Queen
v. Dainer; Ex parte Milevich (1988) 91 FLR 33. This
has nothing to do with
the right to silence in criminal matters. A defendant or prospective
defendant is entitled to refuse an explanation
to the police. But if an
explanation is refused, the successful defendant can hardly complain if the
court refuses an award of costs,
when an explanation might have avoided the
prosecution. Again, if the manner in which the defence of a prosecution is
unreasonably prolongs the proceedings, for instance by unnecessary
cross-examination, neither justice nor reasonableness demands
successful defendant be indemnified, at any rate as to the entirety of the
costs incurred. These illustrations are in no
way exhaustive but what they
point up is that a refusal of costs to a successful defendant will ordinarily
be based upon the conduct
of the defendant in relation to the proceedings
brought against him or her.
15. The views expressed in this judgment do not seek to fetter the discretion
of the magistrate faced with an application by a successful
defendant for an
order for costs. But they do seek to identify considerations which are
irrelevant and those which are relevant
on such an application. It is
unnecessary to invoke the analogy of civil actions, though the considerations
identified, on the one
hand as relevant, and those on the other hand as
irrelevant, may prompt such an analogy. Likewise, it is unnecessary to
the guiding principles as requiring an award of costs "unless ...",
though again that may be the practical consequence of the application
principles.
16. To the extent that awards of costs against police officers may be
misunderstood as an implied criticism of those officers, a
scheme such as is
to be found in the Official Prosecutions (Defendants' Costs) Act 1973 (W.A.),
referred to in Dawson J.'s judgment,
has much to commend it. But, in the
absence of such a scheme, magistrates should exercise
their discretion
according to the principles
referred to in this judgment; concerns over a
possible misunderstanding should costs
be awarded against an informant are not
to the exercise of the discretion.
17. In all the circumstances, a proper exercise of the magistrate's
discretion should have resulted in an award of costs to the
appellant. The
appeal should therefore be allowed, the order nisi made absolute and the
respondent ordered to pay the appellant's
costs of the proceedings before the
magistrate, before the Supreme Court and before this Court.
McHUGH J. The issue in this appeal is whether in summary criminal
proceedings a successful defendant should ordinarily be awarded
2. The detailed discussion of the facts, relevant statutory provisions and
authorities in the judgment of Dawson J. enable me to
proceed directly to my
reasons for concluding that a successful defendant in summary proceedings has
a reasonable expectation of
obtaining an order for costs against the informant
and that the discretion to refuse to make the order should not be exercised
him or her except for a reason directly connected with the charge or
the conduct of the proceedings.
3. An order for costs indemnifies the successful party in litigious
proceedings in respect of liability for professional fees and
out-of-pocket
expenses reasonably incurred in connection with the litigation: Kelly v.
Noumenon Pty Ltd (1988) 47 SASR 182, at p
184. The rationale of the order is
that it is just and reasonable that the party who has caused the other party
to incur the costs
of litigation should reimburse that party for the liability
incurred. The order is not made to punish the unsuccessful party. Its
function is compensatory. Thus, in civil proceedings an order may, and usually
will, be made even though the unsuccessful party has
nearly succeeded or has
acted reasonably in commencing the proceedings. It may, and usually will, be
made even though the action
has failed through no fault of the unsuccessful
party. In Cilli v. Abbott
[1981] FCA 70
; (1981) 53 FLR 108, Keely, Toohey and Fisher JJ.
out (at p 111) that "the object of costs is not to penalize; it is to
the successful party in regard to expense to which
he has been put
by reason of legal proceedings"; see also Anstee v. Jennings
[1935] VicLawRp 27
; (1935) VLR 144,
4. Once it is perceived that costs operate as an indemnity and that the
rationale of making a costs order is that it is just and
reasonable that the
successful party should be reimbursed for the costs incurred in bringing or
defending the action, no ground exists
for distinguishing between informants
in summary proceedings who are public officials and those who are private
persons. True it
is that public officials should launch prosecutions only when
the public interest requires it. This is the chief, but not the only,
rationale for the rule that historically the Crown neither paid nor received
costs. This rule also applied to a public official
who instituted proceedings
in his own name but really on behalf of the Crown: Reg. v. Beadle (1857) 7 El
[1857] EngR 427
; (119 ER 1329).
The purpose of enacting statutory provisions such as
s.97 of the
Magistrates (Summary Proceedings) Act 1975
(Vict.) ("the
however, is to reverse the historic rule: Acuthan v. Coates (1986) 6 NSWLR
472, per Kirby P. at p 480. Once a legislature abolishes
the rule that the
Crown and those who institute summary proceedings in the public interest
neither pay nor receive costs, the various
rationales of that rule cannot be
used to justify the exercise of the discretion to refuse to order the payment
of costs of a successful
defendant in summary proceedings. To use them in
that manner is to ignore the purpose of the legislature in enacting the
legislation.
Moreover, as the decisions on costs in summary proceedings in
Queensland and Victoria demonstrate, if the rationales of the historic
are taken into account in the exercise of the discretion to award costs, they
result in practice in the continuance of the position
which existed before the
legislation, at least so far as informants not being liable for costs are
concerned. In the rare cases
in those States where a costs order is made
against a police officer-informant, the real basis of the order is punishment
police officer: he or she is ordered to pay costs because his or her
conduct has fallen below what is expected of a police officer-informant.
Paradoxically, the rationales of the historic rule are not used to defeat the
exercise of the discretion in favour of the Crown or
police informant when the
informant seeks an order for costs. The result is unequal justice.
5. It follows that I am of the opinion that the South Australian Supreme
Court in Hamdorf v. Riddle (1971) SASR 398 was correct
in its general approach
to the payment of costs in summary proceedings.
6. In civil proceedings, the relevant statute or rule often provides that
costs follow the event unless the court thinks that some
other order should be
made. But even when the discretion is uncontrolled, civil courts act on the
basis that a successful party has
a reasonable expectation of obtaining an
order for costs and that the discretion to refuse to award costs should not be
against the successful party except for a reason connected with the
case. Thus, if a plaintiff sues on two causes of action and
succeeds on one,
he or she will obtain the general costs of the action and the costs of the
cause of action on which he or she succeeded,
but the defendant will receive
the costs of the cause of action on which he or she was successful: Greeves
v. Freshwater (1938)
55 WN (N.S.W.) 113.
7. It is true that the discretion to award costs in summary proceedings has
to be exercised in circumstances which are not identical
to those which exist
in civil cases. For example, a criminal case cannot be settled, and the
informant does not seek to vindicate
any right or define any obligation of his
or her own. Moreover, there are no written pleadings in criminal proceedings.
of not guilty in criminal proceedings, like its historic common law
counterpart in civil proceedings, puts everything in issue.
As Wells J.
pointed out in Schaftenaar v. Samuels (1975) 11 SASR 266, at p 274, "the
issues, apart from the one joined on the plea
of not guilty, can be identified
only from the course of the evidence and the addresses". But, despite the
differences between civil
and criminal proceedings, once the real issues in
the summary proceedings are identified, there is no difficulty in applying in
proceedings principles akin to those applicable to the making or refusing
of orders for costs in civil cases.
8. Nevertheless, it needs to be stressed that, subject to any contrary
legislative indication, costs in summary proceedings do not
follow the event
and that a successful defendant in such proceedings, like a successful party
in civil proceedings, has no right
to an order for costs. As Viscount Cave
L.C. pointed out in Donald Campbell and Co. v. Pollak (1927) AC 732, at pp
"A successful defendant in a non-jury case has no doubt,
in the absence of special circumstances, a reasonable
expectation of obtaining an order for the payment of his
costs by the plaintiff; but he has no right to costs unless
and until the Court awards them to him, and the Court has an
absolute and unfettered discretion to award or not to award
them. This discretion, like any other discretion, must of
course be exercised judicially, and the judge ought not to
exercise it against the successful party except for some
reason connected with the case."
Likewise, a successful defendant in summary proceedings has a reasonable
expectation of obtaining an order for the payment of his
or her costs because
it is just and reasonable that the informant should reimburse him or her for
liability for costs which have
been incurred in defending the prosecution.
Consequently, a magistrate ought not to exercise his or her discretion against
a successful
defendant on grounds unconnected with the charge or the conduct
of the litigation. The fact that the informant has acted in good
faith in the
public interest or may have to meet the costs out of his or her own pocket is
not a ground for depriving the defendant
of his or her costs. Speaking
generally, before a court deprives a successful defendant in summary
proceedings of his or her costs,
it will be necessary for the informant to
establish that the defendant unreasonably induced the informant to think that
could be successfully brought against the defendant or that the
conduct of the defendant occasioned unnecessary expense in the institution
conduct of the proceedings: cf. Ritter v. Godfrey (1920) 2 KB 47, at pp 53,
54-60, 66; Sunday Times Newspaper Co. Ltd. v. McIntosh
(1933) 33 SR(NSW) 371,
at p 377; Redden v. Chapman (1949) 50 SR(NSW) 24, at p 25; Schaftenaar, at pp
274-275; see also McEwen v.
Siely (1972) 21 FLR 131, at p 136. Thus,
non-disclosure to investigatory police of a tape recording later successfully
used in cross-examination
of the informant's witnesses may be a relevant
matter to be taken into account in determining whether the defendant should be
costs: cf. Reg. v. Dainer; Ex parte Milevich (1988) 91 FLR 33. A
successful defendant cannot be deprived of his or her costs, however,
the charge is brought in the public interest or by a public official, because
the charge is serious or because the informant
acted reasonably in instituting
the proceedings or might be deterred from laying charges in the future if he
or she was ordered to
pay costs. Nor can the successful defendant be deprived
of his or her costs because the conduct of the defendant gave rise to a
or probability that he or she was guilty of the offence the subject
of the prosecution. Hence, in most cases, the successful defendant
proceedings, like the successful party in civil proceedings, should obtain an
order for costs in respect of those issues
on which the defendant succeeds.
9. According to an affidavit filed in the Supreme Court in the present case,
the magistrate said that he proposed to consider the
exercise of his
discretion by reference to the following matters:
"(i) It was reasonable for the Informant to have sworn the
information, given that she had a reasonable suspicion
that the Defendant was in possession of stolen goods -
some of which were in fact now conceded to have been
stolen albeit not by the Defendant.
(ii) He did not propose to award costs to a Defendant in
circumstances where a Defendant had failed to seek
proof of identity or proof of ownership of goods at
the time of purchase, thereby causing a significant
suspicion to fall upon him and, notwithstanding that
his account of possession was accepted by the Court as
being satisfactory."
10. The learned magistrate erred in taking into account that it was
reasonable for the informant to have sworn the information.
That is not a
ground for depriving the appellant of his costs. The exercise of the
magistrate's discretion, therefore, miscarried.
Consequently, this Court must
exercise the discretion which the magistrate has legally failed to exercise.
In the circumstances
of this case, the only possible ground for exercising the
discretion against the defendant is that he failed to seek proof of the
identity of the owner or proof of the ownership of the goods at the time of
the purchase.
11. The magistrate appears to have accepted the evidence of the appellant
that, in early December 1987, he had a conversation on
the CB radio with a man
who used the call sign "Peter" and who said he was selling Ford GT sedan,
model XY parts from a car which
he was wrecking. The appellant made an
arrangement to meet the man. When he met him, he realised that "Peter" was
the same man
that he had seen at drag races at Dandenong when the man was
driving a red GT Ford model XY with black interior. He arranged to
seats and door trims from "Peter" at an agreed price of $350. "Peter" later
delivered those goods to his home. The appellant
said that he considered $350
to be a fair, and not a bargain, price and that he had sold the seats and
trims from his own vehicle
for $300. The appellant said that it had never
occurred to him to ask for proof of ownership because he knew from his
of the man over several months that he was "apparently the owner" of
a vehicle of the type concerned and that he had no reason to
imagine that he
was not the true owner of the parts which the appellant assumed to have come
from that vehicle. The appellant did
not know the man's true name. The
appellant said that, during an adjournment shortly before giving his evidence,
he had learned
from Mr Phillips, the owner of the stolen car, that the true
name of "Peter" was Greg Opparo or Greg Apparo.
12. According to an affidavit sworn by the informant in the proceedings in
the Supreme Court, she asked the appellant "where he
got the bits on the car,
checked around the house for any other parts and checked his room for any
receipts for the parts purchased
or the name of the fellow he stated he had
bought them from". The account which the appellant gave to the informant when
she interviewed
him was not materially different from the account which he
gave in the witness box. It was common ground that the appellant did
obtain a receipt for the payment of the goods.
13. In the circumstances, this Court cannot refuse to order the informant to
pay the appellant's costs incurred in defending the
proceedings before the
learned magistrate. The prosecution tendered no evidence in support of the
indictable offence of theft.
The magistrate held that there was no evidence
to support the indictable charge of receiving stolen goods and, on the summary
of unlawful possession, he accepted the appellant's account of how he
obtained the goods. It is true that, when the goods turned
out to be stolen,
suspicion fell on the appellant because he had not obtained a receipt for the
purchase or sought to establish the
identity of the person from whom he bought
the goods. The claim that the appellant should be deprived of his costs
really depends,
however, upon the proposition that a person who buys goods in
the circumstances in which the appellant did is not entitled to his
costs because his or her conduct has caused suspicion to fall upon him or her.
If that is a ground for refusing a costs order
in summary proceedings, most
successful defendants would not obtain a costs order. The mere fact that a
successful defendant's conduct
has given rise to a suspicion that he or she
was guilty of the offence charged is not a reason for depriving that person of
14. The appeal should be allowed. The orders of the Supreme Court made on 29
September 1989 should be set aside. In lieu thereof,
it should be ordered
(a) the order nisi be made absolute; (b) the order of the magistrate
refusing the appellant's
applications for costs be set aside; in lieu thereof,
it should be ordered that the appellant's costs of the
proceedings before the magistrate on 20 April 1989 be paid by
the respondent; and
(c) the appellant's costs of the order nisi be paid by the
respondent.
The respondent should pay the appellant's costs of and incidental to this
appeal including the application for special leave to appeal.
Appeal allowed with costs.
Set aside the orders of the Supreme Court of Victoria made on 29 September
1989 and in lieu thereof order that:
(i) the order nisi be made absolute;
(ii) the order of the magistrate refusing the appellant's
application for costs be set aside and in lieu thereof order that the
appellant's costs of the proceedings before the magistrate on
20 April 1989 be
paid by the respondent;
(iii) the appellant's costs of the order nisi be paid by the respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter