Poulton v Chief of Navy [2023] ADFDAT 1 (22 December 2023)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Poulton v Chief of Navy
[2023] ADFDAT 1
Appeal from:
Defence Force Magistrate
File number:
DFDAT 1 of 2023
Judgment of:
LOGAN J (President), PERRY j (deputy President)
AND SLATTERY J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
DEFENCE AND WAR
– appeal against conviction by Defence Force
Magistrate (DFM) – where the appellant found guilty of committing an act
of indecency without consent – where complainant alleged defendant entered
her bed without consent and committed acts of sexual
nature – whether
conviction unreasonable, or cannot be supported, having regard to the evidence
because the DFM acted contrary
to the evidence and engaged in speculation
– where complainant and defendant gave competing evidence – where
DFM directed
themselves correctly according to
Liberato v R
[1985] HCA 66
– where DFM rejected the accused’s evidence as unconvincing
– where DFM found each charge proved beyond reasonable
whether the evidence before the DFM sufficient in nature and quality to
eliminate any reasonable doubt of accused’s
guilt – convictions not
unreasonable and supported by evidence– observations about drawing charges
in accordance with
the principles of
R v Merriman
[1973] AC 584
appeal dismissed
Legislation:
Constitution
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Jervis Bay Territory Acceptance Act 1915
Judiciary Act 1903
Crimes Act 1900
Evidence Act 2011
Court Martial and Defence Force Magistrate Rules 2020
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Regulation 2016
(Cth) reg 8
Cases cited:
AK v Western Australia
[2008] HCA 8
(2008) 232 CLR
Angre v Chief of Navy (No 3)
[2017] ADFDAT 2
Boyson v Chief of Army
[2019] ADFDAT 2
Coulter v R
(1988) 164 CLR 350
Dansie v The Queen
[2022] HCA 25
(2022) 274 CLR 651
DW v The Queen
[2004] ACTCA 22
(2004) 150 A Crim R 139
Filippou v The Queen
[2015] HCA 29
(2015) 256 CLR 47
Jones v Chief of Navy
[2012] ADFDAT 2
(2012) 262 FLR 418
Kantibye v Chief of Army (No 2)
[2022] ADFDAT 4
Kearns v Chief of Army
[2022] ADFDAT 3
Liberato v R
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
Mikus v Chief of Army
[2020] ADFDAT 1
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
(2020) 268 CLR 123
Perkins v County Court of Victoria
[2000] VSCA 171
(2000) 2 VR 246
Private R Army v Chief of Army
[2022] ADFDAT 1
Private R v Cowen
[2020] HCA 31
(2020) 271 CLR 316
R v Merriman
[1973] AC 584
Re Ferriday’s Appeal
(1971) 21 FLR 86
Rixon v Thompson
(2009) 115 A Crim R 110
Wills v Chief Executive Officer of the Australian Skills Quality
[2022] FCAFC 10
(2022) 289 FCR 175
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr R Clutterbuck with Mr T Schmitt
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Salerno Law
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms M Chalmers SC
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Office of the Director of Military Prosecutions
DFDAT 1 of 2023
JONATHAN JAMES POULTON
CHIEF OF NAVY
LOGAN J (PRESIDENT), PERRY J (DEPUTY PRESIDENT) AND
SLATTERY J (MEMBER)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
as the same may be necessary, having regard to the grounds pleaded in the notice
of appeal, the appellant be granted leave
appeal be dismissed.
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
THE TRIBUNAL:
Introduction
is yet another appeal arising from alleged off-duty behaviours between members
of the Australian Defence Force (ADF), found proven
at trial, to which excessive
consumption of alcohol was one but not the only contributing factor. As found
proven, the charges arise
from behaviour by a male officer towards a female
officer in a vulnerable condition which is unacceptable not just according to
norms but also according to civilian criminal law. However, the
behaviour found proven, as the sentence of dismissal from the ADF
reflects, has an additional aspect by reason of the impact of such behaviour on
morale and trust between members of the ADF.
The question for resolution on the
appeal is, in essence, whether it was unreasonable, on the evidence, to find the
behavioural conduct
alleged proven beyond reasonable doubt, and for the reasons
which the Defence Force Magistrate (DFM) gave.
appellant, Lieutenant Commander (LCDR) Jonathan James Poulton, to use his then
rank in the Royal Australian Navy (RAN), was convicted
on 22 May 2023, after
trial by a DFM, on four counts of committing an act of indecency without
consent, contrary to the
Crimes Act 1900
application to him as a “defence member” via
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) (DFDA). At the time, LCDR Poulton
was a Flight Commander in the RAN’s 816 Squadron. In respect of each of
these service
offences, LCDR Poulton was sentenced to dismissal from the
complainant was a female member of the RAN then holding the rank of Lieutenant
(LEUT). The four offences were alleged to have
occurred at Camberwarra, in New
South Wales, on the evening of 8 and morning of 9 July 2022, more particularly
in the complainant’s
pleaded in the charge sheet, the four charges made against LCDR Poulton were as
a defence member at Camberwarra, in the state of New South Wales, on or about 09
July 2022, did commit an act of indecency upon
[the complainant] by getting into
bed with her without her consent or being reckless as to whether she
a defence member at Camberwarra, in the state of New South Wales, on or about 09
July 2022, did commit an act of indecency upon
[the complainant] by kissing the
back of her neck and/or shoulders without her consent, and being reckless as to
whether she consented.
a defence member at Camberwarra, in the state of New South Wales, on or about 09
July 2022, did commit an act of indecency upon
[the complainant] by undoing her
bra and/or touching her breast without her consent, and being reckless as to
whether she consented.
a defence member at Camberwarra, in the state of New South Wales, on or about 09
July 2022, did commit an act of indecency upon
[the complainant] by touching her
upper thigh without her consent, and being reckless as to whether she
parties to the proceeding before the DFM were each represented by legally
qualified officers. The form in which the charges were
laid was not the subject
of any objection at trial. Nor, although the subject was expressly raised by the
Tribunal, was there any
issue pressed before the Tribunal concerning the form of
the charges. Nonetheless, the form of the charges warrants our making some
observations, which we do so at the conclusion of these reasons.
was never in issue at trial that:
(a) the DFDA applied to the conduct charged;
(b) if committed, and this was denied, each of the alleged acts was indecent;
(c) LCDR Poulton was, and knew that he was, a defence member at the time of the
alleged acts.
he did not deny an association with the complainant on the evening of 8 and
morning of 9 July 2022, including at her residence,
LCDR Poulton emphatically
denied that the events as charged had occurred. The principal issue at trial was
therefore whether the
alleged offences had been proved beyond reasonable doubt
by the prosecution. The hearing of evidence and submissions at trial concluded
on 5 May 2023. Proceedings were then adjourned to 22 May 2023. On that day, for
reasons which he delivered orally (or
as that method is
sometimes termed), the DFM found each of the charges proved beyond reasonable
doubt and convicted LCDR Poulton.
The DFM then proceeded forthwith to hear
submissions concerning punishment and to determine punishment.
the course of the hearing of the appeal on 4 December 2023, the Tribunal made
orders that:
(1) There be no publication of any matters that identify or are likely to
identify the complainant; and
(2) LCDR Poulton be granted the requisite extension of time within which to
appeal and the appeal be heard instanter.
Restriction on publication of identity of complainant
occasion for the Tribunal’s publication restriction in the exercise of the
power conferred by
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act
(Cth) (Appeals Act) in relation to matters which might identify the
complainant is to be found by analogy with the longstanding practice
of civilian
criminal courts dealing with sexual offence cases:
Private R Army v Chief of
[2022] ADFDAT 1
), at [28]. Neither party opposed
that order being made.
Extension of time
LCDR Poulton was convicted on 22 May 2023, he did not file his appeal until
31 August 2023. He thus required an extension
of time in which to do so:
, Appeals Act. In granting an extension of time at the hearing, the Tribunal
stated that the reasons for so doing would be given in
conjunction with the
reasons in respect of the determination of the appeal.
evidence before the Tribunal discloses the following. The outcome of the
automatic review under s 152 of the DFDA was completed
and communicated to LCDR
Poulton on 15 June 2023. On 14 July 2023, LCDR Poulton petitioned for a review
under s 154 of the DFDA.
The result of that review was communicated to him on 27
July 2023. This review upheld the conviction and punishment with the consequence
that his hitherto stayed sentence of dismissal from the ADF then took effect.
The following day, LCDR Poulton made contact with his
solicitors, who then moved
expeditiously to seek relevant documentation, brief and obtain advice from
counsel and file the notice
several previous occasions, the Tribunal has observed, and again observes, that
it is reasonable that an appellant should exhaust
other review mechanisms
– including the automatic review under s 152, and a petition of review
under s 154 – before being
expected to file an appeal to the Tribunal [see
for example
Boyson v Chief of Army
[2019] ADFDAT 2
, at [44] and, most
Kantibye v Chief of Army (No 2)
[2022] ADFDAT 4
), at [16]]. Further, the Tribunal has previously suggested,
and again suggests, that amendment of s 21(2) of the Appeals Act ought
considered, so as to provide that time for an appeal runs at least from
notification of the results of a review under s 152,
or even notification of
results of a review under s 154 if one is sought [
Kearns v Chief of Army
[2022] ADFDAT 3
s 156 of the DFDA reveals, that Act is presently cast on the assumption that an
appeal to the Tribunal might be lodged before the
review processes for which it
provides might be completed; hence the provision in s 156(1) of the DFDA for the
staying of completion
of the review processes pending the outcome of an appeal.
There doubtless can be cases in which the circumstances attending a trial
conviction in respect of a service offence by a service tribunal are such as to
commend an appeal to the Tribunal forthwith.
Provision for a stay of review
processes in that event recognises the paramountcy which any order of the
Tribunal quashing a conviction
would then have. However, given the reporting
role in relation to a review consigned by the DFDA (see 154(1)(a)) to legal
appointed on the recommendation of the Judge Advocate General (an
independent office holder), in many cases awaiting the outcome
of the review
processes can be, and in this case was, a perfectly reasonable course to take.
The DFDA is not cast on the assumption
that its review processes are mere rubber
stamps for outcomes before service tribunals; rather the reverse. Awaiting the
of a review process can present both for a petitioner and potential
appellant, as well as a service chief, the potential benefit
of avoiding the
expense of an appeal.
respondent Chief of Navy did not oppose an extension of time. The Tribunal was
persuaded, in the events that had transpired, that
the appellant had acted
reasonably and with due expedition and that no prejudice was thereby occasioned
to the Chief of Navy. Accordingly,
an extension was granted.
Grounds of Appeal
grounds of appeal are as follows:
(a) the learned DFM erred in acting contrary to the evidence and engaging in
speculation in rejecting evidence given by the Appellant
of knowledge as to his whereabouts;
(b) by reason of (a), the conviction is unreasonable, and cannot be supported,
having regard to the evidence.
Leave to appeal
grounds thus pleaded engage s 23(1)(a) of the Appeals Act. However, in so doing,
they raise a question of fact for which a grant
of leave to appeal is required:
s 20(1), Appeals Act.
the Tribunal has observed in the past (
Angre v Chief of Navy (No 3)
[2017] ADFDAT 2
, at [42] – [43]), by analogy with observations which have
been made in relation to purpose of a requirement for leave to appeal
Coulter v R
(1988) 164 CLR 350
, at 359), the purpose of the requirement
for leave found in s 20(1) of the Appeals Act is to serve as a filter on
unmeritorious or
trifling appeals, or those which would obviously fail. But
where, as particularised, a proposed ground of appeal is reasonably arguable
and, if upheld, would result in a conviction being set aside if leave were to be
granted and the appeal heard, it is difficult to
envisage circumstances in which
it would be appropriate to refuse leave.
this case, the Chief of Navy, fairly and commendably, conceded that there were
passages, set out below, in the reasons of the DFM
which, if read in a
particular way, might be thought illogical. One such passage is expressly
referred to in appeal ground (a). In
these circumstances, the case is one which
warrants a grant of leave so as to permit an examination of the evidence and of
the reasons
of the DFM by the Tribunal. The case will also offer an opportunity
to offer some further guidance in respect of the provision by
DFM of reasons for
The use on appeal of a s 154 report
summarising below both the prosecution case, the evidence given at trial and the
reasons of the DFM, we have drawn upon summaries
offered by the s 154 DFDA
report furnished to the reviewing authority. To the extent that we have adopted
any passages from those
summaries, that reflects the result of our separate
examination of the evidence in light of the submissions made on the appeal and
our resultant concurrence with those passages.
reports are furnished to the Tribunal by the Registrar of Military Justice, as
required by reg 8(1)(b) of the
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Regulation
(Cth), on request by the Tribunal’s Registrar. This regulation
recognises the potential under the DFDA and the Appeals Act
for there to be a
continuum of scrutiny within the executive branch, both within and outside the
ADF, of a conviction in respect
of a service offence. Where an appeal is
instituted after a review, the Tribunal sits at the apex of that continuum
within the executive
branch. Such scrutiny may later progress into the judicial
branch, either by an appeal to the Federal Court of Australia from the
on a question of law pursuant to s 52 of the Appeals Act or, exceptionally, via
a constitutional writ issued pursuant to
Constitution
equivalent under
Judiciary Act 1903
for the furnishing of such reports recognises that continuum but they in no way
bind the Tribunal. In the civilian criminal
justice system, it is not uncommon
for there to be provision for a report by a trial judge made available to an
appellate court.
These, too, in no way bind that appellate court but can be of
assistance in the exercise of that appellate jurisdiction. Similarly,
report can provide helpful insight into the issues raised in an appeal, provoke
submissions by the parties or the posing
of questions by the Tribunal in the
course of a hearing to either or each of the parties to an appeal or their
representative and,
in the summaries which they contain, obviate duplication of
effort by the Tribunal, with consequential benefit in terms of expediting
delivery of the Tribunal’s reasons. A report can also assist at an
interlocutory stage in determining applications for
legal aid by appellants. The
furnishing of such reports entails no denial of procedural fairness to a party
to an appeal, as the
reports are always already in their hands via the normal
DFDA processes.
The Prosecution Evidence
Poulton and the complainant were, according to the complainant, not just fellow
officers but known to each other as friends for
over a decade prior to the
alleged conduct charged. That friendship had waned during a particular seagoing
deployment but was restored
during a later short-term posting to another ship to
undertake a particular task. Their friendship was not a romantic one. However,
the complainant stated that, in December 2021, after a celebration in
King’s Cross, Sydney at the end of the short-term task
and when walking
posted was berthed, the two had a conversation
in which LCDR Poulton allegedly
asked the complainant “why hadn’t they gotten together” and if
he could kiss her.
The complainant’s evidence was that she declined the
approach citing her respect for his wife and children, that LCDR Poulton
then dropped the subject and they had just finished their walk back to the
the evening of 8 July 2022, the complainant was at the neighbouring home of her
friend, another female naval officer, LCDR A and
the latter’s partner,
LEUT B. We have refrained from naming these officers solely because of a view we
hold that to do so might,
indirectly, provide a means by which the identity of
the complainant could be ascertained, thus subverting the purpose of the
non-publication
order which we made. LCDR Poulton, his wife (another naval
officer) and their young children also lived in close proximity.
evening, the complainant, LCDR A and LEUT B had a meal and drank a combination
of old-fashioned cider whisky cocktails and beer
together. A discussion ensued
between them as to whether LCDR Poulton, who was friends with each of them,
should be invited to join
them. The complainant expressed some concern about the
accused visiting the house in light of the December 2021 incident, which she
described to the others, stating that she and LCDR Poulton had not since spoken.
However, the group “agreed it was a one-off
thing that had happened and
that it was unlikely he would do that again – proposition me”, and
that “it would still
be fun to have him over for drinks”.
afterwards, LCDR Poulton joined the group. He was wearing a puffer jacket over
his pyjamas. The group then talked shop and
drank together, initially more
old-fashioned whisky and, after the complainant had retrieved ingredients from
her home, martinis.
was common ground at the hearing that over the course of the evening the
complainant became heavily intoxicated. At around midnight
LCDR A and LEUT B
went to bed. LCDR Poulton suggested to the complainant that they continue
drinking but leave to give those two
some privacy. The complainant agreed to
this, suggesting that they go back to her house.
two arrived at her house around midnight. There, the complainant made them both
a gin-based cocktail. They sat together in her
lounge area. The complainant
stated that, halfway through her drink, she felt violently ill and dashed into
the kitchen area where
she vomited. She acknowledged in evidence that, by that
stage, she was “quite intoxicated”, having consumed what she
estimated to be “a minimum 10 to 15 standard drinks”. She estimated
that LCDR Poulton’s level of intoxication was
“reasonably high as
complainant stated that, after observing from the lounge area her vomiting, LCDR
Poulton had proceeded into the kitchen area,
to check if she was okay. The
complainant subsequently moved to her en-suite toilet and bathroom, then wearing
a black T shirt and
jeans over underwear. In the en-suite, the complainant
resumed vomiting but also lost control of her bladder, wetting her jeans and
underwear. Her T shirt was already soiled by some of her vomit.
leaving the ensuite, the complainant removed her wet and soiled garments,
retaining her bra, dressed into pyjamas and fresh
underwear, and got into her
bed. She again felt bilious and returned to her en-suite where she again vomited
into her toilet, once
again losing control of her bladder. She returned to her
bedroom, where LCDR Poulton was present, and got back into bed, wearing
underwear and pyjama bottoms. Upon her indicating to LCDR Poulton that she had
wet herself again, he retrieved a fresh pair
of underwear from her chest of
drawers and suggested she change into them. The complainant stated that,
initially, she had demurred
but that LCDR Poulton had stated,
“You’ll thank me for it later” and she had then agreed she
should change her
underwear. The complainant stated that she had then stripped
off her pyjama bottoms and underwear in front of LCDR Poulton, put on
underwear, lain back down on one side of her bed and pulled up her doona over
complainant stated that, shortly thereafter, she heard LCDR Poulton remove his
clothes and she felt him get under the doona on
the other side of her bed. She
felt his skin on her back and legs and realised he was only wearing underwear.
He had not asked her
permission to get into her bed and she had not consented to
this, although she had not said anything at the time. The complainant
that, while they were in the bed together, he had asked her to take off her bra
but that she had not. Thereafter, he had unclipped
her bra. According to the
complainant, LCDR Poulton then cupped her left breast with his open hand and
kissed her shoulders whilst
lying behind and against her. She stated he said,
“I want to go down on you.” The complainant stated that, at this
she was extremely highly intoxicated, “frozen” and
“panicked”, and had passed out.
complainant stated that she woke up at about 5:00 am on 9 July 2022 to find LCDR
Poulton “still pressed up against me, so
I was still on my left side, he
was still pressed up against me and had his hand on my body, I don’t
remember exactly where,
but after I woke up he put it on the top of my right
thigh, on the sort of top side of my body, and started digging his fingernails
into my leg” but without any pain. They were each still just wearing
underwear. The complainant stated that she had ignored
him and just checked her
phone and watched some sport. After no more than about 15 minutes, to her
estimation, LCDR Poulton had got
out of bed and get dressed. The complainant
stated that, after this, LCDR Poulton moved from the left side of the bed to the
side of the bed, and, after being ignored by LCDR Poulton, had made
comments that “he had deserved what he had done as –
looked after me”. She stated that LCDR Poulton “started saying,
“Nothing happened, I just slept on the
couch.” And he said that to
me a couple of times”. LCDR Poulton then left the room briefly but
returned telling her
he did not do anything wrong, had slept on the couch and
that nothing had happened (or words to that effect). The complainant stated
she had got out of bed, put a dressing gown on over her still unclipped bra and
underwear and stood by her opened front door.
LCDR Poulton accompanied her and
left her unit. In the course of leaving the unit, the complainant stated, he had
said more than
once to her “I did nothing wrong. I slept on the
couch”. She said that when they got to the front door and as she was
holding it open for him, she “very clearly” remembered him turning
to her and saying, “You can’t even look
at me” before
This text exchange became Exhibit 6. That exchange
was initiated by LCDR A via
an inquiry as to whether the complainant was OK and whether she would like
anything to eat or drink from
McDonald’s restaurant. The text exchange
then included the following:
Complainant:
I am beyond maccas, it is bad
Complainant:
Nah all good
Complainant:
Just Jono man
Did you guys kick on? Also did he go home?
Complainant:
Is he still there?
Are you ok?
Complainant:
I got very sick, he took looking after me as an invitation to
Complainant:
He left when I sobered up at 5
Complainant:
It’s fine, I’m just annoyed
Complainant:
Mostly about how much I threw up
Waste of good scotch!
Complainant:
Actually, can I get a large maccas coke please
You poor thing
Yes absolutely
We aren’t 20 anymore
Want a hash brown too?
Complainant:
Yeah alright thanks
Oh dude, I’m sorry,
Complainant:
Eh, it’s cool. Didn’t have anything on this weekend
A delivered the requested food and drink to the complainant at her house a short
time later but, at that stage, the interaction
between the two of them was
brief. The complainant ate and drank the items delivered and then went back to
following text exchange, which became Exhibit 9, separately occurred between
LCDR A and LCDR Poulton in the period between 0905
and 0945 on 9 July
Are you alive?
LCDR Poulton:
Oh dear... did you and [the complainant’s given name] kick
LCDR Poulton:
LCDR Poulton:
Yeah. Today is going to be a little sad
I’m in the maccas queue, want some?
I had a missed call from your wife at 2
LCDR Poulton:
But what ever we are all adults
LCDR Poulton:
Nah all good thanks
LCDR Poulton:
Yeah I passed out on the couch
10 was a continuation of this text exchange between LCDR A and LCDR Poulton in
which, immediately after the “passed
out on the couch” text, the
following exchange occurred:
LCDR Poulton:
Woke around 5
LCDR Poulton:
Wandered home
Oops! Are you in bulk trouble? [sic]
LCDR Poulton:
Mmmm don’t think so
LCDR A: Oh good!!
LCDR Poulton:
Because [given name of LCDR Poulton’s wife] is going to
barista course and leaving kids with me
LCDR Poulton:
LCDR Poulton:
10:45am on 9 July 2022, the complainant received a text message from LCDR
WTF happened last night? I have flashes of gin vomit and
walking home at 0500
!” She did not reply to this message.
the middle of the day, there was a brief further text exchange between LCDR A
and the complainant about whether the complainant
wanted food from a shop in
Cambewarra. The complainant declined, stating that she still did not feel well.
LCDR A subsequently asked
if the complainant was “sure you don’t
want [food]”? The complainant responded in these terms:
I said no, and that’s when I said to her by text that it - it wasn’t
just the – the hang over that was making me
feel sick; it was what had
happened to me. We - we texted about that for a bit.
before they headed off for the evening to LEUT B’s
house. They had a brief
conversation at the complainant’s front door. The complainant stated in
evidence, “I just remember
vividly saying to them that I shouldn’t
have to say no twice.”
occurred between LCDR A and the complainant. It was
initiated by a text by LCDR
A, who mentioned that she had left two avocados at her house, to which the
complainant was welcome if
she wanted them. The complainant did not reply
immediately. However, a little less than an hour later, commencing at 1700 on 9
2022, the following text exchange (also part of Exhibit 6) occurred between
her and LCDR A:
Complainant:
Thanks man. Also, I really don't feel well. Like, not the
hangover. The whole situation with Jono.
Complainant:
I’m don’t really feel okay
Oh honey, I’m so sorry.
Can I help?
I feel awful for inviting him over
Complainant:
No don’t. You nor I could have anticipated him. I
haven’t had shit like this happen to me in a really long time, and I
feel a bit sick
Can I help?
Complainant:
And no. I just need to talk to someone
was not controversial that the complainant’s references to
“Jono” in these text exchanges were references to
LCDR Poulton.
complainant complained to her mother the following day, Sunday, 10 July 2022,
during a telephone call. In her evidence, and although
she recalled that her
daughter’s account had been disjointed, the complainant’s mother
summarised the complaint made
by her daughter in this way: “What she told
me was that she had drunk far too much, made a complete mess of herself,
soiling herself, she did tell me that at the time. And that she
collapsed into bed and later found the person assaulting her while
her own bed.” The complainant’s mother also recalled that her
daughter’s voice had “sounded terrible”.
A and LEUT B each gave evidence of the socialising on the evening of 8 July
2022, and of their observations of the complainant
at the time when they
delivered food and drink from McDonalds to her the following day. Each of them
observed the complainant to
be upset. LCDR A also related a conversation which
she had had with the complainant when the food and drink from McDonalds was
LEUT B’s evidence was of not overhearing that conversation due
to standing back about a metre to give the other two some space.
LCDR A stated
that, “[the complainant] and I had a little bit of a chat, she told me
that she wasn’t feeling particularly
good, she’d thrown up the night
before, which she didn’t feel great about. She’d told me that Jon
had stayed with
her while she was sick, but that she didn’t feel great,
and that he had looked after her while she was unwell, but then proceeded
– you know, she woke up with him in her bed.” Her reference to
“Jon” is a reference to LCDR Poulton.
Best, a female naval officer member of the Royal Navy on exchange with the RAN
also gave evidence. She related that she had had
a telephone conversation with
the complainant in about mid-July about an incident the complainant had
experienced earlier that month.
She recalled that the complainant had
“sounded quite upset”. As summarised by LEUT Best in evidence, the
account given
to her by the complainant as to events after she and LCDR Poulton
had left LCDR A’s house was as follows:
[The complainant] then proceeded to go back to her house after they had finished
drinking, at which point due to her level of intoxication
she was quite unwell
and was very embarrassed that she was actually sick in her bathroom, after which
she then went to bed. At no
point in this did she ever invite LCDR Poulton back
to her house. When she did arrive and went to bed, LCDR Poulton then proceeded
to also get into bed with her naked without consent and much to [the
complainant’s] objection and his hands were everywhere.
Of most concern
was because of her level of intoxication she was unable to take control of the
situation and unable to get him out
of her bed despite her best efforts.
Garrett also gave evidence. She related a conversation which she had had with
the complainant when the two met at HMAS Albatross
to hand over some clothing.
Referring to the complainant, LCDR Garrett stated, “She went to give me
the clothes. I noticed
that she looked visibly upset, like she was about to cry.
I asked her what was wrong, and she said, in a recent weekend past, that
she’d been sexually assaulted by someone she considered a friend.”
She also described another conversation which she
had had with the complainant
in January 2023 concerning the events of the evening 8 and morning of 9 July
complainant also related in evidence having, on or about Tuesday, 12 July 2022,
told another close friend of hers, Dr Kate Hill,
a medical practitioner, about
the incident. Dr Hill was not called by the prosecution. However, in a statement
of agreed facts tendered
to the DFM, it was agreed that Dr Hill had stated in a
statutory declaration, “To the best of my recollection, [the
complainant’s
given name] didn’t provide any specifics of what
touching occurred; [the complainant’s given name] mentioned that she
to be quite forcible to ask Jono to leave the house and that their interaction
was tense.” It was further an agreed fact
that this was the evidence which
Dr Hill would have given if called. Once again, it was uncontroversial that the
reference to “Jono”
was a reference to LCDR Poulton.
complainant gave evidence that she had told other people in her workplace about
the incident but none of these other people were
to the complainant, on the morning of 9 July 2022, after she had her first
conversation with LCDR A, she made some investigation
via the internet about
sexual assault and decided that what she had experienced was not a sexual
assault and so decided not to go
to the civilian police but instead resolved to
report the incident to the military police. On Monday, 11 July 2022, the
complainant
attended the military police office and made a statement about the
complainant was cross examined at some length by one of LCDR Poulton’s
defending officers in respect of her evidence. The
thrust of the
cross-examination was that the complainant was heavily intoxicated that night
and she was unclear about what had in
fact happened. It was suggested that it
was reasonably possible that the complainant had reconstructed the incident and
of the allegations she made against LCDR Poulton were in fact correct.
The complainant remained adamant that the events which she
had described had in
fact occurred in her bedroom. The defending officer also highlighted to her in
cross examination inconsistencies
in her complaints to friends and family and
also her failure to include the whole of her complaint in her initial statement
military police. It was put to the complainant that the complaint to LCDR
A itself developed over the course of the day and was as
The Defence Evidence.
Poulton gave evidence at the trial. He denied ever having had any romantic or
sexual interest in the complainant. He particularly
denied that he had
propositioned the complainant in December 2021.
to the evening 8 and morning of 9 July 2022, LCDR Poulton’s version,
including how he came to be in the complainant’s
completely consistent with the complainant’s version, up to the point of
the alleged events in her
bedroom. Contrary to the complainant’s version,
LCDR Poulton stated that he had in fact been invited into the
complainant’s
unit because she had “a gift for [him]”,
although he was never told what that gift was. LCDR then made drinks for
and the complainant, and after a period of time, the complainant became
violently ill. LCDR Poulton said he was concerned for the
complainant’s
welfare, walked to the kitchen sink to offer assistance, and then followed the
complainant into her bedroom to
provide further support. After the complainant
vomited in the ensuite, LCDR Poulton stated that he provided further assistance
her in the ensuite, and then manoeuvred her from the ensuite to bed. LCDR
Poulton said that he had assisted the complainant on her
second visit to her
ensuite and had then assisted her to change her underwear.
Poulton stated that there was never any indecent behaviour on his part, as
alleged, in the complainant’s bedroom. He stated
that after the
complainant got under the doona in her bra and underwear, he took up a position
on the bed on top of the doona. He
remained clothed and was “leaned
against the bedhead with my jacket draped over me” in a “slouched
sitting up position”.
LCDR Poulton said he briefly surfed social media,
and then fell asleep, accepting that he was on “drunk duty”. He set
an alarm for 0500, and woke up at this time. At around that time he touched the
leg of the complainant, but that this was a naval
“shake a leg”
technique, used at sea to rouse a person for duty. He did this to ensure that
she was OK – “I
gave her probably a gentle shake and then a bit more
of a “Wake up, [complainant’s given name], shake, how I would
that.” He stated that the touching was done with his hand on the
outside of the doona. It was never part of the prosecution
case that, if this
account were reasonably possible, it could amount to an indecent assault.
Poulton stated that, before he left the complainant’s premises, he told
her “just to sort of reiterate it, don’t
stress about last night,
there’s no need to be embarrassed ... I’ll tell people I passed out
on the couch”. He
admitted to having lied in his text message to LCDR A on
the morning of 9 July 2022 about sleeping on the couch but stated that his
reason was to save the complainant embarrassment. LCDR Poulton also explained
that the text he sent to the complainant that same
morning was “an easy
way to check if she was still alive and feeling okay”, as well as an
“attempt to save that
embarrassment as in almost alluding to that I
don’t remember the events of the evening”. He said that he felt the
complainant
was “a little bit rude” not replying to him. He
considered that he did not need to follow up as he knew she was okay,
she “was walking under her own stead” and was “coherent”
in the morning when she let him out the
Poulton also gave evidence that he had personal family experience with sexual
assault and had thereby witnessed the impact on
close family members. He stated
that, because of this, he viewed sexual-based crimes as “pretty
disgusting” and “would
hope it [that opinion of sexual-based crimes]
is a view of everybody”. He maintained that he was simply on “drunk
that night and that he had not contacted his wife about where he was
as he felt it unnecessary.
witnesses gave evidence corroborating LCDR Poulton’s good character. Their
evidence was uncontested.
The DFM’s reasons and their alleged illogicality and
Mikus v Chief of Army
[2020] ADFDAT 1
), at [40] and
following, the Tribunal discussed whether a DFM was subject to an obligation to
give reasons and, if so, the source,
nature and extent of an obligation of a DFM
to give reasons. The Tribunal’s conclusion was that a DFM was obliged to
give reasons
for a conviction decision. We adhere to the conclusion, for the
reasons given in
, that the DFM was subject to an obligation to give
, the present is not a case where the DFM gave no reasons. Thus,
, the adequacy or otherwise of the DFM’s reasons
must be judged by reference to the issues that arose at the trial and the nature
of the evidence led at trial and other relevant circumstances. This flows from
an application by analogy of the following observations
made in the ACT Court of
DW v The Queen
[2004] ACTCA 22
(2004) 150 A Crim R 139
, in which, at [27], it
was stated:
... Any grounds of appeal based upon an alleged inadequacy of the reasons that
have been provided must obviously be determined by
reference to the issues that
arose at the trial, the nature of the evidence, the scope of the appeal and
other relevant circumstances.
However, the general scope of the duty should be
noted: it is a duty to explain his or her decision; not to write an exhaustive
on every aspect of the trial ...
that, this year, Australia marked the 50th anniversary of the cessation of its
involvement in the Vietnam War, we consider
it appropriate to make these
additional observations in relation to the obligation of a DFM to give reasons.
As the decisions of
the Tribunal of that era and since reveal, that war was the
last occasion in which the ADF regularly conducted hearings in respect
service offences in a theatre of war. Under the prevailing military law of that
era, there was no provision for trial by a DFM.
Nonetheless, one sees in some
decisions of the Tribunal of that era, an understanding that operational
circumstances may be pertinent
in determining whether an irregularity attended a
Re Ferriday’s Appeal
(1971) 21 FLR 86
, at 98 – 99
per Street J, President (as his Honour then was).
Necessarily,
having regard to the subject matter, scope and purpose of the DFDA, the
ADF’s disciplinary code is intended for
application in both peace and war
in all its phases and intensities, be that in Australia or anywhere abroad. It
is thus by no means
impossible to envisage circumstances in which the
operational circumstances under which a DFM came to hear and determine a charge
in respect of an alleged service offence may become relevant to any assessment
of the adequacy of that DFM’s reasons. The
Court Martial and Defence
Force Magistrate Rules 2020
CM/DFM Rules
) made by the Judge
Advocate General under s 149A of the DFDA, in conjunction with the right of
appeal against conviction to this
Tribunal under the Appeals Act, may mean that,
depending on operational circumstances, a summary of reasons sufficient to
why a defence member was convicted is compliant with the obligation to
give reasons.
this case, the trial before the DFM was conducted under peacetime conditions.
Further, the DFM gave extensive reasons, not a summary.
Although those reasons
were delivered orally, they were lengthy. They entailed the exposing of
directions on issues of law which
the DFM had given himself, a summary of the
evidence tendered at the trial, reference to the submissions of the parties and
an explanation
as to why the DFM had found the charges proved beyond reasonable
features of the case mean that it is neither necessary nor appropriate for us to
make any further observations concerning the
impact which operational conditions
may have on the adequacy of a DFM’s reasons.
flowing from the fact that reasons were given, it seems to us, as was held
likewise in
, at [15] and [63], that there is not for that reason a
wrong decision on a question of law in terms of s 23(1)(b) of the Appeals
or a material irregularity in terms of s 23(1)(c) of the Appeals Act, each of
which would be exposed by a failure to give any
the above summary of the evidence reveals, this was a case where the defendant
gave evidence. Thus, the DFM appropriately gave
himself what has come to be
termed a “Liberato direction” [as to which see
Liberato v R
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
), at 515]. Moreover, in the course of his
reasons and having summarised the evidence before him and the submissions of
both the prosecution
and the defence, the DFM returned to the three-staged test
in deciding whether he was satisfied that the
prosecution had proved the case beyond reasonable doubt.
first stage of the test required that the DFM address whether the
accused’s evidence was believed, in which case he was
obliged to acquit
the accused. The DFM found that he did not accept that LCDR Poulton had given a
truthful and accurate account.
The DFM found that his evidence was not credible
or reliable.
so addressed and answered the first stage of the test, the DFM was obliged to
address the second stage of the test. That required
that he ask himself whether,
even though the accused’s evidence was difficult to accept (or
unconvincing), it may nonetheless,
as a matter of reasonable possibility, be
true. If so, the DFM was also obliged to acquit the accused. Unlike in
, the DFM’s reasons disclose that he made no error in
applying the second stage of the test. The DFM found, explicitly, that
Poulton’s account could not, as a matter of reasonable possibility, be
true. It did not leave him in a state of reasonable
doubt as to what the true
position was. The DFM just did not accept LCDR Poulton’s account.
in his reasons, and correctly, the DFM, appreciated that this was not the end of
his task. In conformity with the third stage
of the test described in
, he stated in his reasons, “But that is not the end of the
case though under the third limb of
. Having rejected the
accused’s evidence, I must and do put it to one side and go back to the
prosecution case and consider
whether I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that the prosecution has proved its case in respect of each charge.”
followed in the DFM’s reasons was not just an answer to the third stage
question in
but also an elaboration on why he had made the
findings about LCDR Poulton’s account that led him to address the third
the way in which the case for LCDR Poulton was put on the appeal, it is
necessary to set out a lengthy excerpt from this following
part of the
DFM’s reasons. That is because it was submitted on LCDR Poulton’s
behalf that the DFM’s reasons were
attended with illogicality such that
the resultant guilty verdict was unreasonable, or could not be supported, having
regard to the
whole of the evidence.
this following part of his reasons, the DFM stated:
In deciding to reject the evidence of the accused, I particularly remind myself
of the reasons he gave as to why he did not contact
his wife at 0100 hours,
while checking social media on his mobile phone and lying next to the
complainant on her bed. His reasons
under cross-examination were that it did not
seem required and that it did not seem to him that he needed to tell her. [We
interpolate
that this is an accurate rendition of an explanation LCDR Poulton
gave in his evidence.] Such reasons, to my mind, fly in the face
of the content
of Exhibit 9 and the oral evidence of LCDR A.
The accused’s wife had, at about 0200 hours, tried to call LCDR A. It
seemed to me that his wife was at least interested in
his whereabouts. This was
hardly surprising in my view, considering the accused had departed his house
8 July 2022, dressed in his pyjama bottoms, a
T-shirt, a puffer jacket and carrying a near full bottle of wine. I find his
unconvincing in terms of content and the manner he gave them.
contents of Exhibit 9 are quoted above in our summary of the prosecution
evidence. It was put for LCDR Poulton, correctly, that
this text exchange was no
proof at all that he was aware, before then, that his wife had tried to call him
at 0200 on the evening
8 and morning of 9 July 2022. Moreover, it was submitted,
again correctly, that there was no evidence that LCDR Poulton was earlier
that his wife had made any call during that evening. It was submitted that the
reasons disclosed an illogicality in discounting
LCDR Poulton’s
credibility based on a missed call by his wife to another of which he knew
nothing. Taking up ground (a) in
the grounds of appeal, it was further put that
the DFM had engaged in unwarranted and, as she had not given evidence,
unsupported
speculation about his wife’s state of knowledge as to his
whereabouts.
Immediately
after the excerpt from his reasons just quoted, the DFM stated:
I have also, in deciding to reject the evidence of the accused, borne in mind
the deliberate lie he told LCDR A, and I refer to exhibits
9 and 10, about
passing out on the couch at the complainant’s house and the reasons for
telling it, his reason being to save
the complainant embarrassment.
The complainant had already, according to Exhibit 6, disclosed to LCDR A at
sick and thrown up while
the accused was at her house. His text message to LCDR A about passing out on
the couch was sent at about
0945 hours. The content of Exhibit 6 is, in my view,
consistent with the evidence of the complainant under cross-examination that
was not embarrassed about vomiting and, as it turned out, soiling herself. I
have used this lie as only going to credit. I find
his answers unconvincing in
terms of content and the manner he gave them. I have also, in deciding to reject
the evidence of the
accused, borne in mind his text to the complainant, that is
Exhibit 9, which referred to among other things:
WTF happened. Flashes of vomiting and stumbling home at 0500 hours.
And his explanation for doing so. I find that the message suggested that he did
not recall what had happened that night. The accused
himself accepted that this
was not true, he did recall. I find that the text message constituted a
deliberate lie. The explanation
offered was that it was an easy way to check in
if the complainant was still alive and feeling okay and also an attempt to save
embarrassment.
Again, according to Exhibit 6, the complainant had already, at
been sick and throwing up.
The accused sent this text message to the complainant at about 1045. The accused
could have simply asked how the complainant was
feeling without suggesting that
he did not recall earlier events. I confirm that I have used this lie as only
going to credit. I
find his answers unconvincing in terms of content and the
manner he gave them. I find that the reasons the accused gave for lying
A and the complainant were vague and illogical.
[emphasis in original]
was submitted on behalf of LCDR Poulton that this passage of the DFM’s
reasons manifested a further illogicality of reasoning
in that he could not
possibly have known that the complainant was not embarrassed about having been
sick from excessive alcohol consumption
and vomiting.
a particular way, and as the Chief of Navy conceded, these two passages in the
DFM’s reasons might be regarded as exhibiting
the illogicality identified
in the submissions made for LCDR Poulton. However, also as the Chief of Navy
submitted, that is not the
only way in which to read these passages.
and foremost, the reasons of the DFM must be read as a whole. Next, and no less
importantly, it is to be remembered that these
reasons were delivered orally.
Further, they have not been revised from transcript by the DFM, even for matters
of grammar or style.
Wills v Chief Executive Officer of the Australian Skills Quality
[2022] FCAFC 10
(2022) 289 FCR 175
), at [141], and citing well-known
and authoritative observations concerning the approach to reasons furnished by
civilian public
administrative officials and tribunals, Perry J, with whom Logan
and Griffiths JJ agreed, stated:
... it is well established that the reasons of an administrative decision-maker
“are not to be construed minutely and finely
with an eye keenly attuned to
the perception of error”:
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v
Wu Shan Liang
(1996) 185 CLR 259
at 271–2 (Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh
and Gummow JJ (quoting with approval
Collector of Customs v Pozzolanic
Enterprises Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 456
(1993) 43 FCR 280
at 287)). When, therefore, it is said
that such reasons should be read beneficially, ultimately this means that
“a commonsense
and realistic approach should be taken to understanding the
reasons as a whole to see what it was that the Tribunal was saying”:
Fang Wang v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2003] FCA 1044
–[15] (Allsop J (as his Honour then
the West Australian legislation considered by the High Court in
AK v Western
[2008] HCA 8
(2008) 232 CLR 438
, which prescribed particular criteria to be
addressed by a trial judge in a judge alone trial in respect of an offence,
neither the
DFDA nor the
CM/DFM Rules
specify particular criteria which
must be addressed in the reasons of a DFM. Instead, r 31 of the
Functions of Defence Force magistrate
In addition to any functions conferred on the Defence Force magistrate by the
Act, the regulations or any other rule, the functions
of the magistrate at any
proceedings before the magistrate are to ensure:
(a) that the proceedings are conducted in accordance with the Act and these
in a manner befitting a court of justice
(b) that an accused person who is not represented does not in consequence of
that fact suffer any undue disadvantage; and
a proper record of the proceedings is made
and that the record
of proceedings and the exhibits (if any) are properly safeguarded.
[Emphasis added]
implication, the conduct of a hearing “in a manner befitting a court of
justice” bespeaks that reasons must be given
but does not seek further to
prescribe their content. So, too, does an obligation to keep a
“proper” record of proceedings.
It is difficult to see how a record
could be “proper” if it did not admit of meaningful challenge to a
conviction under
the Appeals Act or, for that matter, meaningful review under
the DFDA. However, as we have observed already, the very purpose of
the DFDA and
the contexts in which a DFM may come to sit may dictate that what is “a
befitting manner” and what is a
“proper record” may perhaps be
a summary of reasons rather than a reasoned narrative.
may also be that an analogy with the approach revealed in the authorities in
respect of reasons given in the course of civilian
public administration can be
taken too far with respect to the reasons of a DFM. Although service tribunals
constituted under the
DFDA do not exercise the judicial power of the
Commonwealth under Ch III of the
Constitution
, they are at the very least
obliged to act judicially [
at [52] – [56], citing
[2020] HCA 31
(2020) 271 CLR 316].
Conviction decisions of a DFM may, and in
this case did, carry with them penal consequences. Further, it bears repeating
reasons (or perhaps in operational conditions a summary of reasons) of
a DFM must by necessary implication be such as to permit the
meaningful exercise
of the right of appeal against conviction as conferred by the Appeals Act. In
turn that means that the reasons
(or such a summary) must admit of a meaningful
hearing by the Tribunal on one or more of the grounds specified in s 23 of the
Act, including on a ground available by leave of the Tribunal. These are
part of the purposes of the giving of reasons by a DFM.
considerations in turn mean that a degree of caution must be exercised when
considering civilian criminal law authorities concerning
the obligation of
courts of summary jurisdiction (including a Magistrates Court) to give reasons.
The bases upon which the decisions
of such courts may be challenged on appeal,
if at all, as opposed to in some instances only by way of what these days is
termed constitutional
writ, can supply the context in which courts make
observations on the nature and extent of a civilian court of summary
to give reasons. This is one of the points made by The Honourable
Justice M Weinberg AO, writing extra-judicially, in an illuminating
“Adequate, Sufficient and Excessive Reasons”, Speech at the Judicial
College of Victoria, 4 March 2014, at 7 –
relation to a DFM, and by analogy, we agree with an observation made by Buchanan
JA in one of the summary justice authorities which
Weinberg JA discusses in his
Perkins v County Court of Victoria
[2000] VSCA 171
(2000) 2 VR 246
, at [64], Buchanan JA stated:
The degree of detailed reasoning required of a tribunal depends upon the nature
of the determination, the complexity of the issues
and whether the issues are
ones of fact or of law or of mixed fact and law, and the function to be served
by the giving of reasons.
As to the last matter, reasons which are required to
enable a right of appeal on questions of fact to be exercised might not be
if an appeal is limited to questions of law.
Weinberg JA observes in his article and following his reference to
and other authorities concerning courts of summary jurisdiction,
although courts of summary jurisdiction “are obliged to give
reasons for
what they do, they are not expected to go into matters in anything like the
detail that would be expected from judges
in the higher courts when delivering
reasons for judgment”. To require more of a DFM in a service disciplinary
system designed
to be used in peace and war may be to render that system
incapable in practice of serving the purpose for which it has been enacted.
Equally, to require less may likewise be subversive of that purpose and of the
related right of appeal to the Tribunal.
is also necessary to remember that the finding of the DFM was, as the reasons
explicitly disclose, in part based on demeanour.
, at [71], the
Tribunal made these observations on findings so based:
Where the question is one of accepting and rejecting the evidence of a witness
on demeanour-based grounds, little may be required,
and there is no requirement
for a judge to give a detailed explanation for a decision to prefer the evidence
of one witness against
that of another:
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
, at 280 (McHugh JA); Keyte, at [56] (Doyle CJ);
[2003] SASC 77
(2003) 141 A Crim R 203
, at [57], [59], [63] –
DW v The Queen
R v Barrowman
[2007] SASC 28
(2007) 96 SASR 294
, at [6] – [7].
Douglass v R
[2012] HCA 34
(2012) 290 ALR 699
, does not contradict that proposition, though it held that as
a criminal trial depends on whether the evidence as a whole proves
the elements
of the offence beyond reasonable doubt, reasons which record no finding about
the accused’s evidence will be insufficient
if they do not suffice to
exclude the possibility that the judge simply preferred the complainant’s
evidence and proceeded
to convict upon it, applying a standard less than proof
beyond reasonable doubt: at [14].
adopt the approach discussed in the preceding paragraphs to our examination of
the reasons of the DFM in this case, rather than
uncritically applying the
civilian public administration authorities mentioned in
our view, in each of the excerpts from his reasons quoted, the DFM is not just
expressing reasons why he has rejected LCDR Poulton’s
evidence. He is also
engaging in interpolated asides.
the first passage quoted above at [68], and by way of aside, the DFM makes
reference to the missed call at 0200 to LCDR A from
LCDR Poulton’s wife.
The essence of his reasoning in that passage expressed is this. Here is a
married man who has left his
wife and children at home at or about 2000 on the
evening of 8 July 2022, wearing nothing more than his pyjamas and a puffer
and carrying a near full bottle of wine, to socialise with fellow naval
officer neighbours. Here is a man who has admitted he lied
in texts about where
he slept at the residence of one of them, who had stated in evidence that he had
been awake at 0100 on top of
the bed at that residence, next to a female naval
officer he acknowledged was clad only in underwear (but said was under the
checking social media on his mobile phone but has said he didn’t
think it was necessary, although he had the means so to do,
to text his wife to
inform her where he was. The aside about the wife’s missed call to LCDR A
is, at most, an exposed way of
highlighting the incredibility the DFM found, for
the reasons just given, in LCDR Poulton’s explanation for his lie.
the DFM stated that the evidence of LCDR A “fl[ew] in the face” of
LCDR A’s evidence, the DFM was not stating
that LCDR A’s evidence
demonstrably
that LCDR Poulton knew of his wife’s interest
in his whereabouts at that time, and therefore was being untruthful in stating
that he considered it unnecessary to contact her. Of course, LCDR Poulton could
not be aware of the attempted phone call between
LCDR A and the accused’s
wife. Rather, the evidence verified the view of the DFM that, in the
circumstances, the accused’s
wife would have inevitably been interested in
the accused’s whereabouts. That evidence therefore confirmed the
finding that the accused’s testimony (being that he considered
it unnecessary to tell his wife of his whereabouts) was implausible.
So read, it
does not carry with it any premise that LCDR Poulton was aware, before the text
exchange between LCDR A and him, that
she had had a missed a 0200 call from his
to the second excerpted passage at [70] above in which there was claimed
illogicality, in our view there is an aside or interpolation
complainant’s credibility, based on the consistency of her account in oral
evidence with the text exchange on the
morning of 9 July 2022 between LCDR A and
her (Exhibit 6). The DFM was entitled to conclude the two are consistent. There
controversy on the appeal about the admissibility of the various text
exchanges. They were admitted without objection at trial. Further,
a basis for
their admission could be found in
Evidence Act 2011
its application to the proceeding via
Jervis Bay Territory
Acceptance Act 1915
(Cth) and s 146 of the DFDA. Immediately after this
aside or interpolation, there is a sentence which commences, “I have used
this lie as only going to credit.” Had a new paragraph commenced here, and
as we observed to counsel at the hearing, it would
be difficult to see any basis
for illogicality. We consider that is the better way to read this passage.
DFM’s reasons also disclose that his conclusions about LCDR
Poulton’s credibility were also based on his observation
of him during his
oral evidence. That is an advantage that he peculiarly enjoyed. Related to that
and reading the reasons as a whole,
the DFM’s assessment of LCDR
Poulton’s credibility was multi-faceted and the result of a cumulative
whole, which included
demeanour when giving oral evidence.
these reasons, we are not satisfied that the reasons of the DFM are illogical.
Unreasonable verdict?
presented in oral submissions, LCDR Poulton’s contentions ranged beyond
just the alleged illogicality, and sought to place
the DMF’s reasons
against a background of alleged inconsistencies such that the conviction was, in
terms of s 23(1)(a) of the
Appeals Act, one which was unreasonable, or could not
be supported, having regard to the evidence. Adapting to this ground in the
Appeals Act what was emphasised in relation to a like ground of appeal in the
civilian criminal justice system last year by the High
Dansie v The
[2022] HCA 25
(2022) 274 CLR 651
), at 657 [37] [citing
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
Filippou v The Queen
[2015] HCA 29
(2015) 256 CLR 47]
what is required of the Tribunal under this ground is independently to determine
for itself whether the evidence was sufficient
in nature and quality to
eliminate any reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty of the service
offences charged. This requirement
is not satisfied by a mere examination of the
reasons of the Tribunal for error. If the Tribunal’s own assessment of the
leads it to have a reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty, the
Tribunal will conclude that it was not open to the tribunal
of fact, be that
court martial panel or, as in this case a DFM, to be satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the accused was guilty,
unless that Tribunal’s advantage in
seeing and hearing the evidence is capable of resolving that doubt
, at 660 [15]]. In particular, in undertaking this assessment, and
as is likewise the case in relation to the analogous ground of
appeal in the
civilian criminal justice system, the reasons of the DFM, “must be
approached by the court of criminal appeal
performing that function with
circumspection lest the findings of fact made by the trial judge divert the
court from undertaking
the requisite independent assessment of the
, at [19]. Thus, for the purposes of this
assessment, we have put aside our earlier conclusion that the reasons of the DFM
exhibit illogicality.
have already referred above, in summary, to the evidence which was before the
DFM. Our own, independent examination of that evidence
leaves us without a doubt
that it was sufficient both in nature and quality to convict LCDR Poulton of the
service offences charged.
accepted, the evidence of the complainant was sufficient to prove each of the
service offences alleged. Of course, she was, by
her own admission, heavily
intoxicated by the early hours of 9 July 2022. But that does not render her
evidence incapable of credibility.
It is just a factor to take into account.
Looking to the contents of the texts authored by the complainant, and to her
conversation
with LCDR A over the course of 9 July 2022, and using what was
stated solely for the purposes of assessing credibility, we are struck
emotional rawness and consistency of the complainant’s accounts that day.
At a more general level of abstraction, that
is also so in relation to the
accounts of others in evidence as to the accounts of the incident given to them
by the complainant
of the incident. It is true that there are some differences
in detail but none of these are such as to regard the complainant’s
account as to what occurred as glaringly improbable. These differences in detail
are evident enough in the evidentiary summary above.
But these differences can
be regarded as indicative of normal differences in human memory. What is
consistent in the recollections
of the complainant’s accounts is that she
had a non-consensual experience of a sexual nature in July 2022.
for example,
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
(2020) 268 CLR 123
, here there is no other
body of unchallenged evidence which renders the account given by the complainant
improbable. To the contrary,
it was common ground on the evidence that the
accused was present in a private venue, the complainant’s residence and
for reasons associated with an unpleasant sequel to her acknowledged
intoxication, she had consensually removed her underwear in
his presence and
replaced them with fresh underwear before lying on her bed wearing nothing but a
bra and those fresh underwear.
It was also common ground on the evidence that
only the complainant and LCDR Poulton were present in her residence at the time.
improbable.
that of the complainant, the evidence given by LCDR Poulton depended, for its
acceptance, even as a possibility, on an assessment
of credibility. He was never
under any obligation to prove his innocence. The onus of proving the service
offences charged beyond
reasonable doubt always remained on the prosecution. As
we have already observed, in assessing credibility, the DFM enjoyed the
of observing demeanour which we do not. But there is nothing in our
assessment of the evidence which suggests to us that this advantage
was abused.
LCDR Poulton’s account, namely sitting on the top of the
complainant’s bed in the early hours of the morning
of 9 July 2022,
checking social media but not at least at that time sending his wife a message
as to where he was, has the appearance
of contrivance about it to us. So, too,
does his gratuitous statement and later acknowledged lie, “Yeah I passed
couch” in his 0945 text to LCDR A, which immediately followed
his awareness from her text to him that she had a missed call
from his wife at
these reasons, our conclusion, based on our own assessment of the totality of
the evidence, is that the convictions were not unreasonable,
supported, having regard to the evidence.
Conclusion and an observation about drawing charges
make the following additional observations about the form of the charges laid on
the basis of the prosecution evidence, lest it
be thought from our review of the
evidence that this subject had escaped our attention.
the evidentiary case accepted by the DFM, the events at the complainant’s
residence on the evening of 8 and morning of 9
July 2022, after they had left
LCDR A’s residence, occurred over a period of some four to five hours,
from at or about midnight
to 0500. It is possible to discern two phases, a phase
after the complainant and LCDR Poulton entered her residence, entailing shortly
afterwards multiple episodes of vomiting and loss of bladder control by the
complainant, which ultimately saw her change into fresh
underwear in his
presence and lie under the doona on her bed, where the conduct charged as
charges 1, 2 and 3 occurred and a phase
upon her waking up at about 0500 on the
morning of 9 July 2022, when the conduct charged as charge 4 occurred, also in
her bed. On
any view, the conduct charged as charges 1, 2 and 3 occurred in a
compressed period. It might also be thought of as inter-connected
Jones v Chief of Navy
[2012] ADFDAT 2
(2012) 262 FLR 418
), this was not a case where there was any objection at trial to
the form of the charges. Moreover, any such objection was expressly
on the hearing of the appeal.
, at [55], the Tribunal cited with approval an approach to the
drawing of charges counselled in circumstances such as the present
R v Merriman
[1973] AC 584
, at 607, which is to adopt a
“practical approach”. His Lordship there stated, “where a
number of acts of a similar
nature committed by one or more defendants were
connected with one another, in time and place of their commission or by their
purpose, in such a way as they could fairly be described as forming part
of the same transaction or criminal enterprise, it was the
practice, as early as
the eighteenth century, to charge them in a single count of an
indictment.” This practice is sometimes
termed with respect to criminal
case pleading, “the single transaction rule” and operates as an
exception to the rule
against duplicity in charges. The rule against duplicity,
which has been described as “easy to state but ... often difficult
apply”, requires that only one offence should be charged in any charge on
an indictment:
has been said of the rule against duplicity (and its single transaction
exception) that it is a rule of law and that, although
matters of judgement are
entailed in the drawing of charges on the basis of particular evidence to be led
by the prosecution, that
does not thereby convert a rule of law into the
exercise of a discretion:
Rixon v Thompson
(2009) 115 A Crim R 110
are by no means convinced that it was necessary in the circumstances to avoid
duplicity for four charges to be laid against LCDR
Poulton. The two phases to
which we have adverted might aptly have lent themselves to two charges. But
there was no controversy that
each of the alleged acts, if proved, could
constitute an act of indecency and the evidence of the complainant, if accepted,
admitted of a conclusion that each of the acts charged occurred. In
circumstances where the form of the charges was not at trial,
and is not on
appeal, controversial, we do not consider it either necessary or appropriate
further to consider the ramifications
(if any) of the form in which the Director
of Military Prosecutions chose to charge LCDR Poulton. Particularly that is so
we are satisfied it visited no procedural fairness on him.
follows from the foregoing is that, although leave to appeal should be granted,
the appeal should be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
one (101) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Justices Logan, Perry and
Dated: 22 December 2023
RTF format (434 KB)
Signed PDF/A format