John Michael Jarvie v Comtec Industries Pty Ltd [2018] ADO 5 (31 October 2018)
DESIGNS ACT 2003
OF A DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF DESIGNS WITH REASONS
Re: Request for revocation of registration by John Michael Jarvie of design
numbers 201515406 and 201616328 both in the name of
Comtec Industries Pty
Adrian Richards
REPRESENTATION:
Robert Wuff and Derek Baigent of Griffith Hack
Registered Owner:
Walsh & Associates (did not make
submissions)
Request for revocation of two designs pursuant to
Designs Act 2003
(Cth) – whether requestor is sole person entitled
to be the owner of the designs – whether requestor is sole or joint
designer of the designs – whether requestor was employed by the registered
owner or an independent contractor – requestor
found to be the sole
designer and entitled to be recorded as the owner of both designs –
whether the Registrar of Designs has
discretion to alter the register to change
ownership in this circumstance – no such power found – designs
revoked and
declaration made pursuant to
section 52(2)
naming the requestor as
the entitled person
decision with reasons concerns a request for revocation on the basis of entitled
persons (‘the Request’) under
Designs Act 2003
(Cth) (‘the Act’) of design numbers 201515406 and 201616328
(‘the Designs’). The Request was filed on 4 May
2017 by Mr John
Michael Jarvie (‘the Requestor’).
The Request asserts that the
Requestor is the sole designer of both designs, and that
because of this he is the sole person entitled to be entered on the Register of
Designs as their owner.
25 May 2017 a delegate of the Registrar of Designs wrote to the registered owner
of the Designs, Comtec Industries Pty Ltd (‘the
Owner’) at its then
address for service, Anderson-Taylor & Associates. The letter asked whether
the Owner wished to contest
the claims made in the
Also included in the Request was design
number 201415843. On 9 June 2017 the Requestor withdrew his request for
revocation of that
third design, noting that its term of registration had
days later, this office received a request to change the address for service of
the Owner in favour of Walsh & Associates.
This request asked that all
future correspondence be sent to that firm, but did not mention the recent
letter from the delegate.
Walsh & Associates later confirmed in a telephone
call that the Owner did indeed intend to contest the claims made in the
a result of this new information, the delegate issued directions to the parties
on 25 July 2017 which set out the practice and
procedure to be followed in
deciding the Request. In accordance with the terms of those directions, the
Requestor filed evidence
in support of the Request, the Owner then filed
evidence in answer to the evidence in support, and the Requestor filed evidence
reply to the evidence in answer.
the evidence stages having been completed, on 12 June 2018 the delegate invited
the parties to request a hearing. The Requestor
did so on 28 June 2018, and the
Owner did not. Formal Hearing Notices issued on 31 July 2018. They indicated
that the Request in
respect of each of the Designs would be heard together, in
Canberra on 19 September 2018. I was subsequently allocated to hear and
on the Request in my capacity as a delegate of the Registrar of Designs.
preparation for the hearing, on 28 August 2018 I wrote to the parties. Among
other things I asked the Owner whether it planned
to attend the hearing, and I
invited both parties to file their outline of submissions by 12 September 2018.
The Requestor duly filed
its submissions, but I received no response from the
hearing went ahead as scheduled. Robert Wulff and Derek Baigent of Griffith Hack
along with the Requestor attended by videoconference.
Consistent with its
failure to file written submissions, the Owner did not
evidence filed in the prosecution of the Request consists of the
Evidence in support
Statutory declaration of John Michael Jarvie, founder and co-director of Armour
Wall Group Pty Ltd, made 23 September 2017 with annexures
JMJ-1 to JMJ-15
(‘the Requestor’s First Declaration’)
Statutory declaration of Luke Anthony Jarvie, listed as the sole designer of
design 201515406 and son of John Jarvie, made 23 September
2017 with annexure
Statutory declaration of John Michael Jarvie, made 14 October 2017 with
annexures JMJ-16 to JMJ-18 (‘the Requestor’s
Declaration’)
Evidence in answer
Statutory declaration of Stephen David Whelan, Consulting Civil and Structural
Engineer, a director of the Owner and listed as co-designer
of design 201616328,
made 16 March 2018 with annexure A
Evidence in reply
Statutory declaration of Jon Michael Jarvie, made 18 May 2018 with annexure
Requestor’s Third Declaration’)
The Designs
Requestor’s First Declaration provides an explanation of the Designs, some
images of which I have included below. This aspect
of the factual background is
uncontroversial, and I include it here for context. The Designs are intended to
be used in combination
to provide a retaining wall or sea wall. Design 201616328
is recorded on the Register as having been designed by Ryan Nugent and
David Whelan, and is titled ‘sheet pile’. These flat faced, roughly
rectangular cross-section elements of the
wall are driven into the ground and
packed with soil or other heavy filler. Design 201515406 is recorded on the
Register as having
been designed by Luke Anthony Jarvie, and is titled
‘pin pile’. These circular cross-section elements slot in between
the sheet piles, coupling with the sheet pile using the clutches visible around
the outside of both Designs. The pin piles reinforce
and stabilise the wall, and
permit the line of the wall to meander. An example of this appears in the image
below titled ‘Wall
Design 201616328
The Requestor filed two annexures called
JMJ-16. To avoid confusing them, I refer below to the sole annexure to the
Requestor’s
Third Declaration as JMJ-19.
Design 201515406
Wall example
Development of the Designs – the Requestor’s
way of further background, and closely relevant to the issues to be decided
here, the Requestor’s First Declaration outlines
the Requestor’s
qualifications and background in relation to coastal and shoreline protection
systems. He declares therein
that he has 30 years’ experience in the
design and installation of such systems, using a range of materials including
sandstone and timber. His most recent decade of work in this field has
focused on solutions based on sheets made from composite material
pultrusion process. He lists a series of benefits of these composites over more
traditional materials: ‘they weigh
less, are more water resistant, have
greater ability to absorb forces and contribute to reduced overall project
Requestor started using composite sea wall material in around 2007. At the time,
he imported products from the United States of
America. Working with these
ready-made designs eventually showed up their limitations, and by 2010 the
Requestor had resolved to
come up with his own system. By 2011, the Requestor
had conceived of his first model dubbed ‘Platypus’. At the heart
it is a series of identical, interlinked, composite sheet piles, pictured below.
To work effectively, the Platypus system employs
a series of geogrids and
gridspines. This lessens the loading of soil that sits against the fascia of the
sheet piles. The Platypus
system, according to the Requestor, represented a
breakthrough—the first time anywhere that geogrid had successfully been
with a composite sheet pile system.
satisfied with this success, by early 2014 the Requestor conceived of several
improvements to the Platypus system, which included
a composite sheet pile very
similar to Design 201616328. Below is the Requestor’s 2014 improvement as
depicted in drawings
sent to the Requestor on 27 July
in early 2014, the Requestor conceived of the idea of placing a pin pile in
between each sheet pile from the Platypus system.
This increased the sheer
loading of the wall and dramatically decreased its footprint by removing the
need for bulky geogrids. The
first iteration of this pin pile appears in
technical drawings dated 10 April 2014 in the following
27 July 2015 the pin pile had an extra pair of clutches
remainder of The Requestor’s First Declaration is essentially concerned
with the relationship between the Requestor and
the Owner. I return to this
material below. For now it is convenient to turn to the declaration of his son,
Mr Luke Jarvie.
Luke Jarvie is, in quite obvious contrast to the Requestor’s account
above, currently listed as the designer of the pin pile,
Design 201515406. The
revelation contained in Mr Luke Jarvie’s declaration on this issue has to
be among the most startling
imaginable. He declares: ‘I have never been,
nor have I ever held myself out to be, a designer of [Design
201515406].’
reason for his appearance on the Register of Designs appears to have related to
advice given to a director of the Owner (Mr Nugent)
in relation to the
Requestor’s eligibility to be listed as a designer. According to this
account, Mr Luke Jarvie was listed
the sole designer because Mr Nugent was under
the impression that Mr John Jarvie’s financial position at the time
disqualified
him from being a designer.
such advice was in fact given, it was utterly wrong. Who is the designer of a
design is a question of fact. It cannot be changed
by anything other than proof
there was another, earlier designer. Questions of a designer’s financial
standing, or for that
matter whether they were employed to create the design,
that they have subsequently assigned the design, or even they have died have
absolutely no bearing on this fact.
Development of the Designs – the Owner’s
the background to these proceedings is a similar matter decided by a delegate of
the Commissioner of Patents on 6 July 2018:
The similarities include:
the same factual
consideration of
the inventorship and ownership of the subject matter of two provisional patent
applications in the name of the Owner
subject matter
in those provisional patent applications include drawings of the Designs
powers that the
Commissioner of Patents exercised in hearing and deciding the matter were in
large part analogous to the powers invoked
John Jarvie v Comtec Industries Pty Ltd
[2018] APO 46
(‘the Patents Matter’).
mention all of this for two reasons. Firstly, by way of explanation, in some of
Mr Whelan’s testimony he refers to inventions
rather than designs.
Wherever it is appropriate to do so, I have taken these as references to the
Designs. Secondly, it appears that,
based on my reading of Mr Whelan’s
declaration (which I reiterate was the only material led by the Owner in the
present matter)
the Owner may have held an expectation that the Request and the
patents matter would be treated as one by the Designs Office and
Office. While the statutory offices of the Commissioner of Patents under the
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) and the Registrar of Designs under the Act happen
to be occupied by the same individual at present, the Commissioner and the
Registrar remain separate offices with distinct functions. As such, I am not a
delegate of the Commissioner. As a delegate of the
Registrar I do not have
access to the evidence filed in the matter before the Commissioner, and it is
not the role of the Registrar
or her delegates to seek to obtain evidence on the
Owner’s (or any party’s) behalf. If the Owner wanted evidence from
the Patents Matter to be considered in the present proceeding, the evidence
should have been filed in in accordance with the directions
as to practice and
procedure set down on 25 July 2017. I now turn to the substance of Stephen
Whelan’s declaration.
Whelan declares that he is ‘the author of the drawings [of the Designs]. I
pause here to note that authoring drawings is
not the same as being the designer
of the thing those drawings depict—the drawings could potentially be
subject to copyright,
but the ownership of this copyright does not necessarily
inform the present enquiry. More to the point, Mr Whelan also declares that
is ‘the author of the design of the extrusions/profiles depicted in the
designs registrations arising from [his] technical
involvement in the design of
a sheet and pin pile system, including refinements and technical input into the
inventions.’ Some
concession is made to the Requestor, however, when Mr
Whelan declares that ‘John Jarvie was involved in the original conceptual
works and as such was a collaborator in the inventions.’
is no disagreement in the parties’ evidence, therefore, that Mr Nugent was
not a co-designer of Design 201616328 and Mr
Luke Jarvie was not the designer of
Design 201515406. Both parties also agree that the Requestor was a designer
the Designs. Where they differ is on whether this he was the sole designer, a
question to which I now address.
to how he came to be an author of the Designs, Mr Whelan declares that he
received drawings of the sheet pile and pin pile as they
were on 8 May 2015,
which I take to be the Requestor’s 2014 improvement to the sheet pile and
the 27 July 2015 version of the
pin pile, as provided to this office by the
From this point, Mr Whelan declares that he applied his skills as an engineer to
certain technical problems with the above designs.
The result of Mr Whelan’s
labours was the drawings that depict the Designs. For the purposes of
comparison, cross-sectional
views of the Designs before and after Mr
Whelan’s contribution are set out below. I note that there are
differences, particularly
to the sheet pile component. Taking Mr Whelan’s
declaration at face value, these may represent a significant application of
engineering nous, but this is not the point. Designs are concerned with visual
appearance. Visually then, the two iterations of the
sheet pile are very close
and the pin pile is almost identical.
Whether there were such problems is
contested by the Requestor, but this is not been necessary for me to decide.
Legal Principles - Designer
Act defines ‘designer’ as ‘the person who created the
Adding to this,
the designer has been held to be the ‘person whose mind conceives the
relevant shape, configuration, pattern
or ornamentation applicable to the
article in question and reduces it to visible form’.
Analysis and Conclusion - Designer
Requestor has shown how, through many years and iterations, and in particular
the spark of inspiration that hit him in early 2014,
he arrived at the
‘Before’ shapes above. Mr Whelan’s case is, at its highest,
that he took the ‘Before’
shapes and applied his skill as an
engineer to them, resulting in the ‘After’ shapes. Mr Whelan is
therefore clearly
not the person whose mind conceived of these shapes—his
contribution was a refinement of shapes already conceived in the mind
Requestor. Mr Whelan’s work was that of a drafter and engineering
consultant tasked with ironing out the kinks in someone
else’s original
concept. For completeness I also note that Mr Whelan’s declaration asserts
that his drawings are the
closest to the Designs, closer in particular to the
‘Before’ shapes above. As should already be clear by now, this is
not the test.
find that the sole designer of the Designs was the Requestor. Having so found, I
am now able to turn to the main question—on
the day the Designs were
registered, who was entitled to be recorded as their registered
Entitlement
13 of the Act provides:
13 Who is entitled to be registered as the registered owner of
person mentioned in any of the following paragraphs is entitled to be entered on
the Register as the registered owner of a design
that has not yet been
registered:
(a) the person
who created the design (the
designer created the design in the course of employment, or under a contract,
with another person—the other person,
unless the designer and the other
person have agreed to the contrary;
(c) a person
who derives title to the design from a person mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b),
or by devolution by will or by operation
Designs Act 2003
Chris Ford Enterprises Pty Ltd v BH
& JR Badenhop Pty Ltd
(1985) 7 FCR 75
, 80 quoted in
LED Technologies
Pty Ltd v Elecspess Pty Ltd
[2008] FCA 1941
(2008) 80 IPR 85
(d) a person who would, on registration of the design, be entitled to have the
exclusive rights in the design assigned to the person;
(e) the legal personal representative of a deceased person mentioned in
paragraph (a), (b), (c) or (d).
(2) Despite subsection (1), a person is not entitled to be entered on the
Register as the registered owner of a design that has not
yet been registered
(a) the person has assigned all of the person’s rights in the design to
another person; or
(b) the person’s rights in the design have devolved on another person by
operation of law.
(3) To avoid doubt:
(a) more than one person may be entitled to be entered on the Register as the
registered owner of a design; and
(b) unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to the registered owner
of a registered design in this Act is a reference
to each of the registered
owners of the design.
(4) No person other than a person mentioned in paragraph (1)(a), (b), (c), (d)
(e) is entitled to be entered on the Register as the registered owner of a
design that has not yet been registered.
from leaving me to join some dots between his directorship of the Owner and Mr
Whelan’s alleged role as co-designer, his
declaration provides no clear
explanation of how the Owner came to have an entitlement to the Designs from
him, let alone from the
Requestor. Noting that the Owner has not put forward a
positive case for its ownership of the Designs, I now turn to the account
one reading, this account is fairly simple and follows on from the discussion
above. The Requestor brought his designs for the
sheet and pin pile system to
the attention of the Owner through its directors. One of those directors, Mr
Whelan, created new drawings
of the system components. At no point in this
sequence of events is any implication that the Requestor was employed by the
Indeed, the conceptualising of the Designs and their reduction to an
early visible form had already happened before the Owner was
incorporated on 2
April 2015. Further, there is no suggestion of an assignment of the Designs. The
only conclusion open on this reading
is that entitlement remained with the
Requestor under
of the Act, since he was their sole designer and had
not alienated the property.
Complicating
things slightly is a relationship that the Requestor has in the past had with
one of the directors of the Owner, Mr Nugent.
The Requestor for a time performed
work for Mr Nugent’s company, Nugent Developments Pty Ltd.
overlapped with the period wherein the Requestor developed the Designs. The
Requestor has provided a significant amount of information
that goes to the
nature of his relationship with Nugent Developments Pty Ltd. There is no
reference to any contract requiring the
creation of the Designs in the evidence,
so that aspect of
of the Act need not be considered further. Turning
to the only remaining possibility, employment, the starting point is to recall
the principles relating to inventorship under the
Patents Act 1990
generally to designership under the
Designs Act 2003
. Both involve
activities of original creativity. Both involve situations where multiple people
involved in the creative exercise. And both require devolution of title from the
creator of the work to the person obtaining the
legal monopoly right.’
the relevant tests from patent case law then: a designer will have created a
design ‘in the course of employment’
only where the employee’s
duties include a duty to create designs.
This has been held, in the patents
context, to extend to situations where an invention relating to the
employer’s commercial
activities, made in the course of employment and
using the materials of the employer. Even in such a situation, an absence of a
to invent will mean that the property in the invention remains with the
In contrast, a design
created by an independent contractor under a contract for services retains
rights in any design created during
the performance of the contract (subject, of
course, to the terms of the contract).
the balance of the evidence before me, it seems most likely that the Requestor
created the Designs completely independent to his
relationship with Nugent
Developments Pty Ltd. However, in case I am wrong, I will also consider two
other possibilities: that the
Requestor created the Designs as an independent
contractor of Nugent Developments Pty Ltd, or as an employee of Nugent
Developments
these two options, it seems far more likely that the Requestor was an
independent contractor performing general tasks relating
to building work on a
series of projects for Nugent Developments Pty Ltd. Indeed, the Requestor has
provided copious evidence that
goes to this point, including his answers to a
tool on the Australian Taxation Office’s website used to indicate whether
Allen Hardware Products Pty Ltd v Tclip
[2008] ADO 8
University of Western Australia v Gray
(2009) 179 FCR 346.
an employee or a contractor and his superannuation statements covering the
entire period of his work with Nugent Developments Pty
Ltd. Among them are
several strong indicators that the Requestor was in fact an independent
contractor, including that he brought
his own tools and machinery to the jobs,
he operated as a sole trader with his own ABN, that he was permitted to
subcontract his
work, and that he did not receive superannuation or leave
entitlements. If this was the case, in line with the principles set out
any designs created by the Requestor remain his alone (subject to the terms of
the contract, which have not been provided
for me to consider
the other hand, if I were to assume against the weight of the evidence that the
Requestor was an employee of Nugent Developments
Pty Ltd, then to find in favour
of the Owner I would still need to be shown, evidence that the Requestor’s
job included a duty
to create designs or that he was otherwise was bound by
fiduciary duty that would give rise to proprietary rights in favour of Nugent
Developments Pty Ltd.
Requestor’s evidence is that his job was limited to masonry work and
installing earth retention levies. Nothing in this
implies a duty to create
designs. Finally, he was not, for example, a director of Nugent Developments Pty
Ltd, so nothing in the
facts presented to me indicate that he was under a
fiduciary duty to that company.
Decision and Costs
of the Act provides two bases for a successful application under
Registrar is satisfied that:
(a) a person or
persons were entitled persons at the time the design was first registered, and
one or more of the original registered
owners of the design was not an entitled
person at that time; or
original registered owner of the design was an entitled person at the time when
the design was first registered, but another
person or persons were also
entitled persons at that time;
the Registrar may make a written declaration specifying that a person whom the
Registrar is satisfied was an entitled person at the
time the design was first
registered is an entitled person under this subsection.
on my discussion of the facts above, I find in favour of the Requestor under
paragraph (a). At the time of their respective
registrations, John Michael
Jarvie was the only entitled person to be entered on the Register as the owner
University of Western Australia v Gray
(2008) 246 ALR 603
, 940 [1418], 948 [1442].
Designs, and Comtec Industries Pty Ltd was not an entitled person for either of
the Designs. These reasons shall be taken to be my
written declaration to that
Requestor has asked that I use ‘discretionary powers’ under
the Act and reg 11.22 of the
Designs Regulations 2004
(Cth) (‘the
Regulations’) ‘to order that’ the Designs be transferred to
the Requestor. I have set out those
provisions below:
148 Exercise of discretionary power by Registrar
Registrar must not exercise a discretionary power under this Act adversely to a
person without giving that person an opportunity
to be heard.
11.22 Exercise of discretionary powers by Registrar
Registrar must give a person an opportunity to be heard before exercising a
discretionary power under these Regulations adversely
to the person.
Note: See section 148 of the Act for a similar provision.
(2) For section 148 of the Act and subregulation (1), the Registrar must give
the person an opportunity to be heard by:
(a) asking the
person for written submissions; or
(b) notifying the person that, on request to the Registrar, the person may be
heard by way of an oral hearing on a date, and at a
time and place, determined
by the Registrar; or
(c) notifying
the person of the date, time and place of an oral hearing.
(3) The Registrar may exercise the discretionary power if the
(a) notifies
the Registrar that the person does not want to be heard; or
(b) does not file written submissions if requested under subregulation 11.23(1);
(c) does not
attend an oral hearing if notified under subregulation 11.23(2).
(4) If the Registrar exercises discretionary power in any of the circumstances
mentioned in subregulation (3), the Registrar must
notify the person of the
Registrar’s decision.
of these provisions provide me with a positive power to amend the Register.
Rather, they specify a procedure for me to follow
should I intend to exercise a
discretionary power elsewhere conferred under the Act or Regulations. The
nearest provision to a power
to change the ownership appears to be reg 9.05 of
the Regulations, which is set out below:
9.05 Correction of Register
Registrar may, of his or her own motion, amend an entry in the Register to
correct a clerical error or an obvious mistake.
(2) The Registrar may, on request made in the approved form, amend an entry in
the Register:
(a) to correct
a clerical error or an obvious mistake; or
(b) if a name or an address entered in the Register has been changed—to
change the name or address.
(3) If the Registrar proposes to amend an entry in the Register, the Registrar
may give notice of the proposed amendment to a person
who is entered in the
Register as having an interest in the design.
(4) If a proposed amendment of an entry would materially alter the meaning or
scope of the entry, the Registrar must publish, in
Official Journal
a notice of the request to amend the entry.
(5) A person may oppose the amendment by filing a notice of opposition, in an
approved form, within one month from the publication
of the notice under
subregulation (4).
Note: For the circumstances in which an extension of time can be sought, see
section 137 of the Act.
(6) The Registrar must give a copy of the notice of opposition to the person who
requested the amendment as soon as practicable.
(7) If the amendment is not opposed, the Registrar must amend the entry as
(8) If the amendment is opposed, the Registrar must amend the entry if the
Registrar decides to do so, subject to a decision of a
tribunal or prescribed
court in relation to the opposition.
being no clerical error or obvious mistake
in relation to the ownership of
either of the Designs, this power is not enlivened. On my reading of the Act and
Regulations, having
decided for the Requestor under s 52 of the Act, I am now
required to follow the remainder of that provision. Had the Designs been
application stage, I would have the power to do as the Requestor asked me due to
the terms of s 30 of the Act. The Requestor
may find some comfort in the fact
that due to my declaration above, he is entitled by virtue of ss 21 and 55 of
the Act to make an
application for either or both of the Designs, and he will be
entitled to the priority dates that each currently has.
Designs are to be revoked one month from the date of this decision. If the
Registrar of Designs has been served with a notice
of appeal from this decision
before that time, I direct that revocation shall not occur until the appeal has
been withdrawn or discontinued.
Otherwise the disposition of this examination
should be in accordance with the Court’s order or
For a discussion of the meaning of these
terms, see, eg,
Johnson & Johnson v Self Care Corporation Pty Ltd
[2014] ATMO 111
, [16]-[33].
Requestor has sought an award of costs. The ordinary course is for costs to
follow the event. I see no reason to stray from that
here. I award costs against
the Owner in the applicable amounts set out in sch 3 of the
Regulations.
Adrian Richards Hearing Officer
Oppositions and Hearings
Trade Marks and Designs Group 31 October
RTF format (4.81 MB)
Signed PDF/A format