JYVT and Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs (Migration) [2024] AATA 3617 (11 October 2024)
JYVT and Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs (Migration) [2024] AATA 3617 (11 October
Division: GENERAL DIVISION
File Number(s):
2023/0931 and 2023/0933
Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
Deputy President
Britten-Jones
The Tribunal sets aside the two decisions of
the delegate dated 15 February 2023 and substitutes:
decision to revoke the cancellation of the applicant’s Class XB Subclass
202 Global Special Humanitarian visa; and
decision to not exercise the discretion under s 501(1) to refuse the grant of a
Protection visa.
........................[sgd]................................................
Deputy President Britten-Jones
MIGRATION – Non-revocation of mandatory cancellation of Class XB
Subclass 202 Global Special Humanitarian visa – Subsequent
refusal of a
Protection (Class XA) visa under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) – where the applicant does not pass the character test –
whether there is another reason to revoke the mandatory
cancellation –
whether the discretion under
of the Act to refuse to grant the
Protection visa should be exercised – applicant has strong ties to
Australia because he arrived
when eight years old and has lived the majority of
his life in Australia – applicant has been living in the community for 10
months and is unlikely to reoffend – decisions under review are set
Legislation
Migration Act 1958
v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2023] HCA 37
v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services
and Multicultural Affairs
[2023] HCA 17
(2023) 276 CLR 136
v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and
Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 6
Tanielu v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2014] FCAFC 673
Ismail v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship & Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 2
RCLN v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCA 876
Secondary Materials
Direction No. 110 – Visa refusal and cancellation under
section 501
and revocation of a mandatory cancellation of a visa under
section 501CA
REASONS FOR DECISION
Deputy President
Britten-Jones
the Applicant
) seeks a review of decisions by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs (
7 July 2016, the Applicant’s Class XB Subclass 202 Global Special
Humanitarian visa (
the humanitarian visa
) was mandatorily cancelled under
Migration Act 1958
the cancellation decision
) because he had been convicted of armed
robbery and sentenced to 16 months imprisonment.
26 March 2018, the Applicant applied for a Protection (Class XA) visa (
Protection visa
) which was refused on 15 February 2023 under
are two decisions under review. The first decision (
the non-revocation
) was made pursuant to
to not revoke the mandatory
cancellation of
the humanitarian visa. The second
the refusal decision
) was to refuse his application for a
Protection visa under
Tribunal affirmed these decisions on 10 May
The Federal Court set aside
the affirmation and remitted the matter for re-hearing to the Tribunal.
(7)(c) provide that a person does not pass the character test
if they have been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 12 months or
Applicant fails the character test on account of being sentenced to a term of
imprisonment of 16 months for armed robbery
on 17 May 2016.
Applicant concedes that he does not pass the character test. The issues before
the Tribunal are:
(a) whether the Tribunal is satisfied that there is another reason to revoke the
cancellation of his humanitarian visa; and
(b) whether the discretion under
to refuse to grant the Protection visa should be exercised.
hearing was held on 9 October 2024. The Applicant was
represented and gave
oral evidence to the Tribunal. The hearing was originally listed for 25 and 26
September 2024 but the Applicant
failed to attend. He explained that his lift
did not arrive and he did not have any money for public transport. The hearing
adjourned and the Applicant was lucky to be given another chance.
Respondent noted in his statement of facts, issues and contentions that some
significant events have occurred since the last Tribunal
(a) The High Court handed down judgment in
v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2023] HCA 37
(2023) 97 ALJR 1005
which held that immigration detention under
of the Act for the
purposes of removal under
of the Act was not constitutionally permissible
where there was no realistic prospect of the non-citizen’s removal from
becoming practicable in the reasonably foreseeable future;
(b) subsequently, the applicant was granted a Bridging (Removal Pending) visa
) on 21 November 2023, and has thus spent about ten months in the
(c) the Minister has made a new Ministerial Direction (Direction 110). The new
Direction puts a stronger emphasis on the protection
of the Australian
community, which is now essentially paramount: it is “generally to be
given greater weight than other primary
considerations”; and
(d) the High Court’s decisions in
v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2023] HCA 17
(2023) 276 CLR 136
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 6
(2024) 98 ALJR
have the effect that the Tribunal cannot rely upon any
“non-conviction” dispositions recorded in the applicant’s
criminal record.
Applicant is a 26-year-old man of Nuer ethnicity, who was born on 6 September
1997. His family are from an area that is now part
of South Sudan, the region of
Nasir, and are Christians. He has been separated from his mother since he was
around five years old.
She went to Ethiopia, but the applicant is now concerned
heard from her for some time. The applicant had no father figure as a child,
and eventually discovered, when he was later told
by his sister, that his father
Applicant arrived in Australia on 8 December 2005, when he was eight years old.
He was accompanied by his older sister and three
other siblings.
Applicant’s criminal history is detailed in the police certificate. The
Applicant’s visa was mandatorily cancelled
on 7 July 2016 on the basis
that he was convicted on one count of armed robbery and one count of carrying a
firearm as a prohibited
person. The Applicant completed his sentence of 16
months’ detention in a Youth Justice Centre and was transferred to
immigration
accordance with the High Court of Australia decision in
Applicant was released from immigration detention in November 2023 and was
granted a BVR. The last BVR issued to the Applicant
on 17 July 2024 did not
require the Applicant to wear a monitoring device or to abide by a specified
Evidence from the applicant
Applicant had a traumatic childhood due to the Sudanese Civil War. He fled Sudan
and went to Egypt in 2002, where he also witnessed
violence. He came to
Australia with his siblings who have all adopted Australia as their home. The
Applicant’s older sister,
has been his primary carer and he lives with her
to this day. The applicant found it very difficult to adjust to life in
in particular because of the language barrier and he soon got himself
into trouble. However, the applicant was good at soccer and
he became a house
captain at primary school. From about the age of 13 he started smoking marijuana
and then proceeded to alcohol
and ice. His sister knew about the alcohol and
told him he was drinking too much but she was busy with six children of her own.
was expelled from school at the end of year 10 when they found marijuana in
his locker. At that time, he was smoking marijuana every
day. He attended TAFE
at Dandenong but by that stage he had started smoking ice daily and committing
Applicant has been outside of the community since late 2015 when he was put into
juvenile detention, serving three months in an
adult prison before returning to
juvenile detention, after which he went into immigration detention from which he
was released in
November 2023. Upon his release he went to live with his older
sister. His BVR had conditions which included a nightly curfew and
a requirement
to report every day and an ankle monitor. These conditions have been relaxed so
that he no longer has an ankle monitor,
reports once a week and has no curfew.
He has not been able to find any paid employment since he was released but he
has been helping
a friend with landscaping on a regular basis for experience.
More recently he has done some rendering for another friend. He was
Centrelink payments up until about a month ago which should resume soon.
Applicant was in a relationship immediately after his release from detention but
that ended about two months ago because she cheated
on him. He has tried to
reach out to her again because she may be pregnant, although the Applicant is
not sure about this.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
, the Minister must cancel a visa that has been granted to a person if:
(a) the Minister is satisfied that the person does not pass the character test
because of the operation of paragraph (6)(a) (substantial
criminal record), on
the basis of paragraph (7)(a), (b) or (c); and
(b) the person is serving a sentence of imprisonment, on a full-time basis in a
custodial institution, for an offence against a law
of the Commonwealth, a State
or a Territory.
character test referred to in
is outlined in
Relevantly,
provides that a person does not pass the character test if the
person has a substantial criminal record (as defined by sub-s (7)).
purposes of
s 501(6)(a)
, and relevant to this matter, a person has a
substantial criminal record if the person has been sentenced to a term of
imprisonment
of 12 months or
a visa has been cancelled as set out above, the Minister has a power under
s 501CA(4)(b)
to revoke the cancellation decision if satisfied that the
visa holder passes the character test, or that there is another reason
original decision should be revoked:
501CA Cancellation of visa—revocation of
decision under
subsection 501(3A)
(person serving sentence of
imprisonment)
(1) This section applies if the Minister makes a decision (the original
decision) under
subsection 501(3A)
(person serving sentence of
imprisonment) to cancel a visa that has been granted to a person.
(2) For the purposes of this section, relevant information is
information (other than non‑disclosable information) that the
(a) would be the reason, or a part of the reason, for making the original
decision; and
(b) is specifically about the person or another person and is not just about
a class of persons of which the person or other person
is a member.
(3) As soon as practicable after making the original decision, the Minister
(a) give the person, in the way that the Minister considers appropriate in
the circumstances:
(i) a written notice that sets out the original decision; and
(ii) particulars of the relevant information; and
(b) invite the person to make representations to the Minister, within the
period and in the manner ascertained in accordance with
the regulations, about
revocation of the original decision.
(4) The Minister may revoke the original decision if:
(a) the person makes representations in accordance with the invitation;
(b) the Minister is satisfied:
(i) that the person passes the character test (as defined by
section 501)
(ii) that there is another reason why the original decision should be
deals with the refusal or cancellation of a visa on character grounds.
Relevantly, it provides:
(1) The Minister may refuse to grant a visa to a person if the person does
not satisfy the Minister that the person passes the character
Note: Character test is defined by subsection (6)
(6) For the purposes of this section, a person does not pass the
character test if:
(a) The person has a substantial criminal record (as defined by subsection
the cancellation decision is not revoked or a visa is refused, the right to have
that decision reviewed by the Tribunal is enlivened.
Tribunal is bound by
to comply with any directions made under the
Migration Act
. In this case,
Direction No 110 – Visa refusal and
cancellation under
section 501
and revocation of a mandatory cancellation of a
section 501CA
the Direction
) has application.
the purposes of deciding whether to refuse a non-citizen’s visa or whether
or not to revoke the mandatory cancellation of
a non-citizen’s visa,
paragraph 5.2 of the Direction contains several principles that must inform a
decision-maker’s
application of the Primary and Other Considerations
identified in
where relevant to the decision.
principles that are found in paragraph 5.2 of the Direction are as
(1) Australia has a sovereign right to determine whether
non-citizens who are of character concern are allowed to enter and/or remain
Australia. Being able to come to or remain in Australia is a privilege Australia
confers on non-citizens in the expectation that
they are, and have been,
law-abiding, will respect important institutions, such as Australia's law
enforcement framework, and will
not cause or threaten harm to individuals or the
Australian community.
(2) The safety of the Australian Community is the highest priority of the
Australian Government.
(3) Non-citizens who engage or have engaged in criminal or other serious
conduct should expect to be denied the privilege of coming
to, or to forfeit the
privilege of staying in, Australia.
(4) The Australian community expects that the Australian Government can
and should refuse entry to non-citizens, or cancel their visas,
if they engaged
in conduct, in Australia or elsewhere, that raises serious character concerns.
This expectation of the Australian
community applies regardless of whether the
non-citizen poses a measureable risk of causing physical harm to the Australian
(5) Australia has a low tolerance of any criminal or other serious conduct
by visa applicants or those holding a limited stay visa,
or by other
non-citizens who have been participating in, and contributing to, the Australian
community only for a short period of
(6) With respect to decisions to refuse, cancel, and revoke cancellation
of a visa, Australia may afford a higher level of tolerance
of criminal or other
serious conduct by non-citizens who have lived in the Australian community for
most of their life, or from a
very young age.
(7) Decision-makers must take into account the primary and other
considerations relevant to the individual case. In some circumstances,
nature of the non-citizen's conduct, or the harm that would be caused if the
conduct were to be repeated, may be so serious that
even strong countervailing
considerations may be insufficient to justify not cancelling or refusing the
visa, or revoking a mandatory
cancellation.
(8) The inherent nature of certain conduct such as family violence is so
serious that even strong countervailing considerations may
be insufficient to
justify not cancelling or refusing the visa, or revoking a mandatory
cancellation, even if the information available
at the time of consideration
suggests that the noncitizen does not pose a measureable risk of causing
physical harm to the Australian
by the principles in paragraph 5.2 above, I must take into account the primary
and other considerations in the Direction.
primary considerations
(1) protection
of the Australian community from criminal or other serious conduct;
(2) whether the conduct engaged in constituted family violence;
(3) the strength, nature and duration of ties to Australia;
(4) the best interests of minor children in Australia;
(5) expectations of the Australian community.
other considerations
consequences of the decision;
b) extent of impediments if removed;
c) impact on Australian business interest.
primary consideration of the protection of the Australian community is generally
to be given greater weight than other primary
considerations.
CONSIDERATION
Protection of the Australian community – 8.1 of Direction
considering the protection of the Australian community, I have regard to the
principle that the Government is committed to protecting
the Australian
community from harm as a result of criminal activity. Entering or remaining in
Australia is a privilege that Australia
confers on non-citizens in the
expectation that they are, and have been, law abiding, will respect important
institutions, and will
not cause or threaten harm to individuals or the
Australian community.
As required
by paragraph 8.1(2) of the Direction, I give consideration below to:
(a) the nature and seriousness of the non-citizen’s conduct to date;
(b) the risk to the Australian community, should the non-citizen commit further
offences or engage in other serious conduct.
The nature and seriousness of the non-citizen’s
conduct – 8.1.1 of Direction 110
Applicant’s criminal record is set out in the report from the Australian
Criminal Intelligence Commission.
The four earliest entries can be disregarded because they proceeded without
conviction.
first offences for the purposes of this application were convictions on 4
November 2015 for possession and use of cannabis and
stating a false name. The
Applicant was discharged without penalty. The Applicant was unable to remember
details of this offending,
but it is consistent with his evidence about smoking
marijuana regularly from an early age.
there were a series of offences for which the Applicant was convicted on 8
December 2015. These offences involved theft, damaging
property, causing
injury, resisting a police officer and a series of bail offences. He was
ordered to be detained in a Youth Justice
Centre for a period of at least six
months. The Applicant was unable to remember details of this offending.
17 May 2016, he was convicted of armed robbery and of carrying a firearm as a
prohibited person. These offences took place on 5
November 2015 when the
Applicant was 18 years old and affected by drugs. In respect of the charge of
armed robbery, the Applicant
was sentenced to 16 months’ detention in a
Youth Justice Centre. In respect of the charge of carrying a firearm as a
person, the Applicant was sentenced to 4 months’ detention in a
Youth Justice Centre, concurrent with the sentence imposed
on the charge of
armed robbery. The total effective sentence was 16 months’ detention in a
Youth Justice Centre. The sentencing
judge considered his offending serious and
alarming. He described how the Applicant walked up to the victim and pointed a
shot gun at his head and asked for the keys to his car. This had a
traumatic effect on the victim who later took his own life.
Applicant recalled the armed robbery. He was using drugs and alcohol at the
time. He recalls pointing the shot gun at the head
of the victim and stealing
his car. He understands how scary that would have been and he feels disgusted
that he acted in that way.
Applicant was subsequently convicted on two counts of theft of a motor vehicle
in July 2016 for which he was sentenced to 30 days’
detention in a Youth
Training Centre on each charge.
4 May 2017, the Applicant was convicted of criminal damage by fire (arson) and
sentenced to three months’ imprisonment.
He was 19 years old at this time
and in youth detention where there was a riot. In sentencing the Applicant, the
magistrate took
into account his guilty plea, that he was still a teenager and
that in spite of a very difficult life he was considered to have reasonable
prospects of rehabilitation. The magistrate noted that the Applicant was not one
of the instigators and that his role in the episode
was fairly small but that
the offence of arson was extremely serious and setting fire to any premises is a
very dangerous act that
can risk life and limb.
Applicant is recorded as having been involved in what were described as two
minor incidents at Villawood immigration detention
Further, he was issued
with a seizure notice at the Christmas Island detention centre in relation to
goods seized on 2 November 2020.
offending involved violence and damage to property which is very serious. The
custodial sentences reflect the seriousness of the
offending. The offending was
frequent with a significant cumulative effect but I note the relevant offending
was limited to a two
year period when the Applicant was still a teenager. The
last offence occurred in 2017 when the Applicant was 19 years old. The most
serious offence was the threatening behaviour with a sawn-off shotgun but
otherwise the criminal conduct is less serious.
conclude as to the nature and seriousness of the Applicant’s conduct that
it was serious but should be seen in the context
of the age of the Applicant,
his drug and alcohol abuse and the limited period of offending. Nevertheless,
it is a significant factor
in terms of whether I am satisfied that there is
‘another reason’ to set aside the non-revocation decision or whether
I should refuse to grant a visa.
The risk to the Australian community should the non-citizen
commit further offences or engage in other serious conduct – 8.1.2
Direction 110
considering the need to protect the Australian community from harm, I have
regard to the Government’s view that the Australian
community’s
tolerance for any risk of future harm becomes lower as the seriousness of the
potential harm increases. Some conduct
and the harm that would be caused, if it
were repeated, is so serious that any risk that it may be repeated may be
unacceptable.
As required by
paragraph 8.1.2(2) of the Direction, I also have regard to, cumulatively:
(a) the nature of the harm to individuals or the Australian community should the
non-citizen engage in further criminal or other
serious conduct; and
(b) the likelihood of the non-citizen engaging in further criminal or other
serious conduct, taking into account:
(i) information and evidence on the risk of the non­ citizen re-offending;
(ii) evidence of rehabilitation achieved by the time of the decision, giving
weight to time spent in the community since their most
recent offence (noting
that decisions should not be delayed in order for rehabilitative courses to be
undertaken).
(c) where consideration is being given to whether to refuse to grant a visa to
the non-citizen — whether the risk of harm may
be affected by the duration
and purpose of the non-citizen's intended stay, the type of visa being applied
for, and whether there
are strong or compassionate reasons for granting a short
terms of measuring the risk to the Australian community, guidance can be found
in the decision of Mortimer J (as she then was)
Tanielu v Minister for
Immigration and Border
Protection.
Her Honour said
that, to determine an unacceptable risk, one has to evaluate what the
consequences of reoffending are as well as
the likelihood of the person engaging
in that conduct in the future.
Nature of harm if further criminal or other serious conduct
– 8.1.2(2)(a) of Direction 110
the Applicant were to engage in further similar criminal offending, the nature
of the harm would be serious. By committing acts
of violence and arson, the
Applicant has caused significant trauma and damage to property. If the Applicant
continued to engage in
similar conduct it would have serious
consequences.
Likelihood of further criminal or other serious
conduct – 8.1.2(2)(b) of Direction 110
Applicant has expressed remorse for his offending and has shown in the last 10
months that he is capable of behaving appropriately
whilst in the
report from the Department of Health and Human Services dated 9 March 2017 was
provided to the sentencing magistrate with respect
to the arson offence. The
report noted that the Applicant adhered to unit rules and expectations without
any issues and often proactively
refrains from antisocial incidents during his
sentence at the Youth Justice Centre. Further, the Applicant had utilised his
well attending all programs that have been offered to him such as
psychological, drug and alcohol counselling, hospitality and vocational
unit where he was participating in ground maintenance duties. In summary it was
applicant] is a young man who has recently turned 19 years of age with a
significant trauma history. [The applicant] presents
as an intelligent and
insightful young man who is still processing the loss of his parents and his
traumatic childhood experiences.
[The applicant] appears motivated to want to
make significant life changes and has evidently demonstrated these changes
through predominantly
prosocial behaviour during his sentence at MYJC, despite
his alleged involvement in the matter that comes before the Court today.
Applicant has been diagnosed with PTSD and has abused drugs. These are factors
that contributed significantly to his past offending,
but the Applicant has
expressed insight about this and has started to address these issues by
attending relevant programs and receiving
counselling. In youth detention the
Applicant went to school and attended classes and he has tried to rehabilitate
himself by doing
courses. He has avoided drugs since 2015 and since his release
from detention he only drinks socially.
his most recent written statement, the Applicant said that spending time in
youth detention and immigration detention was hard
but helped him to break the
pattern of bad behaviour that he had settled into prior to his arrest. He said
that at the time of his
offending he was using drugs and spending time with the
wrong people, but he had started to address these issues and now had a support
network of positive people around him. Those people include his sister with whom
he is living. She is providing the support and
stability which has helped the
Applicant transition into the community. She has provided a statutory
declaration in support of the
Applicant which provides details of the difficult
life in Sudan and Egypt and when the family first arrived in Australia. The
said that family is extremely important to him and is a huge motivator
for him going forward. He knows what it was like to grow up
without parents and
he does not want that for his own children. Further, he is a religious person
which helps him to understand the
world and his place in it. He says that he is
determined to show that he is no longer a risk to anyone in the community.
are letters from the Ulang Community Association, the All Nations Presbyterian
Church and the Youth Support Service in Victoria
which speak positively about
the Applicant’s engagement with them and offer support to him in the
community. In his oral evidence
the Applicant said he goes to church and has a
good relationship with the priest. He is trying to organise some 5 on 5 soccer
through the church.
consider that the Applicant has commenced taking appropriate steps towards
rehabilitation through his activities whilst in detention
and through his
behaviour in the community. The Applicant has shown maturity and insight into
his previous conduct and has support
from his family and community groups. The
Applicant has proved that he can live in the community without engaging in crime
last 10 months. During that period in the community, the BVR conditions
have been relaxed because of his good behaviour. The Applicant
explained how he
no longer associates with people from his past and he avoids drugs and only
drinks alcohol on special occasions.
He has also had the benefit of weekly or
fortnightly meetings with a support worker and he has conducted about seven
sessions over
the phone with a psychologist. He knows that if he relapses into
alcohol and drug abuse that his sister would call the police. He
understands how
important his sister is to him and he wants to maintain is good relationship
with her and not let her down. This
is a particularly strong motivation for him
which suggests that he is unlikely to reoffend, particularly in circumstances
has avoided problems in the community since November 2023 and his last
offending was in January 2017.
Conclusion as to protection of the
Australian community – 8.1 of Direction 110
Respondent says that, irrespective of my decision, the Applicant will remain in
the community. However, the Respondent submits
that the protection of the
Australian community is best served by the Applicant remaining in the community
but subject to strict
visa conditions designed to ensure community safety.
Government is committed to protecting the Australian community from harm as a
result of criminal activity by
non-citizens.
The Applicant has
committed serious crimes but he has not been convicted of any further criminal
offending since his 2017 matter
and he has shown himself able to behave in the
community for the last 10 months. It is my view that the Applicant’s
and the harm that would be caused if it were to be repeated is not so
serious that any risk that it may be repeated is
unacceptable.
circumstances where there remains some risk of re-offending, I conclude that the
protection of the Australian community is
a factor that weighs against the
Applicant but only moderately so.
Family Violence – 8.2 of
Direction 110
Applicant has not committed family violence. The Respondent accepts that this
factor is neutral.
Strength, Nature and Duration of Ties to
Australia – 8.3 of Direction 110
primary consideration provides at paragraph 8.3 of Direction
(1) Decision-makers must consider any impact of the decision
on the non-citizen's immediate family members in Australia, where those
members are Australian citizens, Australian permanent residents, or people who
have a right to remain in Australia indefinitely.
(2) Where consideration is being given to whether to cancel a
non-citizen's visa or whether to revoke the mandatory cancellation of
visa, the decision-maker must also consider the strength, nature and duration of
any other ties that the non-citizen has to
the Australian community. In doing
so, decision-makers must have regard to:
a) how long the non-citizen has resided in Australia, including whether
the non-citizen arrived as a young child, noting that:
i. less weight should be given where the non-citizen began offending soon
after arriving in Australia; and
ii. more weight should be given to time the non-citizen has spent
contributing positively to the Australian community
b) the strength, duration and nature of any family or social links with
Australian citizens, Australian permanent residents and/or
people who have an
indefinite right to remain in Australia.
Applicant has lived in Australia since he was eight years old. The Applicant
experienced difficulties as a youth in Australia
but he went to school and did
well, becoming a house captain in primary school. He has been in Australia for
18 years which represents
the majority of his life. He has no family left in
South Sudan, but he has siblings, nieces and nephews in Australia. His sisters
have provided statements in support of the Applicant. It is clear that he has a
strong relationship with all members of his family
who will be very disappointed
if the Applicant is not successful on these applications. He maintains strong
connections to his family
and religious communities. Less weight would be given
to these factors because, whatever decision is made, he will remain in the
community and be able to continue to develop and enjoy these relationships.
conclusion with respect to ties to Australia, I place significant weight on the
fact that the Applicant has spent 18 years in Australia
which is almost three
quarters of his life. The Applicant has all his family in Australia and has made
a contribution to the Australian
community through his attendance at school. I
conclude that the Applicant’s ties to Australia is a factor that weighs
in favour of the Applicant.
Best interests of minor children – 8.4 of Direction
must determine whether the visa refusal and the non-revocation of the
cancellation of the Applicant’s visa is, or is not,
in the best interests
of a child who is affected by the decision. The following factors that I must
consider where relevant to this
application
(a) the nature and duration of the relationship between the child and the
non-citizen. Less weight should generally be given where
the relationship is
non-parental, and/or there is no existing relationship and/or there have been
long periods of absence, or limited
meaningful contact (including whether an
existing Court order restricts contact);
(b) the extent to which the non-citizen is likely to play a positive parental
role in the future, taking into account the length of
time until the child turns
18, and including any Court orders relating to parental access and care
arrangements;
(c) the impact of the non-citizen's prior conduct, and any likely future
conduct, and whether that conduct has, or will have a negative
impact on the
(d) the likely effect that any separation from the non-citizen would have on
the child, taking into account the child's or non-citizen's
ability to maintain
(e) whether there are other persons who already fulfil a parental role in
relation to the child;
(f) any known views of the child (with those views being given due weight in
accordance with the age and maturity of the child);
(g) evidence that the child has been, or is at risk of being, subject to, or
exposed to, family violence perpetrated by the non-citizen,
or has otherwise
been abused or neglected by the non-citizen in any way, whether physically,
sexually or mentally;
(h) evidence that the child has suffered or experienced any physical or
emotional trauma arising from the non-citizen's conduct.
Applicant said he has eight or nine nieces and nephews who are minors. In his
his sister and her six children
(three of whom are minors). He has a strong relationship with them as well as
the children of his
other siblings. The Respondent accepts that it would be in
the best interests of the Applicant’s nieces and nephew to have
him in the Australian community and for the Applicant to be able to assist his
siblings with their children’s development.
consider that it would be in the best interests of these children for the
cancellation decision to be revoked and for the visa to
be granted, although I
note that, irrespective of my decision, the Applicant will remain in the
community with access to these children.
Consequently, I find that the interests
of minor children is a factor that weighs in favour of revocation and grant of
the visa but
overall I do not give it significant weight.
Expectations of the Australian community – 8.5 of
Direction 110
Australian community expects non-citizens to obey Australian laws while in
Australia. Where a non-citizen has engaged in serious
conduct in breach of this
expectation, or where there is an unacceptable risk that they may do so, the
Australian community, as a
norm, expects the Government to not allow such a
non-citizen to remain in
The Applicant has
failed to obey the laws of Australia and would therefore be expected to be
removed from the community. His criminal
conduct was serious but at the lower
end of the spectrum and I do not consider there is an unacceptable risk of
further re-offending.
I take into account that the Australian community may
afford a higher level of tolerance of the Applicant’s criminal past
he has lived in Australia for most of his life and from a very young
8.5(4) of Direction 110 provides that, as a decision-maker, I must consider the
expectations of the Australian community
as a whole and proceed on the basis of
the Government’s views expressed therein, without independently assessing
the community’s
expectations in the particular case. In this regard, the
High Court recently stated in
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship & Multicultural
(Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman, Gleeson and Jagot JJ) in
relation to the equivalent paragraph in an earlier version of the
8.4 (“Expectations of the Australian community”) involves an
assessment in which the decision-maker is required
to consider that the
Australian community, as a norm, expects the Australian Government not to allow
a non-citizen who has engaged
in serious conduct in breach of Australian law to
enter or remain in Australia. This assessment under para 8.4 thus focuses on the
expectations that Direction 90 itself (by para 8.4(1)-(3), applied as required
by para 8.4(4)) instructs the decision-maker that
the Australian community holds
enter or remain in Australia
if they have committed serious breaches of
Australian law.
in its reasons, the Court said (at [51]–[52]):
para 8.4 does not stipulate that, in assessing what weight is to be given to the
expectations of the Australian community,
the decision-maker must attribute to
that hypothesised community knowledge of the personal circumstances of the
applicant for the
visa as known to the delegate. To the contrary, para 8.4(4)
stipulates that the decision-maker is to proceed on the basis of the
Government’s views as set out in para 8.4 “without independently
assessing the community’s expectations
in the particular
the recent Federal Court decision of
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
after considering the High Court’s decision in
assessment of community expectations is therefore not a matter of evidence, and
does not turn on the personal circumstances of
the individual non-citizen:
compare, in relation to an earlier iteration of the Ministerial
direction: FYBR v Minister for Home Affairs
(2019) 272 FCR
at [66] –[67] , [74]
–[75] (Charlesworth J), [91]–[93], [103]–[104] (Stewart
J); see also CKL21 v Minister
for Home Affairs
[2022] FCAFC 70
(2022) 293 FCR
–[30] (Moshinsky, O’Bryan and Cheeseman
JJ). The “degrees of tolerance” referred to elsewhere in the
“are matters that fall for consideration by the decision-maker
in the ultimate exercise of his or her discretion” (or,
in the present
context, the determination whether there is another reason to revoke the
original cancellation decision), and “in
determining whether it is
appropriate to give more or less weight to a deemed community expectation of
visa refusal that might otherwise
arise simply because of the nature of the
non-citizen’s character concerns or offences”: FYBR at
[77] (Charlesworth J).
In other words, the decision-maker can take into account
the personal circumstances of the individual non-citizen in so far as they
relevant to another primary consideration or one of the other considerations,
and adjust the relative weight to be given to each
of the primary and other
considerations accordingly.
Applicant in his statement of facts, issues and contentions at [40] outlined
seven factors but these factors are more appropriately
dealt with under
elsewhere by reference to primary and other considerations.
Applicant has failed to obey the laws of Australia and would therefore be
expected to be removed from the community. His criminal
conduct was serious and
I find that the Australian community expects that the Australian government
should cancel the humanitarian
visa and not grant the Protection visa. However,
Australia may afford him a higher level of tolerance because he has lived in the
Australian community for the majority of his life.
is a factor that weighs in favour of non-revocation of the cancellation decision
and not granting a Protection visa, but only
moderately so.
Considerations
deciding whether to exercise the discretion to refuse to grant a Protection visa
or whether there is ‘another reason’
to revoke the cancellation of
the Applicant’s visa, I must also take into account the ‘other
considerations’ listed
in Direction 110, but these are not
exhaustive.
Legal Consequences of Decision – 9.1 of Direction
Applicant was found by a delegate of the Minister to be owed protection.
Therefore paragraph 9.1.1 of the Direction is engaged
and non-refoulement
obligations are engaged in relation to the
9.1.1 of Direction 110 provides:
(1) Where a protection finding
(as defined in
section 197C
of the Act) has been made for a non-citizen in the
course of considering a protection visa application made by the non-citizen,
indicates that non-refoulement obligations are engaged in relation to the
non-citizen.
Section 197C(3)
ensures that, except in the limited circumstances
specified in
section 197C(3)(c)
section 198
does not require or authorise the
removal of an unlawful non-citizen to a country in respect of which a protection
finding has been
made for the non-citizen in the course of considering their
application for a protection visa. This means the non-citizen cannot
to that country in breach of non-refoulement obligations, even if an adverse
visa decision under
section 501
is made for the non-citizen and they
become, or remain, an unlawful non-citizen as a result. Instead, the non-citizen
must remain
in immigration detention as required by
section 189
unless and until
they are granted another visa or they can be removed to a country other than the
country by reference to which the
protection finding was made.
(3) Decision-makers should also be mindful that where the refusal,
cancellation or non-revocation decision concerns a protection visa,
will be prevented by
section 48A
of the Act from making a further application
for a protection visa while they are in the migration zone (unless the Minister
section 48A
does not apply to them — see
sections 48A
of the Act). Further, as a result of a refusal or cancellation decision
section 501
or a non-revocation decision under
section 501CA
, the person
will be prevented from applying for any other class of visa except a Bridging R
(Class WR) visa (see
section 501E
of the Act and regulation 2.12AA of the
Regulations
provisions of
of the Act and paragraph 9.1.1(2) of the Direction are
engaged because the Applicant has made a valid application for a Protection
that has been finally determined and because a protection finding has been made
with respect to the Applicant’s country
of nationality.
Section 197C(3)
applies whether or not either of the two visas have been refused and/or
cancelled. In these circumstances, an officer of the Respondent’s
Department is not authorised to remove the Applicant from Australia unless the
Applicant requests that he be removed to his country
of nationality. No such
request has been made by the Applicant. It follows that no weight would be given
to any risk of harm that
would arise if returned to South Sudan.
in mind the protection finding, were this Tribunal to not restore the
Applicant’s humanitarian visa status or, in the
alternative, were to
exercise its discretion to refuse the Protection visa, the Applicant would not
be removed to South Sudan and
would remain in the community subject to his
is not a case where removal or detention is a consequence of affirming the
decisions under review. The Applicant will stay in
the community if the
decisions are affirmed but he will remain subject to the conditions of his BVR.
These conditions were recently
relaxed, but conditions remain. By contrast, if I
find in favour of the Applicant, he will regain his humanitarian visa which will
allow him to remain in Australia permanently without the conditions of a BVR.
The preferable outcome for the Applicant is a humanitarian
visa or potentially a
Protection visa (as opposed to a BVR). The legal consequence of potentially
remaining subject to a BVR is a
factor that weighs in favour of the Applicant,
but with limited weight given that the differences in potential outcomes are not
significant as they used to be when removal or further detention were
potential outcomes.
Extent of impediments if removed – 9.2 of Direction
110 requires that I consider the extent of any impediments that the Applicant
may face if removed from Australia to South
Sudan in establishing himself and
maintaining basic living standards (in the context of what is generally
available to other citizens
of that country), taking into account:
(a) the applicant’s age and health;
(b) whether there are substantial language or cultural barriers; and
(c) any social, medical and/or economic support available to him in that
Applicant is 26 years old and in good physical health. He has been diagnosed
with PTSD and had a drug problem in the past. He
left Sudan as a child and has
no close family there. There would be substantial language and cultural barriers
if he returned to
South Sudan and the support needed for his mental health would
be limited.
Respondent accepts that if removed the Applicant would face very significant
impediments but submits (correctly in my view) that
if there is no prospect of
removal, then no weight would be given to this consideration. The Applicant is
subject to a protection
finding and therefore does not face the prospect of
removal to South Sudan. It follows that no or neutral weight would be given to
this consideration.
Impact on Australian business interests – 9.3 of
Direction 110
was no evidence of impact on Australian business interests within the meaning of
the Direction. This factor is neutral.
have considered the specific circumstances relating to the Applicant as part of
my consideration. I am now required to carry out
the evaluative exercise of
weighing up the factors to determine whether I am satisfied that there is
‘another reason’
to revoke the cancellation decision or to exercise
the power under
to refuse to grant the Protection visa to the
primary considerations of the protection and expectations of the Australian
community weigh against the Applicant, but only moderately
so. The Applicant
last offended in 2017 and has proved himself capable of behaving by avoiding
further offending in the community
over the last 10 months. His good behaviour
in the community has been recognised because he is no longer required to wear a
device or comply with a specified curfew. The Applicant had a
traumatic childhood. He has stopped taking drugs and has engaged
in appropriate
rehabilitative programs when in custody so as to address his past trauma and
drugs and alcohol abuse. He has good
support from his family who are providing
a stable environment for him. He has shown that he can reintegrate into society
any issues. In these circumstances, it is unlikely that he will reoffend
and he poses very little risk to the community. Whilst
the primary
consideration of expectations of the Australian community is generally to be
given greater weight than other primary
considerations, I consider this to be a
case where it is outweighed by the Applicant’s strength, nature and
duration of ties
to Australia which primarily arises from the fact that all his
family is in Australia and because he has lived in Australia for the
majority of
his life from the age of eight.
note that the best interests of minor children and the legal consequences of the
decisions are two further factors that weigh in
favour of the Applicant, but I
have given them very little weight.
weighed the considerations,
the Tribunal sets aside
the two decisions of the delegate and substitutes a decision to revoke the
cancellation decision and a decision
to not exercise the discretion to refuse
the grant of a Protection visa.
I certify that the preceding 78 (seventy-eight) paragraphs are a true
copy of the reasons for the decision herein of Deputy President
Britten-Jones
.........................[sgd]...............................................
Dated: 11 October 2024
Date(s) of hearing:
for the Applicant:
Dylan Ioannou-Booth
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Refugee Legal
Counsel for the Respondent:
Jonathan Barrington
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Australian Government Solicitor
All references to legislation
Migration Act
unless otherwise specified
JYVT and Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2023] AATA 1135
The background facts are
sourced from the applicant’s SOFIC dated 3 September 2024
Migration Act 1958
Migration Act
s 501(7)(c).
Direction 110 at 8.
Ibid 8.1(1).
Remittal Bundle pages 41 to
Remittal Bundle pages 363 to
Direction 110 at 8.1.2(1).
[2014] FCAFC 673
(2014) 225 FCR 424.
Remittal Bundle 215.
Direction 110 at 8.1(1).
Ibid 8.1.2(1).
Ibid 8.4(4).
Direction 110 at 8.5(1).
Ibid 5.2(6).
[2024] HCA 2
[2024] FCA 876
SZRTN v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2014] FCA 303
, 258 [86].
Paragraph 9.1.1(1) of the
RTF format (1.79 MB)
Signed PDF/A format