Seqirus Inc. v ModernaTX, Inc. [2025] APO 21 (4 July 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT
Seqirus Inc. v ModernaTX, Inc.
Patent Application: 2017326423
Title: High purity RNA compositions and methods for preparation
Patent Applicant: ModernaTX, Inc.
Opponent: Seqirus Inc.
Delegate: M. Umehara
Decision Date: 4 July 2025
Hearing Date: Written submissions completed on 7 April 2025
Catchwords:
– opposition to the grant of a patent under
s59 – no claims found to lack utility – novelty – citations do
not disclose all features of the claims – inventive step – it would
be a matter of routine to arrive at the claimed invention
– clear enough
and complete enough disclosure and support – technical contribution to the
art does not extend to a general
principle – opportunity to amend –
costs awarded
Representation: Patent attorney for the applicant: RnB IP
Patent attorney for the opponent: FB Rice Pty Ltd
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Patent Application: 2017326423
Title: High purity RNA compositions and methods for preparation
Patent Applicant: ModernaTX, Inc.
Date of Decision: 4 July 2025
The opposition is successful on the grounds of inventive step, clear
enough and complete enough disclosure and support with regard
to claims 1-8 and
11-20 and fails on the grounds of clarity, utility and novelty.
the applicant two (2) months from the date of this decision to file amendments
to overcome the deficiencies identified in
this decision.
I award costs according to Schedule 8 against the applicant, Moderna TX,
REASONS FOR DECISION
patent application no. 2017326423 (the
opposed application
) in the name
of ModernaTX, Inc. (the
) was filed under the provisions of the
Patent Cooperation Treaty on 14 September 2017 and claims priority from US
provisional patent
application 62/394711 filed on 14 September 2016. While
nothing turns on this point, a divisional application, 2024200861 claiming
priority from the opposed application was filed on 9 February 2024 and
examination has commenced.
acceptance of the opposed application was advertised on 9 November 2023.
Seqirus Inc. (the
) filed a notice of opposition under section
Patents Act 1990
) on 9 February 2024. A
statement of grounds and particulars (
) was subsequently filed on 9
May 2024. The SGP identified entitlement, manner of manufacture, novelty,
inventive step, utility,
sufficiency, clarity and support as grounds of
opposition.
evidence in support (
) was filed on 9 August 2024, consisting of a
declaration by Professor Andre Gerber dated 8 August 2024 (
together with exhibits AG-1 to AG-13 and a declaration by Professor Thomas
Preiss also dated 8 August 2024 (
) together with exhibits TP-1 to
evidence in answer was filed and the matter was set for hearing by written
submissions. The submissions were completed on 7 April
opponent’s submissions in support pressed novelty, lack of inventive step,
lack of clear enough and complete enough
disclosure, lack of utility and lack of
Onus and standard of proof
opposed application was filed after 15 April 2013 and is governed by the Act and
Patents Regulations 1991
as amended by the
Intellectual Property Laws
Amendment (Raising the Bar) Act
. Thus, the standard of proof that
applies in the present case is the balance of probabilities.
onus rests with the opponent to satisfy me, on a balance of probabilities, that
a ground of opposition to the grant exists. Under
subsection 60(3A), if I am
satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that a ground of opposition to the
grant of a patent exists,
I may refuse the application. I note, however, that,
under subsection 60(3B), I must not refuse an application without giving the
applicant a reasonable opportunity to amend the relevant specification to remove
any grounds of opposition.
The specification
specification includes 110 pages of written description, 20 claims as accepted,
40 figures spanning 51 pages and 32 sequences.
Before construing the
specification, I note the comments of Middleton J:
“It is well settled that the Court should, from the outset, approach
the task of patent construction with a generous measure
of common sense. The
Court must place itself in the position of a person skilled in the relevant art,
being the subject matter of
the patent. From this perspective, the patent is to
be read as a whole, in the context of the specification and in light of the
prevailing common general knowledge and state of the relevant art at the
priority date.”
invention as described
the heading “Background of the Invention”, it is explained that mRNA
has immense therapeutic potential by transiently
expressing any desired protein
while avoiding the downsides of viral and DNA-based nucleic acid delivery
approaches.
However, mammalian
cells contain sensors of nucleic acids including RNA as part of the innate
immune system, which need to be avoided
when developing mRNA
therapeutics.
work in the field showed that incorporation of modified nucleosides, in
particular pseudouridine, reduced innate immune activation
and increased
translation of mRNA.
progress identified double stranded RNA contaminants as being at least partially
responsible for the innate immune
activation.
However, there remains
a need for better understanding of the nature of contaminations and improved
methods of preparing mRNA for
therapeutic
the heading “Summary of Invention”, the invention is described as
relating to
RNA synthesis for producing RNA transcripts having
enhanced properties resulting in qualitatively and quantitatively superior
compositions.
In contrast to
methods described in the art which attempt to remove contaminants following
production, the described invention controls
the nature and levels of
contaminants produced in the
-transcription (
“Without being bound in theory, it is believed that preventing the
production of unwanted contaminants in the IVT reaction from
the outset provides
for improved compositions having higher purity and potency, measurable, for
example, in terms of increased translation
from full-length, intact mRNA in the
composition.”
“Detailed Description” explains that the IVT methods of the
invention involve a modification in the relative amounts
of nucleotides and/or
nucleotide analogues in the reaction mixture to produce a high yield product
which is significantly more pure
than products produced by typical IVT
The typical IVT
reaction is described as including the following:
“an RNA polymerase, e.g., a T7 RNA polymerase at a final concentration
of, e.g., 1000-12000 U/mL, e.g., 7000 U/mL; the DNA template
concentration of, e.g., 10-70 nM, e.g., 40 nM; nucleotides (NTPs) at a final
concentration of e.g., 0.5-10 mM, e.g., 7.5
mM each; magnesium at a final
concentration of, e.g., 12-60 mM, e.g., magnesium acetate at 40 mM; a buffer
such as, e.g., HEPES or
Tris at a pH of, e.g., 7-8.5, e.g. 40 mM Tris HCl, pH
to typical IVT methods, the process of the invention involves modifying the
relative amounts of nucleotides and/or nucleotide
analogs in the reaction
For example, one or
more nucleotides and/or one or more nucleotide analogs may be added in excess to
the reaction mixture.
particular, the following is noted:
“the methods of the invention involve the surprising finding that the
presence of an excess amount of one or more nucleotides
and/or nucleotide
analogs can have significant impact on the end
nucleoside triphosphate (
) is in excess when it is it in a
concentration that is 2-fold to 100-fold, or more, greater than any one or more
of the other individual
NTPs in the reaction
Alternatively, the
excess of the selected NTP is in a concentration of 0.5 mM to 150 mM, or more,
greater than the amount of any
one or more of the other individual NTPs in the
reaction mixture.
may also be achieved by including a corresponding nucleoside diphosphate
) where all NTPs are present in equimolar
In the broadest sense,
the NTP in excess may be any one of GTP, ATP, UTP or
Otherwise, buffers, RNA
polymerases and DNA templates to be used are typical for IVT
RNA produced by using a NTP in excess is said to be “surprisingly pure and
of high integrity.”
said to have fewer contaminants, including immune-stimulating contaminants, such
as reverse complement transcription products,
cytokine-inducing RNA contaminants
and double-stranded RNA
contaminants.
With regard to
these contaminants, the following comment is provided:
“Without being bound in theory, it is believed that the removal of
certain species or contaminants, for example, dsRNA species
or contaminants, is
important in the preparation of IVT RNA compositions for therapeutic
NTPs may include both natural and modified
The modified NTPs may be
chemically modified with respect to the natural adenosine (A), guanosine (G),
uridine (U), thymidine (T)
or cytidine (C) ribo- or deoxyribnucleosides in one
or more of their position, pattern, percent or population and can include any
useful modification, such as to the sugar, the nucleobase, or the
internucleotide linkage.
extensive list of modified nucleic acids is
highly pure RNA compositions may themselves be therapeutic or are used to
produce polypeptides of
Therapeutic proteins
mediate a variety of effects in a host cell or a subject in order to treat a
disease or ameliorate the signs
and symptoms of a
The polypeptides of
interest may be selected from any of “biologics, antibodies, vaccines,
therapeutic proteins or peptides,
cell penetrating peptides, secreted proteins,
plasma membrane proteins, cytoplasmic or cytoskeletal proteins, intracellular
bound proteins, nuclear proteins, proteins associated with human
disease, targeting moieties or those proteins encoded by the human
which no therapeutic indication has been identified but which nonetheless have
utility in areas of research and
discovery.”
specification concludes with 12 examples. Examples 1-3 describe the methods for
the manufacture of polynucleotides using prior
art methods, including methods
for synthesis of chimeric polynucleotides and standard PCR procedures for the
production of DNA templates.
Example 4 describes the optimisation of IVT to
synthesise short model “RNA-1” and uses specific IVT reaction
referred to as “
” nucleotide
formulations and assesses the induction of immune response associated with each
product. Examples 5-12 all used
IVT reaction processes and shows that RNA produced from the
reaction mixtures had improved purity compared
three reaction mixtures of Example 4 are as follows:
model transcript prepared using the
IVT process had a higher
IFN-β response than material prepared using the
process also showed the presence of reverse complements, which was not present
Similarly, both
reactions mitigated extraneous
IFN-B inducing impurity formation, which was enhanced in the
specification ends with 20 claims. Independent claims 1 and 16 read as
A method of producing a messenger ribonucleic acid
(mRNA) that is suitable for administration as a vaccine to a human subject,
the mRNA comprises an open reading frame encoding a vaccine antigen, the
method comprising incubating a reaction mixture comprising
a deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA), an RNA polymerase that initiates with a GTP or GDP, a buffer,
adenosine triphosphate (ATP), cytidine
triphosphate (CTP), uridine triphosphate
(UTP), and guanosine triphosphate (GTP), thereby producing the mRNA, wherein:
(i) the concentration of GTP is greater than the concentration of one or more
of ATP, CTP, and UTP, and two or more of ATP, CTP, and
UTP are in equimolar
concentrations; and/or
(ii) the reaction further comprises guanosine diphosphate (GDP), the
concentration of GTP plus GDP is greater than the concentration
of one or more
of ATP, CTP, and UTP, and two or more of GTP, ATP, CTP, and UTP are in equimolar
concentrations.
A method of producing a messenger ribonucleic acid
(mRNA) that is suitable for administration as a vaccine to a human subject,
the mRNA comprises an open reading frame encoding a vaccine antigen, the
method comprising incubating a reaction mixture comprising
a deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA), a T7 RNA polymerase, a buffer, adenosine triphosphate (ATP),
cytidine triphosphate (CTP), uridine
triphosphate (UTP), and guanosine
triphosphate (GTP), thereby producing the mRNA,
wherein the concentration of GTP is greater than the concentration of one
or more of ATP, CTP, and UTP, and two or more of ATP, CTP,
and UTP are in
equimolar concentrations,
wherein the UTP is a modified UTP comprising 2’-O-methylribose,
pseudouridine (ψ), N1-methylpseudouridine (m1ψ), 2-thiouridine,
4-thiouridine, 2-thio-1-methyl-1-deaza- pseudouridine,
2-thio-1-methyl-pseudouridine, 2-thio-5-aza-uridine ,
2-thio-dihydropseudouridine,
2-thio-dihydrouridine, 2-thio-pseudouridine,
4-methoxy-2-thio-pseudouridine, 4-methoxy-pseudouridine,
4-thio-1-methyl-pseudouridine,
4-thio-pseudouridine, 5-aza-uridine,
dihydropseudouridine, or 5-methoxyuridine.
claims 2-15 and 17-20 further define the components and incubation conditions as
well as the properties of the produced mRNA.
The full claim set is reproduced
at Annex A.
The person skilled in the art
is well established that many of the issues in an opposition are answered by
reference to the person skilled in the art:
“He is the person to whom the patent is addressed and who must construe
it. He is the person whose knowledge will determine
whether a patent is novel.
He is the person who will judge whether a patent is
hypothetical skilled person works in the field with which the invention is
connected and is a non-inventive person or team likely
to have a practical
interest in the subject matter of the
As noted by Nicholas
ToolGen Incorporated v Fisher (No 2)
, the notional team for
considering obviousness may have
skills than the team required for
sufficiency.
opponent has characterised the relevant person as follows:
“In this case, the person skilled in the art is a person, or more
likely a team of persons, comprising a PhD qualified molecular
biochemist or molecular bioscientist with experience in RNA-mediated mechanisms
and methods of RNA preparation, including
IVT methods of RNA production. They
would be likely to have a significant amount of laboratory experience in
research and be working
at research hospitals, universities and research
institutes and/or be employed by medical and pharmaceutical companies with a
on RNA biology and/or methods of RNA production, including protein
therapeutics.”
opponent’s evidence was obtained from independent experts Professor Preiss
and Professor Gerber. The applicant did not
provide any evidence in answer.
However, the applicant submitted that neither Professor Preiss nor Professor
Gerber have qualifications
or experiences in relation to mRNA vaccine production
or formulation at the relevant date and are therefore not relevant persons
skilled in the
Professor Preiss is an expert in the field of RNA
His postdoctoral work
involved the investigation of the mechanisms of mRNA translation initiation in
eukaryotes.
Since then,
Professor Preiss has continued to study various aspects of gene regulation at
the RNA level, becoming the Professor
of RNA Biology at
Similarly, Professor
Gerber is a Professor of RNA Biology at University of Surrey, a position held
since 2012.
Gerber’s field of interest lies in RNA-protein
interactions.
therefore understand the applicant’s concerns to be specific to
qualifications or experiences directly related to immunology
and mRNA vaccines
in the immunology sense. I acknowledge the applicant’s concerns insofar
as the available evidence being
relevant to the processes for preparing RNA
products rather than to the therapeutic efficacy of mRNA vaccines.
preparation of RNA products by IVT is a standard technique known in the art
since at least the 1980s.
nature of the RNA product or the peptide or protein encoded by the produced mRNA
is not important to the process. As I understand
the technology, whatever is
encoded by the template DNA will be transcribed into mRNA during the IVT
reaction and the host will produce
the encoded peptide or protein following
administration of the mRNA so produced. If the DNA template encodes a vaccine
the product of the IVT reaction will be a mRNA encoding the target
vaccine antigen.
neither declarant purport to be immunologists, contaminants triggering
unintended immune and inflammatory responses was a known
Professor Gerber stated
that “Failure to effectively control contaminants was known to result in
strong rejection reactions
in patients during final clinical
application.”
controlling the contaminants during IVT reactions does not only address
efficiency but also the safety of the RNA product
and the declarants are
familiar with this issue.
noted by the opponent, the opposed application generally relates to an improved
IVT reaction.
The specification
itself generally relates to the production of pure mRNA where the polypeptide of
interest may relate to any biologic,
antibody, vaccine, therapeutic protein or
I consider that the declarants are well placed to give evidence in relation to
the opposed application.
Construction
correct approach to the construction of claims was discussed by Bennett J in
H Lundbeck A/S v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
“the words in a claim should be read through the eyes of the skilled
addressee in the context in which they appear. ... While
the claims define the
monopoly claimed in the words of the patentee’s choosing, the
specification should be read as a whole
... It is not permissible to read into a
claim an additional integer or limitation to vary or qualify the claim by
reference to the
body of the specification ... terms in the claim which are
unclear may be defined or clarified by reference to the body of the
specification.”
claims are to be construed in light of the specification as a whole, but the
plain and unambiguous meaning of a claim cannot be
varied or qualified by
reference to the body of the
specification.
construction according to which the invention will work is to be preferred to
one in which it may
Full Court in
Airco Fasteners Pty Ltd v Illinois Tool Works
recently reiterated
the principle that experts can give evidence on the meaning which those skilled
in the art would give to technical
or scientific terms and phrases and on any
unusual or special meanings that would be given by skilled addressees to words
which might
otherwise bear their ordinary
and the Court is to
place itself in the position of some person acquainted with the surrounding
circumstances as to the state of
the art and manufacture at the
However, it is for the
Court, not for any witness however expert, to construe the
specification.
approach is taken in matters before the Commissioner.
method of producing a mRNA that is suitable for administration as a
independent claims 1 and 16 are directed to methods of producing mRNA that is
suitable for administration as a vaccine to a human
subject, wherein the mRNA
comprises an open reading frame encoding a vaccine antigen. A vaccine antigen
is defined in the specification
as “a biological preparation that improves
immunity to a particular disease or infectious
The opposed
application does not purport to have invented new vaccine antigens. Instead,
the opposed application states that “one
or more vaccine antigens
currently being marketed or in development may be encoded by the RNA of the
invention.”
applicant stressed that the claimed subject matter is specific to mRNA vaccines
where a vaccine antigen is encoded by the
This was contrasted to
the broader use of the term “vaccines” in the art which may include
references to the delivery
of non-antigenic therapeutic polypeptides, such as
antibodies, which assist in boosting an immune response but do not comprise an
I agree with the
applicant and nothing in the opponent’s submissions nor the expert
evidence suggest non-antigenic polypeptides
were considered relevant. For
completeness, I will further add that the mRNA product itself does not elicit an
immune response and
it is the antigen expressed therefrom that vaccinates the
host against the target pathogen.
applicant further submitted that the requirement for suitability for
administration as a vaccine means that “methods to
produce the mRNA must
result in an mRNA that meets both safety and efficacy requirements as a human
However, the
specification does not define any particular safety or efficacy requirements.
Instead, the specification states as
“... the methods of the invention arrive at mRNA compositions suitable
for therapeutic use by controlling the nature and levels
of contaminants
produced in the IVT reaction, i.e., the contaminants are not made in the initial
reaction, as contrasted to art-described
methods which attempt to remove
contaminants once they have been produced. Without being bound in theory, it is
believed that preventing
the production of unwanted contaminants in the IVT
reaction from the outset provides for improved compositions having higher purity
and potency, measurable, for example, in terms of increased translation from
full-length, intact mRNA in the
composition.”
the context of the specification, both declarants associate the levels of
contaminants with suitability of the product for administration
Relative to standard
IVT processes, the modified IVT process simply produces the same mRNA with
reduced contaminants, thereby negating
the need for post-synthesis purification.
There is no ingenuity claimed in relation to any mRNA sequence for encoding a
vaccine antigen
in the opposed application.
NTPs and modified NTPs
claims refer to NTPs without qualification, natural NTPs and modified NTPs. The
specification provides the following explanations
“A nucleoside triphosphate, as used herein, refers to a molecule
including a nucleobase linked to a ribose (i.e. nucleoside)
and three phosphates
(i.e. nucleotide). A nucleotide diphosphate refers to the same molecule, but
which has two phosphate moieties.
A nucleotide monophosphate refers to the same
molecule, but which has one phosphate
“Natural nucleotide triphosphates include at least adenosine
triphosphate (ATP), guanosine triphosphate (GTP), cytidine triphosphate
5-methyluridine triphosphate (m5UTP), and uridine triphosphate
“The nucleotide analogs useful in the invention are structurally
simliar [sic] to nucleotides or portions thereof but, for example,
polymerizable by T7. Nucleotide/nucleoside analogs as used herein (including C,
T, A, U, G, dC, dT, dA, dU, or dG analogs)
include for instance, antiviral
nucleotide analogs, phosphate analogs (soluble or immobilized, hydrolyzable or
nonhydrolyzable),
dinucleotide, trinucleotide, tetranucleotide,
cap analog, or a precursor/substrate for enzymatic capping (vaccinia, or
ligase), a nucleotide labelled with a functional group
to facilitate
ligation/conjugation of cap or 5' moiety (IRES), a nucleotide labelled with a 5'
PO4 to facilitate ligation of cap
or 5' moiety, or a nucleotide labelled with a
functional group/protecting group that can be chemically or enzymatically
Antiviral nucleotide/nucleoside analogs include but are not limited
to Ganciclovir, Entecavir, Telbivudine, Vidarabine and
Cidofovir.”
person skilled in the art would understand that where “natural” and
“modified” NTPs are specified, the claimed
subject matter is
directed to the specified subgroup. Where it is not specified, the NTPs
encompass both natural and modified NTPs.
concentrations
claims specify relative concentrations of the NTPs in the IVT reaction mixture.
The following concentrations are defined in the
(i) the concentration of GTP is greater than the concentration of one or more of
ATP, CTP, and UTP, and two or more of ATP, CTP,
and UTP are in equimolar
concentrations;
(ii) the concentration of GTP plus GDP is greater than the concentration of one
or more of ATP, CTP, and UTP, and two or more of
GTP, ATP, CTP, and UTP are in
equimolar concentrations.
noted by the opponent, the IVT reaction mixture may comprise any amount of GTP
or GTP plus GDP greater than another
When GTP alone is used,
the claims require that two or more of ATP, CTP, and UTP are in equimolar
concentrations. When GTP plus
GDP are used, the claims require that two or more
of GTP, ATP, CTP, and UTP are in equimolar concentrations. As long as there are
two NTPs in equimolar concentrations, they need not be present in lower or
greater concentrations than any other NTP.
not explicitly pressed as a specific ground of opposition, the opponent
submitted that the claims were unclear because “there
is no clear meaning,
definition or boundary for what constitutes a concentration ‘greater
than’ the concentration of
Professor Preiss
was specifically asked to comment on this:
“I was asked what I understand the term ‘greater than’ to
mean in the context of the above claim. In my view this
is ANY amount greater
than another amount. In particular, claim 1 does not limit the concentration of
the particular NTPs, nor does
it limit the extent to which the GTP can be
‘greater than’ another
Gerber gave a similar
explanation.
Consequently, the
concentration of GTP or GTP plus GDP may be only marginally greater than one or
more of the other NTPs. Alternatively,
the concentration of GTP or GTP plus GDP
may be significantly greater than one or more of the other NTPs. There is no
lower limit
for how much the concentration of GTP or GTP plus GDP must be
“greater” by in the specification. Similarly, there is
limit. The claims simply require that the concentration of GTP or GTP plus GDP
is greater than one or more of the other
Furthermore,
I note that there is no requirement in the claims that GTP or GTP plus GDP to be
present in the IVT reaction mixture
at the highest concentration among all NTPs
present. The concentration of GTP or GTP plus GDP need only be greater than one
NTPs. While two or more NTPs must also be equimolar to one another,
these conditions can be met as long as there is one NTP at a
lower concentration
than GTP or GTP plus GDP. This is reflected in the specification, which
“For instance, an excess of a nucleotide and/or nucleotide analog may
be a greater amount than the amount of each or at least
one of the other
individual NTPs in the reaction mixture or may refer to an amount greater than
equimolar amounts of the other
consider that a person skilled in the art would readily be able to determine
whether any given IVT reaction mixture falls within
the scope of the present
claims by comparing the concentrations of each of the NTPs present
18(1)(c) of the Act requires that the invention, so far as claimed in any claim,
is useful. The ground of utility was
considered by the Full Court of the
Federal Court in
H Lundbeck A/S v Alphapharm Pty
, where Emmett J stated:
“A claim is bad if it covers means that will not produce the desired
result, even if a skilled person would know which means
to avoid. That is to
say, everything that is within the scope of a claim must be useful, otherwise
the claim will fail for
inutility.”
Apotex Pty Ltd v AstraZeneca AB (No 4)
, Jagot J pointed out that lack of
utility requires evidence, not just speculation:
“Ultimately, an asserted lack of utility must be established by
appropriate evidence, not be mere speculation that the invention
will not work
or meet the promise set out in the
specification.”
summary of relevant principles was provided by the Full Court of the Federal
“It is ‘no objection’ to the validity of an innovation
patent granted under the Act that it is ‘commercially
impracticable’. The utility of the patent depends upon whether, by
following the teaching of the specification, the result
produced...
The ‘basic principle’ of inutility is that if an invention
‘does what it is intended by the patentee to do, and
the end attained is
itself useful, the invention is a useful invention’... What the invention
is ‘intended’ to
do is a matter to be gathered from the ‘title
and the whole of the specification’.
Put another way, the two questions are: first, what is the promise of the
invention derived from the whole of the specification?;
second, by following the
teaching of the specification, does the invention, as claimed in the patent,
attain the result promised
for it by the patentee?... Further,
‘everything’ that is within the scope of a claim must be useful,
that is, attain
the result promised for the invention by the
[citations omitted]
I note Beach J’s observation regarding construction of the
specification:
“...the specification (including the claims) must be construed from the
perspective of a skilled person, but not in a way that
such a person would
appreciate would lead to unworkability when by construction it could be given a
more limited but workable
completeness, I also note that Section 7A states that an invention is taken to
not be useful unless a specific, substantial, and
credible use for the invention
(so far as claimed) is disclosed in the complete specification. However, this
requirement is additional
to the requirement that the claimed invention must
achieve the promised benefit
the opponent’s submissions relate only to a failure to achieve the
promised benefit.
What is the promise of the invention?
noted by the opponent, the specification promises methods for
RNA synthesis wherein the RNA transcripts produced “have enhanced
properties which result in qualitatively and quantitatively
compositions”.
the applicant submitted that utility should be assessed with reference to the
invention as claimed, I note that the first
question in
seeks the promise of the invention derived from the whole of the specification.
Does the claimed invention attain the result
opponent pressed that “at least claim 1 lacks utility because, the claim
encompasses reaction mixtures and reaction conditions
which will not work or
indeed, will not produce mRNA suitable for administration as a vaccine to a
human subject (i.e., with less
contaminants than the art-described
To this end,
the opponent relied on the following quotes from the experts:
“I note that Example 4 showed that for both the equimolar process and
alpha process low temperature IVT reactions (< 30°C)
produce a larger
abundance of reverse complement RNAs than IVT reactions at
“...there will be upper and lower limits to all NTP concentrations, and
the disparity between GTP and the remaining NTPs, beyond
which the reaction will
no longer be efficient in producing (full-length) transcripts. The upper limit
of NTPs will also be driven
by the solubility of NTPs in
“...there will be NTP concentrations that fulfil the criteria of the
NTP concentrations of the claims but will be outside the
useful range for
efficient IVT and consequently could result in a higher proportion of
immunogenic
contaminants.”
“...I would not expect to achieve the same result (i.e., less than 1%
of the total mass of RNA in the reaction mixture is a
reverse complement
transcription product) with any concentration of GTP that is at a concentration
greater than the concentration
of one or more of ATP, CTP and UTP, wherein two
or more of ATP, CTP and UTP are in equimolar amounts. One can envisage NTP
concentrations
that fulfil these criteria but will be outside the useful range
for efficient IVT and could result in higher proportions of immunogenic
contaminants.”
statements by the two experts relate to their comments in relation to the
examples of the opposed application. The examples of
the opposed application
showed only that the
outperformed the
starting mixture. Consequently, the experts are unable to
extrapolate these results across the claimed scope without any certitude.
note that the concerns are couched in possible outcomes, such as “could
result in”, rather than absolute terms. There
is no evidence as to any
particular embodiment properly within the scope of the claims that does not
person skilled in the art would understand the invention to operate within
generally accepted limits of IVT reactions. While failure
may be achieved by
intentionally operating outside known limits, the promise of the opposed
application does not extend beyond known
limits of IVT reaction conditions. It
follows that I consider this a case as alluded to by Beach J in
where a skilled person would construe the claims in a manner that does not give
rise to unworkability.
Conclusion on utility
opponent has raised doubts and concerns in relation to the likely outcomes of
the claimed IVT process. However, the opponent
has only provided mere
speculation rather than any evidence to show that the claims include within
their scope any particular embodiment
that would not be useful or would not
achieve at least some aspect of the benefits promised in the specification.
Consequently,
this ground of opposition
is a requirement of subsection 18(1) of the Act that the invention, so far as
claimed in any claim, is novel. Subsection 7(1)
provides that an invention is
taken to be novel unless it is not novel in light of the prior art base. Prior
art information made
publicly available in a document or through the doing of an
act forms part of the prior art base for the purpose of novelty if it
published before the priority date of a claim.
is well established that the general test for lack of novelty is the reverse
infringement test, as set out by Aickin J in
Meyers Taylor Pty Ltd v Vicarr
Industries Ltd
“The basic test for anticipation or want of novelty is the same as that
for infringement and generally one can properly ask
oneself whether the alleged
anticipation would, if the patent were valid, constitute an
infringement.”
test is satisfied if the alleged anticipation discloses all the essential
features of the invention as
The level of
disclosure required is set out in
General Tire & Rubber Co v Firestone
Tyre and Rubber Co Ltd
“If the prior inventor’s publication contains a clear description
of, or clear instructions to do or make, something that
would infringe the
patentee’s claim if carried out after the grant of the patentee’s
patent, the patentee’s claim
will have been shown to lack the necessary
novelty, that is to say, it will have been anticipated. ...if carrying out the
contained in the prior inventor’s publication will inevitably
result in something being made or done which, if the patentee’s
were valid, would constitute an infringement of the patentee’s claim, this
circumstance demonstrates that the patentee’s
claim has in fact been
anticipated.
If, on the other hand, the prior publication contains a direction which is
capable of being carried out in a manner which would infringe
patentee’s claim, but would be at least as likely to be carried out in a
way which would not do so, the patentee’s
claim will not have been
anticipated, although it may fail on the ground of obviousness. To anticipate
the patentee’s claim
the prior publication must contain clear and
unmistakable directions to do what the patentee claims to have invented. A
however clear, upon the road to the patentee’s invention will
not suffice. The prior inventor must be clearly shown to have
planted his flag
at the precise destination before the patentee.”
(citations omitted)
requirement for clear and unmistakable directions in the prior publications from
General Tire
is well known.
General Tire
also states that if
carrying out the directions in the prior art leads inevitably to doing something
within the scope of the claim
, then there will be a lack of
novelty. This inevitable consequence of carrying out the directions in the
prior art was considered
Novozymes v
with Jessop J
providing the following guidance (with Yates J and Greenwood J
concurring):
“In my view, the
General Tire
approach, if taken at all, may be
taken only with respect to the whole of any claim asserted to have been
anticipated. The ‘precise
destination’ at which the flag must have
been planted is one which includes every integer of the claim. The approach
in my view, be taken for some integers only, leaving others to be dealt
with by reference to the understanding of the skilled
addressee.”
recently, the Full Court considered where the prior art discloses the invention
in hypothetical manner without concrete confirmation
of the results and
emphasised as follows:
“We do not accept that a documentary disclosure containing an
hypothesis cannot be an anticipatory disclosure that deprives
an invention of
novelty. In such a case the question, simply put, remains: what does the prior
document disclose? The occasion
on which, or the context in which, a particular
documentary disclosure is made may well inform the interpretation of the
content. But if, as a matter of interpretation, the document
nonetheless discloses that which is later claimed as an invention,
disclosure will anticipate the invention and deprive it of
that in mind, I will now look at the disclosures of the prior art. The Opponent
pressed that claims 1-3, 5-8 and 11-13 are not
novel in light of D2, D4 or
Triana-Alonso
: “Self-coded 3’-Extension
of Run-off Transcripts Produces Aberrant Products during
Transcription with T7 RNA Polymerase”,
Journal of Biological
, 1995, vol. 270, iss. 11, pp. 6298-6307
.: “Suppression of RNA Recognition by
Toll-like Receptors: The Impact of Nucleoside Modification and the Evolutionary
, 2005, vol. 235, no. 2, pp. 165-175
WO 2011/005799 A2 (NOVARTIS AG) 13 January 2011
Gerber was asked to consider each of these documents and provide general
comments as well as whether he thought that the
claimed invention was new given
the disclosures of these
Professor Preiss was
asked a similar task for eight documents, including D2, D4 and
in light of D2
opponent pressed that claims 1, 2, 5-8 and 11-13 lack novelty in light of D2.
According to Professor Preiss, “D2 generally
discusses synthesis of
incorrect products during RNA transcription with T7 RNA polymerase as a result
of run-off transcription.”
Professor Preiss goes on to note that D2 identifies the following parameters
that influence the extent of false transcription: incubation
polymerase concentration; and UTP
concentration.
Professor Gerber
took particular interest in the last parameter:
“In summary, the key finding of D2 was that the number of false
products formed during IVT depends on NTP concentration. That
is, if all NTPs
are used in the same concentration then the transcript will be extended and
false products will be produced. However,
if the concentration of UTP was
lowered, then the production of false products is
the abstract of D2 concludes with the following:
“Surprisingly, a reduction of the UTP concentration to 0.2-1.0 mM in
the presence of 3.5-4.0 mM of the other NTPs leads to faithful
transcription and
good yields, irrespective of the nucleotide composition of the
person skilled in the art may expect the modified IVT process of D2 to result in
faithful transcription of whatever DNA template
used. Neither expert suggested
that D2 discloses a method for producing mRNA comprising an open reading frame
encoding a vaccine
antigen and is suitable for administration as a vaccine.
to the applicant, the use of
P labelled mRNA “cuts against
the requirement in the present claims that the mRNA must be suitable for
administration as a vaccine
The applicant
went on to submit that “given the increased risk of cell death and
mutation resulting from radiation exposure”,
therapeutics and vaccines do
not typically contain radioactive
However, I note that
neither expert had any concerns with using
P labelled mRNA as a
model for studying the transcription fate.
Irrespective
of whether D2 included studies using
P labelled mRNA, in the
absence of any disclosure of producing mRNA comprising an open reading frame
encoding a vaccine antigen D2
cannot be said to anticipate the present claims.
All claims are novel in light of D2.
Novelty in light of
opponent pressed that claims 1-3, 5-7 and 11-13 lack novelty in light of D4.
According to Professor Preiss, D4 generally describes
the effects of
incorporating modified nucleosides into RNA on toll-like receptor (TLR)
signalling and on dendritic cell
activation.
describes materials and methods used to produce mRNA by IVT, including the use
of DNA templates and T7 RNA
polymerase.
Professor Gerber
noted that the methods of D4 describe the following RNA transcripts with
functional coding regions: RNA-1866 (NdeI-linearized
pTEVluc) which encodes
firefly luciferase and a 50 nt-long polyA-tail; RNA-1571 (SspI-linearized
pSVren) which encodes Renilla luciferase;
RNA-730 (HindIII-linearized
pT7T3D-MART-1) which encodes the human melanoma antigen; RNA-713
(EcoRI-linearized pT7T3D-MART-1) which
corresponds to antisense sequence of
MART-1; and RNA-497 (BglII-linearized pCMV-hTLR3) which encodes a partial
5’ fragment
applicant submitted that “While there is some disclosure in D4 of an mRNA
produced using T7 RNA polymerase and encoding
MART-1, this is not in the context
of vaccination.”
that the claims of the opposed application are directed to methods of producing
mRNA that is suitable for administration as
a vaccine and comprises an open
reading frame encoding a vaccine antigen, there is no need for D4 to have
disclosed a vaccination
protocol using the mRNA. The question is whether the
mRNA encoding for MART-1 produced by the method of D4 would be suitable for
administration as a vaccine. While D4 does not mention vaccinations, as noted
by the applicant, MART-1 is an antigen that can be
recognised by the immune
system and is used as a cancer vaccine.
Preiss was specifically asked to consider whether the methods disclosed in D4
would potentially produce a viable mRNA vaccine
and responded that “if the
template was switched to a template encoding an mRNA vaccine candidate, the
conditions used in D4
could have produced an mRNA that was functional as a
prototype mRNA vaccine.”
From this, I understand that Professor Preiss does not consider RNA-730 encoding
the human melanoma antigen to be a vaccine antigen
and/or that it would not be
suitable for administration to a human subject as a vaccine. The evidence of
Professor Gerber is also
silent with respect to any of the model mRNA of D4
being suitable as a vaccine antigen.
as repeatedly stressed by the applicant, neither declarant is an expert in the
field of vaccines. It is therefore unsurprising
that they did not recognise a
potential antigen of interest.
Professor Preiss stated that each IVT reaction in D4 used equimolar
concentrations of all four
nucleotides.
Upon comparing
the claimed invention with D4, Professor Preiss reasoned that the concentration
of GTP was greater in instances where
one or more of the other natural NTPs were
substituted with a modified
equivalent.
As D4 disclosed
substituting one natural NTP at a time, as well as GTP being present in greater
concentration than the natural NTP
with modified substitution, there were also
two other NTPs in equimolar amounts. Professor Gerber made a similar
observation for
explained in the construction section above, where the claims do not specify
“natural” or “modified” NTPs,
they encompass both
natural and modified NTPs. Therefore, I understand the claims to be defining
the relative concentrations of
the sums of both natural and modified NTPs. This
is consistent with the examples of the opposed application and the initial
of D4 given by Professor Preiss before being asked to compare the
disclosures of D4 specifically to the claims. Moreover, D4 explicitly
that “In each transcription reaction, all four nucleotides or their
derivatives were present in equimolar (7.5 mM)
concentration.”
given my construction of the claims, D4 does not disclose an IVT process where
GTP, or GTP plus GDP, is in greater concentration
than one or more of ATP, CTP
and UTP where the molar concentration is calculated on the sum of natural and
modified NTPs. All claims
are novel in light of D4.
in light of D5
opponent pressed that claims 1-3 and 11-13 lack novelty in light of D5.
According to Professor Gerber, “D5 describes the
synthesis and
transfection of self-replicating RNAs using cell based assays and their
immunogenicity in
In particular,
attention is drawn to example 9, where self-replicating RNA vaccines were
produced through IVT with modified
nucleosides.
Similar to D4,
the example uses equimolar NTPs, where difference in concentrations between
natural NTPs occur only when a portion
of one NTP is substituted for a modified
the experts draw direct analogy to the claimed features, they do not suggest
that self-replicating RNAs fall within the scope
of mRNAs. Even if
self-replicating RNA was equated to mRNA, D5 discloses the use of equimolar NTPs
in the IVT reactions. Therefore,
the claims are novel in light of
Conclusion on novelty
of the prior art documents provide clear and unmistakable directions to the
claimed invention. The opponent has not made out
this ground of opposition.
Inventive step
7(2) states that an invention is taken to involve an inventive step unless it
would have been obvious to a person skilled
in the art in light of the common
general knowledge (whether in or out of the patent area) before the priority
date of the relevant
claim when considered alone or together with the
information mentioned in subsection 7(3).
J provided a statement of principles relevant to assessing inventive
“Section 7(2) of the Act uses the word ‘obvious’ in the
course of describing what must be established before an
invention can be held
not involve an inventive step. Something may be ‘obvious’ in light
of the common general knowledge,
or the common general knowledge coupled with
the relevant s 7(3) information, if it is ‘plain or open to the eye or
mind, something
which is perfectly evident to the person thinking on the
subject’ or something which ‘would at once occur to anyone
with the subject and desirous of accomplishing the
An invention may also be obvious in light of the common general knowledge if
the person skilled in the art faced with the same problem
as the inventor would
have taken as a matter of routine whatever steps might have led from the prior
art to the invention, whether
they be the steps of the inventor or not or (using
the language of the ‘modified Cripps question’) if the person
in the art would be directly led as a matter of course to take such
steps in the expectation that doing so might well produce a useful
alternative to the prior art. However, a claimed invention is not obvious
merely because the person skilled in the art
would consider that it was
‘worthwhile to
is important to note the requirement for a reasonable expectation of success.
This is explicit in the expectation that an approach
“might well”
succeed, and implicit in the characterisation of steps as those to be taken as a
matter of routine.
success need not be guaranteed: “the relevant test is not knowing that
steps will or would or even may well work,
but merely expecting that the steps
may well work.”
Further, it is possible that the skilled person might be directly led to try
more than one alternative expecting that each may well
produce a useful or
Importantly,
where a claim is directed to a combination of known integers obviousness is not
established merely by identifying each
of those features in the prior art or the
common general knowledge – the question is whether the combination of
those features
is obvious.
In a similar vein, the High Court said that the question of whether it would be
obvious to add one integer to a combination of other
“...will turn on what a person skilled in the relevant art, possessed
with that person’s knowledge would have regarded,
at the time, as
technically possible in terms of mechanics, and also as practical. ... Even if
an idea of combining integers, which
individually may be considered mere design
choices, is simple, its simplicity does not necessarily make it
general knowledge
general knowledge is the background knowledge and experience available to all
those working in the relevant art:
“The notion of common general knowledge itself involves the use of that
which is known or used by those in the relevant trade.
It forms the background
knowledge and experience which is available to all in the trade in considering
the making of new products,
or the making of improvements in old, and it must be
treated as being used by an individual as a general body of
knowledge.”
it is not enough that information is recorded in a document, even if that
document is widely circulated. It is only part
of the common general knowledge
when it is generally known and accepted in the art:
“...information does not constitute common general knowledge merely
because it might be found, for example, in a journal, even
if widely read by
persons in the art ... Reference in this regard is made to the words of Luxmoore
British Acoustic Films
(1936) 53 RPC 221
at 250, cited by Lehane J
Aktiebolaget Hässle v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
(1999) 44 IPR 593
[1999] FCA 628
In my judgment it is not sufficient to prove common general knowledge that
a particular disclosure is made in an article, or series
of articles, in a
scientific journal, no matter how wide the circulation of that journal may be,
in the absence of any evidence that
the disclosure is accepted generally by
those who are engaged in the art to which the disclosure relates. A piece of
knowledge as disclosed in a scientific paper does not become common
general knowledge merely because it is widely read, and still
less because it is
widely circulated. Such a piece of knowledge only becomes general knowledge
when it is generally known and accepted
without question by the bulk of those
who are engaged in the particular art; in other words, when it becomes part of
their common
stock of knowledge relating to the
opponent provided a summary of matters that were common general knowledge before
the priority date, as explained by Professor
Gerber and Professor
“(i) Methods of synthesising mRNA encoding a protein of interest,
including use of IVT.
(ii) Key properties of a functional mRNA, including therapeutic mRNA, such as
coding sequence and humanised codon choice, optimised
untranslated region (UTR)
sequences, cap structures, polyadenylation and internal nucleoside
modifications.
(iii) Components of IVT reactions and the role of each component, including a
DNA template, an RNA polymerase, nucleotide triphosphates
(i.e., ATP, GTP, UTP,
GTP), reagents for capping such as a capping dinucleotide (if performing
co-transcriptional capping), modified
nucleotides if used, an RNase inhibitor, a
buffer, a reducing agent, and optionally a bulking agent. A number of
commercial IVT
kits were available before the claimed priority date, such as
MEGAscript™ and RiboMAX™, included standard reagents and
troubleshooting manuals.
(iv) Effect of IVT reaction conditions on the resultant mRNA transcript that
could cause issues with the mRNA produced, including
therapeutic use, such as
generation of double-stranded RNA, generation of degradation products,
incomplete capping and incomplete
transcription.
(v) Effect of excess and/or unincorporated nucleotides in IVT reactions on RNA
produced, including purity, yield and quality, and
persistence in a mRNA IVT
product, which can potentially activate the neuroinflammatory mechanisms in the
central nervous system.
(vi) Methods of optimising IVT reaction conditions to control the nature, or
amount, of unwanted contaminants, include [sic] optimising
triphosphate concentrations and ratios, and enzyme concentrations.
(vii) Advantages of using modified nucleotides (e.g., pseudouridine (Ψ),
2-thiouridine, 5-methylcytidine, etc.) in IVT reaction
mixtures titrated with
the corresponding natural nucleotide to achieve improved yield and purity, and
to reduce immune recognition
and stimulation.
(viii) Importance of reducing immune system stimulation when producing mRNA
therapeutics, including vaccines, such as those caused
by contaminants,
including double-stranded
applicant was in agreement with the above, except for (viii) including reference
to vaccines.
The applicant
stressed that neither declarant was specifically qualified to give evidence in
relation to mRNA vaccines.
However, I note that the applicant did not provide any contradictory evidence.
any event, the opposed application itself makes apparent that various vaccine
antigens were already well known in the art. It
is suggested that vaccine
antigens currently being marketed or in development may be
personalised cancer vaccines,
a long list of infectious diseases that RNA vaccines may treat, such as
hepatitis, measles, influenza, cholera, rabies, amoebiasis,
rubella, mumps and
polio, is given as suitable treatment
noted by the opponent,
problem to be solved according to the opposed application is:
“a need for better understanding of the nature of contaminants in
IVT-generated mRNA preparations, in order to better control
for levels and
nature of contaminants in IVT preparations. There further exists a need for
improved methods of preparing mRNA for
therapeutic use and for high purity
compositions produced according to such
claimed invention is directed at the mRNA vaccine subset of the broader field of
RNA production. That is, the problem addressed
by the opposed application does
not reside in providing a new vaccine antigen or even a new mRNA vaccine. The
problem lies simply
in providing improved IVT methods for preparing RNA.
Inventive step in light of common general knowledge
understand the broad strokes of the opponent’s case on obviousness in
light of the common general knowledge alone to be along
the lines of RNA
synthesis through IVT being well known and the production of mRNA vaccines
through such methods being a mere choice
Of particular
relevance to the present claims, Professor Gerber summarised the process of
carrying out IVT reactions using commercially
available kits:
“At 14 September 2016, these kits, and others, were commonly used for
IVT with linearised DNA templates derived from plasmids
or upon annealing of
single stranded DNA (ssDNA) synthetic fragments (30-60 nucleotides) bearing a
minimal T7 promotor sequence.
Following incubation, DNAse I digest is performed
in the same reaction buffer and then EDTA is added to stop the reaction and
Following the IVT reaction, RNA precipitation and/or purification is
typically undertaken using an RNA isolation kit to ensure contaminants
removed that could induce inflammatory responses when used
The mRNA produced using IVT normally comprises of 5’ UTRs, 3’
UTRs, the coding sequence, 3’ polyA tail and 5’
cap. Typically, the
3’ polyA tail and 5’ cap components can be added either
co-transcriptionally or
post-transcriptionally.”
evidence convincingly establishes that those in the field knew, as a matter of
common general knowledge, that IVT methods could
be used to produce RNA
products. The evidence also establishes that IVT reaction conditions, such as
excess and/or unincorporated
NTPs, can impact on the on the resultant mRNA
transcript that could cause issues with the mRNA produced. For example,
of double-stranded RNA, generation of degradation products,
incomplete capping and incomplete transcription could potentially activate
inflammatory mechanisms and cause issues in therapeutic use.
the present case, although IVT methods were known and it was also known that
many factors could affect the resulting product, there
is nothing to suggest
that the modified method itself was common general knowledge. Irrespective of
the RNA product being encoded,
the opponent has not established that the claims
lack inventive step in light of the common general knowledge alone.
Common general knowledge plus D2
opponent submitted that a person skilled in the art looking for an IVT method to
produce mRNA suitable for use as a vaccine would
follow the IVT method of D2:
“In particular, it is clear that the person skilled in the art,
desirous of controlling for levels and the nature of contaminants
preparations to thereby produce high purity mRNA, ) [sic] would have been
directly led, if not driven, as a matter of course
to follow the IVT method
taught in D2 and reduce the concentration of UTP in the IVT reaction mixture
relative to the remaining NTPs
(i.e., GTP, ATP and CTP), to arrive at the method
of claim 1 and with a reasonable expectation of successfully producing a high
mRNA suitable for therapeutic
applicant was concerned by the lack of disclosure of mRNA suitable for
administration as a vaccine to a human and the presence
radioactive label in the model experiments as teaching away from such a
However, both Professor
Gerber and Professor Preiss answered positively to the hypothetical task of
using the technique of D2 to
produce mRNA encoding a vaccine antigen for
therapeutic use.
weight of the evidence, I am confident that a person skilled in the art would
not share the same concerns as the applicant.
an IVT method is described as using an excess of GTP or a reduction of UTP, they
both fulfil the requirement of GTP concentration
being greater than one or more
of the other NTPs (UTP) and two or more NTPs (ATP and CTP) being in equimolar
concentrations. The
only difference is in the product to be encoded by the
mRNA, which is determined by the DNA template used in the IVT process.
to the expert evidence, replacing one template with another known
template does not require further invention.
regard to the presence of
P radioactive label in the model
experiments in D2, it was simply used for visualisation of the mRNA products,
not for any therapeutic
In a similar
fashion, the opposed application also used
P radioactive label in
Example 11 to determine the sample purity of model RNA
constructs.
present claims are directed to methods of producing mRNA by IVT where the
reaction mixture has been modified to reduce the production
of contaminants. As
noted by the opponent, D2 teaches that the preferential reduction of UTP
concentration relative to the other
NTPs “leads to faithful transcription
and good yields, irrespective of the nucleotide composition of the
context, I am satisfied that the expert evidence supports a conclusion that
simply encoding a known vaccine antigen in place
of the model peptides of D2
does not require further invention.
claims 1-8 and 11-20 of the opposed application lack inventive step in light of
D2. Features of the IVT process, such
as the use of modified NTPs, choice of
polymerase and reaction temperature, are routinely chosen by the person skilled
depending on the nature of the desired product and components used in
the reaction mixture. There are well defined reaction conditions
and components
known in the
9 and 10 of the opposed application are inventive over common general knowledge
plus D2 as this document teaches maintaining
GTP, CTP and ATP in equimolar
concentrations.
Common general knowledge plus
opponent submitted that a person skilled in the art looking for an IVT method to
produce mRNA suitable for use as a vaccine would
have been directly led, if not
driven, to follow the IVT method of
Similar to D2, at least
Professor Preiss also hypothesised that switching the template with one encoding
for a mRNA vaccine antigen
candidate would produce a prototype mRNA
noted by the applicant, D4 discloses an IVT process using modified UTPs to
produce mRNA including an embodiment encoding MART-1,
which is a peptide
suitable for use as a therapeutic cancer
The document itself
is silent with respect to the potential use of MART-1 as a cancer vaccine and
neither professor picked up on
this antigen.
of the nature of the template, the IVT process employs equimolar amounts of GTP,
CTP, ATP and UTP. The concentration of
the natural NTPs may vary from
experiment to experiment as modified NTPs replace portions of their natural
cousins. However, the
combination of the natural and modified NTP is equivalent
to the other NTPs. Consequently, D4 does not teach an IVT method where
concentration of GTP or GTP plus GDP is greater than another NTP and where two
or more NTPs are present in equimolar amounts.
it has not been established that claims 1-20 of the opposed application lack
inventive step in view of common general knowledge
Common general knowledge plus D5
to the opponent, a person skilled in the art looking for an IVT method to
produce mRNA suitable for use as a vaccine would
have been directly led, if not
driven, to follow the IVT method of D5 as
However, whilst
Professor Preiss could identify some features of the invention disclosed in D5,
he does not suggest that the method
of D5 could be used to produce mRNA
Professor Gerber
was put to a similar task and responded:
“I was also asked whether I would expect the methods of D5 to work for
an mRNA comprising an antigen for therapeutic use (i.e.,
vaccine). Overall, I
consider that the methods look promising when looking to produce IVT mRNA for
use in vaccines and therapeutic
IVT process of D5 may provide a good starting point for producing mRNA vaccines.
However, as with D4, the IVT process of D5 employs
equimolar amounts of GTP,
CTP, ATP and UTP where variations in concentrations can only be found where a
modified NTP is subtracted
from the total.
it has not been established that claims 1-20 of the opposed application lack
inventive step in view of common general knowledge
Conclusion on inventive step
opponent has not established that the claims lack inventive step in light of the
common general knowledge alone or in combination
with D4 or D5.
evidence does however establish that claims 1-8 and 11-20 lack inventive step in
light of common general knowledge plus D2. The
opposition is successful on this
Clear enough and complete enough disclosure and
40, as amended by the
Raising the Bar Act
, relevantly requires that the
complete specification disclose the invention in a manner that is clear enough
and complete enough
for the invention to be performed by a person skilled in the
relevant art (section 40(2)(a)) and that the claim or claims be supported
matter disclosed in the specification (section 40(3)). Such enablement must be
across the whole breadth of the claims, without
undue burden or the need for
further invention and the claim scope must not exceed the applicant’s
contribution to the art.
Delegates of the Commissioner have adopted the
following stepped approach to assessing whether there is a clear enough and
enough disclosure:
a) Construe the claims to determine the scope of the invention as
b) Construe the description to determine what it discloses to the person
skilled in the art; and
c) Decide whether the specification provides an enabling disclosure of all
the things that fall within the scope of the
it plausible that the invention can be worked across the full scope of the
the invention be performed across the full scope of the claims without undue
principles have been confirmed by the Federal
Similarly, the
requirement of support was discussed by Burley J:
CSR Building Products Ltd v United States Gypsum Company
[2015] APO 72
, Dr S D Barker adopted the summary provided by Aldous J in
Schering Biotech
at 252 – 253, which has been often followed in the
United Kingdom (emphasis added):
...to decide whether the claims are supported by the description it is
necessary to ascertain what is the invention which is specified
in the claims
and then compare that with the invention which has been described in the
specification. Thereafter the court’s
task is to decide whether the
invention in the claims is supported by the description. I do not believe that
the mere mention in
the specification of features appearing in the claim will
necessarily be a sufficient support. The word ‘support’ means
than that and requires the description to be the base which can fairly entitle
the patentee to a monopoly of the width claimed.
That approach encapsulates broadly the claim support obligation under s
40(3). To it may be added the requirement that the technical
contribution to
the art must be ascertained. Where it is a product, it is that which must be
supported in the sense that the technical
contribution to the art disclosed by
the specification must justify the breath of the monopoly
opponent also points to the matter
the Full Court applied principles entirely consistent with those above and also
considered the concept of a relevant range
for the purpose of assessing
enablement across the scope of the claims. There it was noted that whether a
range is a relevant range
“...judged against the invention as claimed and, where appropriate,
against its essence or core where that is understood to
be related to the
technical contribution the specification makes to the art and/or its inventive
Full Federal Court considered issues of support and sufficiency and
“In many cases these obligations may tend to be the same since they are
describing the same relationship although viewed from
the differing perspectives
of the claims and the specification. As Burley J has observed in
Merck Sharp
& Dohme Corporation v Wyeth LLC (No 3)
[2020] FCA 1477
Merck Sharp
’) at [543], they may often be viewed as two
sides of the same
submissions
opponent submitted that claim 1 is overly broad and encompasses any amount of
GTP or GTP plus GDP that is greater than that of
It is their view that
“Claim 1 of the Opposed Application encompasses ranges and combinations of
nucleotide concentrations
that would not successfully produce an mRNA product
that would be suitable for administration as a
Claims 8 and
9 introduce ratio values but remain broader than the exemplified embodiment but
claim 10 is recognised as reflecting
the ratios of NTPs used in the exemplified
embodiment.
Claims 14 and 15
introduce further functional limitations directed to the desired outcomes of the
mRNA transcript produced by the
methos of the
explained by Professor Gerber and Professor Preiss, the claimed invention
encompasses any amount of GTP or GTP plus GDP greater
than the amount of another
For example, Professor
Preiss explained:
“There will be upper and lower limits to all NTP concentrations, and
the disparity between GTP and the remaining NTPs, beyond
which the reaction will
no longer be efficient in producing (full-length)
transcripts.”
Gerber also explained:
“In addition, the error rate of RNA polymerase may pose a problem
depending on the concentration of NTPs in the reaction. In
particular, if the
NTP concentration is too low, it may lead to aberrant transcripts, whilst if the
NTP concentration is too high
it may lead to aberrant transcripts and
inefficient
transcription.”
opponent submitted that although the specification references a wide range of
NTP concentrations and ratios for the modified IVT
reactions, there is no
guidance on how to make appropriate selections to successfully produce a mRNA
that is suitable for administration
as a vaccine to a subject across the very
broad scope of the claims.
Throughout the specification, only 3 reaction mixtures are provided: the
(1:1:1:1 ratio of GTP:ATP:CTP:UTP),
(4:2:1:1 ratio
of GTP:ATP:CTP:UTP) and
(4:2:2:1:1 ratio of
GDP:GTP:ATP:CTP:UTP)
In comparison to
reaction, the
processes demonstrated increased RNA integrity and purity, and reduced reverse
complements, double stranded and run-on
transcripts.
opponent describes the applicant’s technical contribution to the art as
“to exemplify a reaction mixture comprising a 4:2:1:1 ratio of
GTP:ATP:CTP:UTP or 2:2:1:1 ratio of GTP:ATP:CTP:UTP when GDP
opponent submitted that the breadth of the subject matter claimed is
“nothing more than mere speculation derived from the
two exemplified
reaction mixtures provided in the Opposed
Application.”
Furthermore, the experts also noted additional differences between the
“However, I note that there are additional difference between the
equimolar process and the alpha process (see page 95, Table
1). For example,
the alpha process comprises more polymerase (i.e., 14 U/μl) than the
equimolar process (i.e., 7 U/μl).
The alpha process also comprises more
phosphate (i.e., effective phosphate 180 or 195, for the alpha or alpha GDP
processes respectively)
than the equimolar process (i.e., effective phosphate
90). Accordingly, I cannot attribute any improvements conferred by the alpha
process solely to the different concentrations of
opponent submitted that there is therefore “an absence of teaching in the
opposed application as to how an appropriate reaction
mixture is obtained in
order to achieve a mRNA product with enhanced properties suitable for
administration to a subject as a
limited range of conditions and reaction mixtures shown to produce any mRNA
product, the opponent submitted that it “places
a significant undue burden
on the skilled person seeking to successfully work the invention to ascertain
which incubation times and
reaction temperatures achieve a mRNA having enhanced
properties that is suitable for administration as a vaccine to a human
submissions
applicant submitted that the “breadth of claim scope cannot automatically
be equated with undue experimental effort”
and the specification must be
considered as a whole in the context of the common general knowledge in the art
at the relevant time.
applicant does not consider Professor Gerber and Professor Preiss to be relevant
persons skilled in the art and submitted that
their evidence in relation to the
specification should be
it was submitted that the examples in the opposed application provided a proof
of concept showing B cell activation in an
animal model following the
administration of mRNA encoding human erythropoietin prepared by the
further submitted that “This proof of concept is irrefutable and together
with the other examples taught in the opposed
application, would be understood
by the skilled person as evidence of the ability to produce an mRNA that is
suitable for administration
as a vaccine to a human subject, wherein the mRNA
encodes a vaccine antigen, using the claimed
regard to the breadth of the reaction conditions in the claims, on the
understanding that the person skilled in the art is motivated
to make the
claimed invention work, the applicant submitted that “it is clearly well
established precedent that method claims
do not require prescriptive recitation
of every possible parameter such as the concentration of reaction constituents,
temperatures,
dosing regimes,
Consideration
the outset, I will stress that the applicant did not provide any evidence. All
submissions made by the applicant lack any evidentiary
backing, unless relevant
reference could be drawn from the evidence given by Professor Gerber or
Professor Preiss. Although, the
applicant held a strong view that both
declarants lacked relevant skills and experiences to be giving evidence in
relation to mRNA
vaccines, in recognition of their qualifications and
experiences in RNA biology as a whole, the opponent’s expert evidence
be preferred where the applicant’s submissions stray into technical
specification of the opposed application relates generally to mRNA production
and there is no specific disclosure directed at
the production of mRNA vaccines.
The specification treats all mRNA products equally and does not single out mRNA
vaccines as requiring
any process that would differ from the others. The
opposed application simply suggests that “one or more vaccine antigens
currently being marketed or in development may be encoded by the RNA of the
present invention.”
Furthermore, both declarants, who are experts in RNA synthesis through IVT, have
not identified any difficulties with preparing
mRNA encoding vaccine antigens
relative to any other peptide sequence. Instead, both declarants attribute the
lower levels of contaminants
achieved through the modified IVT process with
suitability of the product for administration as a
than the use of model sequences which do not encode vaccine antigens, the
reactions of the opposed application fall
within the scope of the claimed IVT method where the concentration of GTP or GTP
is greater than one or more NTPs and two or more of ATP, CTP and UTP
are in equimolar concentrations. Both experts agree that the
IVT process produces an improved mRNA
However, both
experts also agree that the modified IVT reactions would not work across the
full breadth of the claimed scope to
produce mRNA suitable for administration as
“There will be upper and lower limits to all NTP concentrations, and
the disparity between GTP and the remaining NTPs, beyond
which the reaction will
no longer be efficient in producing (full-length) transcripts. The upper limit
of NTPs will also be driven
by the solubility of the NTPs in
“For example, with some concentrations the IVT reaction would possibly
be less efficient and produce contaminants (e.g., no
longer produce mRNA
suitable for administration as a vaccine). In addition, the error rate of RNA
polymerase may pose a problem
depending on the concentration of NTPs in the
reaction. In particular, if the NTP concentration is too low, it may lead to
transcripts, whilst if the NTP concentration is too high it may lead to
aberrant transcripts and inefficient
transcription.”
some parameters, such as NTP concentrations in the IVT reaction mixture, may
require some attention on the part of the
person skilled in the art. Based on
the evidence at hand, it is apparent that the art of IVT has certain bounds
within which a person
skilled in the art would operate. That is, a person
skilled in the art can anticipate the consequences of altering some reaction
parameters and how to modify the reaction to suit their needs. For example, the
opposed application shows that low temperature IVT
reactions (< 30 °C)
produce a larger abundance of reverse complement RNAs than IVT reactions at 37
The overall
concentrations of NTPs, choice of RNA polymerases, reaction temperature and
incubation duration are routinely adjusted
and a person skilled in the art would
expect to work through some fine tuning.
opposed application provides a “typical” IVT reaction as including:
an RNA polymerase at a final concentration of
1000-12000 U/mL; the DNA template
at a final concentration of 10-70 nM; NTPs at a final concentration of 0.5-10 mM
each; magnesium
at a final concentration of 12-60 mM; a buffer at a pH of
specification broadly describes IVT reaction mixtures where any given NTP may be
The excess of the
selected NTP is 0.5 mM to 150 mM greater than the other individual
This is in line with
the claimed invention extending to where the concentration of GTP or GTP plus
GDP is simply greater than any
one of the other NTPs and where two or more other
NTPs are equimolar. Marginally increasing the GTP concentration or marginally
dropping the concentration of just one of ATP, CTP or UTP in the IVT reaction
mixture is all that is required to fall within the
contrast to this, the only effective suppression of contaminants has been shown
reactions performed with 30 mM GTP,
15 mM ATP, 7.5 mM CTP and 7.5 mM UTP (4:2:1:1 ratio of GTP:ATP:CTP:UTP) or 30 mM
GDP, 15 mM GTP,
15 mM ATP, 7.5 mM CTP and 7.5 mM UTP (4:2:2:1:1 ratio of
GDP:GTP:ATP:CTP:UTP). Professor Gerber stated that “it is not possible
know what other concentrations encompassed by the claim would work and certainly
not every variation encompassed by the claim
Professor Preiss does not expect an IVT reaction where GTP concentration is only
marginally greater than the other NTPs
to achieve the desired reverse complement
transcription suppression.
opposed application does not provide any guidance, beyond the examples, with
regard to appropriately choosing the relative amounts
of the NTPs to ensure
improved RNA products are obtained. Armed only with the guidance of using a
selected NTP, GTP or GTP plus
GDP in the case of the claimed invention, in a
greater concentration than at least one of the other NTPs and two or more other
are equimolar, the person skilled in the art is expected to work within the
general bounds of IVT reactions to produce mRNA products
with improved purity.
Gerber opines that an IVT reaction of claim 8, where the reaction mixture
comprises an at least 2:1 ratio of GTP concentration
to any one of ATP, CTP or
UTP concentrations, “may in principle work” but continues on to say
that “it is not possible
to know what would work and certainly not every
variation encompassed by the
Preiss considers that the ratios recited in claim 9 (at least 2:1 GTP:ATP, at
least 2:1 or at least 4:1 GTP:CTP and at
least 4:1 GTP:UTP) and claim 10 (2:1
GTP:ATP, 2:1 or 4:1 GTP:CTP and 4:1 GTP:UTP) reflect the
there is no certitude of product purity with deviation from the
reactions, given the expert evidence, I am prepared to accept
that the opposed application provides sufficient disclosure to enable
skilled in the art to perform the invention of claims 9 and 10. Accordingly,
the applicant’s contribution to the
art resides in providing modified IVT
reactions which have been shown to produce RNA with effective suppression of
contaminants,
thereby providing a better product. The modified IVT reaction is
particularly well represented by the
reactions. The applicant’s contribution to the art is a modified IVT
reaction where GTP or GTP plus GDP is in excess by at
least 2-fold of ATP and by
at least 4-fold of CTP and UTP.
reactions do not extend to a general
principle where the concentration of the GTP or GTP plus GDP need only be
greater than one or
more of the other NTPs and two or more of the other NTPs are
in equimolar concentrations. There is insufficient disclosure to enable
person skilled in the art to perform the inventions of claims 1-8 and 11-20,
where the claims extend beyond the applicant’s
contribution to the art.
opposition is successful on these grounds.
opponent has not made out the grounds for clarity, utility and novelty. The
opposition is successful on the grounds of inventive
step, clear enough and
complete enough disclosure and support. Based on the evidence at hand, claims
1-8 and 11-20 lack inventive
step and support and are not sufficiently
my determination, I consider that the specification includes patentable subject
matter and these issues can be overcome by
amendment. I therefore allow the
applicant two (2) months from the date of this decision to propose amendments to
overcome the issues
identified.
normal approach is that costs should follow the event. I see no sufficient
reason to depart from this approach. The opposition
is successful.
Accordingly, I award costs in accordance with Schedule 8 against the applicant,
Moderna TX, Inc.
Delegate of the Commissioner of Patents
Annex A – claims
method of producing a messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) that is suitable for
administration as a vaccine to a human subject, wherein
the mRNA comprises an
open reading frame encoding a vaccine antigen, the method comprising incubating
a reaction mixture comprising
a deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), an RNA polymerase
that initiates with a GTP or GDP, a buffer, adenosine triphosphate (ATP),
triphosphate (CTP), uridine triphosphate (UTP), and guanosine
triphosphate (GTP), thereby producing the mRNA, wherein:
(i) the concentration of GTP is greater than the concentration of one or more of
ATP, CTP, and UTP, and two or more of ATP, CTP,
and UTP are in equimolar
concentrations; and/or
(ii) the reaction further comprises guanosine diphosphate (GDP), the
concentration of GTP plus GDP is greater than the concentration
of one or more
of ATP, CTP, and UTP, and two or more of GTP, ATP, CTP, and UTP are in equimolar
concentrations.
method of claim 1, wherein the UTP is a natural UTP.
method of claim 1, wherein the UTP is a modified UTP comprising
2’-O-methylribose, pseudouridine (ψ), N1-methylpseudouridine
(m1ψ), 2-thiouridine, 4-thiouridine, 2-thio-1-methyl-1-deaza-pseudouridine,
2-thio-1-methyl-pseudouridine, 2-thio-5-aza-uridine
thio-dihydropseudouridine, 2-thio-dihydrouridine, 2-thio-pseudouridine,
4-methoxy-2-thio-pseudouridine, 4-methoxy-pseudouridine,
4-thio-1-methyl-pseudouridine, 4-thio-pseudouridine, 5-aza-uridine,
dihydropseudouridine, or 5-methoxyuridine.
method of claim 1 or 3, wherein the UTP is an N1-methylpseudouridine
triphosphate (N1-methylpseudo-UTP).
method of any one of claims 1-4, wherein the amount of the GTP is greater than
an amount of the UTP.
method of any one of claims 1-5, wherein the amount of the ATP is greater than
the amount of the UTP.
method of any one of claims 1-6, wherein the amount of the CTP is greater than
the amount of the UTP.
method of any one of claims 1-7, wherein the reaction mixture comprises an at
least 2:1, at least 3:1, at least 4:1, at least
5:1, and/or at least 6:1 ratio
of GTP concentration to any one of ATP, CTP, or UTP
concentrations.
method of any one of claims 1-8, wherein the reaction mixture comprises an at
least 2:1 ratio of GTP concentration to ATP concentration,
an at least 2:1 or at
least 4:1 ratio of GTP concentration to CTP concentration, and an at least 4:1
ratio of GTP concentration to
UTP concentration.
method of any one of claims 1-9, wherein the reaction mixture comprises a 2:1
ratio of GTP concentration to ATP concentration,
a 2:1 or 4:1 ratio of GTP
concentration to CTP concentration, and a 4:1 ratio of GTP concentration to UTP
concentration.
method of any one of claims 1-10, wherein the RNA polymerase is selected from T7
polymerase, T3 polymerase, and SP6 polymerase.
method of claim 11, wherein the RNA polymerase is T7
polymerase.
method of any one of claims 1-12, wherein the reaction mixture is incubated at
25 degrees Celsius or at 37 degrees Celsius.
method of any one of claims 1-13, wherein the produced mRNA is less immunogenic
and/or has fewer double-stranded impurities than
an mRNA made by a comparable
method but with equimolar amounts of the GTP, ATP, CTP and UTP in the reaction
method of any one of claims 1-14, wherein less than 1% of the total mass of RNA
in the reaction mixture is a reverse complement
transcription
method of producing a messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) that is suitable for
administration as a vaccine to a human subject, wherein
the mRNA comprises an
open reading frame encoding a vaccine antigen, the method comprising incubating
a reaction mixture comprising
a deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), a T7 RNA
polymerase, a buffer, adenosine triphosphate (ATP), cytidine triphosphate (CTP),
triphosphate (UTP), and guanosine triphosphate (GTP), thereby producing
wherein the concentration of GTP is greater than the
concentration of one or more of ATP, CTP, and UTP, and two or more of ATP, CTP,
and UTP are in equimolar concentrations,
wherein the UTP is a modified UTP comprising 2’-O-methylribose,
pseudouridine (ψ), N1-methylpseudouridine (m1ψ), 2-thiouridine,
4-thiouridine, 2-thio-1-methyl-1-deaza- pseudouridine,
2-thio-1-methyl-pseudouridine, 2-thio-5-aza-uridine ,
2-thio-dihydropseudouridine,
2-thio-dihydrouridine, 2-thio-pseudouridine,
4-methoxy-2-thio-pseudouridine, 4-methoxy-pseudouridine,
4-thio-1-methyl-pseudouridine,
4-thio-pseudouridine, 5-aza-uridine,
dihydropseudouridine, or 5-methoxyuridine.
method of claim 16, wherein the UTP is an N1-methylpseudouridine triphosphate
(N1-methylpseudo-UTP).
method of claim 16 or 17, wherein the amount of the GTP is greater than an
amount of the UTP.
method of any one of claims 16-18, wherein the amount of the ATP is greater than
the amount of the UTP.
method of any one of claims 16-19, wherein the amount of the CTP is greater than
the amount of the
Eli Lilly and Company
Limited v Apotex Pty Ltd
[2013] FCA 214
Specification at page 1
lines 15-17.
Specification at
page 1 lines 17-19.
Specification at page 1 lines
Specification at page 1
lines 27-29.
Specification at
page 2 lines 11-15.
Specification at page 2 lines
Specification at page 2
lines 25-30.
Specification at
page 2 line 30 – page 3 line
Specification at page 18
line 29 – page 19 line 8.
Specification at page 21
lines 6-11.
Specification at
page 22 lines 11-12.
Specification at page 22 lines
Specification at page
22 lines 6-9.
Specification
at page 22 lines 24-29.
Specification at page 23 lines
Specification at page
24 lines 24-26.
Specification at page 24 lines
Specification at page
27 line 29 – page 28 line
Specification at page 29
lines 15-16.
Specification
at page 29 lines 17-22.
Specification at page 36 lines 16-18.
Specification at page 45
Specification at
page 45 lines 8-24.
Specification at pages
Specification at page
68 lines 23-25.
Specification at page 68 lines
Specification at page
69 lines 25-31.
Specification at page 95,
Specification at
page 95 lines 10-11.
Specification at page 95 lines
Specification at page
100 line 10 – page 100 line
Root Quality Pty Ltd v
Root Control Technologies Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 980
Root Quality Pty
Ltd v Root Control Technologies Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 980
ToolGen Incorporated v Fisher (No 2)
submissions in support at
Applicant submissions
in answer at [0137].
Gerber at [1].
Gerber at [16] and
Preiss at [20].
[19] and Preiss at
Opponent submissions
in reply at [10].
Specification at page 29 lines
H Lundbeck A/S v
Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2009] FCAFC 70
Welch Perrin
& Co Pty Ltd v Worrel
[1961] HCA 91
Pfizer Overseas
Pharmaceuticals v Eli Lilly & Company
[2005] FCAFC 224
Airco Fasteners
Pty Ltd v Illinois Tool Works Inc.
[2023] FCAFC 7
Sartas No 1 Pty Ltd
v Koukourou & Partners Pty Ltd
[1994] FCA 1529
Kimberley-Clark
Australia Pty Ltd v Arico Trading International Pty Ltd
[2001] HCA 8
Sartas No 1 Pty Ltd
v Koukourou & Partners Pty Ltd
[1994] FCA 1529
Specification
at page 21 lines 26028.
Specification at page 71 lines
Applicant submissions
in answer at [22].
submissions in answer at [22].
Applicant submissions in
answer at [019].
Specification at page 2 line25 page 3 line
Gerber at [88] and Preiss
Specification at
page 19 lines 19-22.
Specification at page 19 line 30 – page 20 line
Specification at page 20
lines 14-23.
submissions in support at
Opponent submissions
in support at [79].
Specification at page
22 lines 16-18.
Lundbeck A/S v Alphapharm Pty Ltd.
[2009] FCAFC 70
Apotex Pty Ltd v
AstraZeneca AB (No 4)
[2013] FCA 162
Artcraft Urban
Group Pty Ltd v Streetworx Pty Ltd
[2016] FCAFC 29
Sequenom, Inc. v Ariosa Diagnostics, Inc
[2019] FCA 1011
Explanatory Memorandum,
Intellectual Property Laws Amendment (Raising the Bar)
(Cth) at page 44.
Specification at page 2 lines
Opponent submissions
in support at [254].
Meyers Taylor Pty
Ltd v Vicarr Industries Ltd
[1977] HCA 19
137 CLR 228
Nicaro Holdings Pty
Ltd v Martin Engineering Co
[1990] FCA 40
(1990) 91 ALR 513
General Tire &
Rubber Co v Firestone Tyre and Rubber Co Ltd
[1972] RPC 457
at 485-486.
Novozymes A/S v Danisco
[2013] FCAFC.
Novozymes A/S v Danisco A/S
[2013] FCAFC at [145].
Mylan Health Pty Ltd v
Sun Pharma ANZ Pty Ltd
[2020] FCAFC 116
Opponent submissions
in support at [84].
Preiss at [29] and
Preiss at [43].
Applicant submissions
in answer at [054].
Applicant submissions in answer at
D4 at page 174 left
column paragraph 2.
submissions in answer at
Preiss at [55].
D4 at page 174 left
column paragraph 2.
Gerber at [60].
[61] and Preiss at [89].
Gerber at [61] and Preiss at
Hood v Bush
Pharmacy Pty Ltd
[2020] FCA 1686
Health Pty Ltd v Bayer Pharma Aktiengesellschaft
[2014] FCAFC 73
Corporation v Arrow Electronics Australia Pty Ltd
[2019] FCAFC 2
Corporation v Arrow Electronics Australia Pty Ltd
[2019] FCAFC 2
Mining and Manufacturing Co v Beiersdorf (Aust) Ltd
[1980] HCA 9
Aktiebolaget Hässle v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2002] HCA 59
212 CLR 411
Lockwood Security Products Pty Ltd v Doric Products Pty Ltd (No 2)
Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co v Beiersdorf (Australia) Ltd
[1980] HCA 9
144 CLR 253
Laboratories Limited v AstraZeneca AB
[2013] FCA 368
submissions in support at [25]. (citations
submissions in answer at
submissions in answer at [0137].
Specification at page 71
lines 28-29.
Specification at page 71 line 30 – page 72 line 2.
Specification at page 73
line 4 – page 74 line
Opponent submissions
in support at [154].
Specification at page 2 lines
submissions in support at [164].
submissions in support at
submissions in answer at
Gerber at [47]
and Preiss at [78].
Gerber at [44].
[14]-[20 and Preiss at
submissions in support at [178].
submissions in answer at
submissions in support at [184].
CSR Building
Products Limited v United States Gypsum Company
[2017] APO 57.
Industries Inc. v Nalco Company
Merck Sharp &
Dohme Corporation v Wyeth LLC (No 3)
[2020] FCA 1477
Nominees Pty Ltd v Rattlejack Innovations Pty Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 178
Jusand Nominees
Pty Ltd v Rattlejack Innovations Pty Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 178
Jusand Nominees
Pty Ltd v Rattlejack Innovations Pty Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 178
submissions in support at
submissions in support at
submissions in support at
submissions in support at
submissions in support at
Preiss at [127].
Gerber at [88].
Opponent submissions in
support at [206].
Opponent submissions in support at
submissions in support at
submissions in support at
submissions in support at
submissions in support at
submissions in support at
submissions in answer at
submissions in answer at [0205].
Applicant submissions in
answer at [0206].
Applicant submissions in answer at [0206].
Applicant submissions in
answer at [0208].
Specification at page 72 lines
Gerber at [88] and
Preiss at [25].
[88] and Preiss at [140].
Preiss at [127].
Gerber at [91].
Specification at page 21
lines 6-11.
Specification
at page 24 lines 9-11.
Specification at page 22 lines 24-26 and page 23 lines
Preiss at [141].
Preiss at [132].
RTF format (1.16 MB)
Signed PDF/A format