Application by Mr Jacob Lye [2025] FWC 3410 (13 November 2025)
[2025] FWC 3410
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Application for an order to stop bullying
Application by Mr
(AB2025/468)
COMMISSIONER REDFORD
MELBOURNE, 13 NOVEMBER 2025
Application for an FWC order to stop bullying – procedural decision
– request to adjourn hearing – request to denied
June 2025, an application was made by Mr Jacob Lye pursuant to
Fair Work Act 2009
) for an order to stop bullying
at work. The application seeks orders be made against Mr Lye’s employer,
the Bureau of Meteorology
) and alleges bullying against four
named persons. The application has been the subject of several
decisions of the Commission, including
in which some of the relevant background is set out.
hearing has been listed in relation to this matter to occur tomorrow, 14
November 2025 in person in the Commission in Melbourne.
Mr Lye has asked that
the hearing be adjourned or vacated. I have refused that request and my reasons
for that decision are set out
Summary of recent
matter has been the subject of significant delays, caused to a large extent by
repeated requests made by Mr Lye for variations
to Directions to allow
additional time to prepare, file and serve material, and various procedural
October 2025, the Bureau made an application under cover of Form 1, pursuant to
of the Act, seeking that Mr Lye’s application for stop bullying
orders be dismissed (
the dismissal application
). It also seeks an order
prohibiting the publication of the names of the named persons.
dismissal application asserts that on 22 October 2025 Mr Lye’s employment
was terminated and thus the Commission has no
power to make stop bullying orders
of the Act because it cannot be satisfied in the circumstances
there is a risk that Mr Lye will continue to be bullied at work by
an individual
October 2025 I made directions for the dismissal application to be dealt with,
by directing the Respondent to file and serve
an Outline of Submissions and any
evidentiary material upon which it relies on 31 October 2025 and Mr Lye to do so
on 7 November
2025 (referred to in error as “Thursday”). I indicated
that the matter would be listed for a hearing on 14 November 2025.
the same day, Mr Lye advised chambers that he was unable to comply with the
directions “until appropriate reasonable adjustments
are made ...”.
His email referred to adjustments as outlined in his “interlocutory
application currently before the Commission”.
This appeared to be a
reference to frequent requests Mr Lye has made for various orders to be made in
relation to this matter, including
for example, requests he made on 22 October
2025 for “preservation orders” in relation to records said to be in
the possession
of the Bureau that are relevant to Mr Lye’s application, or
his frequent requests for “reasonable adjustments”
to be made, such
as the Bureau being ordered to grant Mr Lye access to its systems so he can
access his work email and other material.
Bureau filed an Outline of Submissions in relation to the dismissal application
on 31 October 2025.
November 2025, Mr Lye wrote to my chambers, referring to the direction that he
file and serve submissions in relation to the
dismissal application on 7
November 2025. He said that he had filed an appeal and stay application in
relation to
, a decision in which I explained that Mr Lye’s earlier
application that I disqualify myself from dealing with the matter was
He asked that the directions issued on 23 October 2025 in relation to the
dismissal application be vacated or deferred until
the appeal and stay
application was determined.
November 2025, Mr Lye was advised, in correspondence from my chambers, that I
was not inclined to agree to vacate or suspend
directions in relation to the
dismissal application, noting that Mr Lye’s appeal and stay application
would be dealt with according
to the Commission’s usual process and in
accordance with the Act. Mr Lye responded to that email recording his
objection”. Later on 6 November 2025 Mr Lye also filed an
application under cover of Form 1 seeking issues he sought to raise
pursuant to
of the Act, and pursuant to the
Disability Discrimination Act
be dealt with as “preliminary matters” prior to the conduct
of any hearing, mention or dismissal application.
November 2025, I advised parties that the application Mr Lye had made on 6
November 2025 would be dealt with in due course, if
necessary, but that the
directions made for the conduct of the dismissal application stood and were
expected to be complied with.
Mr Lye sent several emails in response, repeatedly
seeking that the application he filed on 6 November 2025 be dealt with urgently,
and immediately listed for directions or mention.
Lye did not file and serve submissions in relation to the dismissal application
by the return date, 4:00PM 7 November 2025
10 November 2025, solicitors for the Bureau wrote to my chambers and asked that,
as Mr Lye had not complied with directions, the
dismissal application be dealt
with on the papers.
3:14PM on 10 November 2025 my chambers alerted Mr Lye to the fact that he had
failed to comply with Directions and provided him
with an extension of time to
do so, provided his material was filed by 4:00PM the following day, 11 November
2025. Later, on 10 November
2025, Mr Lye sent a reply, complaining about the
proposition that the matter be dealt with on the papers, and seeking that the
request in this regard be rejected. He also sought that he be
provided access to appropriate office space for three to four days
could prepare materials. He again sought that his application filed on 6
November 2025 be listed urgently and the directions
be vacated.
11 November 2025, I advised parties that Mr Lye’s request for office space
could not be accommodated by the Commission. I
provided him with another
extension of time to file material in relation to the dismissal application
– this time until 4:00PM
12 November 2025. I once again repeated that Mr
Lye’s request that his 6 November 2025 application be prioritised was
and the dismissal application would be dealt with first.
12 November 2025, Mr Lye filed submissions in relation to the dismissal
application. I issued a Notice of Listing for the matter
to be the subject of a
hearing on 14 November 2025. Later, on 12 November 2025, Mr Lye advised chambers
that he would be present
at the hearing “under duress”. The Bureau
also confirmed its appearances for the hearing.
the morning of 13 November 2025 Mr Lye appeared before Coleman DP in relation to
his application that the decision in
be stayed. The application was
. Later, on 13 November
2025, Mr Lye contacted my chambers and advised that he was experiencing a
significant deterioration in his
mental health arising from the ongoing
proceedings and was not fit to safely participate in a hearing. He said he would
medical certificate later that day and asked that the hearing listed
for 14 November 2025 be vacated or adjourned.
asked the Bureau as to its views on this request, which could be provided before
or after Mr Lye’s medical certificate was
on 13 November 2025, Mr Lye contacted my chambers with further medical
information. The Bureau was not copied into this correspondence.
requested that the information not be placed on the public case file, not be
provided to the Bureau, and be used solely for
the purpose of determining his
adjournment/vacation request. I am referring to this as “medical
information” so as not
to disclose its contents, in circumstances where Mr
Lye asks that it not be provided to the Bureau.
asked Mr Lye to provide a copy of the information to the Bureau so its response
to his request for and adjournment of the hearing
could be informed by that
information. Mr Lye then asked that I grant a confidentiality order in relation
to the information, and
that he was not prepared to provide it to the Bureau.
This correspondence was also sent to my chambers without the Bureau being copied
in. In it, he claimed that the Bureau had previously mishandled and misused his
medical and personal information and had previously
disputed medical evidence
without any expertise.
3:48PM I advised Mr Lye that in so far as he asked for a confidentiality order
to be made on an
basis, I was not prepared to do so, and that if
he was not prepared to inform the Bureau as to his request for a confidentiality
order, so it could be heard on the request, his application would be
4:32PM on 13 November 2025 Mr Lye sent a copy of his confidentiality order
application to the Bureau.
4:56PM solicitors for the Bureau said that it had not received Mr Lye’s
medical evidence and objected to the hearing being
adjourned on the basis that
it would cause the Bureau substantial prejudice.
the time Mr Lye eventually sent a copy of his application for a confidentiality
order to the Bureau, allowing for its eventual
response to the proposition that
the hearing be adjourned, I was concerned that the prejudice to the parties not
knowing whether
the hearing was to take place the following day had accumulated
to the point that it was unacceptable. I considered it was necessary
determine the request and advise the parties and I did so, advising the parties
at 5:18PM that I was not prepared to grant
Mr Lye’s request that the
hearing be adjourned or vacated.
not required to issue written reasons for a decision such as this
but have determined it
appropriate provide short written reasons as to why I have decided Mr
Lye’s request for the hearing
to be adjourned or vacated is refused. These
reasons follow a short email I sent to the parties earlier this afternoon
advising them
that Mr Lye’s request for the hearing to be adjourned or
vacated was refused, that the hearing would proceed, also altering
the effect of s 600 of the Act which provides that the Commission may determine
a matter before it in the absence of a
person who has been required to attend
before it. I also indicated in that email that while Mr Lye had previously
indicated a preference
that matters be heard in person, I was prepared to make
such accommodations as may be of assistance to him in relation to the hearing,
for example that he be allowed to appear via video, and be provided with
additional breaks. I also reminded parties that the hearing
was simply to allow
the parties to provide such oral submissions as they may wish to make, to
supplement written submissions already
filed and served and that it would not be
necessary for the parties to make substantive submissions during a hearing not
to run for more than 90 minutes.
reasons for the decision are as follows.
I consider, there is undoubtedly prejudice to the Bureau if the hearing is
vacated or adjourned at this late stage. The prejudice
is compounded by the
inordinate delay that has afflicted this proceeding, largely caused by Mr
Lye’s repeated requests for
additional time to comply with Directions
(most of which have been granted) and his procedural requests. In addition to
the general
prejudice to both parties caused by unnecessary
the Bureau is in this matter
now required to take steps to prepare for an appeal hearing in relation to an
aspect of the proceedings.
It also seeks that its non-publication order be dealt
with, and until it is, the named persons may continue to be identified in the
proceedings, in circumstances where otherwise this may cease to occur by way of
order of the Commission if the matter is determined
in its favour.
I consider that both Mr Lye and the Bureau have already been afforded procedural
fairness in relation to the dismissal application,
and the substantive
proceeding. In relation to the dismissal application, both parties have filed
and served submissions in relation
to it, and Mr Lye was provided two
unsolicited extensions of time for him to do so. Thus, the Commission is already
appraised of
the basis upon which the Bureau says the application should be
dismissed, and why Mr Lye opposes that course. I had listed the matter
hearing to provide both parties an opportunity to supplement those submissions
if they wished to do so, largely out of an abundance
of prudence. This is not to
say that based on the written submissions, I do not already have a reasonable
comprehensive understanding
of the parties’ respective positions.
in the Directions I issued in relation to the dismissal application, I alerted
parties to decisions of the Commission such
as that of Gostencnik DP in
v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Limited T/A ANZ Bank; Bianca
. Decision such as this
suggest that the circumstances in which an Applicant might resist the dismissal
of an application made pursuant
to s 789FC of the Act for orders to stop
bullying where their employment has been terminated may be extremely
these circumstances, a compelling reason is required to justify adjourning a
hearing at a very late stage, in circumstances where
it is likely to be
relatively brief and largely supplementary.
Mr Lye has chosen not to reveal to the Bureau the medical information he has
provided me with which he says warrants the
adjournment of the hearing. This
deprives it of procedural fairness in responding to his request, which is
particularly relevant
in circumstances where its interests are affected by it,
in the manner I have described.
I do not consider Mr Lye’s basis to have chosen not to disclose this
information to the Bureau, thus depriving them
of the procedural fairness I have
described above, has merit. Mr Lye has already provided medical information to
the Bureau in the
course of this proceeding. I am aware of no basis for his
allegation that it has been misused. I see no reason why this further
information
could not have been provided.
while I will not therefore disclose the details of Mr Lye’s medical
information in circumstances where he himself has
chosen not to disclose it to
the Bureau, I will observe that it is very brief. A short piece of medical
information suggesting a
proceeding should not proceed will not always be
accepted as the basis upon which to vacate a
Mr Lye’s conduct over the last 24 hours does not accord with the
proposition he lacks capacity to participate in the
litigation. Mr Lye appeared
before the Commission in a stay application heard by Coleman DP earlier today
before he made his request
for the adjournment of the hearing tomorrow. I also
observe Mr Lye appears to have had capacity to engage in various correspondence
with the Commission during the course of this afternoon, after his request was
this into account, and with the little medical information that has been
provided, I am not convinced that Mr Lye’s capacity
is so limited that he
cannot attend the hearing tomorrow to provide brief supplement to his
submissions in relation to the dismissal
application. If he wishes,
accommodation could be made to assist him to appear. While he has previously
expressed a preference for
proceedings to occur in person, the hearing could be
conducted by video. As has previously been the case, additional breaks can be
provided to Mr Lye. The hearing will not involve the giving of evidence –
it simply requires brief submissions from parties
to supplement those they have
made in writing (if they wish to provide them).
am not so convinced, I consider that the prejudice to the Bureau in vacating the
hearing at this late stage outweighs a more
cautious approach that might
otherwise be taken to adjourn the hearing; and in my view, it is not appropriate
to do so. My view in
this regard is informed by the inordinate delays in this
proceeding that have occurred already. In the circumstances, taking into
the nature of the dismissal application, further delay is inappropriate, and the
hearing is to proceed tomorrow as listed.
COMMISSIONER
Fair Work Act 2009
789FF(1)(b)(ii).
Fair Work Act 2009
Sophia (Marttea) Baker v
Bodhicorp Pty Ltd ATF The Gadens Service Trust Nos 2 T/A Gadens Lawyers
McGinn v High Court of
Australia (No 5)
[2025] FCA 975
Bellou v Victoria University (No
[2023] FCA 183
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government
RTF format (560 KB)
Signed PDF/A format