D20-21\106 [2020] SCTA 215 (15 December 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\106
FILE NUMBER : 17-1319
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
The Prior Trustee
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
The Former Advisor
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(Cth) (the Complaints Act) and held on 17 September 2020 before Justin
Malbon, Member.
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
decision under review is that of the Trustee refusing to compromise the
Complainant’s claim arising from the Trustee’s
requirement he pay
ongoing commissions until 11 July 2018.
Trustee notified the Complainant of its decision by letter dated 30 May 2017
and, following review, by letter dated 6 September
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal determines to set aside the decision under review and substitute its
own decision that the Complainant receive an amount
equivalent to the annual
commissions deducted from his account from 2012 to 2018. Interest is payable on
those amounts calculated
on the basis the relevant commission paid each year
during that period was invested in the investments he had with the Fund.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
Tribunal, under s32 of the Complaints Act, requested submissions from the
submission was received from the Complainant.
Trustee declined to provide a submission, choosing instead to rely on
information previously submitted to the Tribunal.
submissions were exchanged and responses were invited. No responses were
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
papers provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant complains the decision of the Trustee was
unreasonable for the reasons summarised in this determination.
Complainant’s pension account was opened with the Fund on 23 March 2007
after he received financial advice from the Former
Advisor. The advice was
confirmed by a letter dated 6 November 2006 (initial advice letter) with an
accompanying Statement of Advice
Complainant’s account was established with ongoing commissions payable to
the Former Advisor incorporated into the annual
administration fee.
accounts he held with the Fund that are the subject of this complaint are:
Accounts A, B and C. The Trustee unilaterally transferred
members of Account A
(including the Complainant) to Account B on 8 August 2009, and from Account B to
Account C on 4 December 2016.
Complainant believes the Former Advisor advised him to join the Fund in the
Former Advisor’s capacity as an authorised representative
of the Trustee.
He further believes the payment of ongoing commissions to the Former Advisor
was, at least in part, for the receipt
of ongoing review and advice (financial
service) about his portfolio of investments with the Fund. In his view, the
ongoing financial
service would be provided to him by the Trustee, and
consequently, he was not confined to only receiving financial service from the
Former Advisor. The Trustee submits any agreement or arrangement for financial
service was a matter between the Complainant and the
Former Advisor and did not
involve the Trustee. The Trustee agreed at relevant times to arrange to provide
the Complainant financial
service if he paid it an additional ‘personal
advice’ fee.
Complainant asked the Trustee to cease deducting the ongoing commissions from
his account with the Fund. The Trustee acceded to
his request on 11 July
Complainant seeks to be refunded the amount of the ongoing commissions he paid,
plus interest, because of the Trustee’s
refusal to provide him financial
service when he requested it, which was after he joined the Fund and before it
ceased deducting
the ongoing commissions on 11 July 2018.
resolution he seeks is compensation of $100,000.
Events not in dispute:
first column below specifies the day on which the event or events specified in
the second column occurred.
− The Complainant is born.
− The Complainant joins the Fund.
− The Complainant lodges his complaint against the
Trustee with the Tribunal.
− The Complainant requests the Trustee remove the
Former Advisor as his nominated advisor and to cancel all fees and commissions
paid to the Former Advisor.
− The Trustee accedes to the request.
Tribunal considers the trust deed of the Fund relevant to this complaint is that
in effect on the date when the Complainant made
his complaint (i.e. 4 August
, being the trust deed as amended up to and including the amendment
dated 19 April 2016 (the Trust Deed).
Trust Deed provisions relevant to the complaint are:
3.5 General Powers
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Deed, the Trustee has complete
management and control of the Fund and may, without
limitation, exercise all the
Powers of a natural person in order to:
(a) properly administer, manage, maintain and invest the Fund, a Division, a
Sub-Division or a Plan; and
(b) perform its duties.
3.6 Absolute discretion in exercising Powers
(a) Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Deed, the Trustee has
absolute and uncontrolled discretion in the exercise of any
Power at any lime
and from time to time and is not required to justify the exercise of any
(b) The Powers conferred on the Trustee by this Deed are additional to the
powers exercisable by a trustee at law.
(c) Subject to the Relevant Law, any determination made by the Trustee under
this Deed to pay or apply any amount of assets to or
for the benefit of a
Beneficiary may ai any lime in the absolute discretion of the Trustee be varied,
altered, revoked or replaced.
(d) Without limiting this clause 3.6, in exercising any Power, subject to
clause 5A and the Relevant Law, the Trustee may discriminate
between Investment
Options, Divisions, Sub-Divisions, Plans or Beneficiaries.
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
salient points made by the Complainant are as follows:
In 2007 the
Complainant switched his superannuation account to the Fund after meeting with
the Former Advisor who was employed by
the Trustee as a Financial Advisor.
Complainant’s Former Advisor told him in ‘very clear terms’
the fees he paid would cover the Former Advisor’s
financial advice.
The Trustee has
not been truthful in its decision about the fee structure as it was clear to the
Complainant and other clients of
the Former Advisor that a significant component
of the fees was for financial advice, however such advice was not provided.
The Complainant
notes there is an expectation of receiving ‘service’ for the
‘fees’ paid.
Complainant known the correct or full information, he would not have switched
his super to the Trustee or elected to pay a
‘once only fee’ if the
financial advice was not on-going and included in the fee structure.
There is no
transparency in the fee structure from the Trustee and he has no accurate method
for differentiating between the fees
for investment management, administration,
commission and financial advice:
However, with fees generally costing around $2Kpa -
$4Kpa, one expects financial advice.
The SoA provided
to him by the Former Advisor included a cover letter on the Trustee’s
letterhead and was signed by the Advisor
as ‘Representative for [the
Trustee]’. Furthermore, the SoA was given to the Complainant by the Former
Advisor at an
office of the Trustee where the Former Advisor was employed or
worked from:
My experience in business (which spans nearly 40 years across three
continent and in companies and working with government
organisations/universities)
tells me that one does not write a letter on a
firm’s letterhead unless one is employed by that firm.
The SoA details
both his contact details and those for the Former Advisor, which lists an
address, email and telephone number all
owned by the Trustee. The Australian
Financial Services License number listed is also owned by the Trustee.
The Complainant
conducted a search of the moneysmart.gov.au website which revealed that the
Former Advisor worked for the Trustee
between 1 December 2009 and 12 May 2016
with no record for the Former Advisor prior to 1 December 2009.
The Complainant
The entire SOA is constructed in the plural. That is, the
“Advice” is from a collective group of “we”. It
from a singular person (“I”) i.e. [the Former Advisor].
One assumes when the plural is used, it comes from many – such as a
company and not a single person.
The Complainant
was under the impression from 2006, when he first met the Former Advisor, that
he was employed by the Trustee as a
Financial Advisor. However, after reading
the material supplied by the Tribunal, the Complainant is unsure whether the
Former Advisor
was employed by the Trustee or was a contractor or
consultant:
Certainly the phone, fax, email and physical address for [the
Former Advisor] was [the Trustee] and the impression provided suggested
[Trustee] employee.
There was never any suggestion I was doing business with a party not employed
by [the Trustee]. I never believed I was doing business
with a single entity
(vis one-man-band) and this single entity was referring me to [the Trustee].
The Complainant
says that by April 2009 he had no contact with the Former Advisor nor any other
Financial Advisor within the Fund.
He succeeded in
having the Former Advisor removed as his Financial Advisor on 12 July 2018.
From 2010 until
2018 he was trying to obtain from the Trustee a statement of what fees he was
paying for ‘Advice’ and
why he was not receiving this
telephone conversation in July 2018:
...a fee being disclosed and a requirement to have an
“absentee/delinquant Advisor” removed from my file. I should point
out at this juncture, I was speaking with this same Call-Centre person over a
year earlier .... attempting to ascertain the same
information –
“Where can I get Financial Advice? Am I paying a fee for that Advice? I
have no relationship with [the
Former Advisor] since 2008”. I was in
all to no avail.
The Complainant
In 2018 it was made clear to me I paid [the Former Advisor] a fee
of $1116. Over the ten (10) year period of 2008 to 2018 I would
have paid [the
Former Advisor] around $10K. This was not disclosed to me and there is no
evidence of this amount in PDS or other
material supplied by [the Trustee] to
me. On the contrary, I was attempting to discover exactly what fees I paid over
an extended
period of years. When I removed [the Former Advisor] from my file at
[the Fund], my fees reduced. So I was paying the fee, regardless
[Trustee’s] claim they paid the fee. And there is no disclosure of a
break-down of these fees ever supplied to me in
any of the [Fund]
documentation.
And finally, it seems [the Trustee] is now stating [the Former Advisor] was
never employed by [the Trustee!] This reeks of deceptive
marketing, collusion
and perhaps fraud.
The Complainant
submits: There has been no Financial Management of my account since 2009, apart
from basic accounting reporting.
From around 2010
until July 2018 he was paying the Former Advisor around $85/month, or over $1000
per annum for financial advice that
he did not receive.
The Trustee
salient points made by the Trustee are as follows:
Since joining
the Fund, the Complainant has been provided with information about his fees,
giving him the opportunity to see what
fees were charged and on what basis.
Regarding the
migration of the Complainant account from Product B to Product C, this was
conducted after a review by the Trustee of
the product.
The Trustee can
only make a change if it benefits at minimum, 80% of members and it was assessed
that the migration would be for the
‘overall betterment’ of members
and thus all Product B members were migrated to Product C.
The setting for
communication preferences the Complainant had with Product B was moved over to
Product C as prior to migration the
Complainant had reported email as his
preferred method of contact effective 3 August 2016.
There is no
record of an Adviser Service Fee being charged to the Complainant’s
account, rather there was a trail commission
paid to the Former Advisor.
This fee was
agreed to between the Complainant and the Former Advisor when he obtained his
financial advice. The Complainant would
need to have contacted the Former
Advisor to discuss the terms of this fee.
The Trustee
refers to the Complainant’s Pension Statement as at 30 June 2009 which
...Other Management Costs $4,029.41. These indirect costs
are calculated daily and deducted from Investment Earnings prior to being
distributed to the fund and the members account. Other Management Costs include
the Management Costs of the Investment Manager.
...Total Fees Paid $3,967.56. This approximate amount includes all the fees
and costs which affected the members investment during
the period. This is made
up of the Fees and Charges that are charged directly to the members account,
including a fee Rebate of $61.85,
and are listed in the Transaction Summary and
Transaction Details sections plus the Other Management Costs listed above.
Advisor was initially a Fund Financial Planner but transferred to become an
Independent Financial Planner in 2009.
during which an advisor was linked to the Complainant’s investment in the
Fund, the Complainant paid the agreed administration
fee consistent with
disclosures in the relevant PDS and annual statements. Over that same period,
the Trustee paid trail commissions
to the advisor’s licensee which was
referable to the Complainant’s investment in the Fund consistent with its
contractual
obligations to that licensee and FOFA grandfathering.
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
Tribunal must initially determine, under s37(6) of the Complaints Act, whether
the decision of the Trustee to refuse to compromise
the Complainant’s
claim arising from the Trustee’s requirement he pay ongoing commissions
until 11 July 2018 was fair
and reasonable in its operation in relation to the
Complainant in the circumstances.
issue is not what decision the Tribunal would have made on the evidence before
the Trustee but whether the decision was fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal took the whole of the evidence and
submissions into account. The Tribunal is satisfied
the material it has relied
on has been provided to both Parties
The status of the Former Advisor
Complainant joined the Fund on the advice the Former Advisor gave him in late
2006 (initial advice). The Complainant believed
that in return for paying annual
commissions he would receive ongoing reviews and advice about his Fund
investments (financial service),
upon his requests, from the Trustee. That is,
he believed the financial advice would be availed by the Trustee, and that he
limited to receiving any financial service only from the Former
Complainant’s belief was in part formed on the basis he considered the
Former Advisor to be an authorised representative
of the Trustee and was
therefore, as such, acting as an employee or agent of the Trustee. The
Complainant submitted:
...The information I relied upon in 2007 was the [Product A]
Product Disclosure Document; the Proposal prepared by [the Former Adviser]
switch my Super ... In his capacity as Financial Adviser and Salesman, [the
Former Adviser] told me I would have the services
of a financial adviser over
the life of the investment. ... explained to me the advice I was to receive
would be paid for by the
monthly fees I would pay to [the Trustee].
The information and advice was ... clear ... I would pay [the Trustee] ...
administration fee for the life of the investment and for
this fee I would
receive financial advice, administration services and management of ...
investment. The advice would be supplied
on an “adhoc” or “as
required” basis as my own or market circumstances changed, plus there
would be a regular
review of my investment (by the financial adviser) which
would occur at least on an annual basis.
I also expected to receive regular documentation advising me of the
performance of the investment and where appropriate, alerting
me to matters or
issues which may have a negative impact upon the performance of the
investment.
this the Trustee submitted:
...[The Trustee] cannot speak on behalf of the Complainant’s
financial adviser [the Former Advisor] who was not employed by
the fund and
operated independently under a separate AFSL licence. The adviser is not
employed by the fund. [The Trustee] never referred
the Complainant to a
financial adviser, rather a financial adviser referred the Complainant to [the
Trustee] to become a member.
the Trustee is suggesting the Former Advisor ‘was not employed by the fund
and operated independently under a separate AFSL
licence’ when the
Complainant received the initial advice and joined the Fund, this is not
supported by a letter the Former
Advisor sent the Complainant dated 6 November
2006 (initial advice letter). The letter confirmed the financial advice he had
the Complainant. The Trustee’s logo appears at the top of the
letter, along with its name and its Australian Financial Services
Licence (AFSL)
number. The Former Advisor’s name appears at the bottom of the letter,
along with the words ‘as Representative
for’ the Trustee. Also
appearing are the words ‘Financial Product advice is provided by
Representatives of [the Trustee]...Australian
Financial Services
Licensee’. The Trustee made no submissions to the Tribunal stating, or
suggesting, the Former Advisor used
its letterhead or described himself as
‘as Representative for’ the Trustee without the permission or
authority of the
Trustee. Indeed, it submitted to the Tribunal that:
[The Former
Adviser] was an adviser under the [Trustee] Financial Planning (SFP) licence
until 2016.
From 24 May 2016
[the Former Adviser] continued as the listed account financial adviser by
transferred to a new AFSL licensee ...
Complainant submitted: ‘A search of the moneysmart.gov.au website reveals
[the Former Advisor] worked for [the Trustee]
1/12/2009 and 12/5/2016 and that
[the Trustee] held the license number...There is no record available for [the
Former Advisor] prior
to 1/12/2009’. Confusingly, the Trustee also
submitted the Former Advisor ‘started as a [Trustee] Financial Planner,
transferred to become an Independent Financial Planner (IFA) in 2009’.
Tribunal is satisfied, however, the Former Advisor was an authorised
representative of the Trustee at the time he provided the
initial advice to the
Complainant and he continued in that position until May 2016.
Trustee annually deducted fees from the Complainant’s accounts with the
Fund, a proportion of the fees was used for remunerating
the Former Advisor,
which is discussed further below. The deductions for the purpose of remunerating
the Former Advisor ceased on
11 July 2018, upon the Complainant’s request.
The Trustee submitted it was up to the Former Advisor to reach any agreement
with the Complainant to ‘dial down or rebate the commission’.
‘Dialling down to zero’, according to the Trustee,
adviser trail fee was no longer charged to the member’s account’.
The Trustee submitted the Complainant’s
investments were transferred to
another account, effective from 11 July 2018, which resulted in the trail
commission being paid to
the Former Advisor being ‘dialed down to
zero’ and no other adviser fees were payable.
to the Complainant:
I can confirm that on/about 12 July 2018 I was successful in having
[the Former Advisor] removed as my Financial Advisor. From about
2010 until 2018
I was trying to ascertain from [the Trustee] a statement of what fees I was
paying for “Advice”, why
I was not receiving this
“Advice” and who was prepared to pick up the case within [the
Trustee] and help me out.
The action of the July 2018 Telecon with [an employee of the Trustee]
resulted in a fee being disclosed and a requirement to have
“absentee/delinquant Advisor” removed from my file. I should point
out at this juncture, I was speaking with this
same Call-Centre person over a
year earlier (March 2017 – see spreadsheet file {attached} from [the
Trustee]) attempting to
ascertain the same information – “Where can
I get Financial Advice? Am I paying a fee for that Advice? I have no
relationship
with [the Former Advisor] since 2008”. I was in contact with
[the Trustee] frequently over the years attempting to gain Advice
Trustee submitted:
...A Call recording made on 09/07/2018 @ 2:11pm – ... is
attached. In this recording the 0.55 trailing commission is discussed.
Complainant is advised this fee forms part of the administration fee. Full
disclosure of this fee is given to the Complainant.
The Complainant was advised
the advisor can be removed and a signed request from him is required.
appears the Former Advisor was removed from connection with the
Complainant’s Fund accounts without any agreement being reached
the Former Advisor and the Complainant about the matter.
Tribunal is satisfied after reviewing the circumstances the Trustee did not
inform the Complainant prior to July 2018 that he
could request the Trustee to
dial the commissions down to zero; that is in effect, to cease commissions being
paid to him from the
Complainant’s accounts. The Tribunal is satisfied the
Trustee ceased deducting commissions from the Complainant’s accounts
the purposes of remunerating the Former Advisor on 11 July 2018.
Options for compensating the Former Advisor for the initial
Complainant was offered, at about the time of receiving the initial advice, two
options for compensating the Former Advisor for
the advice. In the initial
advice letter the Former Advisor stated:
Fee Structure
For information regarding the fees and charges of the recommended products
please refer to the relevant Product Disclosure Statements.
However we specifically draw your attention to the following fee in relation
to the products detailed below. You have a choice of
two fee payment options:
Contribution (Entry) Fee and Nil Contribution (Entry) fee option.
the SoA in the section titled ‘Fee Structure, and [Product A] Allocated
Pension and Term Allocated Pension’ stated:
We have recommended the nil contribution fee option. Under this
option there is no upfront fee, however you will pay higher ongoing
costs for the life of your investment.
You may pay more in total fees under this option than if you select the
Contribution Fee Option.
This option has been recommended as you do not want to pay an upfront fee for
this investment. You understand that higher ongoing
management costs will apply
under this option.
Complainant agreed to the Nil Contribution (Entry) fee option, which meant he
paid no upfront fee, but agreed to pay higher ongoing
management costs for the
life of his investments with the Fund. He agreed he understood this to mean he
may pay higher ongoing management
costs than if he paid the upfront Contribution
Fee Option.
mentioned, one of the options for compensating the Former Advisor was by means
of paying a one-off dollar fee, or ‘Contribution
Fee’, which meant
the compensation for the initial advice had a finite value. This suggests the
Nil Contribution (Entry)
option was a fee for a service or services,
which included the initial advice, which also had a finite value.
the amount of the remuneration under the Nil Contribution (Entry) fee option was
finite, it was not necessarily equivalent
to the amount payable under the
Contribution Fee Option. As was stated in the SoA, it might involve him paying
more in total fees
under this option for the initial advice.
leaves open the question as to whether the payment of ongoing commissions under
the terms of the Nil Contribution (Entry) –
after it fully compensated or
remunerated the Former Advisor for the initial advice – was for the
purposes of paying for ongoing
review and advice regarding the
Complainant’s investments with the Fund. He believed it did so. The effect
of the Complainant’s
submissions is that his payment of ongoing
commissions remunerated the Former Advisor for the initial advice, and after
satisfied, paid for ongoing review and advice (financial service) from
the Trustee.
SoA and the relevant PDS’ are not explicit as to what, if anything, the
Complainant was entitled to receive for the payment
of ongoing commissions
beyond remunerating the Former Advisor for the initial advice. The SoA did,
however, impress upon the Complainant
that it would be prudent for him to have
his investments regularly reviewed:
Once implemented, this Statement of Advice should be reviewed on a
regular basis to ensure that it continues to meet your needs. We
are available
to review your Statement of Advice upon your request.
SoA further stated under the heading ‘Please read the following
It should be noted that in times of adverse economic conditions
future earning rates may diminish with the consequence that additional
might be required to reach your future funding goal. Likewise, a rise in the
rate of inflation without a compensating increase
in nominal interest rates can
result in your funding goal being insufficient to cover your future expenditure
requirements. It is
important that your investment portfolio is reviewed
regularly to ensure your investments remain relevant to your future needs and
objectives.
another section headed: ‘Our Recommendations/Advice’ it stated:
You should consider reviewing your financial strategy on an ongoing
basis to ensure that it continues to satisfy your ongoing needs
and objectives,
and remains appropriate to your circumstances.
Trustee submitted the Complainant was able to obtain ongoing review and advice
he paid an additional personal
advice fee. The additional fee was described as a ‘personal advice
Personal advice fees
You can authorise [the Trustee] to pay a fee for personal advice to your
financial adviser (agreed by [the Trustee] and have the fee
charged to the
account. It can be:
a one-of fixed
dollar fee, or
an ongoing fixed
monthly dollar amount or percentage of your account balance up to a maximum of
Trustee had no record of the Complainant paying it such a fee, which he does not
It informed him it did
‘not agree to provide
financial advice services without a fee’.
How was the Former Advisor remunerated?
the Complainant chose the Nil Contribution (Entry) fee option, the Trustee
facilitated the remuneration of the Former Advisor
on an ongoing basis until
July 2018. It appears the Trustee had made arrangements between itself and the
Former Advisor to provide
a range of ways of remunerating him, including through
the payment of commissions regarding the Complainant’s accounts with
Fund. According to the Product A PDS:
The initial commission and ongoing commission (as defined below)
are not a separate charge (except any remuneration that the financial
may charge you directly as a fee for service or charge members as an Optional
Financial Adviser Service fee).
The initial commission is included in the contribution fee and the ongoing
commission is included in the issuer fee. The amounts shown
include GST, which
is paid by us.
Commission, up to the level as detailed below, is payable to your financial
adviser. Your financial adviser may rebate a percentage
of the commission
payable to you by way of a reduction in the fees charged.
Initial commission
Up to 4.40% of
contributions and rollovers received.
Ongoing commission
Up to 0.55% per
annum of your total account balance.
Optional financial adviser service fee
You and your financial advisor may agree to a level of service different to
that covered by the Ongoing
Commission....
Product B PDS stated:
Ongoing service fee
We pay up to 0.60% pa (including GST) of your account balance to your
adviser’s Licensee as ongoing commission.
Any applicable GST is not payable by you. This fee is part of the admin fee
and is not an additional cost to you.
Adviser service fee
This fee is part of the administration fee and is not an additional cost to
We pay up to 0.60% a year (including GST) of your account balance to your
adviser’s Licensee as ongoing commission. Any applicable
payable by you.
addition, it was stated in the SoA
Initial New Business Commission
For Managed Investments, Superannuation Allocated Pensions, Term Allocated
Pensions, ... [the Trustee] or a member of the [trustee
group] receives new
business commission from product provider based on either the lump sum invested
all the regular investment amount.
SoA stated in the section headed ‘Remuneration, Commission and Other
Importantly, commissions, incentive bonuses and other benefits
paid are not an additional cost to you.
Details of actual commissions (including any rebate of commissions),... in
respect of this advice are detailed...
Service and advice fees are
... an additional cost to you.
is not clear what the Trustee meant by the statement ‘incentive bonuses
and other benefits paid are not an additional cost
to you’. It does not
state what it is not additional to, and to which commissions and incentive
bonuses it is referring. It
may, in part, be referring to the commissions paid
by product providers. In this regard it was stated in the SoA:
Initial New Business Commission
For Managed Investments, Superannuation Allocated Pensions, Term Allocated
Pensions, ... [the Trustee] or a member of the [trustee
group] receives new
business commission from product provider based on either the lump sum invested
all the regular investment amount.
to the Trustee:
In the period during which an advisor was linked to the
Complainant’s investment in the [Fund], the Complainant paid the agreed
administration fee consistent with disclosures in the relevant PDS and annual
statements. Over that same period, [the Trustee] paid
trail commission to the
advisor’s licensee which was referrable to the Complainant’s
investment in the [Fund] consistent
with its contractual obligations to that
licensee and FOFA grandfathering. Those payments were from [the Trustee’s]
own moneys,
and not from the [Fund] or the Complainant’s account.
appears, then, the Trustee remunerated the Former Advisor in a number of ways,
which were not limited to deducting commissions
based on the Complainant’s
annual account balance. Some of the ways in which the Former Advisor was
remunerated were outlined
in the SoA:
REMUNERATION, COMMISSION AND OTHER BENEFITS
Commissions and other benefits are paid by product providers to [the Trustee]
or members of the [Trustee Group]. [Trustee] Representatives
are employed or
contracted to the [Trustee Group] and the commission that the Group receives is
used to cover salaries, bonuses,
training and administration expenses relating
to the Representatives. Representatives receive a salary, paid fortnightly which
based on a number of general factors including industry experience, location,
qualifications and complexity of role. In addition,
your Representative may also
receive monthly and annual incentive bonuses and other benefits payable by [the
Trustee] or a member
of the [Trustee Group], which are directly linked to sales
and performance related targets.
Importantly, commissions, incentive bonuses and other benefits paid are
not an additional cost to you. [Bolded text in the original
addition, the Product A PDS stated:
Other Benefits
In addition to cash bonuses, your Representative is, from time to time,
eligible to participate in various sales incentive programs
with the potential
to receive both pecuniary and non-pecuniary benefits. These benefits may take
various forms including, but not
limited to, attendance at company sponsored
conferences, prepaid holiday accommodation, airline tickets or the like.
the Trustee did deduct monies from annual fees it charged the Complainant, which
it paid to the Former Advisor, calculated
as a commission of 0.55% for Product
A, and 0.60% for Product B of the Complainant’s annual account balance. A
typical example
of an annual statement regarding the disclosure of fees is as
Opening balance as at 01 Jul 2015 $187,514.17
Administration fee – $4,591.83
Rebate – Admin Fee (Fund Mgr) $120.34
Other fees and costs
This approximate amount has been deducted from your investment and includes
all other costs that were not paid directly out of your
Total fees you paid
This approximate amount includes all the fees and costs which affected your
investment during the reporting period. This amount includes
the fees deducted
from your account and other costs. The total fees you paid are the total of all
fees and costs disclosed in this
Your statement explained
Administration fees
Fees charged by the Trustee for managing your investment. All superannuation
funds charge fees to their members. The Trustee uses
tax deductions for
administration fees to reduce tax payable by members on their investment
earnings. The tax deductibility varies
depending on the investment option. Refer
to the PDS for information about fees.
Includes fees and charges deducted directly from your account as well as any
applicable rebates. Some of fees charged by us or your
financial adviser for
administering your super account, and some are government fees and taxes. The
different fees and charges are
explained in more detail below.
What did the remuneration pay for?
the Tribunal’s view, a point of time was reached when the ongoing
commissions deducted from the Complainant’s accounts
fairly compensated or
fully remunerated the Former Advisor for the initial advice. The Complainant
paid ongoing annual commissions,
which were paid to the Former Advisor, over a
period of over ten years. At some point during that time the commissions fairly
remunerated
the Former Advisor for the initial advice.
Complainant sought, following the advice provided in the SoA, reviews of his
investment portfolios with the Fund on an ongoing
basis to ensure his
investments continued to satisfy his ongoing needs and objectives, and remained
appropriate to his circumstances.
He sought the reviews from the Trustee.
However, it informed him this was a matter between him and the Former Advisor
and did not
concern the Trustee.
Tribunal is of the view the Former Advisor was the Trustee’s authorised
representative at the time of him providing the
initial advice. He continued in
that role until May 2016. Consequently, the Trustee had statutory obligations,
including under section
52(2)(b) of the
Superannuation Industry (Supervision)
(SIS Act), which provides that the Trustee’s governing rules
include conditions that it ‘exercise, in relation to all
matters affecting
the entity, the same degree of care, skill and diligence as a prudent
superannuation trustee would exercise in
relation to an entity of which it is
trustee and on behalf of the beneficiaries of which it makes investments’,
and that it
(c) ‘perform the trustee’s duties and exercise the
trustee’s powers in the best interests of the beneficiaries’.
a result of section 52(2)(d), the Trustee’s governing rules include
conditions that:
(d) where there is a conflict between the duties of the trustee to
the beneficiaries, or the interests of the beneficiaries, and the
duties of the
trustee to any other person or the interests of the trustee or an associate of
the trustee:
(i) to give priority to the duties to and interests of the beneficiaries over
the duties to and interests of other persons; and
(ii) to ensure that the duties to the beneficiaries are met despite the
conflict; and
(iii) to ensure that the interests of the beneficiaries are not adversely
affected by the conflict; and
(iv) to comply with the prudential standards in relation to conflicts;...
section 912A(1) of the Corporations Act, the Trustee, as an AFSL licensee,
(a) do all things necessary to ensure that the financial services
covered by the licence are provided efficiently, honestly and fairly;
(d) subject to subsection (4) – have available adequate resources
(including financial, technological and human resources) to
provide the
financial services covered by the licence and to carry out supervisory
arrangements; ...
addition, the Product A PDS relevantly stated:
The approved Trustee is responsible for operating the Fund in
accordance with the rules of its trust deed and the relevant financial
and superannuation laws. In addition, the Trustee must ensure that the
provisions of the trust deed are complied with and
applied with fairness and
impartiality and in the best interest of the Fund members. Some of the key
responsibilities of the Trustee
communication
with the Fund members and other parties; and
investment of
the Fund assets.
Complainant complained that:
1. [The Trustee] has failed to address my complaint which is in
ii) The failure of [the Trustee] to advise me that my Financial Adviser was
no longer an employee of [the Trustee] (as of 8 December
2009); the failure of
[the Trustee] to advice me of a replacement Financial Adviser as contracted in
the original terms of engagement;
the failure of [the Trustee] to advise me that
fees would continue relating to Financial Advice (although [the Trustee] would
longer be supplying that service); the non-disclosure of fees paid by myself
in relation to Financial Advice and Sales Commissions
even after I sought to
obtain such information over an extended period of several years; the deceptive
manner in which [the Trustee]
has acted to hide from me those fees and
Complainant did not receive ongoing financial service either from the Former
Advisor or the Trustee despite his continuous requests
over a number of years
for the Trustee to provide him the financial service. Consequently, the Trustee
was made aware of the Complainant’s
desire to receive financial service
from the Trustee and was aware he was paying ongoing annual commissions as it
facilitated the
payments to the Former Advisor until 11 July 2018. It informed
the Complainant that any concerns he had about receiving ongoing financial
service was a matter between him and the Former Advisor and did not involve the
Trustee. It was made aware by the Complainant of
his dissatisfaction with the
Former Advisor yet chose to ignore his complaints.
the Tribunal’s view, the Complainant’s best interests were not
served by the Trustee not ensuring he was receiving
financial service,
particularly after he had regularly contacted it over a prolonged period of
time. It was not sufficient for the
Trustee to wash its hands of the matter and
insist that the Complainant’s requests were only a matter between him and
Advisor. Nor did it serve his best interests not to inform him when
the Former Advisor ceased being its authorised representative.
Complainant formed the reasonable view when he received the initial advice the
Former Advisor was acting on behalf of the Trustee
as an authorised
representative, either as an employee or agent of the Trustee. The Trustee by
allowing the Former Advisor to use
its letterhead and providing him the status
of authorised representative of the Trustee held him out as being its employee
The Complainant relied on those representations when agreeing to have
his monies invested in the Fund. He formed a view based on
these representations
that his relationship was with the Trustee, and that it was the Trustee that
would ensure he would receive
ongoing financial service. In the Tribunal’s
view, the Complainant was told by the Former Advisor when provided the initial
advice that he would receive the services of a financial adviser over the life
of his investments with the Fund, ie financial service,
and this would be paid
for by the annual commissions. He was further informed the advice would be
provided on an ad hoc or as required
basis, either at the Complainant’s
instigation, or the Trustee’s instigation if there were substantial market
on his investments. He relied on the representations of the Former
Advisor, along with the representations of the Trustee that he
was its employee
or agent, to his detriment in that he paid annual fees that were passed onto the
Former Advisor in the form of commissions,
but he received no financial service
was not a matter for the Complainant to pursue the Former Advisor for ongoing
financial service – he had lost faith in his
advice in any event –
it was a matter for the Trustee to ensure such financial service was being
provided to the Complainant,
or at the very least that he was not paying annual
fees or commissions without receiving something in return for those
responsibility continued after the Former Advisor ceased being the
Trustee’s authorised representative. It held the Former
Advisor out as its
authorised representative when the Complainant joined the Fund. The Complainant
reasonably formed the view that
as the Former Advisor was acting for the
Trustee, he was entering into an arrangement between himself and the Trustee,
which meant
he was not limited to only receiving any ongoing advice from the
Former Advisor.
was also informed it was in his interests to have his investments regularly
reviewed. He was led to the reasonable conclusion that
the payment of ongoing
commissions related to the receipt of ongoing financial service. He was neither
informed, nor otherwise led
to believe, he would be required to pay ongoing
annual commissions in return for the receipt of no service or other benefit.
Additionally,
and alternatively, the Trustee failed to act in the Complainant’s best
interests by enabling a situation in which
it deducted annual commissions (which
it paid to the Former Advisor) in circumstances where it was aware, or ought to
have been aware,
the Complainant was not, or would not be, receiving ongoing
financial service or indeed any service in return. In other words, it
situation in which he was paying commissions for no service. If the Trustee
believed the Former Advisor ought to have been
providing ongoing financial
service, it should have taken reasonable steps to ensure this was done. Instead,
it acted to absolve
itself of any such responsibility.
Trustee remedied this situation at the Complainant’s request on 11 July
2018. In the Tribunal’s view, the situation
should have been remedied
Tribunal is of the view the Trustee must consider all aspects of the
Complainant’s claim, including whether it had any responsibility
failure to provide ongoing financial service. In doing so, it becomes apparent
the Trustee has an obligation to compromise
the claim. (
Retail Employees
Superannuation Pty Ltd v Crocker
(‘Crocker’)
[2001] FCA 1330
Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme Board v Dexter
[2004] FCA 1434.
Trust Deed grants the Trustee complete management and control of the Fund and
absolute and uncontrolled discretion in the exercise
of its powers (Clauses 3.5
and 3.6 of the Trust Deed), which necessarily includes the power to compromise
claims. As such, if the
Trustee is in any way accountable for the negative
impact on the Complainant’s superannuation benefit, it has the power to
compromise the claim. In the Tribunal’s view, failure to compromise a
claim for an error that is partly or wholly a trustee’s
fault would not be
fair and reasonable.
the Tribunal so finds, the Tribunal, standing in the shoes of the Trustee, can
decide that the Trustee’s power to compromise
the claim should be
exercised in a particular way – as established in Crocker and Dexter.
Tribunal was not provided information about the nil commission dollar payment,
nor information about how calculations can be made
to determine when the Former
Advisor was reasonably compensated or remunerated for the initial advice from
the ongoing commissions
paid by the Complainant. In the absence of all the
relevant information, the Tribunal must make a determination on the information
available. Generally speaking, in these circumstances Australian courts have
held that mere difficulty in estimating the correct
figure does not relieve a
deliberative body, such as the Tribunal, from the responsibility of estimating
as best it can. On occasion
the deliberative body must engage in a measure of
guess work rather than estimation (see
The Commonwealth v Aman Aviation
(1992) 174 CLR 31).
However, to the extent information is available relevant
to informing the calculation of the correct figure, the information should
used rather than engaging in speculation. If precise evidence is not available,
the deliberative body must do the best it can
Biggin and Co. Ltd. v.
Permanite Ltd
(1951) 1 KB 422).
arriving at an outcome, the Tribunal determines the initial commission of 4%
along with the annual 0.55% commissions paid for a
period of four years after
the Complainant joined the Fund constituted a reasonable amount of compensation
for the initial advice.
Consequently,
the Tribunal determines that the Complainant receive an amount equivalent to the
annual commissions deducted from his
account from 2012 to 2018. Interest is
payable on those amounts calculated on the basis the relevant commission paid
each year during
that period was invested in the investments he had with the
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decision under review
if it is satisfied that the decision, in its
operation in relation to the
Complainant, was fair and reasonable in the circumstances.
the reasons stated above the Tribunal is not satisfied that the decision under
review was fair and reasonable in its operation
in relation to the Complainant
in the circumstances. Under s37(3) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must make
a determination and
it can set aside the decision of the Trustee and substitute
another decision.
s37(1)(a) of the Complaints Act, in reviewing a decision of a Trustee, the
Tribunal has all the powers, obligations and discretions
that are conferred on
the Trustee.
making its decision, s37(5) of the Complaints Act requires that the Tribunal
must not do anything that would be contrary to law
or to the governing rules of
s37(4) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal may only exercise its determination
making power for the purpose of placing the Complainant
as nearly as
practicable, in the position that they would have been in but for the unfairness
or unreasonableness, or both, that
the Tribunal has determined to exist in
relation to the Trustee’s decision.
accordance with these provisions, the Tribunal sets aside the decision of the
Trustee to refuse to compromise the complaint and
substitutes a decision that
the Complainant receive an amount equivalent to the annual commissions deducted
from his account from
2012 to 2018. Interest is payable on those amounts
calculated on the basis the relevant commission paid each year during that
was invested in the investments he had with the Fund.
Justin Malbon, Member
Date of Tribunal signature: 15 December 2020
RTF format (388 KB)
Signed PDF/A format