TJ & P Pty Ltd as trustee for the Post Family Trust v Agrinova Pty Ltd (No 4) [2025] FCA 1375 (12 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
TJ & P Pty Ltd as trustee for the
Post Family Trust v Agrinova Pty Ltd (No 4)
[2025] FCA 1375
File number(s):
NSD 1007 of 2020
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– where the applicant is
successful in recovering only a fraction of the amount claimed – whether
the applicant or the
respondent should be considered to be the successful
– where the applicant succeeds on its estoppel
case but not on its contract case – whether costs should follow the
– where the applicant abandoned its claim for
damages for misleading or deceptive conduct as against each of the active
respondents
and consented to an order for the dismissal of its misleading or
deceptive conduct claim against the former third and fourth
respondents
– whether a non-party costs order should
be made against the director of the applicant for any costs payable to the
and the former respondents – where security for costs
previously provided and where no prior notice given of intention to seek
non-party costs order
– operation of
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Legislation:
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth), Schedule 2,
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(NSW), s 195
Supreme Court Act 1933
(ACT), s 69 (no longer in force)
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT), r 1619
Cases cited:
Australian Receivables Ltd v Tekitu Pty Ltd
(Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) (Deed Administrators Appointed)
[2011] NSWSC 1425
Baker v Towle
[2008] NSWCA 73
(2008) 39 Fam LR 323
Chapman v Luminis Pty Ltd
[2003] FCAFC 162
Chou (aka Chou) v Metstech Pty Ltd (ACN 602 390 214)
[2023] FCAFC
; (2023) 178 IPR 406
Court House Capital Pty Ltd v RP Data Pty Limited
[2023] FCAFC
Cressy v Miloriad (No 2)
[2016] ACTSC 339
(2016) 317 FLR 267
Doppstadt Australia Pty Ltd v Lovick & Son Developments Pty Ltd (No
[2014] NSWCA 219
Fanatics, LLC v FanFirm Pty Limited (Costs)
[2025] FCAFC 111
v F.P. Special Assets Limited
[1992] HCA 28
174 CLR 178
Mawhinney v Australian Securities and Investments Commission (No 2)
[2022] FCAFC 205
Morbidelli v Resourceco
[2010] SASC 107
North Shore Property Developments Pty Ltd (in liq) v Haddad (Costs)
[2025] FCA 827
Sampson in his capacity as trustee of the bankrupt estates of Van Vlymen
v Agrinova Pty Ltd
[2022] FCA 529
TJ & P Pty Ltd as trustee for the Post Family Trust v Agrinova Pty
[2025] FCA 587
Trustee for The MTGI Trust v Johnston (No 2)
[2016] FCAFC 190
General Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Commercial and Corporations
Commercial Contracts, Banking, Finance and Insurance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr A Leopold SC with Mr A E Maroya
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Keleher Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
NSD 1007 of 2020
TJ & P PTY LTD (ACN 118 000 516) AS TRUSTEE
FOR THE POST FAMILY TRUST AS ASSIGNEE FROM DAVID SAMPSON IN HIS CAPACITY AS
OF THE BANKRUPT ESTATES OF WILLEM JOHAN VAN VLYMEN AND MARGRIET VAN
AGRINOVA PTY LTD ACN 629 285
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
respondent pay the applicant’s costs of the proceeding, save for the costs
of the applicant’s claim against the respondent
for damages for
contravention of s 18 of the Australian Consumer Law (
misleading or deceptive
conduct claim
applicant pay the respondent’s costs of the misleading or deceptive
conduct claim.
applicant pay the costs of the proceeding of the former third and fourth
respondents, Mr Richard Stott and Mr Mathew Stott (
respondents
application by the respondent and the Stott respondents for an order that
Mr Tjeerd Post be liable for their costs be
application by the applicant for interest be dismissed.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
A. INTRODUCTION
5 June 2025, I delivered reasons for judgment in this proceeding:
Pty Ltd as trustee for the Post Family Trust v Agrinova Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2025] FCA 587
Agrinova (No 3)
). In broad terms, I
found in favour of the applicant with respect to its case based on estoppel but
against it on its case based
on contract. Some familiarity with the reasons in
Agrinova (No 3)
is assumed in these reasons for judgment.
that day, I also
directed the parties to confer as to appropriate orders
for relief to give effect to
Agrinova (No 3)
. They were unable to agree
on such orders. On 26 June 2025, I made an order for judgment in favour of
the applicant and against the
extant respondent (
) in the sum of
$585,000 exclusive of interest, and I reserved for further argument: (1) the
question of the costs of the proceeding;
and (2) whether interest is payable
upon the sum of $585,000. These reasons for judgment address those
B. SALIENT BACKGROUND
following matters provide relevant context for the questions requiring
determination.
proceeding was commenced by Mr and Mrs Van Vlymen on 10 September 2020, by way
of an originating application and concise statement
which included Agrinova and
Mr Richard Stott and Mr Mathew Stott (
Stott respondents
respondents.
claims against Agrinova and the Stott respondents in the originating application
and concise statement included claims in contract,
equity and a claim under the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
). The latter claim
was to the effect that Agrinova and the Stott respondents had engaged in
misleading or deceptive conduct in contravention
of s 18 of the Australian
Consumer Law (
) (being Schedule 2 to the CC Act).
September 2020, Mr and Mrs Van Vlymen filed an amended originating application
and an amended concise statement.
27 October 2020, Mr and Mrs Van Vlymen filed a statement of claim and on 1
December 2020, Agrinova and the Stott respondents filed
separate defences to the
statement of claim.
19 January 2021, Mr and Mrs Van Vlymen filed an amended statement of claim and
on 17 March 2021, Agrinova and the Stott respondents
filed separate
defences to the amended statement of claim.
the entry of Mr and Mrs Van Vlymen into bankruptcy in June 2021 (J[253]) their
trustee in bankruptcy, Mr David Sampson,
made an election under
Bankruptcy Act 1966
(Cth) to continue to prosecute the proceeding on
behalf of their estates; and Mr Sampson, in his capacity as trustee of
those estates
became the applicant in the proceeding pursuant to an order made
by Justice Rares on 8 October 2021 (J[5]).
18 March 2022, Mr Sampson entered into a deed of assignment and that deed,
together with a deed of variation dated 8 April 2022
– as described by
Justice Rares in
in his capacity as trustee of the
bankrupt estates of Van Vlymen v Agrinova Pty Ltd
[2022] FCA 529
– effected an
of “the chose in action comprising
the bankrupts’ interest in the subject matter of the proceeding” to
Pty Ltd, as trustee for the Post Family
& P is a company of which Mr Tjeerd Post is the sole director and one of two
shareholders.
6 May 2022, Justice Rares ordered that TJ & P,
trustee for the
Trust, be substituted as an applicant in place of Mr Sampson: see
. References in these reasons to the
trustee for the Trust.
16 May 2022, the applicant filed a further amended originating application and a
further amended statement of claim. The further
amended statement of claim
removed the allegation that the Stott respondents were primary contraveners of
of the ACL; and instead alleged that they were accessorily liable for
contraventions of
of the ACL by Agrinova.
3 June 2022, Agrinova and the Stott respondents filed a single defence to the
further amended statement of claim.
8 July 2022, Agrinova and the Stott respondents filed an interlocutory
application, seeking,
, an order that the applicant provide
security for the respondents’ costs.
25 October 2022, Justice Rares ordered the applicant to provide security for the
costs of Agrinova and the Stott respondents in
an amount of $255,000 in the
following tranches:
(1) $100,000 on or before 25 November 2022; and
(2) $155,000 within 30 days of the Court setting the proceeding down for final
4 November 2022, Justice Rares set the proceeding down for final hearing, to
commence on 18 July 2023.
25 November 2022, the applicant paid the first of those tranches into Court. The
applicant failed to pay the second tranche of
on 3 March 2023, Justice Rares made an order, by consent, that the form of
security for the second tranche be varied such
that the “the undertaking
to the Court of Tjeerd Post signed on 27 January 2023 and the freezing order
made today be substituted
as suitable security ...”.
freezing order, which was an annexure to the 3 March 2023 orders, relevantly
Freezing of assets
must not or in any way dispose of, deal with, encumber or diminish the value of
your asset being the real property known as ...,
Albany Creek in the State of
Queensland ....
Exceptions to this order
7. This order will cease to have effect if you:
the sum of $155,000 into Court; or
security in that sum by a method agreed in writing with the [Agrinova and the
Stott respondents] to be held subject to the
order of the Court.
24 April 2023, the hearing scheduled to commence on 18 July 2023 was vacated and
the proceeding was referred for re-allocation.
It was subsequently allocated to
my docket and on 30 May 2023, I listed the proceeding for final hearing, to
commence on 4 March
28 July 2023, the applicant filed a second further amended statement of claim.
14 February 2024, the applicant filed its written outline of opening
submissions, ahead of the hearing. Those submissions addressed
the pleaded
claims in contract and estoppel but did not refer to the pleaded claims of
contraventions of the CC Act (
misleading or deceptive conduct claims
5 March 2024, the trial commenced. The applicant pursued its claims in contract
and estoppel but not the misleading or deceptive
conduct claims.
27 March 2024 and near the end of the hearing, orders were made by consent
dismissing the proceeding as against the Stott respondents
and reserving the
question of costs relating to that dismissal.
16 May 2024, and subsequent to the hearing, the applicant regularised its
pleading by filing a further statement of claim which
deleted the misleading or
deceptive conduct claims.
earlier noted, on 5 June 2025, I delivered reasons for judgment and, in broad
terms, found in favour of the applicant with respect
to its case based on
estoppel but against it on its case based on contract; and on 26 June 2025,
I made an order for judgment in
favour of the applicant and against Agrinova in
the sum of $585,000 exclusive of interest.
C. COSTS AS BETWEEN THE APPLICANT AND AGRINOVA
that background, I start with the costs position as between the applicant and
Agrinova. Each contends that the other should
pay its costs. Agrinova also
contends that the applicant should pay its costs of the misleading or deceptive
conduct claim against
it in any event, and that Mr Post – the
director of the applicant and a non‑party to the proceeding – should
jointly and severally liable, with the applicant, for the costs payable to
Agrinova. The latter contention is considered at E. below.
C.1 Generally
is well-established that the Court’s discretion to award costs under
Federal Court of Australia Act
) is broad.
recent summary of applicable principles concerning costs provided by Burley,
Jackson and Downes JJ in
Fanatics, LLC v
Pty Limited
[2025] FCAFC 111
to [7] is apposite:
Applicable principles relating to costs
principles relating to the award of costs are clear and well-settled. The award
of costs is at the discretion of the Court, which
discretion is broad but is to
be exercised judicially:
Idenix Pharmaceuticals LLC v Gilead Sciences Pty Ltd
[2018] FCAFC 7
(Nicholas, Beach and Burley JJ). The
fundamental purpose is to compensate the successful party, not to punish the
unsuccessful party.
set out by the Full Court in
Les Laboratoires Servier v Apotex Pty Ltd
(2016) 247 FCR 61
[2016] FCAFC 27
(Bennett, Besanko and Beach JJ),
the usual principle is that costs follow the event:
Without amounting to an absolute
rule, the principle remains that, subject to certain limited exceptions
generally linked to the disentitling
conduct of the successful party, a
successful party in litigation is entitled to an award of costs (
per McHugh J at [67]-[68], in dissent but not in this aspect of the
principle and with whom Brennan CJ agreed). That is not to punish
unsuccessful party but to compensate the successful party. There is no absolute
rule that, in the absence of disentitling conduct,
a successful party is to be
compensated by the unsuccessful party, nor is there a rule that there is no
party to bear the costs of the unsuccessful
at [40] per Gaudron and Gummow JJ). However, the Courts
have been slow to order a successful party to pay the costs where it has been
unsuccessful on some issues. In
Mok v Minister for Immigration, Local
Government and Ethnic Affairs (No 2)
[1993] FCA 650
(1993) 47 FCR 81
, Keely J was of the
view (at 84) that, without attempting to fetter the discretion, this power ought
to be exercised only where the
Court, on a consideration of all of the
circumstances, has concluded that the raising of an issue by the applicant on
which it has
failed was so unreasonable that it is fair and just to make the
there is a mixed outcome in proceedings, an unsuccessful party is not
automatically entitled to costs in respect of those issues
law on which the successful party failed:
Inspector-General in
Bankruptcy v Bradshaw (No 2)
(Kenny J). Justice Mortimer (as her Honour then was)
Plaintiff S111A/2018 v Minister for Home Affairs (No
[2022] FCA 603
that “the authorities caution
against apportioning the costs of a successful party by some kind of
division into the issues
on which the party succeeded and those the party did
starting point is the order made on 26 June 2025 that Agrinova pay the applicant
the sum of $585,000. An application of the usual
position that costs follow the
event would have the consequence that Agrinova should pay the applicant’s
costs of the proceeding.
position is that the usual position should
apply, such that it should
not be ordered to pay the applicant’s costs of the proceeding; and the
applicant should pay its
costs of the proceeding.
essence of Agrinova’s argument on the former contention is that it, rather
than the applicant, was the successful party.
This argument has several strands.
strand of Agrinova’s argument is that it was the successful
party because the applicant achieved only a very small part of
its overall
claim, in circumstances where the applicant’s claim, as expressed in final
submissions, was for an amount in excess
of $20,000,000, in respect of which it
received $585,000, or approximately three per cent of the amount claimed. In
this regard,
Agrinova relies upon observations in
Baker v Towle
(2008) 39 Fam LR 323
(Beazley JA) and 343 [86] (Basten
Australian Receivables Ltd v Tekitu Pty Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company
Arrangement) (Deed Administrators Appointed)
[2011] NSWSC 1425
[26] (Ward J); and
Australia Pty Ltd v Lovick &
Son Developments Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2014] NSWCA 219
(Ward, Emmett and
Gleeson JJA). Agrinova also relied upon various offers exchanged by the parties,
and in particular the applicant’s
lowest offer of $4,500,000 as further
evidence that the applicant fell well short of what it was seeking, as it
recovered an amount
equal to 13 per cent of that offer
($585,000/$4,500,000).
do not accept Agrinova’s submission. On any measure, an amount of $585,000
is a substantial amount of money and it is not
an amount that the applicant
could have achieved other than by pursuing the proceeding to its conclusion. It
cannot be said that
the applicant did not obtain from the proceeding anything of
value. Care must be taken in the application of mathematical comparisons,
particularly in circumstances where it is commonplace for applicants not to
recover all that they seek in a proceeding.
strand is the contention that the part of the case on which
Agrinova succeeded (i.e. the contract case) was the dominant issue in
proceeding; and that the estoppel case on which the applicant succeeded was a
subsidiary issue.
some cases, it is an appropriate exercise of the costs discretion to award costs
by reference to the success of the parties on
particular issues rather than by
reference to the “event”. However, it is well-established that this
usually requires
that a particular issue be clearly dominant or separable from
other issues: see, e.g.,
Chou (aka Chou) v Metstech Pty Ltd (ACN 602 390
[2023] FCAFC 205
; (2023) 178 IPR 406 (Yates, Downes and Jackman JJ) at
at [17]. As their Honours noted, by reference to the
judgment of O’Bryan and Cheeseman JJ in
Mawhinney v Australian
Securities and Investments Commission (No 2)
[2022] FCAFC 205
“[t]he mere fact that a court does not accept all of a successful
party’s arguments does not make it appropriate to
apportion costs on an
issue by issue basis”. See also
do not accept that the contract case was the dominant issue of the proceeding.
Certainly, the applicant’s opening submissions
were capable of conveying
such an impression, with the estoppel case playing a lesser role in those
submissions. However, this shifted
during the course of the hearing and in
closing submissions the focus of the applicant’s submissions was upon the
case rather than the contract case (J[259]). That focus is also clear
in the analysis in
Agrinova (No 3)
also do not accept that the contract and estoppel cases were separable. There
was considerable overlap between those cases as is
evident from
Agrinova (No
and the closing submissions of the parties.
putting to one side for the moment the question of the costs of the
applicant’s misleading or deceptive conduct claim
as against Agrinova, I
am not persuaded that there is any reason to depart from the usual position that
costs should follow the event
with the result that Agrinova should pay the
applicant’s costs.
C.2 Costs between the applicant and Agrinova with respect to
the applicant’s misleading or deceptive conduct claim
turn now to the costs of the applicant’s misleading or deceptive conduct
claim as against Agrinova.
noted above, the misleading or deceptive conduct claim was part of the
applicant’s claim against Agrinova from the inception
of the proceeding,
but was not pursued in the applicant’s pre-trial written submissions, or
at the hearing.
applicant contends that the misleading and deceptive conduct claim could not be
pursued because Mr and Ms Van Vlymen entered bankruptcy
as a result of
Agrinova’s conduct. Assuming for present purposes that this is so (and
noting that there is no such finding),
this does not assist the applicant, which
assumed the burden of the proceeding when it took the assignment and then
continued to
pursue the misleading and deceptive conduct claim as against
there has been no determination of the merits of that claim, the applicant
should pay Agrinova’s costs of that claim
in circumstances where the
applicant surrendered with respect to it:
Chapman v Luminis Pty Ltd
[2003] FCAFC 162
(Beaumont, Sundberg and Hely JJ).
C.3 Conclusion as to costs between the applicant and
the reasons set out above, Agrinova should pay the applicant’s costs save
with respect to the misleading or deceptive conduct
claim against Agrinova; and
the applicant should pay Agrinova’s costs of its misleading or deceptive
conduct claim as against
D. COSTS AS BETWEEN THE
APPLICANT AND THE STOTT RESPONDENTS
turn next to the costs position as between the applicant and the Stott
respondents.
noted above: (1) the Stott respondents were, from the inception of the
proceeding, respondents to the applicant’s misleading
or deceptive conduct
claims (whether primarily or accessorily liable); (2) the applicant did not
pursue this claim in its pre-hearing
written submissions, or at the hearing;
and (3) on 27 March 2024 and near the end of the
hearing, orders were made by consent dismissing the proceeding as against the
respondents and reserving the question of costs relating to that
dismissal of the proceeding as against the Stott respondents may be regarded as
an event which costs should follow. The applicant
contends, in essence, that
costs should
follow this event and that there should be no order as
to costs as between the applicant and the Stott respondents for the following
the applicant contends that the claim against the Stott respondents was properly
brought by Mr and Mrs Van Vlymen but became untenable
following the
assignment because the applicant (as opposed to Mr and Mrs Van Vlymen) had not
suffered any loss or damage. I do not
regard this as a reason why costs should
not be ordered against the applicant, rather it provides a reason as to why the
should pay such costs. The applicant, in taking the assignment,
assumed the risk of a claim which it now concedes was unviable. Further,
applicant affirmed that claim, by amending it, including by the introduction of
the accessorial liability allegations, and then
maintained that claim until at
least 14 February 2024 when it served its pre-trial submissions without
addressing it.
to the applicant’s submissions, the fact that the Stott respondents
consented to the orders by which the applicant
became a party to the proceedings
is of little moment.
the applicant contends that particular conduct of the Stott respondents
disentitled the Stott respondents to any costs. In this
regard, the conduct
relied upon by the applicant is primarily identified by reference to evidence
adduced at the hearing, rather
than to findings made in
Agrinova (No 3)
By such evidence, the applicant seeks to characterise the Stott respondents as
the “masterminds” behind the engendering
of a false assumption on
the part of Mr and Mrs Van Vlymen and the “architects of the
downfall” of Mr and Mrs Van Vlymen.
In my view, disentitling conduct
with respect to costs is conduct with respect to the manner in which the
proceeding was conducted,
rather than conduct the subject of the underlying
dispute. As Justice Kennett explained in
North Shore Property Developments
Pty Ltd (in liq) v Haddad (Costs)
[2025] FCA 827
Court’s discretion in relation to costs under
Federal Court
of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) is not a general power to punish past
misconduct. Departures from the general rule that costs follow the event are
by “misconduct”, not in a general sense, but rather where
such misconduct has itself caused or induced the other party
to incur costs in
litigating”. It is also inappropriate for the Court to revisit the
evidence concerning the underlying dispute
with a view to making further
findings of fact for the purpose of determining the question of costs. For
completeness, I note that
the findings made in
Agrinova (No 3)
insufficient to support the applicant’s contention.
the applicant contends that at no stage in their conduct of the proceedings did
the Stott respondents seek to act in any individual
capacity, or take any step
which set them apart from Agrinova. In this regard, the applicant relies upon
the fact that the defence
to the further amended statement of claim was a joint
pleading on behalf of Agrinova and the Stott respondents ([14] above). I do
accept the premise of this submission in circumstances where, as noted above,
the Stott respondents did file some separate defences
during the proceeding (see
and [8] above). In any event, the differentiation between costs
properly attributable to Agrinova and costs properly attributable
to the Stott
respondents is a matter for taxation and not a reason not to award costs in
favour of the Stott respondents.
the reasons set out above, the applicant should pay the Stott respondents’
costs of the proceeding.
Stott respondents also contend that Mr Post should be jointly and severally
liable, with the applicant, for the costs payable
to the Stott respondents. I
turn now to that question and the related question whether Mr Post should be
jointly and severally liable,
with the applicant, for the costs payable to
E. NON-PARTY COSTS ORDER
noted above, the Court’s discretion under s 43 of the FCA Act to award
costs is broad. It enables the Court, in an appropriate
case, to make an order
for costs against a non-party to a proceeding. Whether the discretion should be
so exercised in a particular
case is dependent upon the circumstances of that
v Resourceco
[2010] SASC
, White J (Bleby and Kelly JJ agreeing) provided the following conspectus of
principles at [13]:
A review of the authorities indicates that the following principles should
govern the exercise of the power to award costs against
a non-party:
(i) the discretion must be exercised judicially and in accordance with the
general legal principles pertaining to costs;
(ii) the general principle is that an order for costs is made only against a
party to the litigation but there are circumstances
in which considerations of
justice may warrant an order for costs against a non‑party;
(iii) it has been said that the power should not be exercised lightly and that
the circumstances in which it is appropriate to do
so are “rare and
exceptional”;
(iv) such circumstances exist when there is some feature of the association or
connection between the party to the litigation and
the non-party, or between the
non-party and the incurring of costs, which makes it just for the order to be
(v) the mere fact that a non-party may have benefitted from the litigation if it
was successful is not, by itself, sufficient for
an adverse exercise of the
discretion against that non-party;
(vi) the mere fact that the non-party may have funded the legal costs of the
unsuccessful party will not normally be sufficient.
However, as
Knight v F P
Special Assets
illustrates,
if a non-party funding the litigation had
a financial interest in its outcome and involved itself actively in its
commencement and
conduct, the making of an order that it pay the costs of the
successful party may well be appropriate. That is because it would usually
unjust for such a person to be able to pursue its own interests without risk of
a liability for costs should the proceedings fail
or be discontinued;
(vii) the existence and timing of any warning to the non-party that a costs
order against him or her may be sought will usually be
a very relevant
consideration. That is in part because the non-party should not be taken by
surprise after the conclusion of the
litigation, and in part because the absence
of any warning may have deprived the non‑party of the opportunity to
exercise any
influence over the continuance or compromise of the proceedings, or
as to the manner in which it was conducted;
(viii) the Court does not have to be satisfied of improper conduct of some kind
by the non-party, but proof of such conduct may be
very relevant to the exercise
of the discretion;
(ix) the availability of an order for security of costs at an early stage of the
proceedings may be a strong argument for refusing
to exercise the discretion to
order costs against a non-party. By the obtaining of security, a defendant sued
by an impecunious plaintiff
can protect itself in relation to costs. For this
reason the fact that a successful defendant did not seek an order for security
may be a very relevant consideration.
(footnotes omitted)
Trustee for The MTGI Trust v Johnston (No 2)
[2016] FCAFC 190
Collier and Katzmann JJ stated at [28] to [30]:
43(1) of the Federal Court Act empowers the Court to award costs in all
proceedings before the Court other than proceedings
in respect of which that or
any other Act provides that costs shall not be awarded. Section 43(2) provides
that, except as provided
by any other Act, the award of costs is in the
discretion of the Court or Judge.
43 empowers the Court to not only award costs against a non-party to proceedings
Dunghutti Elders Council (Aboriginal Corporation) RNTBC v Registrar of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Corporations (No 4)
FCR 154 at [84]), but to award indemnity costs against a non-party (
Hughes, in the matter of Firepower Operations Pty Ltd (In Liquidation)
[2010] FCA 141
(2010) 183 FCR 150).
guiding the exercise of the discretion of the Court to award costs against a
non-party were set out by Mason CJ and Deane
Knight v FP
Special Assets Ltd
(1992) 174 CLR 178. As more recently explained by
French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ in
Selig v Wealthsure Pty
[2015] HCA 18
Knight v FP Special Assets
, this Court held that its discretionary power to make orders against
non-parties extends to the circumstance “where the party
to the litigation
is an insolvent person or man of straw, where the non-party has played an active
part in the conduct of the litigation
and where the non-party ... has an
interest in the subject of the litigation.” There is, however, no rule
that where a non-party
falls into this category an order for costs will
necessarily follow. Rather, as Mason CJ and Deane J said, “an
order for costs
should be made against the non-party if the interests of justice
require that it be made.”
(Footnotes omitted.)
Court House Capital Pty Ltd v RP Data Pty Limited
[2023] FCAFC 192
to [13] (Charlesworth, Sarah C Derrington and Raper JJ).
the exercise of the discretion in this case, I have had regard to the following
Mr Post is the sole director of the applicant, and the applicant is an
impecunious company which had no involvement in the events
which gave rise to
this proceeding, and instead pursued this proceeding as an assignee following
the assignment.
as the sole director of the applicant, it is likely that Mr Post provided
instructions for the conduct of the proceeding on behalf
of the applicant.
as the sole director of a trustee company, Mr Post is the person with authority
to determine how the proceeds of the applicant’s
success are distributed
among beneficiaries of the Trust. The terms of the Trust, however, are not in
evidence on this application
and the identity of the beneficiary or
beneficiaries is not clear.
the provision of security for the costs of the applicant in the manner described
at [16] to [20] above, including Mr Post’s
provision of an undertaking and
consent to a freezing order for the purposes of the second tranche of security.
The availability
of an order for security for costs at an earlier stage of the
proceeding is, in many cases, a strong argument for refusing to exercise
discretion to order costs against a non-party: see
Special Assets Limited
[1992] HCA 28
; (1992) 174 CLR 178 at 191 (Mason CJ
and Deane J). Agrinova has not contended that the security provided is
insufficient, nor is
there any suggestion that it applied at any time to
“top up” the amount of the security.
Agrinova did not give Mr Post prior notice of the making of the present
application. It appears to have been raised for the first
time following the
delivery of judgment. In this regard, I do not accept Agrinova’s
submission that Mr Post was on notice –
by dint of Agrinova’s
request for security – that Agrinova would seek to recover its costs from
Mr Post. An order
(or agreement) for the provision
of security for costs and a non-party costs order are quite different events
with different consequences.
The bringing of an application for (or agreement as
to) the former is not of itself notice of the latter: see
[48] to [52]. The giving of notice of the bringing of an application for a
non-party costs order,
, allows the non-party an opportunity to
assess its position with respect to the proceeding and to decide whether to
continue with
the additional risk of exposure to such an order: see, e.g.,
at [13(vii)] and the authorities there cited. Indeed, the
making of an order (or agreement) for the provision of security for costs,
the absence of any application to “top up” the quantum of such order
(or agreement), may create the impression in
the non-party that the other party
is content with the protection provided by such an order (or agreement) and will
not seek a non-party
costs order.
all of the above matters into account, and in particular the provision of
security for costs and the absence of any notice
to Mr Post that a non-party
costs order would be sought against him, the proper exercise of the costs
discretion is not to make the
non-party costs order sought by
F. INTEREST
turn now to the question of interest.
applicant seeks an order for the payment of pre-judgment interest on the sum of
$585,000. Agrinova contends that the Court is
unable to make an order for
interest, by dint of the operation of s 51A(3)(a) of the FCA Act.
51A of the FCA Act provides in so far as is presently relevant:
51A Interest up to judgment
(1) In any proceedings for the recovery of any money (including any debt
or damages or the value of any goods) in respect of a cause
of action that
arises after the commencement of this section, the Court or a Judge shall, upon
application, unless good cause is
shown to the contrary, either:
(a) order that there be
included in the sum for which judgment is given interest at such rate as the
Court or the Judge, as the case
may be, thinks fit on the whole or any part of
the money for the whole or any part of the period between the date when the
of action arose and the date as of which judgment is entered; or
(b) without proceeding to calculate interest in accordance with
paragraph (a), order that there be included in the sum for which
is given a lump sum in lieu of any such interest.
(3) Where the sum for which judgment is given (in this subsection referred
the relevant sum
) includes, or where the Court in its
absolute discretion, or a Judge in that Judge’s absolute discretion,
determines that the
relevant sum includes, any amount for:
(a) compensation in
respect of liabilities incurred which do not carry interest as against the
person claiming interest or claiming
a sum in lieu of interest;
interest, or a sum in lieu of interest, shall not be given under
subsection (1) in respect of any such amount or in respect of so
the relevant sum as in the opinion of the Court or the Judge represents any such
(4) Subsection (3) shall not be taken to preclude interest or a sum
in lieu of interest being given, pursuant to this section, upon
compensation in
respect of a liability of the kind referred to in paragraph (3)(a) where
that liability has been met by the applicant,
as from the date upon which that
liability was so met.
(emphasis in original)
51A(1) applies in any proceeding for the recovery of any money in respect of a
cause of action that arose after the commencement
of the section. The present
proceeding is such a proceeding and no party contended otherwise.
51A(1) provides that the Court shall, upon application, make an order for
interest (or for the provision of a lump sum in
lieu of interest) unless
contrary good cause is shown. However, s 51A(3) operates to prohibit the making
of an order for interest
to the extent that the sum for which judgment is given
includes, relevantly, any amount for “... compensation in respect of
liabilities incurred which do not carry interest as against the person claiming
interest...”.
phrase gives rise to several questions.
question is whether the sum of $585,000 – which is the
“relevant sum” for the purposes of s 51A(3) – is
“compensation
in respect of liabilities incurred”.
amount was awarded as compensation in equity. So much is common ground.
applicant contends that the sum of $585,000 was equitable compensation
commensurate of the detriment suffered by Mr and Mrs Van
Vlymen but was not
“in respect of liabilities” incurred by them. I do not accept this
submission. As the reasoning at
J[329] to [354] illustrates, the detriment
suffered by Mr and Mrs Van Vlymen was: (1) a liability for legal fees incurred
in connection
with the re-agitation of Supreme Court proceeding 2015/60753 for
the purpose of determining the amount owing to Mr Wong; and (2)
the potential
liability for legal fees incurred by Mr Wong, which crystallised upon the making
of the 2 September 2020 orders. Thus,
contrary to the applicant’s
submission, the compensation was directly referable to the liabilities incurred
by Mr and Mrs Van
Vlymen. It follows that the compensation was “in respect
of” those liabilities.
applicant also contends that s 51A(3) must be construed by reference to the word
“debt” in s 51A(1) and that the word
“liabilities” in s
51A(3)(a) contemplates an action for the recovery of a debt, giving rise to a
liability for that debt.
I do not accept this submission. “Debt” is
included as one example in the broader expression “any proceedings for
recovery of any money (including any debt or damages or the value of any
goods)” and there is no justification for the
narrow construction
suggested by the applicant. Further, were the applicant’s argument
correct, then the applicant would have
no entitlement to interest under s 51A(1)
(regardless of the operation of s 51A(3)) because the proceeding did not involve
for the recovery of a debt.
the $585,000 is “compensation in respect of liabilities incurred”
within the meaning of s 51A(3) of the FCA Act.
question is whether those liabilities are liabilities “which
do not carry interest as against the person claiming interest”.
person “claiming interest” is the applicant. Thus, the question
becomes whether the liabilities in respect of which
the compensation of $585,000
was calculated did not carry interest as against the applicant.
my view, those liabilities did not carry interest as against the applicant,
(1) I am not persuaded by the applicant’s argument that the assignment
substituted the applicant for Mr and Mrs Van Vlymen
with respect to the
liability to pay Keleher Lawyers and Mr Wong. In this regard, the deed of
assignment is not in evidence. As noted
at [10] above, Justice Rares recorded
that the assignment was an assignment of the “chose in action comprising
the bankrupts’
interest in the subject matter of the proceeding”.
Were the applicant’s argument correct then, subject perhaps to any
contrary terms in the deed of assignment, the applicant would be liable to
Keleher Lawyers and Mr Wong regardless of the outcome
of the proceeding;
(2) the applicant was not otherwise liable to pay the legal fees owed to Keleher
Lawyers or Mr Wong; and
(3) absent any liability on the part of the applicant for the legal fees owed to
Keleher Lawyers or Mr Wong, there is no interest
carried as against the
above conclusion is consistent with the evident purpose of s 51A(3), as
described by Mossop AsJ (as his Honour then was) in
Cressy v Miloriad (No
[2016] ACTSC 339
(2016) 317 FLR 267
(a decision concerning a similar
provision in s 69(3) of the
Supreme Court Act 1933
(ACT) and r 1619(2) of
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT)) at 273 to 274 [34(f)] as being to
avoid a situation in which an applicant who is not required to pay interest to
party being over compensated by an award of interest in their
any event, if s 51A(3) did not prevent the awarding of interest to the
applicant, the windfall nature of an award of interest in
the circumstances of
this case provides a sufficient “good cause” for the purposes of s
51A(1) not to award interest
to the applicant on the sum of $585,000.
I have concluded that the sum of $585,000 is “compensation in respect of
liabilities incurred which do not carry interest
as against [the
applicant]”, s 51A(3) of the FCA Act operates so as to prohibit the award
of interest on that sum.
light of the above conclusions, it is unnecessary to address the question of
whether the fees owed to Keleher Lawyers carried interest
against anyone, and in
particular whether no interest was payable on such fees by dint of the lateness
of the rendering of a tax
invoice by Keleher Lawyers (J[343]) and the operation
of s 195(5) of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
G. CONCLUSION
the above reasons, there should be orders that: (1) Agrinova pay the
applicant’s costs of the proceeding, save for the costs
applicant’s misleading or deceptive conduct claim; and (2) the applicant
pay the Stott respondents’ costs of the
proceeding. I will make orders
accordingly.
I certify that the preceding eighty-three (83)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 12 November 2025
RTF format (462 KB)
Signed PDF/A format