1407604 [2015] RRTA 282 (22 May 2015)
[2015] RRTA 282
(22 May 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Linda Symons
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the
applicants Protection visas.
Statement made on 22 May 2015 at
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to
section 431(2)
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration to refuse to grant the applicants
Protection visas under
Migration Act 1958
first named applicant, who claims to be a citizen of Egypt, arrived in Australia
[in] June 2013 as the holder of a subclass 600
Visitor visa which was valid
until [September] 2013. [In] August 2013, she was granted a Bridging visa in
association with her application
for Protection visas.
second, third and fourth named applicants, are the spouse and children of the
first named applicant respectively and are members
of her same family unit. They
claim to be citizens of Egypt. They arrived in Australia [in] June 2013 as the
holders of subclass
600 Visitor visas which were valid until [September] 2013.
[In] August 2013, they were granted Bridging visas in association with
application for Protection visas.
applicants applied to the Department of Immigration and Border Protection (the
Department) for the Protection visas [in] August
2013 and the delegate refused
to grant the visas [in] April 2014. They applied to the Tribunal on 24 April
2014 for review of that
first and second named
applicants appeared before the Tribunal on 11
February 2015 to give evidence and present arguments. The Tribunal hearing was
with the assistance of an interpreter in the Arabic and English
applicants were represented in relation to the review by their registered
migration agent.
issues that arise on review are whether Australia has protection obligations to
the applicants under the Refugees Convention or
under the complementary
protection criterion.
RELEVANT LAW
criteria for a Protection visa are set out in
of the Act and Schedule 2 to
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). An applicant for the visa must
meet one of the alternative criteria in s.36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c). That is,
the applicant is either a person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the ‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other
‘complementary protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same
family unit as such a person and that person
holds a Protection visa of the same
Refugee criterion
36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a Protection visa is that the applicant
for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the Minister is
satisfied Australia has protection obligations under the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status
of Refugees as amended by the 1967 Protocol relating to
the Status of Refugees (together, the Refugees Convention, or the Convention).
Complementary protection criterion
a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s.36(2)(a), he or she may
nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant of
a Protection visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the
being removed from Australia to a receiving country, there is a real
risk that he or she will suffer significant harm: s.36(2)(aa)
complementary protection criterion’).
Section 499 Ministerial Direction
accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the Act, the
Tribunal is required to take account of policy guidelines
prepared by the
Department of Immigration –PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian - Complementary
Protection Guidelines and PAM3 Refugee
and humanitarian - Refugee Law Guidelines
– and any country information assessment prepared by the Department of
Foreign Affairs
and Trade expressly for protection status determination
purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the decision under
consideration.
Member of the same family unit
Subsections
36(2)(b) and (c) provide as an alternative criterion that the applicant is a
non-citizen in Australia who is a member
of the same family unit as a
non-citizen mentioned in s.36(2)(a) or (aa) who holds a Protection visa of the
same class as that applied
for by the applicant. Section 5(1) of the Act
provides that one person is a ‘member of the same family unit’ as
if either is a member of the family unit of the other or each is a
member of the family unit of a third person. Section 5(1) also
provides that
‘member of the family unit’ of a person has the meaning given by the
Regulations for the purposes of the
definition. The expression is defined in
r.1.12 of the Regulations to include spouse and dependent child.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE AND FINDINGS
first named applicant’s claims in her visa application are summarised as
She left Egypt
as she was persecuted because of her religion. She and her husband have been
attacked. She fears for her children who
have been humiliated at school.
She has been
intercepted by her neighbour many times and told to wear a veil. On one occasion
he told her she needed a pious man like
him to force her to believe in the true
religion. He reached for her top and she hit him. He tore her top, she screamed
and shouted
and he pushed her down the stairs. He accused her of tempting him
and ruining his prayers. Other neighbours intervened and he let
go of her. This
was a culmination of weeks of verbal abuse from him and his wife telling her to
convert to Islam.
Her car has been
vandalised and filth thrown at her and her house. There has been an attempt to
break her windows to scare her. She
moved to her mother’s place. She was
attacked in her mother’s house, their jewellery taken, religious icons
smashed and
the house left in ruins. Her husband came home and was also
She fears she
will be killed by extremists. She will be attacked by her neighbour and his
group who would hurt her and her family.
Her mother and sister were attacked as
well and she is scared to go to her mother’s home. Her mother lives in an
a mosque led by [Sheik A] who was gaoled under the old regime and let
go under the Morsi government. He believes he can do no wrong
persecute Christians.
She will be
harmed by radicals, Islamic extremists and the Islamic ruling party (Muslim
Brotherhood). Extremists can rule Egypt without
fear of prosecution if they
attack Christians. Christian Churches are being burned and transformed into
mosques. Girls, boys and
young men are being kidnapped for ransom and forced
conversions. She believes this is happening to “demoralize
Christians”
into leaving.
She and her
family have no place in Egypt as they have attracted the attention of
extremists. They will be persecuted forever and
will be hurt and killed.
The authorities
are biased and treat Christians as pests and undeserving of their protection.
They will not protect Christians. Christians
fear and distrust the authorities
and cannot seek their help. She tried to complain about her neighbour and his
friends and the Sheik
near her mother’s house and nothing was done.
second, third and fourth named applicants did not make any claims in their own
first named applicant attended an interview with the Department [in] January
2014. During the interview, she made new claims that
she was the victim of an
acid attack, her neighbour, his wife and others held a protest at the fitness
club she attends resulting
in its closure and she fears being kidnapped by her
first named applicant provided the Department with copies of photographs, a DVD,
medical prescriptions, various medical test results,
Birth Certificates for the
third and fourth named applicants, a letter dated [in] April 2013 from [Church
1], a letter dated [in]
January 2014 from [Church 2], country information and
references to websites on the internet.
first named applicant has filed with the Tribunal a copy of the
Department’s Decision Record dated [in] April 2014. On 5
February 2015,
the Tribunal received pre-hearing submissions from the applicants’
migration agent and some country information.
Does Australia
have protection obligations to the applicants under the Refugees
Convention?
Tribunal finds that the applicants are citizens of Egypt based on their
passports which are before the Tribunal and will assess
the claims on this
basis. The Tribunal finds that the applicants are outside their country of
nationality. There is no evidence before
the Tribunal to suggest that the
applicants have a right to enter and reside in any country other than their
country of nationality.
the evidence before it, the Tribunal finds that the applicants are all members
of the same family unit.
Tribunal discussed with the first named applicant the claims made by her in her
visa application and during her interview with
the Department [in] January 2014.
The Tribunal formed the view that she generally gave her evidence in a
straightforward manner but
was prone to exaggeration and embellishment. There
were some inconsistencies between her evidence to the Tribunal and her visa
application.
The Tribunal prefers the oral evidence given by her to the Tribunal
and is of the view that some of her claims were embellished and
even fabricated
in her visa application.
first named applicant gave evidence that she has been a Coptic Christian since
birth. She stated that she used to attend mass
each Sunday, serve at
“Sunday school” which was held on Fridays and used to serve at
shelters, aged care centres and
orphanages. She stated that normally nuns run
these institutions but there are a limited number of nuns. She stated that after
revolution in February 2011 she only attended mass on Sundays and served at
“Sunday school” on Fridays. She stated that
there were occasions she
did not attend mass on Sundays because she was too frightened to do so. The
first named applicant gave evidence
that since she arrived in Australia she has
attended [Church 2] each Sunday and also serves as a [occupation].
first named applicant gave evidence that a few days after the revolution in
February 2011 [Sheik B] moved next door. She stated
that he is a member of the
Muslim Brotherhood. She stated that he started harassing her and abusing her
and because she did not wear a hijab. She stated that
he swore at her, threatened her and wanted her to convert to Islam. She stated
that he told her children their mother was indecent. She stated that his wife
then started harassing her as well and wanted her to
wear a hijab and convert to
Islam. She stated that she did not tell her husband what was happening because
if he said or did anything
members of the Muslim Brotherhood would have beat
first named applicant gave evidence that [Sheik B] told her that “it is
not hard for us to take you and put a hijab on you
and make you part of our
group.” When asked whether she took this seriously, she answered no.
During her interview with the
Department [in] January 2014 she claimed that
[Sheik B] threatened to kidnap her. She made no mention of this in her visa
application.
She gave evidence that she was involved in numerous incidents in
Egypt but only referred to those that caused her the most fear in
application. She stated that she was not aware that she should have referred to
all the incidents in her visa application.
She had the assistance of a migration
agent when her visa application was prepared. The Tribunal is of the view that
if this made
her fear for her safety she would have mentioned it in her visa
application.
first named applicant gave evidence that everyone used to put their garbage
outside their house and they used to put their garbage
outside her house to
start trouble. When asked if garbage had ever been thrown at her or her house,
she answered no. She stated it
was just put in front of her house. This is
inconsistent with her claims in her visa application in which she stated that
was thrown at me and my house”. She stated that she went to
the Police to report this and the verbal abuse from [Sheik B].
She stated that
the Police told her “[Sheik B] is a good man. It doesn’t matter if
he said a few words you don’t
like or he hurt you. Just go”.
first named applicant gave evidence that [in] January 2013, pebbles were thrown
at her window and someone yelled and said things
she had on the window. In her visa application, she claimed that an attempt was
made to break her
windows to scare her.
first named applicant gave evidence that she was a member of a gym at [a] Club.
She stated that on Saturdays and Mondays the gym
was for women only and the
other five days were for men only. She stated that a group of women wearing
hijabs protested outside the
gym saying it was a brothel, they had music and
songs and allowed men and women to mix. They stated that it was forbidden in
religion. They demanded it be closed down. She stated that her
neighbour’s wife was one of the women. She stated that when
she saw her
there she swore at her and told her she had warned her previously. She stated
that the owners closed the gym down and
put up a sign that stated it was closed
for renovations. She stated that after a while it was re-opened as before. She
stated that
she did not return to the gym.
first named applicant provided the Tribunal with a newspaper article which
reported on this incident. She did not make this claim
in her visa application
and raised it for the first time during her interview with the Department [in]
January 2014. She gave evidence
to the Tribunal that she was involved in
numerous incidents in Egypt but only referred to those that caused her the most
her visa application. She stated that she was not aware that she should
have referred to all the incidents in her visa application.
She had the
assistance of a migration agent when her visa application was prepared.
first named applicant gave evidence that [in] February 2013 at about 2.00pm she
was returning home from shopping when [Sheik B]
stopped her as she was walking
up the stairs. She stated that he said “I have warned you about your
clothes, make up and perfume.
You need a man to keep you decent and that man is
me. She stated that she responded “you are stupid and a fool”. She
stated that he said “me stupid?” and pulled her shirt. She stated
that she started yelling and he pushed her and she
fell on her back. She stated
that the neighbours heard the yelling and gathered. She stated that they said
“[Sheik B] is a
good man. He warned you. It is the way you are
dressed.” She stated that she had bruises on her back but did not seek
first named applicant’s evidence to the Tribunal about this incident is
different to her claims in her visa application.
In her visa application, she
claimed that [Sheik B] told her she needed a pious man like him to force her to
believe in the true
religion, he reached for her top and she hit him. She stated
that he tore her top and when she started screaming and shouting he
down the stairs and it took the interception of other neighbours for him to let
the Tribunal raised these inconsistencies as an issue with the first named
applicant, she responded that when she yelled the
neighbours came out. She
stated that [Sheik B] told her to go to her apartment. She stated that her
neighbours did not think it was
his fault and told her to go to her apartment.
She stated that they told her that he had a right to yell at her for the way she
dressed. The first named applicant’s response does not explain the
inconsistencies in her evidence. The Tribunal is of the
view that her claims in
her visa application were embellished.
first named applicant gave evidence that when her husband came home she told him
what happened. She stated that he went to the
Police Station to report the
incident. She stated that the Police told him they knew [Sheik B] and there is
nothing wrong with him
wanting to convert her to Islam. He stated that they told
him “you can see the condition of the country. We do not have time
neighbour disputes. Go or you will be in trouble.”
first named applicant gave evidence that [in] February 2013 her car was
vandalised. She stated that the following words were written
“break the cross, you enemy of God. You are not a man.” She stated
that she believed this was done by [Sheik
B]. She stated that she did not report
this incident to the Police. She stated that there had been other occasions when
the air had
been let out of the tyres in her car or something had been broken.
She stated that she did not take much notice of this as it was
normal. She
stated that [in] February 2013 she left her home and moved into her
mother’s home which is in a suburb where there
are more Christians. She
stated that she thereafter had no further contact with [Sheik B].
first named applicant gave evidence that there was a man named [Mr A] who was
part of a terrorist cell. She stated that he was
arrested when Mr Mubarak was in
government but was released after the revolution in 2011. She stated that he
lived near her parent’s
Tribunal asked the first named applicant about her claim that her children were
humiliated. She stated that her children attended
a Convent school and after she
moved to her mother’s home she arranged for the school bus to pick up and
drop off her children.
She stated that the school bus had the name of the
Convent on it. She stated that [Sheik A] intercepted the bus, swore at the
and threatened him that the next time he went there he would not leave
alive. She stated that the school told her that they could
not send the bus to
pick her children up and they would have to find their own way to school. She
stated that her children were scared.
She stated that they stayed at home and
her husband drove them to school on days they had to sit examinations. She
stated that her
children could not attend school. She did not explain why she
was unable to take the children to school. She stated that they left
before the end of the third term.
the Tribunal asked the first named applicant why she did not mention this in her
visa application, she responded that she only
wrote down the main things that
scared her. The Tribunal is of the view that if her children could not attend
school this is a significant
issue and one that she would have mentioned in her
visa application.
first named applicant gave evidence that [in] March 2013, she and her sister
were walking down the street near her mother’s
them. She stated that they said “this is for you to stop wearing
pants.” She stated that they
felt their legs burning. She stated that they
went home and found holes in their pants from the acid and burns on their legs.
stated that they went to the Chemist and obtained some cream to treat it.
She stated that they did not report this incident to the
Police. The first named
applicant did not mention this claim in her visa application and made it for the
first time in her interview
with the Department [in] January 2014. The Tribunal
notes her evidence that that she was involved in numerous incidents in Egypt
only referred to those that caused her the most fear in her visa application.
She stated that she was not aware that she should
have referred to all the
incidents in her visa application. She had the assistance of a migration agent
when her visa application
was prepared.
first named applicant gave evidence that [in] April 2013, there was a knock on
the door of her parents’ home. She stated
that her father opened the door
and a group of five men pushed her father aside and came in. She stated that
they broke things and
the paintings of the Virgin Mary. She stated that they
took money and jewellery from her parent’s home. She stated that they
swore at her and her mother for not wearing the hijab. She stated that because
they were yelling the neighbours gathered. She stated
that her neighbours told
them that her parents had lived there for 40 years. She stated that they said
“this time we will let
you be but next time we won’t”. She
stated that she did not know who these men were. She stated that her father went
to the Police Station and was told “we will send someone” but no one
arrived. She stated that neither the money nor the
jewellery has been recovered.
first named applicant gave evidence that her husband was not home when this
incident took place. She stated that the incident
occurred at about 5.00pm and
the thieves had left by the time her husband returned home at about 9.00pm or
10.00pm. In her visa application,
she stated that her husband returned home at a
“crucial time” and he was attacked. This inconsistency in her
raises further concerns for the Tribunal in relation to the
embellishment of her claims.
first named applicant gave evidence that her parents’ neighbour, [Sheik
A], harassed her parents but not to the extent that
her neighbour, [Sheik B],
did. She stated that she felt responsible for what happened to her parents. She
stated that two days later
she and her family moved to the home of her
parents-in-law and her sister also left. She stated that her parents do not go
all. She stated that they have stopped attending Church.
first named applicant gave evidence that her parents-in-law had health problems.
She stated that her father-in-law is [a certain
age] and her mother-in-law is [a
certain age]. She stated that her mother-in-law was diagnosed with [a medical
condition] about 8
years ago and it is now in an advanced stage. She stated that
her mother-in-law cannot feed or shower herself. She stated that her
father-in-law was looking after his wife and she was helping him. She stated
that he became unwell as well and needed to have two
[operations]. She stated
that his first operation was in November 2012 and the second in January 2013.
She stated that because he
[has medical conditions] there were many
complications.
first named applicant gave evidence that her parents-in-law used to live in [a
certain suburb] and that they arranged for them
to move to [a named suburb] so
they were closer to family. She stated that she used to go to her
parents-in-law’s home every
day to help them. She stated that they delayed
departing Egypt because they could not just leave her parents-in-law in that
She stated that they were able to find a girl who was able to live
with her parents-in-law and care for them. She stated that her
sister lives in [the named suburb] and she is able to check on them. She
provided the Tribunal with a number of supporting
documents in relation to her
parents-in-law’s health issues.
first named applicant gave evidence that she and her husband had a good standard
of living in Egypt. She stated that her husband
had a good job with a good
income. She stated that they lived in a good suburb in Egypt. She stated that
her children attended an
international school. She stated that she worked as an
[occupation] in Egypt. She stated that in Australia she works as a [occupation]
and does not own her own house. She stated that the schools her children attend
are not the best. She stated that her standard of
living is not good. She stated
that she is prepared to put up with worse conditions as long as her children are
safe. She gave evidence
of the worsening situation for Christians in Egypt and
her fear that every time her husband and children leave the house they may
second named applicant gave evidence to the Tribunal. He stated that he had a
good standard of living in Egypt. He stated that
he was a [occupation]. He
stated that this required him to travel a lot. He stated that he was afraid to
leave his wife and children
and feared for their safety whenever he left. He
stated that he had a large salary and lived in a good area. He stated that his
attended an international school. He stated that he had no reason to
come to Australia other than for their safety. He stated that
there was a
terrorist group targeting them and they were able to find them where ever they
second named applicant gave evidence that they were unable to obtain protection
in Egypt. He stated that the Police were unable
to protect themselves from
terrorists. He stated that returning to Egypt was to go to certain death. The
Tribunal has had regard
to his evidence.
Tribunal discussed with the first named applicant country information on Egypt,
in particular, an article from
Christian Post
dated 18 June 2014 referred
to below. In her response, she claimed that the situation in Egypt has got worse
and not better. The
second named applicant stated that it was not just
generalized violence and that they were being targeted because they “stand
up against them” and will be harassed wherever they go.
Tribunal has had regard to the documentary evidence provided by the first named
applicant including Birth Certificates for the
third and fourth named
applicants, a letter dated [in] April 2013 from [Church 1], a letter dated [in]
January 2014 from [Church
2], photographs, medical prescriptions and medical
test results in relation to the first named applicant’s parents-in-law.
first named applicant gave evidence that she obtained the letter from the
[Church 1] before she left Egypt because her brother
in law in Australia told
them to come to Australia and seek asylum and suggested she get the letter. She
stated that she asked the
priest to give her the letter because she wanted to
leave the country and he encouraged her to go. The letter states in part
to the current country situation where there are insecurity problems
and attacks against Christians, they cannot drive safely to
church to attend
Sunday mass service and kids could not attend Sunday schools (Religion
lessons).” (sic)
evidence is not consistent with the evidence given by the first named applicant.
She did not claim that she had stopped attending
Sunday mass and her children
had stopped attending Sunday school. Her evidence was that she attended mass on
Sundays and served at
“Sunday school” on Fridays. She stated that
there were occasions she did not attend mass on Sundays because she was too
frightened to do so. The Tribunal places limited weight on the letter from
[Church 1 in] April 2013.
first named applicant gave evidence that she did not know [the priest who was]
the author of the letter from [Church 2], prior
to coming to Australia. She
stated that after she arrived in Australia she told him what had happened in
Egypt and that she had applied
for protection. She stated that he told her
“not to worry because people here support people in your situation because
know what is happening there”. The Tribunal places no weight on this
letter as it is not based on personal knowledge but rather
on what the author
was told by the first named applicant to obtain a letter to support her visa
application.
first named applicant has provided the Department with copies of a women’s
shirt torn which she claims is a photograph of
her sister taken after an
incident she was involved in. She also provided a DVD which she claims is of an
incident her sister was
involved in on the Metro. The Tribunal has had regard to
this evidence. In her visa application, the applicant claimed that her sister
was attacked to the point that she fled to [another country]. However, in her
evidence to the Tribunal she stated that her sister
has not gone abroad. She
stated that she had once gone to [Europe] during the visit of Pope John Paul
Tribunal has had regard to the country information and references to websites on
the internet provided by the applicants’
migration agent. He provided the
Department with an article dated 21 August 2013 and titled
Egypt: Mass
attacks on Churches
in relation to sectarian violence, primarily in Upper
Egypt, and attacks on Churches. He also provided a website in relation to
on Churches. He provided a website which he submitted was in relation to
an attack on [a school], the school the first named applicant’s
attended, by the army in 2011. Upon review, the website related to an article
dated 29 October 2011 in relation to the army
seeking to demolish the fence
outside the Monastery of the Virgin and St John which was located on the Desert
Road 80 miles from
Tribunal has considered the oral and written submissions made by the
applicants’ migration agent. In his oral submissions,
he stated that the
applicants were being personally targeted and forced to move because of
religion. He referred to extremism and
terrorism in Egypt and the influence of
Islamic State. He referred to the difficulties the government is having fighting
the influence of the Muslim Brotherhood and extremism within the
government. He referred to the blasphemy laws. He referred to the
Pope advising
Coptic Christians to take precautions to protect themselves from attacks.
Tribunal has considered two Country Information Reports on
prepared by the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT). They state as
Coptic Christians
The exact size of the Coptic population in Egypt is unknown due to the
absence of recent census data. Egypt has a population of
84 million and it is
estimated that 90 per cent of Egyptians are Sunni Muslims. Christians number
over 8 million, or 10 per cent,
making them the largest Christian minority in
the Middle East. Shia and Sufi Muslims, other Christians (including Catholics,
Anglicans, Protestants and Evangelicals), Jehovah’s Witnesses,
Baha’is and Jews are also present, but in smaller numbers.
Copts reside throughout the country though are concentrated in Upper Egypt
(the southern part of Egypt) and in cities such as Cairo
and Alexandria. There
are suburbs in Cairo, other cities and some villages that are known to be
‘Coptic’ areas,
but few are exclusively Coptic. Likewise, there
are few areas that are exclusively Muslim. The Coptic community is politically
and socio- economically diverse; Copts do not necessarily agree on political
representatives or policies and hold varied professions;
Copts are also
represented across the socio-economic spectrum, from the very poor to the
substantially rich, and hold a range
of education levels. As such, it is
difficult to generalise about the day-to-day lives of Copts relative to other
DFAT is not aware of any legal prohibition on Coptic rituals or practices.
There are approximately 2800 registered churches in
Egypt, compared to
approximately 108,400 mosques. DFAT understands that there are several
dozen registered churches in Greater
Cairo, in addition to the Coptic
Orthodox Cathedral; there are many churches in other areas of Egypt.
Generally speaking, Copts dress modestly like other Egyptians. In urban
areas, most Coptic women leave their hair uncovered. Women
living in rural or
conservative areas sometimes cover their hair, but do not wear the Islamic
. Depending on their location and socio-economic status, Coptic
men sometimes wear the traditional Egyptian tunic—known as
—or Western-style clothing like other Egyptians. Copts
tend to have identifiable names.....
The majority of sectarian incidents in recent years have taken place in
Upper Egypt governorates, including Beni Suef, Fayoum,
Aswan, Assiut, Minya,
Luxor and Qena. Of these, the Minya Governorate witnessed the largest
number of incidents in the period
2008–2011 and in the period following
the dispersal of supporters of former president Mohammed Morsi in August 2013;
has both a large Coptic population and a high concentration of Islamist
Notwithstanding the rise in the number of violent incidents (including some
high-profile attacks), DFAT assesses that day-to-day
life for most Copts in
Egypt is not overtly affected by sectarian differences. Most
Egyptians— especially those living
in cities and urban areas—work,
live and socialise together with little regard to each other’s
religious identity.
However, when small-scale disputes arise (e.g. due to a
neighbourhood disagreement) they can adopt a sectarian dimension and,
infrequently, mushroom into community- level violence. This happens more
frequently in poorer urban and rural areas. Spikes in
sectarian violence can
also occur in times of political tension and coincide with broader political
upheavals (see ‘Violence’,
Copts experience low levels of discrimination at the hands of the state
(i.e. ‘official discrimination’). Community
prejudice (i.e.
‘societal discrimination’) against Copts is pervasive, but
severity varies depending on geographic
and socio-economic factors. In middle
class urban areas, societal discrimination is low-level and infrequent. In
poorer urban
and rural areas, where Egyptians tend to be more conservative,
discrimination and instances of harassment can be higher. Rural
generally have lower levels of law and order and higher levels of Islamist
activity (for instance in Aswan, Islamist parties
received 78 per cent of the
vote in the 2011–12 Parliamentary elections).
Most Copts in both urban and rural areas do not experience harassment in
their daily lives and live alongside Muslims across all
social classes,
genders and backgrounds. Religious identity does not tend to be a factor in
day-to-day life. However, underlying
sectarian tensions exist and disputes
have been known to turn violent (see ‘Violence’,
State protection
Following the January 2011 revolution, there was a reduced presence of law
enforcement units in major cities and elsewhere, and
a perceived erosion of law
and order. This is likely to have contributed to a general rise in harassment
of Copts (as well as crime
and civil disorder) throughout the country. The
police have actively attempted to restore its presence and authority since the
2013 military intervention.
The security forces tend to respond to episodes of sectarian tension or
violence as individual security incidents, rather than examples
of a societal
problem requiring broader efforts. Despite this piecemeal approach, security
forces have usually worked to prevent
sectarian friction from getting out of
control; often this has meant intervening to restore order or promising
compensation for
damage. In rural areas, traditional justice mechanisms (such
as community reconciliation committees) have often been encouraged
sectarian tensions, instead of a law enforcement approach.
That said, despite the occasional failures (notably the 7 April 2012 clashes
outside the Coptic Orthodox Cathedral in Cairo—see
Government’, above), DFAT believes that a more substantial police
presence in urban areas has enabled Copts
to live there in greater security.
DFAT assesses that the level of police presence, and consequent protection
provided to Copts,
in rural and poorer areas is generally less than in the
DFAT assesses that on a day-to-day basis in urban areas, the state has a
capacity and willingness to provide protection to Copts
and generally does so.
A Copt facing harassment could go to a local police station for protection in
these areas. DFAT has observed
that under the current Interim Government, the
security services see it in their interest to be responsive to Coptic
grievances,
although societal discrimination could impact on the level of
protection offered to Copts by an individual security official.
In regards to incidents of communal violence, DFAT considers that response
times and rates by security forces are not uniform and
can be delayed, but this
is an issue that impacts the wider community as well. Reported slow responses
to complaints could at times
be due to the local police force feeling
ill-equipped and under- resourced, particularly those in rural areas. However,
not discount the existence of anti-Christian feelings in the security
services, which, in combination with other factors, could
affect how local
commanders respond to particular
Tribunal has had regard to an article in the
Christian Post
dated 18 June
2014 and titled ‘Situation has improved for Christians in Egypt says
CEO’. The article refers to an interview with Dr David
Curry, CEO of
, an organization which advocates for
persecuted Christians around the world, who had recently returned from Egypt. It
part, as follows:
CP: What's the situation like in 2014
for Egyptian Christians?
Curry: The situation has improved for Christians in Egypt.
CP: What do you attribute that to?
Curry: It's been due to the willingness of the new government to
protect Christian areas to allow for free expression of faith for
Christians,
for people to attend church in safety, to be able to associate themselves with
their faith. I am encouraged; this is
not a political statement for the
government because I'm not an expert in political situations, but I can tell
you that this is
an improvement for Egyptian Christians; it's stability that
they welcome........
CP: Any last thing you can add about Egypt?
Curry: This is true of Egypt and Iran, this a place where the church is
strong and it's young. The persecution that the Egyptian
Christians have been
through in the past three years has made faith deeper and so my interactions
with the Egyptian church left
me encouraged. But they've been through very
difficult times and it can be very dicey. You have to remember, not all
persecution
is just from government forces. There's also family persecution
that happens when someone wants to convert from Islam to Christianity.
be very dangerous or very difficult, they can be kicked out of the family or in
some cases even killed. All of those factors
still exist within Egypt even when
the government is more stable and you don't have some of the organized
outbursts against Christian
churches that you had last summer when you had 90
churches burned down and so forth. It's still an Islamic country and the church
is strong and I think it's stabilized and doing
considered all the evidence, the Tribunal finds that the first named applicant
is generally a credible witness. The Tribunal
is of the view that when her visa
application was prepared her claims were embellished and exaggerated. The
Tribunal accepts that
the first named applicant is a Coptic Christian and has
been a Coptic Christian since birth. The Tribunal accepts that she practised
faith in Egypt by attending mass and participating in “Sunday
school”. The Tribunal accepts that since coming to
Australia she has
attended [Church 2] where she serves as a [occupation].
Tribunal accepts that the first named applicant was harassed and verbally abused
by her neighbour, [Sheik B], and his wife since
February 2011 in relation to the
way she was dressed and pressure was put on her to convert to Islam. The
Tribunal does not accept
that [Sheik B] threatened to kidnap her.
Tribunal accepts that garbage was left outside the first named applicant’s
house. The Tribunal accepts that when she reported
this and the verbal abuse
from [Sheik B] to the Police they did not act on it and told her to go away. The
Tribunal does not accept
that the Police told her “it does not matter if
[Sheik B] hurt you.” The Tribunal does not accept that “filth”
was thrown at her and her house.
Tribunal accepts that [in] January 2013 pebbles were thrown at a window in the
first named applicant’s home and someone
yelled things about the Christmas
decorations she had on the window. The Tribunal does not accept that an attempt
was made to break
her windows to scare her.
Tribunal accepts that some women held a protest at the gym the first named
applicant was a member of and demanded that it be closed.
The Tribunal accepts
that [Sheik B]’s wife was one of the women involved in the protest and she
made comments to the first
named applicant during the protest. The Tribunal
accepts that the gym was closed for a short while and subsequently re-opened as
it was previously.
Tribunal accepts that [in] February 2013, [Sheik B] assaulted the first named
applicant. The Tribunal does not accept that he
would not let her go until the
neighbours intervened. The Tribunal accepts that her neighbours did not support
her. The Tribunal
accepts that her husband reported this incident to the Police
and they told him they did not have time for neighbour disputes and
asked him to
leave. The Tribunal accepts that on the following day, [in] February 2013, the
first named applicant’s car was
vandalised. The Tribunal accepts that she
believed it was done by [Sheik B]. The Tribunal accepts that this incident was
not reported
to the Police.
Tribunal accepts that the incident with [Sheik B in] February 2013 would have
been frightening for the first named applicant.
However, having considered all
the evidence in relation to the behaviour of [Sheik B] and his wife towards the
first named applicant,
the Tribunal is not satisfied that it amounted to
persecution as defined in the Act.
Tribunal accepts that the first named applicant has had other incidents where
air had been let out of her car tyres or something
was broken on her car. The
Tribunal accepts that she moved out of her home [in] February 2015 and
thereafter had no further contact
with [Sheik B].
Tribunal accepts that a Sheik named [Mr A] was arrested when Mr Mubarak was in
government but was released after the revolution
in 2011. The Tribunal accepts
that he lives near the first named applicant’s parents’ home. The
Tribunal does not accept
that he was harassing her parents.
Tribunal accepts that the first named applicant’s children attended a
Convent school. The Tribunal accepts that after she
moved to her mother’s
Tribunal accepts that
[Sheik A] intercepted the bus, swore at the driver and
threatened him. The Tribunal accepts that the school told the first named
applicant that they could not send the bus to pick her children up and they
would have to find their own way to school. The Tribunal
does not accept that
the first named applicant’s children could not attend school.
Tribunal accepts that [in] March 2013, the first named applicant and her sister
were walking down the street near her mother’s
by threw acid on their pants and said “this is for you to stop wearing
pants.” The Tribunal
accepts that a few drops of acid damaged the first
named applicant’s pants and she obtained some cream from a chemist to
the burns. The Tribunal accepts that this incident was not reported to the
Tribunal accepts that [in] April 2013, there was a home invasion at the first
named applicant’s parents’ home. The
Tribunal accepts that five men
broke into their home, stole money and jewellery, broke things and religious
paintings and swore at
the first named applicant and her mother for not wearing
hijabs. The Tribunal does not accept that the thieves threatened the first
applicant’s parents. The Tribunal accepts that the first named
applicant’s father reported this incident to the
Police but they did not
send anyone to the house. The Tribunal accepts that the stolen items have not
been recovered. The Tribunal
does not accept that the first named
applicant’s husband came home and was attacked by the thieves. The
Tribunal accepts that
when he returned home the thieves had left.
Tribunal does not accept that the thieves were connected to [Sheik B] or that
they were targeting the first named applicant. The
Tribunal does not accept that
the thieves were connected to [Sheik A] or that they were targeting the first
named applicant or her
parents. The Tribunal does not accept that a terrorist
group was targeting the first named applicant and that they were able to find
her where ever she went. The Tribunal does not accept that the first named
applicant’s sister fled to [another country].
Tribunal accepts that the applicants delayed leaving Egypt after they obtained
their visas to come to Australia because the first
named applicant’s
parents-in-law were not in good health and they needed time to organize a carer
on the country information, the Tribunal is of the view that at the time the
applicants left Egypt in 2013 there was generalised
violence in Egypt and that
Coptic Christians and Christian Churches were targeted for violence. However,
the country information
indicates that although there is still generalised
violence in Egypt the situation for Coptic Christians has improved. The Tribunal
accepts that the first named applicant has a subjective fear of persecution and
a belief that she cannot obtain State protection.
Tribunal is not satisfied, on the evidence before it, that there is a real
chance that the first named applicant will be harmed
or killed by radicals,
Islamic extremists and the Muslim Brotherhood if she returns to Egypt now or in
the foreseeable future.
considered all of the first named applicant’s claims, individually and
cumulatively, the Tribunal finds that there is
no real chance that the first
named applicant would be at risk of persecution on the grounds of religion or
any other Refugee Convention
reason if she returns to Egypt now or in the
reasonably foreseeable future. Therefore, the Tribunal finds that the first
named applicant
does not have a well-founded fear of persecution for a Refugee
Convention reason. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that she does not
satisfy the
criterion in s.36(2)(a).
Are there substantial grounds for
believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable
consequence of the first
named applicant being removed from Australia, there is a real risk
she will suffer significant harm
Tribunal has considered the first named applicant’s claims under
complementary protection.
view of the above findings, and for the reasons given above, the Tribunal is not
satisfied that there is a real risk that the first
named applicant will suffer
significant harm for the reasons claimed.
considered all of the first named applicant’s claims, individually and
cumulatively, the Tribunal is not satisfied, for
the reasons given above, that
the first named applicant will be arbitrarily deprived of life, the death
penalty will be carried out
on her, she will be subjected to cruel or inhuman
treatment or punishment or she will be subjected to degrading treatment or
if she returns to Egypt now or in the reasonably foreseeable future.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal is not satisfied that that there are substantial grounds for
believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable
consequence of the first named
applicant being removed from Australia to Egypt, there is a real risk that she
will suffer significant
harm as defined in s.36(2A) of the Act. Therefore, the
Tribunal finds that the first named applicant does not satisfy the criterion
s.36(2)(aa).
Tribunal finds that the first named applicant does not satisfy the criteria in
s.36(2)(a) or s.36(2)(aa).
is no suggestion that the first named applicant satisfies s.36(2) on the basis
of being a member of the same family unit as
a person who satisfies s.36(2)(a)
or s.36(2)(aa) and who holds a Protection visa. Accordingly, the first named
applicant does not
satisfy the criterion in s.36(2).
the first named applicant does not satisfy the criteria in s.36(2)(a) or
s.36(2)(aa) and does not hold a Protection visa, the
second, third and fourth
named applicants are unable to satisfy the criteria in s.36(2)(b) or s.36(2)(c).
Accordingly, the second,
third and fourth named applicants do not satisfy the
criterion in s.36(2).
Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicants Protection visas.
Linda Symons
DFAT Country
Information Report on Egypt dated 28 January 2014 and DFAT Thematic Information
Report on Egyptian Copts dated 28 January
Thematic Information Report on Egyptian Copts dated 28 January
Thematic Information Report on Egyptian Copts dated 28 January
‘Situation has improved for Christians in Egypt says
Christian Post
, 18 June 2014.
(http://www.christianpost.com/news/situation-has-improved-for-christians-in-egypt-says-open-doors-ceo-part-2-121718/)
RTF format (242 KB)
Signed PDF/A format