Applications for review of Honeysuckle Health Buying Group authorisation determination [2022] ACompT 3 (25 May 2022)
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
Applications for review of Honeysuckle
Health Buying Group authorisation determination
[2022] ACompT 3
Review from:
Applications by National Association of Practising Psychiatrists and
Rehabilitation Medicine Society of Australia and New Zealand
Ltd for review of
Authorisation Determination AA1000542 made on 21 September 2021 in favour of
Honeysuckle Health Pty Ltd and nib
health funds limited in respect of the
Honeysuckle Health Buying Group
File number:
ACT 4 of 2021
ACT 5 of 2021
Determination of:
(Deputy President)
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
COMPETITION –
application for review
authorisation
determination made by the Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission under
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth) – applications for intervention
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Cases cited:
Application by Flexigroup Limited
Application by Fortescue Metals Group Ltd
[2006] ACompT 6
Application by Independent Contractors Australia
[2015] ACompT
Application by Sea Swift Pty Limited
[2015] ACompT 5
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submissions:
Date of hearing:
Determined on the papers
Counsel for the Applicants:
P Thiagarajan with J Gray (Pro Bono)
Counsel for the Authorisation Applicants:
M Borsky QC with A Lord
Solicitor for the Authorisation Applicants:
MinterEllison
Counsel for Australian Competition and Consumer Commission:
R C A Higgins SC with A Barraclough
Solicitor for Australian Competition and Consumer Commission:
Norton Rose Fulbright
IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
ACT 4 of 2021
ACT 5 of 2021
APPLICATIONS FOR REVIEW OF AUTHORISATION DETERMINATION AA1000542 MADE ON
21 SEPTEMBER 2021 IN FAVOUR OF HONEYSUCKLE HEALTH PTY LTD
AND NIB HEALTH FUNDS
LIMITED IN RESPECT OF THE HONEYSUCKLE HEALTH BUYING GROUP
APPLICANTS:
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF PRACTISING PSYCHIATRISTS AND REHABILITATION
MEDICINE SOCIETY OF AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND LTD
O’BRYAN J (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
DATE OF DETERMINATION:
THE TRIBUNAL DETERMINES AND DIRECTS THAT:
1. The Australian Medical Association be granted leave to intervene in the
proceeding.
2. The applications by the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of
Psychiatrists (
) and by the Australian Pain Society (
for leave to intervene be refused.
3. Each of the RANZCP and the APS be granted leave to file and serve a
written submission (not exceeding 12 pages) on or before 4.00pm
on Friday 15
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1 On 8 October 2021, each of the National
Association of Practising Psychiatrists (
) and Rehabilitation
Medicine Society of Australia and New Zealand Ltd (
) (collectively,
Review Applicants
) filed an application pursuant to
Competition and Consumer Act
) for a review
of authorisation determination number AA1000542 granted by the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission (
) on 21 September 2021 under
of the Act in favour of Honeysuckle Health Pty Ltd (
Honeysuckle
) and nib health funds limited (
) (collectively, the
Authorisation Applicants
) in respect of the Honeysuckle Health Buying
HH Buying Group
2 By its determination, the ACCC authorised the Authorisation Applicants to
form and operate a buying group to collectively negotiate
and manage contracts
with healthcare providers (including hospitals and medical specialists) on
behalf of private health insurers
), medical insurance providers and
other payers of healthcare services for a period of five years until 13 October
2026. Authorisation
was granted with a condition that the Authorisation
Applicants must not supply services to the following PHIs which were described
” in the determination: Medibank, Bupa, HCF and
HBF (in Western Australia).
3 On 17 December 2021, the Tribunal made directions for the preparation of
the proceeding for hearing by the Tribunal. Relevantly,
the Tribunal directed
the ACCC to give written notice of the application for review to all persons who
made submissions to the ACCC
in connection with its authorisation determination
and to advise them that any application for leave to intervene in these
proceedings,
and any material relied on in support of any application, must be
filed and served on or before Tuesday, 1 February 2022. No applications
intervene were made in response to that notification. The ACCC subsequently
discovered that a number of submissions to the ACCC
had been overlooked, and a
further notice was given to the persons who made those submissions. Again,
though, no applications to
intervene were made in response to that
notification.
4 The review has been set down for hearing by the Tribunal on Monday, 1
August 2022 for 5 days. In accordance with the Tribunal’s
directions, on
20 April 2022 the Authorisation Applicants filed and served their Statement of
Facts, Issues and Contentions. By that
document, the Authorisation Applicants
notified the Review Applicants and the Tribunal that, at the hearing of the
review, they will
contend that the Tribunal should affirm the ACCC decision to
grant the authorisation and otherwise amend the authorisation such that:
(a) the period of authorisation is extended from five to ten years; and
(b) the condition preventing Major PHIs from joining the HH Buying Group is
removed in respect of medical specialist contracting.
5 A review of the ACCC’s determination by the Tribunal is a
review and the Tribunal must reach its own decision whether
authorisation should be granted and for what period and on what conditions.
follows that it is open to the Authorisation Applicants, on this review, to seek
to persuade the Tribunal that authorisation should
be granted on the basis
originally sought from the ACCC and, specifically, that the period of
authorisation should be ten years and
the ACCC’s condition of
authorisation concerning Major PHIs should be removed. That is so even though
the Authorisation Applicants
did not themselves apply to review the ACCC’s
authorisation determination.
6 Nevertheless, at a directions hearing held on 12 May 2022, the Tribunal
concluded that persons who made submissions to the ACCC
in connection with its
authorisation determination may not have been aware that the Authorisation
Applicants may seek to vary the
authorisation to extend its duration and to
remove the condition concerning Major PHIs. To ensure procedural fairness, the
directed the ACCC to give a further written notice to all persons who
made submissions to the ACCC in connection with its authorisation
determination
advising them:
(a) that in these proceedings, the Authorisation Applicants will contend that
the Tribunal should affirm the ACCC decision to grant
authorisation but vary the
authorisation such that:
(i) the period of authorisation is extended from five to ten years; and
(ii) the condition preventing Major PHIs from joining the HH Buying Group is
removed in respect of medical specialist contracting;
(b) that they may apply for leave to intervene by 4.00pm on Thursday, 19 May
7 In response to that notice, applications for leave to intervene were
received by the Tribunal from the Australian Medical Association
the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists (
and the Australian Pain Society Limited (
8 For the reasons that follow, the Tribunal grants the AMA leave to intervene
but does not grant the RANZCP or the APS leave to intervene.
The Authorisation
9 In the ACCC’s determination, the formal
terms of the authorisation were stated as follows:
Conduct authorised
5.6. The ACCC grants authorisation AA1000542 to the following entities:
(a) Honeysuckle Health Pty Ltd and nib Health Funds Ltd (collectively, the
(b) PHIs registered under the
Private Health Insurance (Prudential
Supervision) Act 2015
(Cth) except for the following specified entities, and
any related body corporate (within the meaning of s4A of the Act), acquirer
successor entity of any of these specified entities:
Medibank Private Limited,
Bupa HI Pty Ltd,
Hospitals Contribution Fund of Australia Limited, and
HBF Health Limited, with respect to its operations within Western Australia
(for clarity, HBF Health Limited is authorised with respect
to its operations
outside of Western Australia),
(collectively,
(c) international medical and travel insurance companies;
(d) government and semi-government payers of healthcare services such as
workers’ compensation and transport accident scheme
operators, and the
Department of Veterans Affairs scheme (DVA); and
(e) any other payer of health services or goods other than an Excluded Entity,
as notified by HH to the ACCC,
(collectively,
Authorised Entities
5.7. Authorisation AA1000542 applies in relation to the following conduct:
(a) the formation and operation of the HH Buying Group by HH, including the
BCPP, involving the provision of services to Authorised
Entities; and
(b) the acquisition of contracting services by Authorised Entities from HH.
5.8. Authorisation is granted in relation to Division 1 of
of the Act,
sections 45
of the Act.
5.9. The ACCC grants authorisation with the following condition until 13
October 2026.
Condition of authorisation
5.10. The ACCC may specify conditions in an authorisation. The legal protection
provided by the authorisation does not apply if
any of the conditions are not
complied with.
5.11. The ACCC grants this authorisation with the condition that the Applicants
must not supply services to any Excluded Entity.
10 The conduct that is authorised is defined by paragraph 5.7, extracted
above, as “the formation and operation of the HH Buying
Group by HH,
including the BCPP, involving the provision of services to Authorised
Entities” and “the acquisition of
contracting services by Authorised
Entities from HH”. The “BCPP” is the Broad Clinical Partners
Program which is
described in the determination as a program “under which
patients would receive a no gap experience for the whole episode of
surgical procedure” (at [1.5]).
11 The above definition of the authorised conduct is not informative as to
the nature and scope of the authorised conduct. To understand
the nature and
scope, it is necessary to have regard to other parts of the determination. The
determination included the following
description of the proposed conduct to be
authorised:
The Proposed Conduct will involve four categories of
contracting
1.24. The four broad categories of contracting intended to be covered by the HH
Buying Group are:
Hospital contracting
– Hospital purchaser provider agreements
), where hospitals agree not to charge out-of-pocket costs to
customers of healthcare payers (
), and are used by PHIs to
provide financial certainty to their customers
Medical specialist contracting
– Medical purchaser provider
agreements (
), used by health insurers to provide financial
certainty to Customers in relation to potential out-of-pocket costs for
services (e.g. radiologists, pathologists, surgeons)
Medical gap schemes
– where health insurers pay a set fee for
each type of professional service provided to their Customers in hospital, and
specialists agree not to charge Customers an out-of-pocket amount or
agree to limit the amount the Customer is charged at a fixed
amount (e.g. $500),
General treatment networks
– arrangements with Providers for
services that are not provided in hospital (e.g. physiotherapists, dentists,
optometrists)
that are covered under the 'extras' component of private health
insurance products.
Services provided by HH in each category of contracting
1.25. For the four types of contracting, the Proposed Conduct will involve HH
engaging in the activities outlined below.
For hospital and medical specialist contracting – data analytics and
contract negotiations
1.26. Initially, HH proposes to engage in collective negotiations with
Providers that currently have HPPAs and MPPAs with nib in
order to agree to new
contracts with Participants based on the Provider's existing agreement with
1.27. HH intends to negotiate new HPPAs and MPPAs on an ongoing basis on behalf
of nib and Participants as the nib-based contracts
expire or enter into
contracts with new Providers. HH intends to act as the lead agent in the
negotiations after consultation with
the Participants. This will involve:
aggregation of Participant claims data for the
Provider and undertaking data analytics to establish benchmarks relating to
of service, price and application of services
conducting collective commercial negotiations on behalf of Participants,
once HH receives instructions that a Participant wishes to enter into an
HPPA or MPPA on the negotiated terms and conditions, coordinate
the execution of
the HPPA or MPPA between the Participant and the Provider (or execute the
contract if HH has signing authority).
1.28. The HH Buying Group will be voluntary and Participants will individually
decide whether to enter into an HPPA or MPPA based
on the terms and conditions
negotiated by HH.
1.29. If they choose to do so, Participants will execute an agreement with the
Provider. HH will not be party to the agreement.
HH will then undertake contract
administration services for that agreement.
1.30. If a Participant does not wish to enter into an agreement on the
negotiated terms, the Applicants submit that Participants
can negotiate directly
with Providers and enter into agreements independently of the HH Buying Group on
their own terms and conditions.
1.31. The Proposed Conduct will not prevent Providers from offering services to
other insurers, buying groups or healthcare payers
that are not part of the HH
Buying Group. Further, it will not restrict the terms and conditions upon which
Providers are entitled
to enter those agreements. Similarly, Providers will be
able to contract with Participants individually or with a different set of
Participants to those proposed by the HH Buying Group.
For the medical gap scheme and general treatment networks –
management and administration of the schemes
1.32. HH intends to engage with Providers registered in nib’s existing
medical gap schemes and general treatment network to
notify them of the
extension of these schemes to Participants.
1.33. On an ongoing basis, HH will manage the medical gap scheme and general
treatment networks, review the schedules of rates and
terms and conditions, and
actively manage the registered Providers of the schemes and networks. This
includes ensuring adherence
to requirements around registration, qualification
and other terms and conditions of the schemes and networks.
For all categories – contract administration, dispute resolution and
ongoing data analytics
1.34. HH intends to provide contract administration and management services,
and dispute resolution services to Participants for
the contracting services
that they have engaged HH to undertake.
1.35. HH will also provide Participants with data analytic services as part of
contract negotiations but also on an ongoing basis
to assess the performance of
each Provider and benchmark their performance for each Participant against the
aggregated data for the
HH Buying Group. This would include an assessment of the
provider quality
provider compliance
benefits paid to the Provider by Participants
access to the Provider’s services, and
efficiency and value of treatment provided by the
1.36. Subject to confidentiality and privacy obligations, HH would also share
information concerning one Participant with the HH
Buying Group to the extent
the information is related to agreements facilitated by HH or services provided
by HH to the Participants.
This could include information such as contract
breaches by a Provider, or the discovery of fraudulent claims made by a Provider
in relation to an agreement with one Participant, which would therefore be
relevant to other Participants who contract with that
The Proposed Conduct involves ‘value-based’
contracting
1.37. The Proposed Conduct involves a value-based contracting model, which HH
describes as comparing health outcomes with the costs
of providing services to
determine the value of the service from the healthcare payer’s
perspective.
1.38. Under this model, HH would initially compare the value of services from a
particular Provider against peers in the local region,
State or Territory and
nationally. Based on the outcomes and quality of care achieved by the Provider,
the cost of the services would
be adjusted (either through price or structure)
to match the value being delivered by the Provider.
1.39. Information sharing and data analytics between members of the HH Buying
Group will provide the necessary information to assess
the performance of
Providers and benchmark their performance for each Participant against the
aggregated data for the HH Buying Group.
1.40. The Applicants state the BCPP, which provides a no gap experience to
consumers for the suite of services involved in knee
and hip replacements with
certain medical specialists, is an example of value-based contracting.
12 Although not included as a condition of the authorisation, the
determination stated (at [1.23]) that the Authorisation Applicants
sought authorisation for the HH Buying Group to engage in the collective boycott
of any services of a healthcare provider
and that, as a consequence, the HH
Buying Group is not permitted to boycott any healthcare providers that refuse to
deal with the
group. The determination did not describe or define the expression
“boycott” and what conduct might be included within
expression.
Relevant principles concerning intervention
Section 109(2)
of the Act provides that the
Tribunal may, upon such conditions as it thinks fit, permit a person to
intervene in proceedings before
the Tribunal. The section has been considered by
the Tribunal on a number of occasions.
Application by Fortescue Metals Group Ltd
[2006] ACompT 6
) (also reported as
Re Fortescue Metals Group Ltd
[2006] ACompT 6
(2006) 203 FLR 28)
, the Tribunal made the following observations about
(at [30], [35] and [43]):
[30] There is no “sufficient” or “real and substantial”
interest requirement found in
and the discretion to grant leave to
intervene reposed in that subsection is not limited by the connotation of such
expressions.
The discretion is not constrained by any limitation and it is not
easy, nor is it appropriate, to define or delimit the categories
of persons who
may be given leave to intervene under
It does not follow that in
exercising its discretion pursuant to
of the Act, there are no
limitations or restrictions on the persons who wish to intervene or participate
in reviews by the Tribunal.
[35] ... an applicant for leave to intervene or participate under
must, as a minimum, be able to establish some connection with, or interest in,
the subject matter of the proceeding which discloses
that it is not merely an
officious bystander. What the nature of that connection or interest must be,
will vary from case to case.
It is not necessary that an applicant be required
to establish that its business interests or business activities or prospects may
be detrimentally affected by the subject matter of the proceeding or its
outcome. ... However the connection should usually be one
that discloses that
the applicant for leave to intervene has some interest which is ignited by the
proceeding, which is an interest
other than that found in members of the general
[43] Although
is not couched in terms of any particular
“interest” being required to be demonstrated before leave should be
I consider that it is necessary for some connection with the subject
matter of the application for review to be demonstrated. Obviously
an officious
bystander would not be given leave to intervene, but it is necessary to show
some particular interest in the subject
matter of the application. I do not
consider that it is necessary for an applicant for intervention to go as far as
to show that
it may be affected in some way by the declaration but it is
necessary, as I have noted earlier, to show that some interest touching
concerning it can be demonstrated.
15 Similarly, in
Application by Independent Contractors Australia
[2015] ACompT 1
(also reported as
Re Independent Contractors Australia
(2015) 292 FLR 80)
, the Tribunal proceeded on the basis that there is no
“sufficient” or “real and substantial” interest
requirement,
and that the discretion to grant leave to intervene is not limited
by the introduction or application of such expressions. However,
the Tribunal
recognised that (at [28]):
... it is important to consider the extent to which the proposed intervenor has
indicated that it can usefully or relevantly add
to, or supplement, evidence
proposed to be led by the parties to the application or the submissions to be
made by them, as well as
considering how the proposed intervenor might be
affected by the Authorisation or the outcome of the application to the Tribunal.
16 It should also be noted that, under
, the Tribunal may permit
intervention upon such conditions as the Tribunal thinks fit. In
, the Tribunal exercised that power in relation to Rio
Tinto’s intervention, explaining (at [78]):
Rio Tinto will therefore be given leave to participate in the proceeding and the
review but not on the basis that it will be at large
as to its participation in
the review or as to the submissions it may make or as to the material it may
place before the Tribunal.
The Tribunal wishes to ensure that there is no
unnecessary duplication of submissions and evidentiary material placed before
The order will be that subject to the Tribunal’s power to direct the
nature and extent of its participation in the proceeding
and the review, Rio
Tinto be granted leave to intervene in the proceeding and participate in the
17 Similarly, in
Application by Sea Swift Pty Limited
[2015] ACompT 5
the Tribunal limited the intervention of the Maritime Union of Australia to one
issue only and to making written and oral submissions
only, with the right to
apply to the Tribunal to adduce evidence and to cross‑examine (at
18 Interested third parties may be able to advance their interests
sufficiently by making submissions to the Tribunal, without being
granted the
rights of an intervener: see
Application by Flexigroup Limited
) at [14], citing
Application for
Authorisation of Acquisition of Macquarie Generation by AGL Energy Limited
[2014] ACompT 1
(at [151], [272] and [392]) and
Applications by Tabcorp
Holdings Limited
[2017] ACompT 5
at [20], the Tribunal observed that it would be wrong
to refuse permission to a person to intervene for the reason that the ACCC
able to represent that person’s interests in the proceeding. Such an
approach would be to misapprehend the role of the ACCC
in the proceeding. The
ACCC is not a party or protagonist in the proceeding. Its role is to assist the
Tribunal in an impartial manner,
regardless of any conclusions it may have drawn
from its earlier analysis in the matter. In the absence of a contradictor, the
may be required to test the evidence of the applicant, present contrary
material and make submissions putting forward an opposing
point of view. In the
presence of a contradictor, however, the role of the ACCC should properly be
more confined.
Application for intervention by the AMA
20 The AMA is the peak professional body for doctors
in Australia, advocating on behalf of doctors and the healthcare needs of
and communities, as well as working with Federal and State governments
to develop and influence health policy to provide the best
outcomes for doctors,
their patients, and the community. By its application to intervene, the AMA
submitted that the conduct the
subject of the authorisation application will, if
authorised, have a direct and immediate impact on the commercial arrangements
underpinning
the provision of inpatient and day patient services by specialist
medical practitioners in private and public hospitals in Australia.
As the peak
lobby body representing the national medical profession, the AMA is best placed
to address the potential implications
of the proposed conduct across the medical
profession.
21 The AMA further submitted that it is intimately familiar with the
operation of the private health insurance regime, having been
centrally involved
in representing the views of its members in the course of the development and
introduction of the
Private Health Insurance Act 2007
(Cth) and the
Health Legislation Amendment (Gap Cover Schemes) Act 2000
(Cth), both Acts
being central to the issues raised by the application for authorisation. The AMA
is also able to address the broader
question raised by the authorisation
application with respect to the participation of Major PHIs in the conduct
sought to be authorised.
The AMA made multiple submissions to the ACCC
expressing concern at the level of market power that would flow from including
Major PHIs in the HH Buying Group and its opinion on the public detriment
that would result.
22 The AMA submitted that it is able to add to, and supplement, any evidence
led by the Review Applicants, which evidence is likely
to include material in
relation to:
(a) the structure of the differing markets (geographic and functional) likely to
be affected by the proposed conduct;
(b) the appropriate weight attributable to the public benefits asserted by the
Authorisation Applicants;
(c) the role and importance of no gap and known gap arrangements between private
health insurers and specialist medical practitioners;
(d) the impact of the Major PHIs participating in the proposed conduct.
23 The AMA’s application was not opposed by any party to the
proceeding.
24 The Tribunal accepts the AMA’s submissions and will grant leave to
the AMA to intervene in the proceeding.
Application for intervention by the RANZCP
25 The RANZCP is a membership organisation that
prepares doctors to become psychiatrists, supports and enhances clinical
provides advocacy for patients, and advises governments on mental
health care. By its application to intervene, the RANZCP expressed
concern about
the variations to the authorisation that will be sought by the Authorisation
Applicants, but noted that it must consult
with its members. The RANZCP did not
otherwise indicate whether and to what extent the RANZCP intends to adduce
evidence in the proceeding
or otherwise add to the information and material
before the Tribunal.
26 The Tribunal notes that the RANZCP made a submission to the ACCC on 26
July 2021. The submission was relatively brief, but expressed
concerns that:
(a) the formation of the HH Buying Group facilitates the concentration of the
market power of up to 60% of PHIs to enter into selective
contracting with
healthcare providers, which the RANZCP argues reduces competition;
(b) the central concept of the proposal includes elements that will reduce
access to care and treatment; and
(c) the approval of the HH Buying Group proposal will allow PHIs and payers to
exert immense market force to selectively contract
healthcare providers and thus
promulgate managed-care that will significantly disadvantage patients with
mental disorders in accessing
their choice of psychiatrist, hospital and type of
27 The Authorisation Applicants opposed the grant of leave to intervene to
the RANZCP, submitting that the Tribunal cannot be satisfied
that the RANZCP can
usefully or relevantly add to, or supplement, evidence proposed to be led by the
parties to the proceeding or
the submissions to be made by them. In that regard,
the Authorisation Applicants submitted that:
(a) The RANZCP has not identified any evidence that it intends to file, let
alone any evidence that could usefully add to, or supplement,
the evidence
likely to be filed by the parties.
(b) The RANZCP’s application does no more than state that it proposes to
make a submission to the Tribunal. It does not identify
with any particularity
the submissions it proposes to make and how, if at all, those submissions could
usefully add to, or supplement,
the submissions likely to be made by the
parties, or those submissions that are already before the Tribunal. The
Authorisation Applicants
argued that, to the extent the RANZCP proposes to
reiterate the submission it made to the ACCC, that submission is already before
the Tribunal; leave to intervene is not required for the Tribunal to take that
submission into account, pursuant to s 107(2) of the
(c) To the extent that the interests of RANZCP in these proceedings can be
discerned, the Tribunal should be satisfied that those
interests can be
protected by existing parties. As a professional body representing
psychiatrists, there is no reason to believe
that its interests in the
proceeding are any different from, or not capable of being protected by, the
NAPP (as an existing party
representing psychiatrists) and by the AMA (if it is
granted leave to intervene) as the peak body representing medical practitioners.
(d) The intervention of RANZCP is likely to increase the risk of duplication and
consequently the time and cost of the proceedings,
noting in particular that
RANZCP seeks an extension of time to file submissions.
28 The Authorisation Applicants submitted that the RANZCP’s application
to intervene should be refused or, alternatively, the
Tribunal should only
permit RANZCP to file submissions with the Tribunal and should not grant RANZCP
the rights of an intervener.
29 The Tribunal accepts that the RANZCP is a membership organisation that
represents doctors (psychiatrists) that will be directly
affected by the conduct
the subject of the authorisation. The Tribunal also accepts that the RANZCP may
have information and knowledge
specifically as it relates to mental health, that may be relevant to the issues
in this proceeding. However, the Tribunal accepts the Authorisation
Applicants’ submission that the role that the RANZCP seeks
to take in this
proceeding has not been articulated in its application for intervention. On the
material before it, the Tribunal
is unable to form any view as to whether the
RANZCP will usefully or relevantly add to, or supplement, evidence proposed to
by the parties to the proceeding. Furthermore, the Tribunal is satisfied
that the RANZCP’s interests in these proceedings will
be adequately
represented by the NAPP and the AMA as intervener.
30 Having regard to the foregoing matters, and to minimise duplication in the
proceeding, the Tribunal will not permit the RANZCP
to intervene in the
proceeding. The Tribunal will, however, make a direction permitting the RANZCP
to file a submission (as a third
party) to which the Tribunal may have regard in
making its decision.
Application for intervention by the APS
31 The APS was established in 1979 by members of a
multidisciplinary team of pain management professionals and currently has 800
It is the Australian Chapter of the International Association for the
Study of Pain. By its application to intervene, the APS expressed
concern about
the variations to the authorisation that will be sought by the Authorisation
Applicants and stated that it supported
the ACCC determination. The APS did not
otherwise indicate whether and to what extent it intended to adduce evidence in
the proceeding
or otherwise add to the information and material before the
32 The Tribunal notes that the APS made a submission to the ACCC on 8 June
2021. The submission was brief and stated that the APA
shares the concerns
raised by groups such as the Australian Orthopaedic Association, the RMSANZ, the
Australian Dental Association,
Occupational Therapy Australia, the AMA, Catholic
Health and the Australian Society of Anaesthetists that the use of a value-base
contracting model will:
(a) prevent parties from being able to choose their source of primary care;
(b) lead to a concentration of allied health services and create
panels of approved providers, further reducing health carer and patient choice
and access to care;
(c) create a vertically integrated managed care arrangement; and
(d) result in the imposition of penalties on health care providers and hospitals
who are deemed not to have met predetermined outcomes.
33 The Authorisation Applicants made largely the same submissions against the
APS’s application to intervene that they made
in respect of the
RANZCP’s application. In short, the Authorisation Applicants submitted
(a) the Tribunal cannot be satisfied that the APS could usefully or relevantly
add to, or supplement, the evidence and submissions
of the parties to the
proceeding;
(b) like the RANZCP, the APS’s application to intervene did not identify
any evidence that it proposes to file and its application
to intervene does no
more than reiterate the brief two page submission that it made to the ACCC (and
which is already before the
Tribunal), and which expressly relied on, and agreed
with, the submissions made to the ACCC by the RMSANZ and the AMA (amongst
(c) there is no reason to believe that the APS’s interests as a medical
professional body representing pain specialists will
not be capable of being
protected by the Review Applicants and by the AMA, if joined.
34 The Authorisation Applicants submitted that the APS’s application to
intervene should be refused, or, alternatively, the
Tribunal should only permit
APS to file submissions with the Tribunal, without being granted the rights of
an intervener.
35 The Tribunal’s conclusions with respect to the application by the
APS are the same as with respect to the RANZCP. The Tribunal
accepts that the
APS is an organisation that represents medical professionals that will be
directly affected by the conduct the subject
of the authorisation. The Tribunal
also accepts that the APS may have information and knowledge about the operation
of the health
system, specifically as it relates to the management of chronic
pain, that may be relevant to the issues that arise in this proceeding.
the role that the APS seeks to take in this proceeding has not been articulated
in its application for intervention and
the Tribunal is unable to form any view
as to whether the APS will usefully or relevantly add to, or supplement,
evidence proposed
to be led by the parties to the proceeding. The Tribunal is
satisfied that the APS’s interests will be adequately represented
Review Applicants and the AMA.
36 Having regard to the foregoing matters, and to minimise duplication in the
proceeding, the Tribunal will not permit the APS to
intervene in the proceeding.
The Tribunal will, however, make a direction permitting the APS to file a
submission (as a third party)
to which the Tribunal may have regard in making
its decision.
37 In conclusion, the Tribunal permits intervention
by the AMA, but does not permit intervention by the RANZCP and APS. The RANZCP
and APS will be permitted to file a submission that the Tribunal may have regard
to in considering the application for review.
I certify that the preceding thirty-seven (37)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination of the
Dated: 25 May 2022
RTF format (414 KB)
Signed PDF/A format