Ali v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FedCFamC2G 1861 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Ali v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1861
File number(s):
MLG 546 of 2021
Judgment of:
JUDGE D HUMPHREYS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Administrative Appeals
Tribunal – Subclass 187 Regional Sponsored Migration Scheme Visa –
Review of a Registrar’s
decision – Extension of Time – Whether
the Tribunal denied the applicant procedural fairness – Whether the
fell into jurisdictional error – No jurisdictional error is made
out – Application dismissed with costs
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) ss 359B, 359B(2),
359C, 359C(2), 359C(5), 360(3), 360(3), 363A,
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) regs 4.17(4), 5.19, sch 2 cl
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General
Federal Law) Rules 2025
(Cth) r 3.06, 3.08(1), 23.08(1)(a)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General
Federal Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) r 13.13(a)
Cases cited:
Hasran v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2010] FCAFC 40
Lee v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2007] FCAFC 62
(2007) 159 FCR
Singh v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] FCAFC 105
SZTES v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
WZAVW v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
Division 2 General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Self-represented litigant
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Ms Stone, Australian Government Solicitor
Second Respondent:
Submitting appearance, save as to costs
MLG 546 of 2021
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
Second Respondent
JUDGE D HUMPHREYS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Application for Review in a Case and the Extension of Time to lodge the review
are dismissed.
Applicant is to pay the First Respondent’s costs, fixed in the amount of
$2,000.00, in addition to the costs ordered by
the Registrar.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or
order to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
or to record a variation to the order pursuant to
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2)
(General Federal Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE D HUMPHREYS
INTRODUCTION
is an application for a review of a Registrar’s decision, enlivened by
Division 3.2 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division
2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
), whereby a
Registrar of this Court summarily dismissed the application.
Application for Review of a Registrar’s (Application for Review) decision
was filed outside of the 21-day timeframe prescribed
by r 3.06 of the
, for which the applicant seeks an extension of time. Accordingly,
leave of the Court will be required to file the Application for
the following reasons, the Extension of Time should not be granted, and the
Application should be dismissed.
SHOULD AN EXTENSION OF TIME BE GRANTED?
decision was made by the Registrar on 8 September 2025 to summarily dismiss the
matter. The applicant’s Application for Review
was received on 7 October
2025, outside of the 21-day timeframe permitted by r 3.06 of the
This is a delay of 8 days. The applicant attributed the time delay to technical
issues with the Courts’ eLodgment portal.
The applicant claims that he
attempted to send the application via email to the Registry; however, no
evidence is provided to support
this claim.
SZTES v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2015] FCA 719
the following matters were held to be relevant as to whether an extension of
time should be granted:
(a) the extent of the delay;
(b) the explanation for the delay;
(c) prejudice to the respondent due to the delay; and
(d) the merits of the proposed application.
extent of the delay is not great, being some 8 days. This mitigates in favour of
leave being granted.
applicant claims his inability to file on time was a result of technical issues
with the Courts’ eLodgment portal. The Court
accepts this may be the case.
This mitigates in favour of leave being granted.
first respondent properly concedes that, other than as to costs and the need for
finality in administrative decision-making, there
is no great prejudice in leave
being granted. I consider this neutral in terms of whether leave should be
then leaves the merits of the proposed application. If there is no merit in the
proposed grounds, it would be pointless to grant
an extension of time.
applicant is a citizen of Pakistan.
22 January 2017, the applicant applied for a subclass 187 Regional Sponsored
Migration Scheme visa (the visa). The applicant sought
to satisfy the primary
criteria for the grant of the visa in the Direct Entry stream.
per cl 187.233 of Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
Regulations
), it was a criterion for the grant of the visa in the Direct
Entry stream for the position to which the visa application relates
position nominated in an application for approval under reg 5.19 of the
Regulations
, and that the nomination to have been approved.
applicant relied on a nomination for the position of Cook made by his employer,
Gajraj Pty Ltd trading as Fusion Restaurant (the
nominator).
20 March 2019, the nomination lodged by the nominator with respect to the
applicant was refused (the nomination refusal decision).
20 March 2019, the applicant was invited to comment on the nominator refusal
decision, to which the applicant did not respond.
29 April 2019, a delegate of the first respondent (the delegate) refused to
grant the applicant the visa, finding that the nomination
to which the visa
application related had not been approved, and therefore the applicant did not
satisfy cl 187.233 of Schedule 2
Regulations
15 May 2019, the applicant applied to the Tribunal for review of the
delegate’s decision. In his review application, the
applicant provided an
email address for the purpose of receiving correspondence (the nominated email
nominator separately applied for review of the nomination refusal decision. On
29 October 2020, the Tribunal found that it had
no jurisdiction with respect to
that application.
12 February 2021, the applicant was invited to attend a hearing scheduled for 18
March 2021.
17 February 2021, by email sent to the nominated email address, the applicant
was invited to comment on or respond to information
(the s 359A letter), being
that the Tribunal had found it had no jurisdiction with respect to the review
application lodged by the
nominator. The applicant was invited to give comments
on or respond to this information in writing by 3 March 2021. The s 359A letter
informed the applicant that if the Tribunal did not receive his comments or
response by the indicated date, it may make a decision
on the review without
taking any further action to obtain his views on the information, and he would
lose any entitlement he might
otherwise have had to a hearing.
applicant did not respond to the s 359A letter.
5 March 2021, the Tribunal affirmed the decision under review without conducting
25 March 2021, the applicant applied to this Court for judicial review of the
Tribunal’s decision.
17 July 2025, the first respondent filed an amended response seeking summary
dismissal of the judicial review application pursuant
to r 13.13(a) of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal
Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) (2021 Rules).
8 September 2025, Judicial Registrar Roberts of this Court dismissed the
application for judicial review pursuant to r 23.08(1)(a)
by way of summary judgment.
7 October 2025, the applicant sought review of the Registrar’s
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
[1] – [5], the Tribunal set out the application for review, the background
of the matter, and the criteria for the provision
of the visa.
[6] – [7], the Tribunal outlined the information set out in its s 359A
letter and the fact that the applicant had not provided
any comment on, or
response to the s 359A letter within the prescribed time period. In those
circumstances, the Tribunal noted that
ss 359C, 360(3), and 363A of the
Migration Act 1958
) applied; therefore, the
applicant was not entitled to appear before the Tribunal, and the Tribunal had
no power to permit him to
appear [8]. Accordingly, the Tribunal decided to
proceed to a decision without taking further steps to obtain the
applicant’s
comments in regard to the information put to him in the
letter [8].
Tribunal noted that at the time the applicant lodged his visa application, he
was the subject of a nomination by the nominator
for the position of Cook [13].
The Tribunal further noted that the Department refused the nomination
application on 20 March 2019,
and although the nominator lodged a review
application in respect of the refused nomination, the Tribunal found it had no
to review that matter [13].
[14], the Tribunal found that there was no approved nomination; therefore, the
requirements of cl 187.233 were not met.
the applicant made no claims in respect of the other visa streams, the Tribunal
noted that the decision under review must be affirmed
Accordingly,
the Tribunal affirmed the decision not to grant the applicant the visa
GROUNDS OF JUDICIAL REVIEW
applicant advances 20 grounds of judicial review contained in an Originating
Application filed with the Court on 25 March 2021.
They are as follows (errors
in original):
department of immigaration did not provide reseonable time to make comment about
infonnmation ask from them.
Admistrative
apppeal Tribunal adviced me their will be hearing on 18 March 2022, but before
that hearing they refused my appeal on
08 March 2022. They did not provide me a
chance to given my view in tribunal hearing.
a breach of the rules of natural justice occurred in connection with the making
of the decision;
procedures that were required by law to be observed in connection with the
making of the decision were not observed;
the person who purported to make the decision did not have jurisdiction to make
the decision;
the decision was not authorised by the enactment in pursuance of which it was
purported to be made;
the making of the decision was an improper exercise of the power conferred by
the enactment in pursuance of which it was purported
to be made;
the decision involved an error of law, whether or not the error appears on the
record of the decision;
the decision was induced or affected by fraud;
there was no evidence or other material to justify the making of the
the decision was otherwise contrary to law.
reference in paragraph (e) to an improper exercise of a power shall be construed
as including a reference to:
an irrelevant consideration into account in the exercise of a power;
to take a relevant consideration into account in the exercise of a power;
exercise of a power for a purpose other than a purpose for which the power is
exercise of a discretionary power in bad faith;
exercise of a personal discretionary power at the direction or behest of another
exercise of a discretionary power in accordance with a rule or policy without
regard to the merits of the particular case;
exercise of a power that is so unreasonable that no reasonable person could have
so exercised the power;
exercise of a power in such a way that the result of the exercise of the power
is uncertain;
THE APPLICANT’S SUBMISSIONS
applicant appeared before the Court unrepresented. While an interpreter was
available, the applicant had more than sufficient
English language skills to
participate in the hearing without using the interpreter.
to the hearing commencing, the Court ensured that the applicant was in
possession of a copy of the relevant Court Books and
that the respondent’s
written submissions had been provided to him and he understood them. The Court
also ensured that the
applicant had access to a pen and paper so that he could
take notes during the course of the hearing, should he wish to.
the commencement of the hearing, the Court explained it was undertaking judicial
review, not merits review, and the difference
between the two types of review.
The Court also explained the procedure by which the hearing would be undertaken.
Court orders, no written submissions or other material were provided to the
Court by the applicant in support of his case.
The applicant told the Court he
felt that he should have had the opportunity for a hearing before the Tribunal.
The Court explained
that as he did not respond to the
letter, he lost his
right to a hearing before the Tribunal.
Court carefully explained that the issue in this case was that, in order for the
applicant to be granted the type of visa he sought,
as at the time of the
decision in relation to his visa, he had to have an approved employer
nomination. He did not. Thus, even if
there had been a hearing before the
Tribunal, there could not have been any different result. The Tribunal, as a
matter of law, were
obliged to refuse his application.
the conclusion of the respondent’s oral submissions, the applicant was
asked if he wished to state anything in reply. He
THE FIRST RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS
Grounds of judicial review relied upon by the applicant do not reveal any
question of fact or law for determination.
one alleges that the applicant was not afforded a reasonable time to comment on
the information put to him by the Tribunal.
The Tribunal complied with all of
its obligations in this regard. The Tribunal sent the
letter to the
applicant by email to the nominated email address, a method prescribed in
. Pursuant to
applicant was taken to have received that email at the end of the day on which
it was sent, being 17 February 2021. Section
359B(2) of the
4.17(4) of the
Regulations
required that the Tribunal allow the applicant
14 days to comment on or respond to the information, being by 3 March 2021. The
359A letter invited the applicant to provide his comments or response by 3
March 2021, and therefore afforded the applicant the prescribed
period of time
within which to respond.
Ground two, the applicant takes issue with the fact that he was not afforded a
hearing opportunity. The applicant did not comment
on or respond to the s 359A
letter within the prescribed period, and no extension of time had been sought.
Section 359C(2) of the
therefore applied, which allowed the Tribunal
to make a decision on the review without taking further action to obtain the
applicant’s
views on the information. In turn, s 360(3) of the
applied, and the Tribunal was not required to invite the applicant to attend a
hearing. In those circumstances, the Tribunal had
no power to invite the
applicant to a hearing, pursuant to s 363A of the
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2010] FCAFC 40.
Accordingly, the applicant lost his entitlement to a hearing, and the Tribunal
had no power to allow him to appear. This is despite
the Tribunal having already
invited the applicant to attend a hearing. Moreover, although the Tribunal had
already invited the applicant
to attend a hearing, the s 359A letter made it
clear that if he failed to respond to that invitation, he would lose his
entitlement
to a hearing.
3 to 20 are copied, verbatim, from
Administrative Decisions
(Judicial Review) Act 1977
(Cth). No particulars are provided, and they are
so broad as to lack any meaningful content. They do not raise any arguable case
error on the part of the Tribunal.
if the Court were to find that the Tribunal’s decision is affected by
error, it would be futile to remit this matter back
to the Tribunal for
reconsideration. The nominator has been deregistered since 31 May 2020;
therefore, there is no prospect of the
nomination associated with the visa
application being approved, and consequently, the applicant has no prospect of
ever satisfying
the criteria for the grant of the visa.
would be futile to remit this matter to the Tribunal, as the Tribunal would be
bound to find that cl 187.233 is not satisfied and
to affirm the decision:
Singh v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2017) 253 FCR
[2017] FCAFC 105
- [90]. Hence, the Court should refuse relief in
the exercise of its discretion on the basis that remittal to the Tribunal would
Lee v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2007] FCAFC 62
(2007) 159 FCR
CONSIDERATION
to r 3.08(1) of the
, this review of the Registrar’s decision
was heard de novo, or afresh.
Court is satisfied that the applicant was properly sent a s 359A letter setting
out the issues in the matter and inviting comment
on material that may form the
basis for the Tribunal to refuse the application. Further, pursuant to s 359B,
the applicant was given
14 days to respond to the s 359A letter.
is common ground that the applicant did not respond. Given that he did not
respond, pursuant to s 359C, 360(3), and 363A of the
, the applicant
lost his right to a hearing,
The Tribunal was entitled to then consider the matter on the basis of the
material before it. In circumstances where the applicant
had no approved
employer sponsor, the Tribunal correctly found the applicant did not meet the
requirements of cl 187.233 of Schedule
Regulations
. This was the
only decision available to the Tribunal.
One and Two of the Application for Judicial Review complain that the applicant
was not allowed a reasonable time to respond
to the s 359A letter, and then
further complain that he was not given an opportunity to appear at a
explained above, the 14-day time limit was in line with the statutory amount of
time allowed in s 359B(2). No error arises as a
result. Having not responded,
the applicant lost his right to a hearing. Again, no error arises. Grounds One
and Two have no merit.
Three to Twenty simply reproduce
Administrative (Decisions
Judicial) Review Act 1977
(Cth). No particulars are provided as to how these
matters are relevant to there being a jurisdictional error in the Tribunal
If grounds of judicial review are not supported by particulars, for
that reason alone, they are liable for dismissal:
WZAVW v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] FCA 760
. Grounds Three to
Twenty have no merit.
the Court notes that even if a jurisdictional error were present (none being
apparent), it would be futile to remit the matter
further consideration, as the employer nominator, Garaj Pty Ltd, has since been
deregistered as a company
by ASIC as of 31 May 2020.
the applicant is unrepresented, the Court has perused the relevant Court Books
and associated documentation. No other jurisdictional
Application for an Extension of Time should be dismissed on the basis that the
substantive Application has no merit.
I certify that the preceding fifty-six (56)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge D
Dated: 13 November 2025
RTF format (401 KB)
Signed PDF/A format