Pound Road Medical Centre: Own motion investigation report [2014] AICmrCN 4 (15 July 2014)
Pound Road Medical Centre Own motion investigation report
Timothy Pilgrim, Australian Privacy Commissioner
13 December 2013, the Australian Privacy Commissioner (the Commissioner) opened
an own motion investigation into Pound Road Medical
Centre (PRMC). This was in
response to media reports that there were boxes of unsecured medical records at
16 Amberley Park Drive,
Narre Warren South (the site), which PRMC confirmed.
The Commissioner’s investigation focused on whether PRMC took
reasonable steps to protect personal information from misuse,
loss, unauthorised
access, modification or
disclosure.
After considering the facts of the case, submissions from PRMC and the
relevant provisions of the
(Cth) (Privacy Act), the
Commissioner came to the view that PRMC had breached the
to take reasonable steps to secure personal information it held.
25 November 2013, the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC)
was notified that there were boxes of unsecured
medical records at 16 Amberley
Park Drive, Narre Warren South (the site).
PRMC owns and controls the site, and previously operated a medical centre
there. PRMC advised that medical records created when PRMC
(then t/a Amberley
Park Medical Centre) was operating at the site were stored in a locked shed at
the back of the site.
On 23 November 2013, the shed was broken into and as a result the boxes of
medical records were compromised (data breach).
The categories of personal
information compromised in the data breach consisted of:
(a) patients’ ‘identifying
particulars’, specifically full name of patient, last address of the
patient, date of
birth, Medicare number and treatment details/progress notes
(b) a document completed by patients to include their name, date of birth,
country of birth, marital status, occupation, address
and phone number
(c) results of medical investigations, correspondence with other medical and
health practitioners, discharge summaries and other
documents from hospitals
(d) payments to medical practitioners
(e) staff pay records
(f) batched Medicare vouchers
(g) paid invoices, and
(h) accounts to third parties (such as WorkCover and the Victorian Transport
Accident Commission) for services to PRMC patients.
estimates there were paper based health records for approximately 960 patients
stored in the shed at the site, and therefore
that at least 960
individuals’ personal information was compromised in the data breach. This
figure does not account for individuals
other than PRMC patients whose personal
information was included in the documents described in paragraphs (c) to (h)
above (for example,
other medical and health practitioners, and officers at
third party organisations such as WorkCover).
PRMC clarified that the majority of the health records compromised related to
individuals who ceased to be active patients of the
medical practitioner who
conducted the practice prior to 2004.
Relevant provisions of the
From 21 December 2001 to
11 March 2014, organisations covered by the
were required to comply
with the ten National Privacy Principles (NPPs), contained in Schedule 3 of the
The NPPs were replaced by the
Australian Privacy Principles (APPs) on 12 March
The NPPs applied to the handling of ‘personal information’ which
defined as:
information or an opinion (including information or an opinion forming part
of a database), whether true or not, and whether recorded
in a material form or
not, about an individual whose identity is apparent, or can reasonably be
ascertained, from the information
or opinion.
Personal information includes ‘sensitive information’. The
’s definition of ‘sensitive information’ prior to
12 March 2014 included health information about an individual.
applies to all private sector organisations with an annual
turnover of more than $3 million and some small businesses. In particular,
applied and still applies to all private sector organisations that
provide a health service or hold health information about individuals
their employees.
PRMC is subject to
and was subject to the NPPs at the time of the data breach.
NPP 4 (Data security) was the
provision relevant to this data
breach. In particular:
NPP 4.1 required
organisations to take reasonable steps to protect the personal information they
hold from misuse and loss and from
unauthorised access, modification or
disclosure,
NPP 4.2 stated
that, if an organisation no longer needs personal information for any purpose
under NPP 2, then the organisation must
take reasonable steps to destroy or
permanently de-identify it.
Security of personal information (NPP 4.1)
assessing whether PRMC took reasonable steps to comply with NPP 4.1, the
Commissioner considered information from PRMC about the
security safeguards in
place prior to the data breach, and what steps would have been reasonable in the
circumstances to protect
the personal information held. This included
considering PRMC’s particular circumstances, such as:
the sensitivity
of the personal information it handled, and
impact in the event that the personal information was
compromised.
The Commissioner also had regard to the guidance set
out in the OAIC’s
Guide to information
Nature of personal information
sensitive information, such as health information, a higher level of privacy
protection than other personal information.
This is because inappropriate
handling of sensitive information can have particular impacts on the individuals
concerned. For example,
some kinds of sensitive information, such as health
information which identifies an individual’s medical condition:
may provide the
basis for discrimination or other forms of harm, and
mishandling of
this information may lead to humiliation or embarrassment, or undermine an
individual’s dignity.
As such, under NPP 4 it may have been
reasonable for an organisation to take additional steps to protect health
information than may
be required to protect other kinds of less sensitive
personal information. This is also the case under the current APP 11.
The personal information handled by PRMC includes ‘sensitive
information’ for the purposes of the
PRMC indicated that the personal information the subject of the data breach
did not relate to current patients. Personal information
that is not current or
that does not relate to current patients may still cause harm in the event that
it is compromised. Further,
the Commissioner noted the extensive personal
information contained in the medical records that were compromised, and
the seriousness of this data breach.
The Commissioner therefore found that more stringent steps were required of
PRMC to keep this information secure than may be required
of organisations that
do not handle sensitive information. The Commissioner therefore held that PRMC
failed to meet the requirement
to keep the sensitive
information it held secure.
Storage of records generally
PRMC advised the OAIC that since November 2004, PRMC
has computerised all patients’ health records, using software called
Director’. Paper-based consultation notes and selected
investigation results are now scanned and added to each patient’s
computerised health record. When PRMC operated at the site, scanned paper-based
records were stored in a locked room within the premises
where PRMC conducted
its medical practice on the site.
PRMC ceased operating the medical practice
at the site from 6 April 2011, and since this date has conducted its practice
premises. Initially, a representative from PRMC visited the site two to
three times a week and later once a week (for maintenance,
repairs and
renovations to prepare for the sale of the site). However PRMC believed that all
the paper-based health records stored
at the site were transferred to a locked
store at the new premises.
Storage of records in shed
In about October 2012,
PRMC advised the OAIC that patient health records were transferred from the
locked room inside the site to
the garden shed at the back of the site (so that
renovations for sale of the site could occur). PRMC advised that at that time it
did not recognise that the moved documents ‘included some health
The garden shed door was locked with three padlocks.
Conclusion on NPP 4.1
Physical security is an important part of ensuring
that personal information is not inappropriately accessed. In order to have
with NPP 4.1, organisations needed to consider what steps were
reasonable to ensure physical copies of personal information were
kept secure.
Reasonable steps may include:
monitoring the
movement of physical files
auditing (or stocktaking) the content of files, including when they are moved,
of the contents, and
any information that is no longer required can be securely disposed of or
de-identified, in accordance with NPP 4.2 (and currently
implementing
physical access controls, such as issuing a limited number of keys or passes to
areas in which the information is stored
monitoring and
guarding the location in which the information is stored, and
using a secure
means of storage, such as a safe, or a secure or locked room in monitored,
guarded or staffed premises.
Based on the information it provided,
PRMC did not take reasonable steps in relation to the compromised personal
information.
Further, the Commissioner did not consider there to be any circumstances in
which it would be reasonable to store health records,
or any sensitive
information, in a temporary structure such as a garden shed. As an exacerbating
factor, the shed was not located
at PRMC’s premises, which means that PRMC
was not in a position to effectively monitor access to the shed.
PRMC’s failure to take reasonable security steps was also exacerbated
by the fact that it did not identify or deal with health
records stored at the
site for a period of more than 2 years following the relocation.
A further issue was that the records PRMC did understand to be stored in the
shed also contained personal information (for example,
the personal information
of other medical and health practitioners, and officers at third party
organisations).
The Commissioner considered PRMC’s storage of health and other personal
information records in a garden shed, particularly at
premises it no longer
operated or staffed, to be a failure to take reasonable security steps as
required by NPP 4.1.
Continuing obligations under the APPs
The obligation to take reasonable security steps to
protect personal information formerly imposed under NPP 4.1 continues to apply
to PRMC under APP 11.1.
Secure destruction or de-identification of personal information (NPP 4.2)
Did PRMC take reasonable security steps to securely destroy or permanently
de-identify personal information it no longer required?
4.2 required organisations to take reasonable steps to destroy or permanently
de-identify personal information not being used
or disclosed for a permitted
purpose (in other words, where the personal information is no longer required).
To comply with this
obligation, an organisation must have had systems or
procedures in place to identify information the organisation no longer needed,
and a process for how the destruction or de-identification of the information
would occur.
PRMC advised that prior to the data breach it reviewed paper-based patient
health records every two years to identify:
whether the
complete paper record has been scanned into the patient’s computer record
(and if not, any remaining documents are
scanned to the computer record, and
then the paper based file is destroyed by secure shredding by PRMC’s
contractor), and
records which
are eligible to be destroyed in accordance with the
Health Records Act 2001
(Vic). Particularly, these records are reviewed for the last activity date,
and if eligible for destruction, recorded and placed in
a secure bin which is
collected by PRMC’s contractor for secure shredding.
PRMC confirmed that the last review of paper based records prior to the data
breach occurred in early 2011.
processes described above, where followed, may evidence that an organisation
takes reasonable steps to destroy or permanently
de-identify personal
information that is no longer required.
in order to
satisfy the requirements of NPP 4.2, ‘reasonable steps’ include both
procedures and adherence to those procedures.
PRMC did not demonstrate in this
instance that it had systems in place to identify all personal information that
was not being used
or disclosed for a permitted purpose. While the Commissioner
accepted that PRMC may have such procedures in place at its current
these procedures did not appear to have been applied to documents at the
previous site or when PRMC moved to its current
Commissioner
noted that PRMC advised that when:
(a) relocating its practice, and
(b) moving documents to the garden shed,
believed that
the relevant documents comprised information other than patient health records.
records such as
payments to medical practitioners, paid invoices and accounts to third parties
(which were also stored in the garden
shed) also contain personal information.
Accordingly, PRMC’s obligation to securely destroy or de-identify personal
information
that was no longer required would still have applied to the records
it knew were in the shed.
The Commissioner also noted PRMC’s
advice above that the majority of the records identified in the shed following
the data breach
related to patients who ceased to be active patients prior to
2004. The majority of records were therefore at least eleven years
also indicates a failure by PRMC to identify and securely destroy or de-identify
personal information that was no longer
being used or required.
For the reasons above, the Commissioner considered that prior to the data
breach PRMC failed to take reasonable steps to destroy or
permanently
de-identify personal information it held that was no longer in use or needed, in
contravention of NPP 4.2.
Continuing obligations under the APPs
The obligation formerly imposed under NPP 4.2 to
take reasonable steps to destroy or permanently de-identify personal information
it held that was no longer in use or needed continues to apply to PRMC under APP
Rectification
data breach, PRMC advised as follows:
PRMC moved all
documents that were previously stored in the garden shed to its new premises, in
a locked room within the main practice
area. The practice uses digital access
controls and is monitored by external provider security cameras.
PRMC developed a
data breach response process.
PRMC will now
review paper based patient health records annually to identify whether they may
be de-identified or securely destroyed.
Recommendations
investigation, the Commissioner also recommended that PRMC:
undertake a risk
assessment with respect to their records management and privacy practices
organise privacy
training for all staff at PRMC, including particularly partners, doctors and any
other health professionals working
PRMC’s data breach response plan to adequately reflect PRMC’s
obligations under the
and APPs, and to enable it to meet those
obligations in the event of a future data breach.
PRMC is now in the
process of implementing these recommendations.
PRMC did not notify the OAIC or the individuals
PRMC advised the OAIC that it analysed its position and
‘it was not
necessary to notify those individuals whose health records had been retrieved
from the shed’.
Notifying the OAIC and affected individuals as
appropriate can be a useful step in responding to a data
The Commissioner
encourages notification where there is a real risk of serious harm to affected
individuals, and particularly where
notification may assist individuals to
mitigate the potential misuse of their personal information by enabling them to
to protect themselves.
Commissioner found that PRMC:
failed to take
reasonable steps to ensure the security of the personal information that it
held, in contravention of NPP 4.1, and
failed to take
reasonable steps to destroy or permanently de-identify the personal information
it held in contravention of NPP 4.2.
PRMC is acting appropriately in
response to the data breach including by:
reviewing its
developing a
data breach response plan
training with all personnel (including partners, doctors and other health
professionals working at PRMC) to ensure their
understanding of privacy and
security policies of the practice, and their obligations under the
undertaking a
risk assessment regarding its management of personal information including
patient clinical records, and
implementing
measures to review paper based patient health records annually to identify
whether they may be de-identified or securely
intends to engage a specialist privacy consultant to undertake a further risk
assessment, help ensure adherence to privacy
policies and procedures, and
undertake periodic reviews of data security processes.
Based on the information from PRMC about its review and remediation of the
data breach and PRMC’s ongoing implementation of
recommendations made by
the OAIC, the Commissioner decided to close the investigation.
Acronyms and abbreviations
Commissioner
— Australian Privacy Commissioner
NPPs — National Privacy Principles (contained in Schedule 3 of the
OAIC — Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
As required under National
On 12 March 2014, the NPPs were
replaced by the Australian Privacy Principles:
http://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-resources/privacy-fact-sheets/other/privacy-fact-sheet-17-australian-privacy-principles.
http://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-act/australian-privacy-principles.
The definition of
‘sensitive information’ under the current
substantially similar to that which applied at the time of the data breach, and
still includes health information.
See APP 11.1 for current
applicable APP.
See APP 11.2 for current
applicable APP.
www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-resources/privacy-guides/guide-to-information-security.
http://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/applying-privacy-law/app-guidelines/chapter-11-app-11-security-of-personal-information.
http://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/applying-privacy-law/app-guidelines/chapter-11-app-11-security-of-personal-information.
Some individuals may have
been made aware of the breach via media coverage:
http://aca.ninemsn.com.au/article/8765315/doctors-dump-thousands-of-medical-documents.
An organisation's decision
to notify the OAIC on its own initiative is likely to be viewed by the public as
a positive action. It
demonstrates that the agency or organisation views the
protection of personal information as a serious matter, and may therefore
enhance client/public confidence in the organisation. Notifying affected
individuals can assist them to manage and mitigate the impact
of the breach in
some cases.
RTF format (193 KB)
Signed PDF/A format