S v Debt Collector [2010] PrivCmrA 22 (24 December 2010)
Case Citation:
S v Debt Collector
[2010] PrivCmrA 22
Subject Heading:
Listing of incorrect information about a payment default on an individual's
consumer credit information file.
Section 18E and 18G(a) of Part IIIA of the
paragraph 2.7 of the Credit Reporting Code of Conduct.
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner prior to 1
November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the powers of the Privacy
Commissioner under the
were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
An individual complained that a debt collector listed a payment default on
their consumer credit information file with a credit reporting
agency which did
not relate to them. After unsuccessfully attempting to resolve the matter with
the debt collector the complainant
complained to the Commissioner.
The credit reporting provisions at
safeguards in relation to consumer credit reporting.
If a payment in relation to consumer credit is outstanding, a credit provider
may record a payment default on the individual's consumer
credit file. A payment
default is permitted if:
the debt is at least 60 days overdue
(section 18E(1)(b)(vi))
the credit provider has taken steps to recover part or all of the amount
outstanding
(section 18E(1)(b)(vi))
in particular, the credit provider must have sent a written
notice to the last known address of the individual advising them of the
payment and requesting payment of the amount outstanding (paragraph 2.7 Credit
Reporting Code of Conduct)
the credit provider has notified the individual that it may provide
information to a credit reporting agency (section
18E(8)(c)).
Section 18G(a)
states that a credit
provider in possession or control of a credit file must take reasonable steps to
ensure that the personal information
contained in the credit file is accurate,
up-to-date, complete and not misleading.
The Commissioner conducted preliminary inquiries into the complaint under
In response to the inquiries, the debt collector stated that it had complied
with its obligations under
when initially listing
the default and had reasonable grounds for believing that the information was
correct. However, in investigating
the matter the debt collector also found
the default listing had been updated after the initial listing,
significantly increasing the amount of the default
the increased amount had been incorrectly referenced from an unrelated
The debt collector acknowledged it was in error and said
it wished to resolve the matter. The complainant provided evidence indicating
that the payment default had prevented them from attaining a significant loan
and had led to the loss of a deposit on a major asset.
The respondent agreed to
compensate the individual and remove the default.
Satisfied that the
respondent had adequately dealt with the matter, the Commissioner closed the
matter under
section 41(2)(a)
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
RTF format (136 KB)
Signed PDF/A format