SZQQA v Minister for Immigration & Anor [2013] FMCA 231 (5 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SZQQA v MINISTER FOR
IMMIGRATION & ANOR
[2013] FMCA 231
MIGRATION – Whether the Refugee Review
Tribunal failed to comply with
Migration Act 1958
relation to the content of its
letter – whether the Tribunal erred
in making a decision after the Applicant responded to the
before the expiration of the prescribed period for a response – whether
the Tribunal engaged in a process of reasoning
that was illogical, irrational
and not based on findings or inferences of fact supported by logical grounds.
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth), reg.4.35
NAFF of 2002 v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs and Another
[2004] HCA 62
M v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
(2006) 155 FCR 333
[2006] FCA 1247
Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship v SZMDS and Another
(2010) 240 CLR 611
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZOCT and Another
189 FCR 577
[2010] FCAFC 159
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v
SZGUR and Another
(2011) 241 CLR 594
[2011] HCA 1
Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs v Lat
(2006) 151 FCR
214; [2006] FCAFC 61
MZXKH v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2007] FCA 663
MZYFH v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship and
(2010) 188 FCR 151
[2010] FCA 559
Nader v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
(2000) 101 FCR 352
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte
Applicant S20/2002
(2003) 77 ALJR 1165
[2003] HCA 30
Review Tribunal and Another; Ex parte Aala
(2000) 204 CLR 82
SAAP and Another v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs and Another
(2005) 228 CLR 294
[2005] HCA 24
v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
(2007) 81 ALJR 1190
SZCIJ v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
SZEOP v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
SZEXZ v Minister for Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous
[2006] FCA 449
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v
SZIZO and Others
(2009) 238 CLR 627
[2009] HCA 37
SZLPO v Minister
for Immigration and Citizenship (No 2)
(2009) 177 FCR 29
[2009] FCAFC
SZLWQ v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship and Another
172 FCR 452
[2008] FCA 1406
SZMKR v Minister for Immigration &
Citizenship
[2010] FCA 340
SZMTJ v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship and Another (No 2)
(2009) 109 ALD 242
SZOOR v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship and Another
(2012) 202 FCR 1
[2012] FCAFC 58
Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship v SZQOY and Another
(2012) 206 FCR 25
[2012] FCAFC 131
First Respondent:
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP
Second Respondent:
REFUGEE REVIEW TRIBUNAL
File Number:
SYG 2043 of 2011
Judgment of:
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Counsel for the Respondents:
Mr H P T Bevan
Solicitors for the Respondents:
Minter Ellison
(1) A writ in the nature of certiorari issue directed to
the second respondent, quashing the decision of the second respondent made
17 August 2011 in Tribunal case number 1101745.
(2) A writ in the nature of mandamus issue directed to the second respondent,
requiring the second respondent to determine according
to law the application
for review of the decision of the delegate of the first respondent made on
14 February 2011.
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYG 2043 of 2011
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
REFUGEE REVIEW TRIBUNAL
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
is an application for review of a decision of the Refugee Review Tribunal dated
17 August 2011 affirming a decision of a delegate
of the First Respondent
not to grant the Applicant a protection visa. The Applicant sought review by
application filed in this Court
on 12 September 2011.
Applicant is a citizen of India who arrived in Australia on 15 September
2010. He applied for a protection visa in October 2010.
In his protection visa
application he made claims for protection arising from the alleged murder of his
brother in 1991. He claimed
that his brother’s murder case, which was
pending in the court of law
” in India, would
atrocities and human rights abuses
” by the Communist
Party of India (Marxist) (CPI(M)) which was in power in his home state. He
claimed to fear that if he returned
to India he would be killed or otherwise
harmed by “
CPI(M) party
authorities
other fundamental groups
CPI(M) party hooligans and Kerala state police try to kill
to destroy witness
” of his brother’s case. He also claimed
generally to be the subject of criminal investigation because of “
6 January 2011 the Applicant attended an interview with a Departmental
delegate. He claimed he witnessed the 1991 incident in
which his older brother
was shot and killed by the police and that thereafter “
he was attacked
by several men on numerous occasions
” because “
unwilling to withdraw the pending court case regarding his brothers
”. He believed these men were “
either members of the
police or CPI(M) ‘gundas’
Applicant’s evidence was that he left India in June 1999 and worked in
Dubai until February 2010, but returned to India
on six occasions during this
period. He claimed that in 2003, 2005, 2008 and 2009 he was assaulted in India.
In addition he claimed
that in 2010, after an event on the anniversary of his
brother’s death attended by 200 to 300 people, he was coerced by police
sign a blank piece of paper. He claimed to fear for his life.
1 February 2011 the Applicant wrote to the Department reiterating his
claims. He advised that he was still waiting for court documents
from India.
He claimed that he believed his brother’s case was “
” but that:
hard for me to produce all the court summons and notices, which is previously
coming to my mother’s name and uaslly
my mother collect this
document by post and submitted to lawyer and my mother is not educated and she
was unable to understand all
these documents.
Applicant also claimed that:
remembrance my mother did not receive all these court notices for the last five
years and she did not attend the court hearing.
Applicant claimed not only that the “
Communist Party take political
revenge against my brother case
” but also that the “
party took political advantage and economic advantage in my brother’s
”. He provided a number of documents in support of his
application, including copies of his marriage certificate, baptism certificates
of his wife and children and medical certificates.
14 February 2011 the Applicant submitted further documents, including a
letter dated 8 February 2011 from a Dr A. Jahangeer (who
himself as an advocate and district notary) which addressed the
present conditions
” of pending court cases, in particular a
1991 case in which the Applicant was said to be one of over 20
” (sic). The letter advised that following a 1991
mob attack in which a civilian
[the Applicant’s brother]
and a Police Officer ... died
”, the police had registered two
cases. It was claimed that thereafter “
several cases
been registered implicating
innocent peoples of the locality along
with the brothers and relatives of
which had been pending since 2002.
14 February 2011 the Applicant was notified that a delegate of the First
Respondent had refused the Applicant’s application
for a protection visa.
The Applicant sought review by the Tribunal on 24 February 2011.
Applicant provided the Tribunal with a statutory declaration dated 10 May
2011 addressing issues raised by the delegate’s
decision. He
provided copies of press reports about the incident in which his older brother
and a policeman were killed.
Applicant attended a Tribunal hearing on 13 May 2011. A transcript of the
Tribunal hearing is in evidence as an Annexure to the
affidavit of Nicole Maree
Mackay sworn on 29 August 2012. In addition, in evidence before the Court
is a transcript of the hearing
before the differently constituted Tribunal of
26 August 2009 in relation to a protection visa application made by a
younger brother
of the Applicant.
had been foreshadowed in the Tribunal hearing, on 13 May 2011 the
Tribunal wrote to the Applicant under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) (the Act) inviting him to comment on or respond to certain information
by 30 May 2011. The Applicant provided a handwritten
response on
30 May 2011, sought and was given additional time to respond and provided a
further letter with supporting documentation
on 20 June 2011.
4 August 2011 the Tribunal wrote again to the Applicant. It asked him to
disregard the letter of 13 May 2011 and gave him a further
to comment on or respond to exactly the same information. This was done on the
basis that the date for response specified
in the letter of 13 May
2011 did not reflect the correct prescribed period.
essence, the information put to the Applicant related to inconsistencies between
his written claims, oral evidence and supporting
documents as discussed further
his response of 15 August 2011 the Applicant sought to rely on his earlier
responses. He also provided what was said to be a copy
of a court order from an
Indian Magistrates Court dated 28 March 2011 in relation to a petition
against the police brought by a person
with the same surname as the Applicant
seeking details of pending cases in which people (including the Applicant) had
been accused
in relation to the 1991 mob attack. The document stated that on
28 March 2010 (sic) the court decided that it was “
not allowed to
” the petition “[d]
ue to various security
The Tribunal Decision
17 August 2011 the Tribunal affirmed the decision of the delegate not to
grant the Applicant a protection visa. In its reasons
for decision the Tribunal
described in detail the claims made by the Applicant in connection with his
protection visa application,
his written and oral claims to the Department, the
documentary evidence he provided and his written and oral evidence to the
including his response to the
its findings and reasons the Tribunal characterised the Applicant’s claims
as based on the Refugee Convention grounds of
political opinion and membership
of a particular social group. It summarised his claim as a claim that his older
brother was shot
by the police during violent clashes involving the (Communist
party-led) Left Democratic Front and the (Congress-led) United Democratic
in Kerala in 1991 and that he witnessed the entire incident. It recorded
that he claimed that his “
family subsequently registered a
‘murder case’ before the courts in Kerala that could potentially
expose human rights
abuses and atrocities committed by the police and the
”. The Tribunal also recorded that the Applicant claimed that
as a key witness to the incident he had been “
assaulted, threatened,
and forced to sign a blank piece of paper by the police
e and his brothers ha
been implicated in a false criminal
”, and that he feared he would be “
killed by CPI(M)
‘goondas’ or arrested and imprisoned by the
authorities
the Tribunal did not find the Applicant to be a reliable, credible and truthful
witness. It had regard to inconsistencies
between the evidence he gave to the
Department and to the Tribunal, inconsistencies between his evidence and
evidence from other
sources, the implausibility of significant aspects of his
claims and other reasons which it detailed.
the Tribunal set out its concerns about inconsistencies between the
Applicant’s evidence and that of his younger brother
to the Tribunal
(differently constituted) in relation to the Applicant’s location and role
at the time his older brother was
killed. It recorded that in his witness
statement, interview with the delegate and at the Tribunal hearing, the
Applicant had claimed
that the police and the CPI(M) “
to eliminate him as a witness in his brother’s murder case
In his interview and at the Tribunal hearing the Applicant had “
claimed that he was the only member of his family who had witnessed the murder
brother and had come to his aid after he was
”. However the Tribunal had regard to the fact that in his oral
evidence to the Tribunal in 2009 the Applicant’s younger
brother had
stated that he “
was the eyewitness to his brother’s case
and that he was being pursued by the Kerala police and the CPI(M) for that
”. The Tribunal observed that the younger brother had
made no mention of any other member of the family being present at
that time to witness the incident
” or of any other family member being
pursued by the authorities. It also had regard to the fact that the younger
brother had
provided a letter from a parish priest, Father Joseph Maria, in
support of his review application. That letter was said to confirm
younger brother was the eyewitness to the murder of his brother. The Tribunal
stated that it did not contain any other
information to indicate “
tentatively, that any other member of the family had witnessed the
Tribunal had regard to the fact that the Applicant had “
specifically address
the inconsistencies between his and his younger
brother’s evidence in his response to the
although at the Tribunal hearing he had stated that his younger brother
may have also been watching the
The Tribunal found that this explanation was unsatisfactory. It was of the view
that if the Applicant’s younger brother
had also witnessed the incident
and if he had been pursued by the authorities for nearly two decades
(culminating in his application
for protection on that basis), it was
highly unlikely that the applicant would have been unaware of his
[younger brother’s]
circumstances
”. Alternatively, the
Tribunal was of the view that “
if the applicant had witnessed the
incident causing him numerous serious difficulties as claimed, his younger
brother would not have
omitted any references to
[the Applicant’s]
role or what he claim
to have witnessed
Tribunal addressed the Applicant’s evidence about Fr Joseph Maria’s
letter of support for his younger brother. While
the Applicant claimed that he
had also submitted a letter from Fr Joseph Maria, there was no such letter
before the Tribunal. The
Tribunal found, in any event, that “
Applicant was the only eyewitness to the incident it
s unclear why
Father Maria had given evidence
[for the younger brother]
stating that
[the younger brother]
was the witness
Tribunal was of the view that the information provided to the Tribunal by the
Applicant’s younger brother, including the
information in the
priest’s letter, “
serious doubt on the
applicant’s key claim that he was the only eyewitness to
murder and that he did not know if any other member of the
family had witnessed the incident
”. The Tribunal did “
accept these claims or the claim that he
s wanted or was targeted by
the authorities, CPI(M), CPI(M) ‘goondas’ or anyone because they
wanted or want to eliminate
him as a witness
the Tribunal was of the view that the Applicant had provided
inconsistent and unconvincing evidence in relation to the nature of
police and the authorities’ interest in
”. It had regard to the fact that while the letter from
Dr Jahangeer referred to cases allegedly pending from 1991, 2002 and
involving the Applicant and other “
either in his application for a protection visa nor in his
interview with the delegate
the applicant made any mention of
having been named as an accused or having been the subject of a police search
nor a court case brought
Tribunal considered the Applicant’s explanation at the hearing and in
response to the
letter to the effect that he only realised he was named
as an accused in relation to the death of the policeman killed in the 1991
clashes after he received Dr Jahangeer’s letter. However the
Tribunal found that the Applicant’s explanations were unsatisfactory.
was of the view that if, as the “
court order
a number of cases were filed against the applicant in 1991, 2002 and
2006, with most cases as ‘long pending warrants’
since 2002 and
the police had continuously searched for the accused, meaning the
applicant and his brothers, in connection with these matters, it
highly unlikely that the applicant had been left completely unaware of any cases
against him over the course of a number of years
”. The Tribunal
observed that, apart from referring to the “
sensitivity
his older brother’s case, the Applicant had provided no reason for such
secrecy that over two decades neither he
nor any other member of his family had
become aware of cases in which he was an “
Tribunal observed that the document described as a “
” dated 28 March 2011 “
information as to what security reasons had prevented the court from issuing
details of the pending cases
” in relation to which long pending
warrants had already been issued. The Tribunal found that if such warrants had
been issued
it was highly unlikely that the Applicant was not aware of these
warrants or the cases against him before February 2011. It also
found that if
no other documents, petitions or official information regarding the pending
warrants and the claimed cases had ever
been released, it was
” that a decision had been made to release the court
order dated 28 March 2011. The Tribunal also expressed concern about the
fact that there was no explanation for the Applicant’s delay in producing
the court order, other than his claim that his lawyer
did not give it to him at
the time. In addition, the Tribunal observed that it was
” that the court order purportedly issued and signed by a
named magistrate featured words and sentences containing particular
grammatical and spelling errors,
identical to those featured in
Mr Jahangeer’s letter of 8 February 2011
Tribunal was of the view that “
these features cast doubt on the
genuineness of both documents
Furthermore,
the Tribunal was of the view that the Applicant had been unable to establish
persuasively the high degree of sensitivity
he claimed surrounded his
brother’s murder case. It observed that details of the 1991 incident had
been published in a national
newspaper and that information about the incident
underlying the case was publicly available. In view of the available
information
in relation to the incident, the Tribunal found it “
unlikely that the matter was treated with such a degree of secrecy or
sensitivity that the applicant and members of his family
never came into
possession of a single document as evidence that a case was lodged in relation
[his brother’s]
death and/or that the case
pending after 20 years
”. The Tribunal found that the
Applicant’s evidence in this regard was unconvincing.
Tribunal addressed the Applicant’s explanation that inconsistencies in his
evidence were because of his “
memory problems
” and his claim
that he was “
undergoing treatment
”. The Tribunal considered
letters from a general practitioner stating that the Applicant was suffering
from depression, anxiety,
memory problem
”. However, it
had regard to the fact that there was no further information or detail about the
Applicant’s condition
or whether and how any diagnosis was made or
how his state of depression and anxiety may have resulted in the
provision of inconsistent information over the course of many months
It was also said to be “
unclear how memory problems relat
the particular problems identified in the applicant’s evidence with regard
to the claimed charges against him
”. The Tribunal also had regard to
the fact that “
while the applicant
provided contradictory
evidence, he
[had] not appear[ed]
to be incoherent or unable to respond
to the Tribunal’s questions in a clear manner
”. The Tribunal
was not satisfied that the medical evidence addressed its concerns or explained
the identified problems in
the Applicant’s evidence. Rather, the Tribunal
was of the view that the Applicant’s evidence in relation to the cases
and/or the charges said to be pending against him was fabricated. It did not
accept that the Applicant had been charged with any
offences or that any cases
were pending against him or his brothers.
the Tribunal found that “
the applicant’s evidence in relation to
the lawyer representing him and/or his brother’s case in India was
inconsistent
and unconvincing
”. The Tribunal stated:
submission of 1 February 2011, the applicant claimed that he was awaiting
court documents relating to his brother’s
case, which is pending. He
claimed that it would be very hard for him to produce all the court documents as
these documents are
by his uneducated mother who
them to the lawyer. In his interview with the delegate he
stated that he was unable to obtain any documents relating to the case
these documents were
by the Congress, which was not prepared to
release them. In his interview with the delegate he also stated that the lawyer
to his brother’s case is a Congress lawyer by the name of
Jahangeer who had said that it would be difficult to reopen the case.
contrast, at the hearing he claimed that he was under the impression that
Mr Jahangeer was a Congress lawyer, but he has found
out that he is not.
Rather, he was a former teacher of his wife and his brother and had taken an
interest in the case because he
is a former teacher of the applicant’s
wife and the applicant’s brother. He was asked why he had told the
delegate that
the family were assigned a Congress lawyer. He said when he asked
his wife why they were unable to obtain the documents his wife
told him that the
case was a sensitive issue. They have worked and suffered for the party and the
party has now turned its back
on them. In his response to the Tribunal’
, the applicant essentially repeated his evidence at the hearing, claiming
that until before he received the letter from Mr Jahangeer,
he thought this
person was a ‘party advocate’ , because he also handled ‘party
cases’. After his wife ‘sought
‘realised’ that he was her and the applicant’s brother’s
teacher and she told
the applicant that Mr Jahangeer was not a ‘party
advocate’. The Tribunal finds the Applicant’s explanations
unconvincing.
If Mr Jahangeer was an old acquaintance of his wife and had
taken an interest in the case, it is odd that the applicant not only
was unaware
of this, but also harboured the assumption that Mr Jahangeer was a Congress
lawyer. Alternatively, it is unclear on
what basis the applicant had held the
strong belief that Mr Jahangeer was a Congress lawyer, why he had persisted
at the interview
that Congress, and by extension Mr Jahangeer, were
unwilling to release any documents in relation to his brother’s case, and
why the nature of his relationship to the family was unknown to him.
Tribunal had regard to the fact that in response to the
Applicant had claimed, “
for the first time that he had experienced
communication difficulties with his representative as they
different languages
” and that in the submission of 1 February
his representative had misrepresented his claims ... in relation
to the manner in which court documents had been received and handled
However the Tribunal observed that the “
applicant had never previously
raised any communication problems
”. It found that it did
not appear that communication difficulties had resulted in
misrepresentation of any other aspect of the applicant’s
addition, the Tribunal had regard to the fact that “[t]
applicant’s evidence in relation to who is in possession of the documents
in relation to
[his deceased brother’s]
case was also inconsistent
[his younger brother’s]
evidence to the Tribunal, differently
constituted, to the effect that the documents were in possession of the
”. The Tribunal found that this inconsistency had not been
specifically addressed by the Applicant in his response to the
on these concerns, the Tribunal was “
of the view that the
applicant’s evidence in relation to court documents and the nature of the
legal representation he and his
fabrication
”. It found that his explanations were “
attempts at
patching up significant gaps in his evidence
did not accept the Applicant’s evidence in this regard.
the Tribunal found that the Applicant had “
provided contradictory and
unconvincing evidence in relation
his political activities and the
attitude towards his
, his family
and his brother’s case
”. The Tribunal set out in detail
inconsistencies in the Applicant’s evidence to the Department and at the
Tribunal hearing
Congress Party (in particular in relation to whether he organised meetings
communicated party instructions or merely participated in meetings and provided
financial assistance). The Tribunal found it
apparent that at the Tribunal
hearing the Applicant “
had added to and expanded upon his political
activities in India
Tribunal had regard to the Applicant’s claim in response to the
letter that, “
despite experiencing difficulties, he had
most of his time for party activities
”, but found that his claim to be
an active and dedicated member of Congress sat “
at odds with
claims throughout the process that the family had been
by Congress, the Congress took political advantage of his brother’s
had done nothing to help progressing the case or
defending the family
”, and that instead it had
misappropriated funds raised in memory of his brother, entered some
form of alliance with the CPI(M) at the national level
”, collaborated
with the CPI(M) to jeopardise and stop the case from progressing, told him
not to enter a conflict with the CPI(M)
now against his family and want
him to leave the
Tribunal found it “
difficult to accept that if the applicant had felt
deeply betrayed by the Congress
and considered the party to have
tarnished and turned against his family
”, he would nonetheless have
most of his time to party activities
While it acknowledged the Applicant’s oral evidence that he did not want
to go against or fight the Congress Party,
the Tribunal was of the view that in
such circumstances the Applicant “
did not have to devote most of his
time to party activities and providing Congress with financial
the Tribunal found that, as it had put to the Applicant at the hearing, he had
not provided a persuasive explanation as to
why the Congress Party did not want
his brother’s case to progress. It noted that his family was said to
support the Congress
Party, that he claimed to have devoted most of his life to
the party and that the party was likely to benefit electorally from the
as the Applicant claimed, it was likely to “
CPI(M). The Tribunal found that the Applicant had not offered any convincing
reason why the Congress Party had taken
a hostile or uncooperative attitude
towards him and/or his brother’s murder case.
Tribunal found that the Applicant’s evidence regarding his political
activities and the Congress Party’s attitude
towards him, his family, and
his deceased brother’s case was unconvincing. It did not accept his
evidence in this regard.
all of these reasons, the Tribunal did not find the Applicant to be a credible,
truthful and reliable witness. It found that
he totality of his
evidence show
propensity to fabricate, shift, and tailor
evidence in a manner which achieved
[the Applicant’s]
”. The Tribunal was of the view that the Applicant had
manufactured his claims and concocted evidence to achieve an
immigration outcome
”. It rejected the Applicant’s claims that
the deficiencies in his evidence were due to his mental health. It was
not satisfied that the applicant’s state of health
affected his ability to give evidence in any way that could satisfactorily
explain, wholly or partly, the width and breadth of the
concerns regarding his credibility
Tribunal then stated that it had considered the documents and photographs
submitted by the Applicant in support of his case.
It found that for the
reasons it had outlined and “
given the fundamental lack of credibility
[the Applicant’s]
” it did not give any
weight to any of the documents the Applicant had provided in support of his
Tribunal was prepared to accept that the Applicant’s older brother had
been shot dead by the police during violent political
clashes in 1991 and
that this tragedy had deeply affected the Applicant and his family. However it
did not accept any of the Applicant’s
other claims, being of the view that
he had relied on his brother’s death to achieve an immigration outcome.
Thus, the Tribunal
did not accept that the Applicant was an eyewitness to the
shooting death of his brother, that a case in relation to his brother
lodged or was still pending in the courts in Kerala, or that the
Applicant’s brother’s death was regarded as
a sensitive matter,
politically or otherwise. Nor did the Tribunal accept that the Applicant was
ever targeted, attacked, assaulted,
injured, threatened, or otherwise harmed by
anyone in connection with his older brother’s death or his claimed role in
incident. It did “
not accept that he was ever charged with any
offence, that cases ha
been filed or
re pending against
him, that he ha
been investigated in the past or that the police were
or are looking for him
”. The Tribunal did not accept that the
Applicant “
was arrested, detained, mistreated, or forced to sign a
blank piece of paper in 2010
”, that he had been “
subjected to
interrogation and physical attacks by the police in the past
ever targeted by CPI(M) officials, members and supporters
did the Tribunal accept that the Applicant was an active member or supporter of
any political party in India or that he was regarded
adversely by any political
party, including the CPI(M) and the Congress Party. It did not accept he would
be targeted or killed
political revenge party groups, Hindu
fanatical groups or the authorities
”, or that he faced
political pressure and life threatening problems in India
view of the Tribunal’s findings in relation to the Applicant’s
political profile and activities and having regard to
the particular
circumstances which led to his older brother’s death in 1991, the Tribunal
did not accept that those circumstances
gave rise to a real chance the Applicant
would face persecution for a Convention reason, now or in the reasonably
foreseeable future.
It was not satisfied that his fear of persecution was
well-founded and found that he was not a refugee.
This application
are four grounds in the further amended application.
explained below, the Applicant ultimately raised a considerable number of
issues. For the reasons given I have found jurisdictional
error in one respect
such as to warrant the relief sought by the Applicant. However, I have also
considered all the other bases
on which jurisdictional error was alleged.
is convenient to consider first the two grounds that relate to the content of
the Tribunal’
letters. These grounds were addressed together in
submissions.
The content of the
two and three in the further amended application were addressed together in
submissions. They are as follows:
Tribunal fell into jurisdictional error in not complying with the requirement
under paragraph 424A (1)(a) of the Act to give
“clear particulars”
of the information that the Tribunal considered would be the reason, or a part
of the reason, for
affirming the decision that was under review.
Tribunal fell into jurisdictional error in not complying with the requirement in
paragraph 424A(1)(b) of the Act that it ensure
as far as is reasonably
practicable the applicant understood the relevance of information, the
particulars of which it purported
to give the applicant in its letters dated
13 May 2011 and 4 August 2011.
light of the lack of specificity in these grounds and matters raised at the
hearing the parties were given the opportunity to make
post-hearing submissions
to clarify and address the precise basis on which it was contended that the
Tribunal had failed to comply
of the Act. I have had regard to all
the submissions.
Migration Act
is relevantly as follows:
(1) Subject
to subsections (2A) and (3), the Tribunal must:
(a) give to
the applicant, in the way that the Tribunal considers appropriate in the
circumstances, clear particulars of any information
that the Tribunal considers
would be the reason, or a part of the reason, for affirming the decision that is
under review; and
(b) ensure,
as far as is reasonably practicable, that the applicant understands why it is
relevant to the review, and the consequences
of it being relied on in affirming
the decision that is under review; and
the applicant to comment on or respond to it.
section does not apply to information:
that is not specifically about the applicant or another person and is just about
a class of persons of which the applicant or
other person is a member; or
that the applicant gave for the purpose of the application for review; or
that the applicant gave during the process that led to the decision that is
under review, other than such information that
was provided orally by the
applicant to the Department; or
that is non-disclosable information.
set out above, the Tribunal wrote to the Applicant under
of the Act on
13 May 2011 and the Applicant responded on 30 May 2011 and on
20 June 2011. However, on 4 August 2011 the Tribunal
again wrote to
the Applicant by letter delivered to him by hand, advising that he should
disregard the letter of 13 May 2011 (which
did not give him the time
for response required under the Act) and putting to him the identical
information and explanation of its
relevance that had been provided in the
earlier letter and a further opportunity to respond or give comments in writing
by 18 August
letter contains six numbered paragraphs (referred to below as Particulars
1 to 6) said to consist of particulars of information the
Tribunal considered
would, subject to the Applicant’s comments or response, be the reason or
part of the reason for affirming
the decision under review.
indicated, grounds two and three in the further amended application are
generally expressed and do not particularise the manner
or extent to which it is
contended that the Tribunal failed to give clear particulars or failed to
ensure, as far as reasonably practicable,
that the Applicant understood the
relevance of information. In pre-hearing written submissions, counsel for the
Applicant appeared
to concede that inconsistencies between what the Applicant
had said at the Tribunal hearing and what he said in other written statements
submitted to the Tribunal or to the Department would fall within the exception
obligation in paragraphs 424A(3)(b) and (ba) of the Act, but
pointed out that such exceptions did not extend to information provided
by the Applicant to the Department. It was submitted that the information in
Particulars 1, 2, 4 and 5 in the
letter was, in whole or in part,
required to be given to the Applicant under
of the Act. However the
only aspects of the
letter addressed in any detail in the
Applicant’s pre-hearing submissions were Particulars 2 and 4 of the
pre-hearing written submissions in response, the First Respondent referred to
the absence of particulars in the further amended
application, but addressed
Particulars 2 and 4 in the
letter as these had been specifically referred
to in the Applicant’s pre-hearing submissions.
at the hearing, when asked about the extent of the matters intended to be raised
in grounds two and three in the further amended
application, counsel for the
Applicant took issue with the whole of the invitation to comment on or respond
to information. He sought
” his earlier apparent
concession that the information in Particular 3 of the letter was not subject to
the obligation in
of the Act. At the same time, the Applicant
conceded that, contrary to the earlier submission, paragraphs 1 and 5 of the
letter did not disclose information that had to be given to the Applicant
of the Act. There was no suggestion at any time that the
information in Particular 6 (in relation to a medical certificate provided
by the Applicant in connection with his protection visa application) had to be
put to the Applicant for comment, as it was accepted
that it was within the
s.424A(3)(ba)
was nonetheless said that the Court should have regard generally to Particulars
1, 5 and 6 on the basis that it was necessary to
letter as a
whole in determining whether the Tribunal had failed to give “
particulars
”. The Applicant submitted that the Court should look at
the objective effect of the invitation “
read in its entirety
SZMTJ v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship and Another (No 2)
(2009) 109 ALD 242
[2009] FCA 486
per Flick J).
have considered all the issues that were ultimately raised by the Applicant in
relation to the whole of the Tribunal’
Particular 1
Particular 1
in the letters of both 13 May 2011 and 4 August 2011 is as
application for a protection visa, you claim that your brother’s
‘murder case’ is pending before the courts
in Kerala. You claimed
that the case will expose human rights abuses and atrocities committed by the
State’s ruling party,
the Communist Party of India (Marxist) (CPI(M)). If
the court were to rule in your family’s favour, CPI(M) will take revenge
against you and your family. You claim that if you were to return to India, you
will be killed by CPI(M) ‘goondas’ or
arrested and imprisoned by the
authorities.
In a written statement submitted to
the Department of Immigration and Citizenship (the Department) on
1 February 2011, you claimed
that your family holds a memorial service for
your brother every year and they use the occasion to ‘expose all the
parties’ and that the CPI(M) will take revenge because of your
brother’s case.
At your interview with the Department, you claimed that whenever you went
to the court you were told that the court would be unable
to open the case
because the CPI(M) is in power and that the accusations made in the case are not
good for the party and the government.
While you claim that you were not
assisted by the Indian National Congress (the Congress) in progressing your
brother’s case,
you stated that the Congress had assigned a lawyer to your
case and wanted to pursue and settle the matter. At no point you claimed
you were told by Congress not to enter into a conflict with the CPI(M) and that
the Congress is now against your family. These
claims, however, were made for
the first time in your submission in support of your application for review,
dated 10 May 2011, and
at the Tribunal hearing held on 13 May 2011.
The information you provided to the Department orally is relevant because,
on the basis of shifts and changes in your evidence as
presented at various
stages to the Department and to the Tribunal, including the inconsistencies
between your evidence to the Department
and your evidence at the review stage,
the Tribunal may disbelieve your claims and find that you have not been truthful
and/or credible.
essence, Particular 1 put to the Applicant the particulars of evidence he had
provided at the Departmental interview about his
older brother’s murder
case and the attitude of the Congress Party and the CPI(M) and inconsistencies
between that evidence
and his written claims made to the Department and the
Tribunal as well as his oral claims at the Tribunal hearing.
counsel for the Applicant acknowledged, the only aspect of this evidence not
clearly within the exceptions in
of the Act would be the oral evidence
given at the Departmental interview. Moreover, counsel for the Applicant
accepted that not
all of the information the Tribunal put to the Applicant in
letter was in fact “
information
” as that term has
been interpreted in
SZBYR v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
(2007) 81 ALJR 1190
[2007] HCA 26
per Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ. As their Honours stated in that case the
concept of “
information
” refers to the “
existence of
evidentiary material or documentation, not the existence of doubts,
inconsistencies or the absence of evidence
Tribunal’s disbelief
(at [18]). Counsel for the Applicant
acknowledged that this would suggest that insofar as it related to
inconsistencies in the Applicant’s
evidence Particular 1 did not
disclose information that had to be put to the Applicant under
Act. His submissions thereafter proceeded on this basis.
this concession, the Applicant submitted that it did not follow that
deficiencies
” in Particular 1 (or, as discussed below,
Particulars 5 and 6) of the
letter or any other deficiency relating
read as a whole
” could not
” to a conclusion that jurisdictional error had
been committed due to a failure to give “
clear particulars
It was submitted that there was “
a general lack of clarity
in the particulars of information (including information not subject to the
obligation) in the
note first that insofar as the Applicant conceded that the matters in
Particular 1 did not constitute “
information
to be put to the Applicant for comment under
of the Act, as pointed
out by French CJ and Kiefel J in
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v
SZGUR and Another
(2011) 241 CLR 594
[2011] HCA 1
it is open to the
Tribunal in the exercise of its discretion to invite an Applicant “
make supplementary submissions in relation to apparent inconsistencies,
contradictions or weaknesses in his other case which have
been identified by the
”. However the Tribunal does not fall into jurisdictional
error merely by putting additional matters to the Applicant beyond
those subject
obligation.
Applicant submitted that Particular 1 lacked clarity in that it was not
clear what information was actually being put to the Applicant
for comment. It
was contended that it was not until the second last sentence of the third
paragraph that what was in issue emerged.
Flick J stated in
SZMTJ v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship and
Another (No 2)
, the Court should look at the objective effect of a
invitation read in its entirety. However what is required under
s.424A(1)(a)
the Act is that the Tribunal give “
clear particulars of any information
that the Tribunal considers would be the reason, or a part of the reason, for
affirming the decision
that is under review
to the Applicant’s contention, the Tribunal’s recital of aspects of
the Applicant’s evidence at various
times about his older brother’s
court case and the attitude of political parties and its subsequent explanation
of the relevance
of shifts and changes and inconsistencies in the
Applicant’s evidence is not so lacking in clarity as to in some way
” the clarity of the provision of particulars of
information within
of the Act in other parts of the
Insofar as the information in Particular 1 was relevant to an adverse
credibility finding, that was clearly set out. Reading
letter as a
whole there could be no uncertainty that this part of the letter was inviting
the Applicant to respond to the issues
raised in Particular 1 (about shifts
and changes and inconsistencies in his evidence) because such matters (together
with other matters
raised, some of which were subject to the
obligation) could lead the Tribunal to disbelieve the Applicant’s claims
and hence affirm the delegate’s decision (
Particular 1
letter in its entirety made it clear that the Applicant was
invited to comment on the matters set out because the Tribunal was questioning
his credibility. There was no lack of clarity in Particular 1 such as to
give rise to uncertainty as to what was being sought in
the letter as a whole
may be circumstances in which a
letter read in its entirety does not give
clear particulars. This is not such a case. The letter did not simply set out
of particulars of information and then a general concluding statement as
to the relevance of all the information in such a way that
a lack of clarity in
matters that did not constitute information within
could be said to
contribute to a failure to give clear particulars of information required to be
put to the Applicant under
Rather, in each paragraph the Tribunal
sought to provide a separate explanation in relation to the
particulars
” of the information in question.
error in the manner contended for in ground two or ground three is not
established, or contributed to, by the manner
in which Particular 1 is
expressed in the
Particular 2
letters was as follows:
statement of 1 February 2011 you claimed that your life is at risk because
CPI(M) and Kerala Police want to eliminate you
as a witness in your
brother’s murder case. In your interview with the delegate and at the
hearing before the Tribunal, you
made similar claims. Both at your interview
and at the hearing, you also claimed that you were the only member of your
had witnessed the murder of your brother and had come to his aid
after he was shot.
Your younger brother
arrived in Australia on 6 April 2009 and applied for a protection
visa. In his oral evidence to the Tribunal, differently constituted,
that he was the eyewitness to your brother’s case and that he was being
pursued by the Kerala Police and CPI(M) for
that reason. Mr
made no mention of any other member of the family being present at
that time to witness the incident or to have been pursued by the
authorities.
[younger brother]
provided a letter from Father Joseph Maria,
parish priest, in support of his application for review in the letter, which was
12 August 2009. Father Maria confirmed that Mr
[younger brother]
was the eye witness to the murder of your brother. There was no other
information in the letter to indicate, even tentatively, that
any other member
of the family had witnessed the shooting.
The information provided to the Tribunal by your brother in relation to
his case, including the information contained in Father Maria’s
relevant because on the basis of this information, the Tribunal may disbelieve
your claims to the effect that you were
the only eyewitness to
murder and that you did not know if any other member of your
family had witnessed the incident. This information and your oral evidence
the Department are also relevant because they may lead the Tribunal to
disbelieve your claims in relation to being wanted or targeted
authorities, CPI(M), CPI(M) ‘goondas’ or anyone else and find that
you have not been truthful and/or credible.
Applicant submitted that Particular 2 in the
letter failed to give
clear particulars
” of the evidence of his younger
brother to the Tribunal (differently constituted) or of the information in the
letter of support
for his younger brother from Fr Joseph Maria. This contention
was put on several bases.
it was submitted that these documents were evidence that the Applicant had not
the witness
” to the death of his deceased brother and
therefore constituted information specifically about the Applicant or another
(his younger brother or his deceased brother) not within the exception in
s.424A(3)(a)
of the Act.
Applicant contended that the “
information
” for the purposes
” of the relevant documents
themselves (see
at [18]). Initially the Applicant submitted that
this required disclosure of the text of the evidentiary material itself,
of a copy of the letter from Fr Joseph Maria and the actual
words said by the younger brother at his Tribunal hearing together with
of the recording of that hearing. It was subsequently conceded that disclosure
of so much of the substance of that evidence
as would enable the Applicant to
have provided a meaningful comment or response would suffice.
Applicant subsequently acknowledged that the obligation under
obligation to provide documents
at [18]), but
rather an obligation to give particulars of information in such a way as to
allow the Applicant to meet the adverse
consequences of that information
Nader v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2000] FCA 908
– [60]). However it was pointed out that
what was required depended on the nature of the information and may or may not
production of actual documentary material in a particular case.
was submitted that it was necessary for the Tribunal to put to the Applicant a
copy of the letter from Fr Joseph Maria or at least
the actual words used by the
priest. This submission was put on the basis that the authenticity of the
letter from Fr Joseph Maria
may have been in issue. Hence it was said that the
Applicant had to be provided with a copy of that letter because it may have been
open to him to say that it was not authentic.
the time of the hearing the letter from Fr Joseph Maria was not in evidence
before the Court. It was in that context that counsel
for the Applicant
contended that had the Applicant been provided with a copy of Fr Joseph
Maria’s letter, he may have had an
issue with the authenticity of the
document. However the possibility was raised that after the hearing the
Applicant may seek to
obtain a copy of Fr Joseph Maria’s letter from the
Minister or the Tribunal and to address it in post-hearing written submissions.
the end of the hearing, counsel for the Applicant proposed that orders should be
made for the production by the Minister of
Fr Joseph Maria’s letter.
After some discussion I declined to order production but gave the parties
liberty to apply. The
timetable for submissions allowed time for production of
the letter from Fr Joseph Maria or for any other relevant issues to be raised
the parties.
post-hearing submissions the Minister sought to tender a copy of Fr Joseph
Maria’s letter of support for the younger brother
dated 12 August
2009 in support of the proposition that the Tribunal’s statement as to the
effect of that letter was correct
and sufficient to meet its obligation under
of the Act.
written submissions in reply the Applicant objected to the tender of Fr Joseph
Maria’s letter on the basis of the timing
of the tender and relevance. It
was submitted that even if this letter was the letter from Fr Joseph Maria
referred to by the Tribunal,
the only issue raised by the Applicant in his
Further Amended Application and submissions was the fact that it had not been
to the Applicant for comment or response and not whether the
4 August 2011 letter misrepresented its content.
having regard to the manner in which the issues in relation to this letter were
raised, the Applicant’s submissions
at various stages and the opportunity
that he had to address the content of that letter, I am of the view that the
timing of the
tender is not such that the objection should be upheld. The
letter is relevant. As the Applicant quite properly conceded, what
is required
depends on the nature of the information and may or may not involve
production of the actual documentary material. Hence the content
of the letter
itself is relevant in determining the scope of the Tribunal’s obligation
in this respect.
the letter Fr Joseph Maria stated that he was the local parish priest at
the time of the murdered brother’s death and the
revolt in Kerala, that he
closely involved in that event
” and that “
was present in the spot where the police opened fire on the crowd
the brother of the younger brother was shot dead. In that context the priest
stated that the younger brother “
is the eye witness of the sad
the Tribunal correctly stated in Particular 2 of the
4 August 2011, there was no other information in Fr Joseph
Maria’s letter to indicate that any other member of the
witnessed the shooting.
Applicant also maintained the contention that in this case the Tribunal had to
put a copy of the text of part of the oral evidence
of the younger brother to
the Tribunal (differently constituted) to the Applicant for comment. It was
submitted that in this case
the actual words the younger brother had said at his
Tribunal hearing in 2009 had to be put to the Applicant to meet the requirements
of the Act and also that the Applicant should have been provided with
a copy of the complete recording of his younger brother’s
hearing and not
simply had put to him that there were inconsistencies in their evidence.
Relevantly,
the transcript of the younger brother’s Tribunal hearing recorded an
exchange between the Tribunal and the Applicant’s
younger brother in
relation to the murdered brother’s death (at Transcript p.14). The
exchange in question occurred after
the younger brother claimed to regard the
CPI(M) as “
dangerous for
” him. It was as
Right, okay, why do you think the CP(M) party wishes you harm?
[APPLICANT’S
YOUNGER BROTHER]
: It is because I had seen the scene of my brother’s
death when they shot and when he died.
I am a witness.
Applicant submitted that Particular 2 in the
letter did not put
clear particulars of this information that accurately represented what the
younger brother had said at his Tribunal
hearing because the younger brother had
never said that he was “
the eye witness
” but only that he was
”. It was contended that it could not be inferred
that the younger brother was claiming to be the sole witness to his
letter the Tribunal stated that the Applicant’s younger brother
had stated that
” eyewitness
to his brother’s case and that he was being pursued for that reason. It
was submitted that the Tribunal
had not provided clear particulars of the
younger brother’s evidence, given its use of the definite article
” rather than the indefinite article
for the Applicant suggested that the fact that the Minister had referred to the
transcript of what was said by the younger
brother and also the context in which
it was said in an attempt to demonstrate the accuracy of the particulars of the
information
in Particular 2 of the
letter supported the proposition
that in order to afford the Applicant the codified form of procedural fairness
required by
and to give him such particulars of information as would
allow him the opportunity to meet the adverse consequences of that information
at [60]), the Tribunal should have put to him an accurate
record of what his younger brother had in fact said.
was also submitted that the fact that the Tribunal put to the Applicant the
further assertion that his younger brother had made
no mention of any other
member of the family being present to witness the incident did not render the
earlier misstatement of the
younger brother’s evidence accurate. The
Applicant submitted that Particular 2 referred to inconsistencies in
relation to
two aspects of the younger brother’s evidence, (one aspect
being that the younger brother had said that he was the sole witness
other being that the younger brother had not said that any other member of the
family was present), but that the Tribunal
had not put clear particulars of both
aspects of the alleged inconsistency to him. It was contended that the
particulars were given
in a manner that was confusing and unclear and also that
Particular 2 contained a significant amount of irrelevant content.
First Respondent submitted that the Tribunal met its obligation to give clear
particulars of information provided to the Tribunal
by the younger brother,
including the information in the priest’s letter.
is not in dispute that under
s.424A(1)(a)
of the Act information must be
provided with “
sufficient specificity
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2007] FCA 663
As Flick J pointed out in
(at [45]), “[l]
which fails to identify information with “sufficient specificity”
and which fails to “unambiguously
set forth information may
fail to comply
” with the requirement in
s.424A(1)(a)
clear particulars
” of information.
Relevantly,
his Honour also stated (at [52]):
imposes the trinity of requirements set forth in paragraphs (a), (b) and
(c), it is not considered that compliance with
is necessarily to be
approached by considering each of the three requirements as though it were
divorced from the rest. The greater
the degree of clarity in the
particulars of any information
” provided, the less may be
the exposition needed to convey the relevance of that information to the review
being undertaken;
the greater the uncertainty in the information being provided,
the greater may be the need to explain why it may be relevant.
remains a requirement to be satisfied; but the steps to be undertaken
to discharge that requirement may well depend upon the clarity
with which the
information has been identified and indeed the character of that information.
is, however, no general requirement that the Tribunal put to an Applicant copies
of documents or the actual text of information
The obligation
s.424A(1)(a)
of the Act is to put to the Applicant “
particulars
” of such information, not an obligation to produce
documents as such (see
at [59]). As Hill J pointed out in
(at [60]) in relation to
as it then stood, the question of
what is required by “
particulars
” will fall to be resolved by
reference to the nature of the information the Tribunal has received. The same
may be said in
relation to “
clear particulars
can be accepted that in certain circumstances it would be necessary for the
Tribunal to put to an Applicant a copy of a document
or the actual text of part
of a particular document in order to provide clear particulars of the specific
information in question
or to ensure that, as far as reasonably practicable, the
relevance of such information was understood. However this is not such
Provided the Tribunal did not misrepresent or insufficiently disclose the
content of the priest’s letter or what the
Applicant’s younger
brother had said to the Tribunal it was not under an obligation to provide the
Applicant with a complete
copy of the letter from Fr Joseph Maria or (insofar as
the Applicant maintained any such contention) a “
that letter presented as such or to put to the Applicant the actual words said
by his younger brother at his Tribunal
hearing, and/or to provide the Applicant
with a copy of the transcript or recording of that hearing.
requires clear particulars of information that the Tribunal considers
would be the reason or part of the reason for affirming the
decision under
review to be put to an Applicant. It does not require a copy of the document
containing that information to be put
to the Applicant in every case in order to
anticipate the possibility that an Applicant may wish to take issue with the
authenticity
of such documentation.
Tribunal’s statement of what was said by Fr Joseph Maria, and what was not
said by him, was clear and, as is now apparent,
consistent with what was
actually said in the letter. In the letter tendered after the hearing, Fr
Joseph Maria certified that from
1990 to 1995 he was the parish priest in the
area where the 1991 revolt took place and that he was “
closely involved
in that event
present in the spot where the police
opened fire on the crowd
” and the Applicant’s named brother
(although described as the “
” brother of the
Applicant’s named younger brother) was shot dead. Moreover the priest
stated that the Applicant’s
younger brother “
is the eye witness
of the sad event
” and gave his address in Australia. The priest also
claimed that “[t]
s still pending in the Court, and
the Police Party is on the alert to arrest those who are involved in the
”, and that “[t]
heir life is threatened and that is the
[the Applicant’s younger brother]
Particular 2 of the
letter the Tribunal stated that the letter from
Fr Joseph Maria dated 12 August 2009 confirmed that the Applicant’s
was the eye witness to the murder
Tribunal also stated that there was “
no other information in the letter
to indicate, even tentatively, that any other member of the family had witnessed
the shooting
”. In this way the Tribunal provided “
particulars
” of the information in question.
it is apparent from the transcript of the Tribunal hearing that the Tribunal
raised with the Applicant the existence of
the letter from Fr Joseph Maria
(Transcript p.39). While the Applicant explained that he did not know why
Fr Joseph Maria had written
the letter for his younger brother, he also
stated that at the time Fr Joseph Maria wrote the letter, his younger
brother needed
the letter. The Applicant claimed that he was “
familiar to
” Fr Joseph Maria. The Tribunal also explained to the
Applicant that the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade had contacted
Joseph Maria about his letter by telephone and that Fr Joseph Maria had
confirmed the contents of his letter which, as the Tribunal
explained to the
Applicant, “
says essentially that your brother was the eye
as the Applicant contends that the Tribunal was required to disclose to him the
actual wording of Fr Joseph Maria’s
letter or a copy of it because it may
have been open to the Applicant to say that the letter was not authentic, there
is no evidence
that the authenticity of this letter was in dispute in this case.
On the contrary, in response to the
letter the Applicant acknowledged
that Fr Joseph Maria had given a letter to his younger brother and claimed that
his name was not
mentioned in that letter because it was only for the younger
brother’s needs. It would have been open to the Applicant to
submission or to raise concerns about the authenticity of the letter had he
wished to do so.
relation to the younger brother’s evidence, it is the case that in his
answer to the specific Tribunal question as to why
he feared harm from the
CPI(M), the younger brother stated that he had “
seen the scene of
brother’s death
” and that “
” (emphasis added, Transcript p.14). However the
brother’s use of the indefinite article “
response rather than the definite article “
”, does not
establish that the Tribunal misrepresented the substance of the evidence given
by the younger brother.
the issue of whether the Tribunal gave the applicant clear particulars of his
younger brother’s oral evidence to the
Tribunal (differently constituted)
has to be seen in light of the younger brother’s evidence as a whole,
including the fact
that the specific response referred to by the Applicant was a
response to a question about why the CPI(M) wished the younger brother
is apparent from the transcript as a whole that at no time did the younger
brother claim that any other member of his family was
present to witness the
incident and/or pursued by the authorities for that reason. When regard is had
to the whole of the younger
brother’s oral evidence, it was open to the
Tribunal to characterise that evidence as being that he (the younger brother)
the eyewitness to the older brother’s death and that he was being
pursued by the police and CPI(M) for that reason.
the younger brother’s evidence in that regard was referred to in the
letter in the context of the Applicant’s written claims to be at
risk because the police and CPI(M) wanted to eliminate
” to his brother’s murder as well as his oral claims that
he was the only member of his family who had witnessed the murder
and had come
to his brother’s aid after he was shot. The meaning and relevance of the
younger brother’s evidence is
to be seen in this context. Clear
particulars were provided.
to whether the Tribunal ensured as far as reasonably practicable that the
Applicant understood why it was relevant to the review,
the critical issue was
whether the Applicant had witnessed the incident and whether he was pursued for
that reason. However at the
Departmental interview and the Tribunal hearing the
Applicant had claimed he was the only member of the family who had witnessed
shooting of his older brother during a demonstration and clash with the police
and that he was the only family member who had
assisted his brother after he was
shot. In particular, at the hearing he claimed (transcript p.20) that he was
” his brother, apart from
”, as follows:
[APPLICANT]
As my brother went down after getting shot, people disbursed to other places. I
ran crying and then I was the only person ... The
man who tried to save police
he was shot so police also got afraid and they ran away themselves.
[APPLICANT]
Some people left the area and ran away, some other people ran after the police
and took revenge on them by physically harming them.
One of them took gun from
police and threw it into the sea. So I did not see this .. of the running of
the sea, I was concentrating
on my brother who was hurt and his brain was all
spread out from the shooting.
Did you take your brother to hospital?
[APPLICANT]
When I was lifting my brother’s body part of his brain came out and there
were only 5 or 6 men around. Another man was watching
the scene and took part
of his clothes and made a bandaid around his head. Me and some of the woman
were around we removed my brother’s
body to a far away place.
Okay, that’s fine, thank you very much. I’m sorry you have to - -
Okay, so it was just you who was able to go and help
your brother?
[APPLICANT]
Yes I was the only one to help. At this time I was fully involved but not
involved in this matter I describe but there was nobody
else to help me.
You mean other than the strangers who helped you, there was nobody
[APPLICANT]
After the police and people disbursed and when we moved away from the scene with
the body of my brother then people started coming
the Tribunal raised the younger brother’s evidence about being
the eye witness
” with the Applicant (including the fact that
the younger brother had not mentioned that any of his other brothers were there)
the Applicant responded that it was “
younger brother may have been watching the incident (Transcript p.38).
Thereafter the Tribunal put the substance
of the younger brother’s
evidence to the Applicant in the
is apparent from the Tribunal’s reasons for decision (see [19] –
[22] above) that the Tribunal’s concern was
the absence of any reference
by the younger brother to the Applicant’s role in witnessing the incident
as well as the fact
that the Applicant was unaware that his younger brother had
been an eyewitness who was pursued by the authorities for nearly two
decades and
had sought protection in Australia on that basis. The Tribunal found that the
information provided by the younger brother
in relation to his case (including
Fr Joseph Maria’s letter) “
serious doubt on the
applicant’s key claim that
he was the only eyewitness
his older brother’s murder and on his claim “
that he did not know
if any other member of the family had witnessed the incident
letter the Tribunal referred to the younger brother’s oral
evidence in terms of being “
” rather than
the witness
”, the Tribunal explained that its concern was
the absence of mention by the younger brother of any other member of the family
being present to witness the incident or to have been pursued by the
authorities. In that context there was a sufficient degree
of clarity in the
particulars (
at [52]) and the relevance was sufficiently explained.
was not simply the younger brother’s oral evidence that he was an
eyewitness to his brother’s death, but rather the
absence of any mention
by him of any other member of the family being present and/or being pursued by
the authorities that was of
concern to the Tribunal. To the extent that such
omission constituted information for the purposes of
s.424A(1)(a)
of the Act, as
an implicit positive statement and not merely a gap (see
SZMKR v Minister for Immigration & Citizenship
[2010] FCA 340
per Gray J), the Tribunal brought it to the Applicant’s attention in
sufficiently clear terms.
has not been established that the Tribunal had to put to the Applicant the
actual words used by the younger brother and/or a copy
of the recording of his
Tribunal hearing in order to meet its obligations under
of the Act.
as the Applicant contended generally that Particular 2 referred to a
significant amount of evidence that had nothing to do
with the relevant
information and in this sense did not provide “
particulars, such a claim has not been made out, either having regard to the
specific language of Particular 2 or in the context
of the letter of
4 August 2011 as a whole.
Particular 2 the Tribunal set out in appropriate detail the
Applicant’s claims at various times including that his life was
a witness in his older brother’s murder case and that he was the
only member of
” to have witnessed the
murder and to have come to his brother’s aid after he was shot. The
Applicant’s oral evidence
to the delegate was not within any of the
exceptions to
Its relevance was made clear by reference to the
internal inconsistency in his evidence and also the suggested inconsistency with
the evidence of his younger brother and Fr Joseph Maria. There was
sufficient specificity.
clarity of the information put to the Applicant in Particular 2 has to be
seen in light of the Tribunal’s explanation of
the relevance of the
information within
of the Act. Such relevance could only be properly
explained if the Tribunal also put to the Applicant his own inconsistent
in that respect. The Tribunal properly explained to the Applicant the
relevance of all this evidence.
as a whole, in light of the character of the information, the degree of clarity
in the particulars of the information and the
exposition of the relevance of
that information, it has not been established that Particular 2 referred to
a significant amount of
evidence that had nothing to do with the relevant
information in a manner that gave rise to a failure to comply with
has it been established that Particular 2 failed to provide
” particulars because there were two elements to the
suggested inconsistency with the younger brother’s evidence. Reading
paragraph as a whole, it is clear that the Tribunal’s concern about what
the younger brother and the priest said about
being the eyewitness and pursued
by the authorities was in circumstances where neither of them had made any
mention of any other
member of the family being present to witness the incident
or being pursued by the authorities.
as the Tribunal relied on a lack of specificity in the Applicant’s
responses to the
information, this does not establish a failure by the
Tribunal to give the Applicant clear particulars in Particular 2. The
clearly understood that his younger brother’s evidence was being
put to him for comment, even though his replies to Particular
30 May 2011 and 15 August 2011 were limited to a claim that he was
facing the same problem as his younger brother (who
had been given protection).
He had also responded to this issue at the Tribunal hearing, but claimed he
could not explain, that
he did not see his younger brother at the incident and
then that he did not know whether any of his other brothers were there, but
he was the only one who went to the aid of his older brother.
Applicant also contended that because the provision of the particulars of
information in respect of the information in Particular
2 was not clear,
that of itself meant that the Tribunal also failed to comply with its obligation
s.424A(1)(b)
of the Act to ensure that, as far as reasonably practicable,
the Applicant understood why the information was relevant to the review.
has not been established that the Tribunal failed to give “
particulars
”, no failure to comply with paragraph 424A(1)(b) of the
Act has been established on this basis.
indicated, the Tribunal’s statement of the relevance of the information in
Particular 2 was sufficient to ensure, as far
as reasonably practicable,
that the Applicant understood the relevance of the information in relation to
his claim about being the
only eyewitness and that he did not know if other
members of his family had witnessed the incident in which his brother was
The Tribunal also explained the broader relevance of the information
in relation to the Applicant’s claims about being wanted
or targeted by
anyone in India and to his credibility. It has not been established that in
putting the younger brother’s oral
evidence (and omissions) to the
Applicant the Tribunal failed to give the Applicant clear particulars of the
information that the
Tribunal considered would be the reason or part of the
reason for affirming the decision under review or that it failed to ensure
far as reasonably practicable that the Applicant understood the relevance of
such information.
failure to comply with
of the Act is made out in relation to
Particular 2 of the letter.
Particular 3
Particular 3
letters is:
14 February 2011, you submitted additional documents to the Department.
One of the documents submitted was a letter from Mr Jahangeer
A, Advocate and
District Notary, dated 8 February 2011. The letter appeared to be in
relation to the status of the case pending
before the Sessions Courts.
According to the letter, you along with your brothers ... and a few others were
named as ‘Accuseds’
(sic) in a number of pending cases dated 1991,
2002 and 2006. In outlining the history of the case, Mr Jahangeer
The case registered by Thumba Police in
1991. It was a mob attack in which a civilian named
[deceased brother]
and a Police Officer were died. Police registered two cases initially and after
than several cases have been registered implicating
innocent peoples of the
locality along with the brothers and relatives of deceased,
[and two named persons].
Most of the cases have been
pending since 2002 as long pending warrants. Police continued their search to
locate the accuseds (sic).
Neither in your application for a protection visa nor in your interview
with the delegate you mentioned having been named as an ‘accused’
having been the subject of a police search, nor a court case brought about by
the police. At the hearing you claimed that you
first heard that you were named
in the case filed by the police after receiving Mr Jahangeer’s
The information in the letter and your oral evidence to the Department are
relevant because, on the basis of the inconsistencies in
your evidence to the
Department and the information contained in the letter, the Tribunal may find
that the letter and its contents
are fabricated and designed to assist you in
achieving an immigration outcome. The Tribunal may also disbelieve your claims
find that you have not been truthful and/or credible.
essence, in Particular 3 of the
letter the Tribunal raised with the
Applicant its concern about the claim in the letter of 8 February 2011 from
Dr Jahangeer that
the Applicant and others were named as
” (sic) in a number of pending court cases from
1991, 2002 and 2006 and that they were the subject of “
Long Pending
” and police searches. The Tribunal expressed concern about
the absence of any prior claim by the Applicant that he had been
named as an
” or that he was the subject of a police search or a
court case brought by the police.
is apparent from Dr Jahangeer’s letter of 8 February 2011 that
it was claimed that the court cases implicated the Applicant
in relation to the
death of a policeman in the 1991 incident in which the Applicant’s older
brother also died. In its reasons
for decision (see [23] – [26] above)
the Tribunal had regard to this information in the course of finding that the
had provided inconsistent and unconvincing evidence in relation to the
nature of the interest of the police and authorities in him.
Applicant submitted that there was illogicality and irrationality in the
Tribunal’s approach, in that there was an inherent
contradiction between
the Tribunal finding that the letter from Dr Jahangeer was
” on the one hand and on the other hand expressing
concern that the Applicant had not provided a satisfactory explanation for
he had not mentioned earlier that he was an “
claimed in that letter. In this context it was submitted that the particulars
of the information in Particular 3 were
particulars
” in that they made it difficult for the Applicant to
understand the relevance of this information.
contrary to the Applicant’s contention the Tribunal did not in fact find
that the letter from Dr Jahangeer was “
. Rather, based on
its adverse credibility finding, it gave no weight to such document (or to the
Court Order
was no inherent contradiction (and hence lack of clarity in the s.424A letter)
in the Tribunal raising with the Applicant its
concerns about the
Applicant’s failure to mention his involvement in what were later said to
be long-standing cases.
as Particular 3 put to the Applicant “
information
within s.424A (in what can be seen as an implicit positive statement about not
having been named as an accused or having been
the subject of a police search or
any court case bought by the police and not merely an absence of evidence from
the Applicant in
his interview with the delegate), this was clearly presented
and contrasted with Dr Jahangeer’s later evidence that the Applicant
and others had been named as accused persons in a number of pending cases dated
1991, 2002 and 2006, that “
most of the cases ha
been pending
since 2002 as
Long Pending Warrants
” and that the
olice continued their search
to locate the
notwithstanding that the Tribunal did not ultimately find that
Dr Jahangeer’s letter was fabricated, the Tribunal
explained in
Particular 3 that on the basis of the inconsistencies and the information
contained in Dr Jahangeer’s letter,
the Tribunal may find not only
that the letter and its contents were fabricated and also may disbelieve the
Applicant’s claims
and find that he had not been truthful or credible.
These two possibilities sit conformably with each other. It has not been
established
either that the Tribunal failed to provide “
particulars
” of information within s.424A(1) or that it failed to
ensure, as far as reasonably practicable, that the Applicant understood
relevance of the information within s.424A(1)(b) of the Act.
as the Applicant’s claims in relation to Particular 3 take issue with
the logic of the Tribunal’s decision, this
does not establish a failure to
comply with s.424A of the Act in relation to the s.424A letters.
Applicant also took issue with the fact that in its findings and reasons the
Tribunal referred to grammatical errors in the letter
from Dr Jahangeer in
its reasons for decision. It was contended that the Tribunal had regard to such
errors in assessing similar
grammatical errors in the “
” documents and that it had erred in not explaining this concern
in Particular 3 of the s.424A letter.
its reasoning in relation to the common language, grammatical and spelling
errors in the letter from Dr Jahangeer and the Court
Order, the Tribunal
did observe that this cast doubt on the genuineness of both documents. However
both documents were given to
the Tribunal by the Applicant for the purposes of
the review and hence were within the s.424A(3)(b) exception. The
reasoning was not “
information
s.424A(1) (see
at [18]) and did not have to be put to the
Applicant for comment. No failure to comply with s.424A is established on this
Particular 4
Particular 4
in both s.424A letters is as follows:
submission of 1 February 2011 you claimed that you were awaiting court
documents relating to your brother’s case, which
is pending. You claimed
that it would be very hard for you to produce all the court documents as these
documents are usually
by your uneducated mother who
them to the lawyer. In your interview with the delegate you stated that you
were unable to obtain any documents relating to the case
because these documents
by the Congress, which was not prepared to release them. In
your interview with the delegate you also stated that the lawyer assigned
your brother’s case is a Congress lawyer by the name of Jahangeer and he
has said that it would be difficult to reopen the
case. At the hearing you
claimed that Mr Jahangeer is not a Congress lawyer. Rather, he was a
former teacher of your wife and your
brother and had taken an interest in the
case. In his claims to the Tribunal, differently constituted, you brother ...
claimed that
he was unable to obtain documents relating to your brother’s
court case because they were held by the police.
information you provided to the Department orally is relevant because, on the
basis of shifts and changes in your evidence as
presented at various stages to
the Department and to the Tribunal, including the inconsistencies between your
evidence to the Department
and your evidence at the review stage, the Tribunal
may disbelieve your claims and find that you have not been truthful and/or
Particular 4
relates to the evidence about the lawyer representing the Applicant and/or his
family in relation to the court case that
(as the Applicant explained at the
hearing) his father had started against the police and the authorities in
relation to his older
brother’s death (Transcript p.21), not the court
cases the Applicant claimed police had instituted against him and others in
relation to the death of the policeman referred to in Particular 3.
its findings and reasons the Tribunal found that the Applicant’s evidence
in relation to the court documents and legal representation
his family had
obtained concerning the case about his brother’s death was inconsistent,
unconvincing and a fabrication. One
factor to which it had regard was the
difference between the Applicant’s evidence about who was in possession of
court documents
in relation to his older brother’s case and his younger
brother’s evidence to the effect that the documents were in the
of the police. It also noted that the Applicant had not specifically addressed
this inconsistency in his response to
the s.424A letter.
was submitted that Particular 4 was liable to mislead the Applicant because
while it explained the relevance of the oral information
provided by him to the
Department (and its inconsistency with the other information the Applicant
provided both to the Department
and the Tribunal), it did not explain the
relevance of the younger brother’s evidence. It was suggested that the
the Applicant dealt only with the first issue in his response
supported the conclusion that Particular 4 was confusing in the way
structured, that it was likely to mislead and that it did mislead. Hence there
was said to be a lack of “
” particulars within
s.424A(1)(a) of the Act.
addition, the Applicant submitted that there was a lack of clear particulars
because the s.424A letter treated two inconsistencies
as one and because it gave
no explanation of the relevance of the information consisting of the
Applicant’s younger brother’s
evidence to the Tribunal. It was
contended that it could not be said that the Tribunal had ensured that to the
extent reasonably
practicable it had explained the relevance of this information
as required by s.424A(1)(b) of the Act.
Applicant submitted that it was relevant to bear in mind that the requirements
in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of s.424A(1) were
not divorced from each other
and acknowledged that the greater the degree of clarity in the particulars of
information provided the
less may be the exposition needed to convey the
relevance of that information to the review being undertaken (
[52]). However it was suggested that the converse also applied, so that if
particulars of information were confusing, misleading
or unclear that would
militate against satisfaction of the obligation in s.424A(1)(b) to ensure
understanding of the relevance of
the information.
was submitted that this was not a case in which the absence of explanation of
relevance of the younger brother’s evidence
could be gainsaid by the
clarity with which particulars of the information were provided (so that the
invitation read in its entirety
could be said to have made the relevance of the
information clear in the manner considered in
at [48]). Rather,
the particulars of the information were said to be far from clear given that
Particular 4 presented two unrelated
items of information but purported to
explain the relevance of only one. In any event, it was said that in such
circumstances the
Tribunal had erred in giving no explanation at all of the
relevance of the younger brother’s evidence and had not met its obligation
to ensure as far as reasonably practicable that the Applicant understood the
relevance of his younger brother’s evidence.
for the Applicant acknowledged that the question of whether s.424A had been
complied with was determined objectively (
at [17] and
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2007] FCA 807
), but also
submitted that the Applicant had been misled into not providing a response
addressing the inconsistency between his evidence
and that of his younger
brother about the location of the documents and that this supported the
contention that the Tribunal had
not ensured that the Applicant understood the
relevance of his younger brother’s evidence in that respect (see
was also submitted that even if the relevance of the younger brother’s
evidence had been explained at the Tribunal hearing,
the s.424A requirement was
mandatory (see
SAAP and Another v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
and Indigenous Affairs and Another
(2005) 228 CLR 294
[2005] HCA 24
per McHugh J).
First Respondent did not cavil with the contention that the evidence of the
younger brother to the effect that he was unable to
obtain documents relating to
his older brother’s court case because they were held by the police
amounted to information which
had to be put to the Applicant under s.424A(1) of
the Act. However, it was submitted that the Tribunal met its obligations under
both s.424A(1)(a) and (b) in relation to such information, in that it gave clear
particulars of the younger brother’s evidence
the relevance of which was
manifest on the face of the s.424A letter.
insofar as the Applicant submitted that the Tribunal failed to provide clear
particulars of information in Particular 4 by
presenting two distinct
inconsistencies as one (and hence failed to meet the obligation in s.424A(1)(a)
of the Act), such claim is
not made out.
first part of Particular 4 set out the Applicant’s claims in relation
to the whereabouts of court documents and the circumstances
representation and the representation of his family by a lawyer in India. It
recited the Applicant’s initial written
claim that the documents were
usually received by his mother who forwarded them to the lawyer, his oral claims
to the delegate that
he was unable to obtain documents relating to the case
because they were held by Congress which was not prepared to release them
that Dr Jahangeer was a Congress lawyer, and his later contrary evidence to
the Tribunal about Dr Jahangeer. In addition, in
the last sentence of the
first paragraph of Particular 4 the Tribunal referred to the younger
brother’s claims to the Tribunal
that he was unable to obtain documents
relating to his older brother’s court case because they were held by the
Tribunal set out “
clear particulars
” of the information in
Particular 4 (including the evidence of the younger brother about who held
the documents). The manner
in which the first paragraph of Particular 4
was structured was not misleading. The failure to explain the relevance of the
brother’s evidence does not mean that the Tribunal failed to
provide clear particulars of that information. The Tribunal identified
information within s.424A(1) with sufficient specificity. There is no ambiguity
in its description of the younger brother’s
evidence and no suggestion
that Particular 4 did not accurately represent the younger brother’s
claims. There was no failure
to comply with s.424A(1)(a) of the Act.
Similarly, as the content of the younger brother’s evidence and the part
of the Applicant’s
evidence within s.424A(1) referred to in
Particular 4 was clearly particularised, any contention that there was a
breach of s.424A(1)(b)
because of a failure to give
clear particulars
” of the information is not made out.
the essence of the Applicant’s argument in relation to s.424A(1)(b) is
that the Tribunal erred in failing to ensure,
as far as reasonably practicable,
that the Applicant understood the relevance of the information given by his
younger brother to
the Tribunal (differently constituted) about the whereabouts
of court documents relating to the murdered brother’s court case
failed to comply with s.424A(1)(b) of the Act in relation to the evidence of the
younger brother.
explanation was given of the relevance of the information consisting of what the
younger brother had said to the Tribunal (differently
constituted). Rather, the
s.424A letter only put to the Applicant that shifts and changes in
evidence, including inconsistencies between his evidence to the Department and
to the Tribunal, may lead the Tribunal to disbelieve
his claims and find that he
had not been truthful and/or credible.
First Respondent submitted that in the circumstances of this case the absence of
an express explanation of the relevance of the
inconsistency between the
evidence of the Applicant’s younger brother and that of the Applicant was
insufficient to establish
inconsistency was manifest on its face and that it was relevant that the
inconsistency
(Transcript p.40). The First Respondent submitted that in circumstances
the Tribunal had referred to “
shifts and changes
Applicant’s evidence and to “
inconsistencies
providing the basis on which it “
may disbelieve
not been truthful and/or credible
sufficiently discharged the Tribunal’s obligations under s.424A(1)(b).
was also submitted that there was no evidence that the Applicant was misled and
that the fact that he chose not to respond to this
aspect was not to the point,
because he chose to respond by disavowing his earlier submission, affirming what
he told the Tribunal
and attributing fault to his previous representative and
claiming communication difficulties.
is not in dispute that the evidence given by the younger brother referred to in
Particular 4 is information subject to the s.424A(1)
obligation. There is
no suggestion that the Tribunal’s description of this evidence was
inaccurate.
is the case that in Particular 4 the Tribunal set out clear particulars of
the evidence given by the Applicant about why he had
not obtained documents
relating to his brother’s case and that it was apparent on the face of the
material that the younger
brother’s reasons for his inability to obtain
such documents in 2009 was not the same as the reason the Applicant gave to the
Department for his inability to produce such court documents in 2011.
in Particular 4 the Tribunal also put to the Applicant his changing
evidence about why he had no court documents and about
the role of
Dr Jahangeer. Its explanation of the relevance of the information in
Particular 4 referred only to inconsistencies in
the Applicant’s own
evidence. There were internal inconsistencies in the Applicant’s evidence
both in relation to why
he could not produce court documents and also in his
evidence about Dr Jahangeer’s role. It was not clear that the
was seeking comment on matters other than the internal inconsistencies
in the Applicant’s own evidence, in particular his oral
evidence to the
Department compared to his other evidence. It was not clear that the Tribunal
was also seeking a comment or response
in relation to the younger
brother’s evidence about the whereabouts of the court documents.
the context of Particular 4 the fact that there was also a
inconsistency between the Applicant’s evidence in 2011 and that of his
younger brother in 2009 did not of itself demonstrate
the younger brother’s evidence so that the Tribunal met its obligation to
put clear particulars of that information to the
Applicant in such a manner as
to enable him to meaningfully comment on such information (see
[52] per Flick J).
Bromberg J stated in
MZYFH v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
and Another
(2010) 188 FCR 151
[2010] FCA 559
, s.424A(1)(b)
reflects the need for the Tribunal to ensure (as far as reasonably practicable)
that the Applicant is “
put into a position where he
understand both the relevance and consequence of the information
at [69]). Particular 4 in the s.424A letter did not refer to
inconsistencies in the evidence generally (which might have encompassed
inconsistencies between his evidence and that of his younger brother). The
Tribunal gave no express explanation of the relevance
to the review of the
younger brother’s evidence. Rather, it put to the Applicant the relevance
of the information
had provided to the Department orally, and referred
to shifts and changes and inconsistencies in
evidence as a reason for
disbelieving his claims and finding he had not been truthful and/or credible.
In these circumstances I
do not accept the First Respondent’s contention
that the use the Tribunal made of the younger brother’s 2009 evidence
the consequences of it being acted on was sufficiently clear from the nature of
the information and its inclusion in a paragraph
that referred (among other
things) to the reasons the Applicant gave in 2011 for not producing court
in Particular 4 the Tribunal used the same wording in its explanation of
relevance adopted in other paragraphs of the s.424A
letter which referred to
internal inconsistencies in or issues about the Applicant’s evidence (such
as in Particulars 1 and
5). In contrast, where the Tribunal referred to
information from another person elsewhere in the s.424A letter, it not only set
out particulars of that evidence but also clearly explained the specific
relevance of the aspect of the evidence cited. Thus in
Particular 2 the
Tribunal referred to the relevance of the evidence of his younger brother and
the claims in Fr Joseph Maria’s
letter to the Applicant’s claims
the truth or credibility of his evidence. Similarly, in
Particular 3 the Tribunal explained the relevance of the information in
letter from Dr Jahangeer together with the Applicant’s oral evidence
(even though the letter would have been within the
s.424A(3)(b) exception) and
in Particular 6 it explained the relevance of information contained in a
medical certificate provided
by the Applicant.
was no practical or other difficulty that would have prevented the Tribunal
informing the Applicant in the s.424A letter that
it regarded his younger
brother’s earlier claims as inconsistent with the Applicant’s claims
documents and that this information (as well as
issues about the Applicant’s own evidence) may (for example) cause it to
or doubt the Applicant’s evidence in relation to court
documents and the legal representation received by his family. Instead
Applicant was “
left to choose
at [36]) between
uncertain inferences to be drawn about the extent of the information on which he
was being invited to comment in
Particular 4.
Tribunal failed to ensure that the Applicant had an understanding of the
relevance of his younger brother’s claims about
court documents being in
the possession of the police and the consequences of such information being
relied on by the Tribunal.
have considered the Minister’s contention that it was apparent from what
had occurred at the Tribunal hearing that the Applicant
understood the relevance
of the inconsistency between his evidence and that of his younger brother
regarding the location of documents
relating to their murdered brother’s
case. It was submitted that it was relevant that the Tribunal’s letter
was written
after the hearing at which the inconsistency with the younger
brother’s evidence concerning the location of the documents was
exchange in question was as follows (Transcript pp.40 –
Yes, but your brother, I guess he would have been familiar with what was going
on as well a couple of years ago he said that the
documents were actually kept
by police and not by the Congress. Can you explain to me why your brother would
have said that?
[APPLICANT]
He never said it like that. What he said is like this - - ... Chief Minister
came home they took all the photos and reports from
us, all that is needed to
begun to assist my family. That is what
[my brother]
said. After that
we have not seen the photos taken at that time.
we can understand that Congress is trying to avoid us and they are not
interested in proceeding with the case.
this exchange did not clearly put to the Applicant the relevance of his younger
brother’s evidence. In any event, the
fact that the Tribunal discussed
the younger brother’s evidence with the Applicant at the Tribunal hearing
did not obviate
the need to comply with the requirement to give written notice
in accordance with s.424A of the Act. As Rares J stated in
matter was before the trial judge he took the view that it must have been
apparent to the appellant, having regard to the
course of the hearing and the
terms of the letter, that the tribunal was contemplating a possible finding that
it was not satisfied
that he was a homosexual. But that approach does not deal
with the strict requirements of s 424A(1)(b). It required the tribunal
ensure, as far as reasonably practical, that it identified to the appellant why
he should have understood the information was
relevant to the review. This is
necessary to avoid an applicant for review being left to choose between
uncertain inferences that
might otherwise be available in the notification. The
natural justice which the Parliament has said an applicant for review is
to receive from the tribunal in a situation such as the present
includes, as far as is reasonably practical, that the Applicant is
told by the
tribunal why the information is relevant to the review.
The tribunal does
not fulfil the obligation imposed by s 424A(1)(b) if it leaves it to chance
that he ought to appreciate that relevance
from the course of the hearing, or
from other circumstances surrounding the way in which the review is being
(Emphasis added)
even if the discussion at the hearing set out about (see transcript pp.40
– 41) should have made it apparent to the Applicant
that the Tribunal may
have had regard to the younger brother’s evidence in finding his own
evidence was a fabrication, this
would not relieve the Tribunal of the
obligation to comply with s.424A of the Act. The strict requirements of
s.424A(1)(b) are not
met by leaving it to chance that the Applicant appreciated
the relevance of the information from the course of the hearing or other
circumstances surrounding the way the review was conducted.
in its reasons for decision the Tribunal found that the Applicant’s
evidence in relation to who was in possession
of documents that pertained to the
murdered brother’s case was inconsistent with that of his younger brother.
It had regard
to the Applicant’s failure to specifically address this
inconsistency in his response to the s.424A letter (which did not ask
address this issue) as well as to internally inconsistent and unconvincing
aspects of the Applicant’s own evidence in
finding the Applicant’s
evidence in relation to court documents and the nature of the legal
representation that he and his
family had received was a fabrication. Such a
use of the younger brother’s evidence was not entirely self-evident.
McHugh J pointed out in
the requirements of s.424A(1) are
mandatory. His Honour stated (at [77]):
... because
the Act compels the Tribunal in the conduct of the review to take certain steps
in order to accord procedural fairness
to the applicant for review, before
recording a decision, it would be an anomalous result if the Tribunal's decision
were found to
be valid, notwithstanding that the Tribunal has failed to
discharge that obligation.
It is not to the point that the Tribunal may have
given the applicant particulars of the adverse information orally.
also not to the point that in some cases it might seem unnecessary to give the
applicant written particulars of adverse information
(for example, if the
applicant is present when the Tribunal receives the adverse information as
evidence from another person and
the Tribunal there and then invites the
applicant orally to comment on it). If the requirement to give written
particulars is mandatory,
then failure to comply means that the Tribunal has not
discharged its statutory function...Parliament has made the provisions of
one of the centrepieces of its regime of statutory procedural fairness. Because
that is so, the best view of the section is
that failure to comply with it goes
to the heart of the decision-making process. Consequently, a decision made after
a breach of
s 424A is invalid.
(emphasis added)
note for the sake of completeness that I do not accept the Applicant’s
contention that his failure to address the part of
Particular 4 that
related to his younger brother’s evidence in his s.424A response
demonstrated that he was in fact misled.
However it can be said that the manner
in which the Applicant addressed the information in Particular 4 of the
s.424A letter gives
no support to the Minister’s contention that the
particulars of this part of the information were provided with such clarity
the explanation of the conflict in the Applicant’s own evidence satisfied
its s.424A(1)(b) obligation in relation to the
younger brother’s evidence.
In any event, it is not necessary to establish that an Applicant was misled to
make out a breach
of s.424A(1)(b).
Tribunal fell into jurisdictional error by failing to comply with s.424A(1)(b)
of the Act. Ground 3 is made out in this respect.
There is no
disentitling conduct
at [30]) or other
sufficient reason not to grant the relief sought. The matter should be remitted
to the Tribunal for redetermination
according to law.
indicated above, I have however also considered all the other bases of suggested
Particular 5
Particular 5
in each of the s.424A letters is as follows:
interview with the Department you were asked a number of questions relating to
the extent of your political activities. In
response, you claimed that you had
assisted the Congress during celebrations or at times of elections. The last
time he assisted
the party towards a ‘block election’ before you
came to Australia by participating in some meetings and gatherings.
if you were involved in any other activities, you said you provided financial
assistance and attended meetings during
his return visits to India.
hearing, when asked about your political activities, you claimed that you
attended meetings and associated with those involved
in the party. In addition,
during election times, you put up posters, participated in
meetings and communicated party instructions to the people. The last elections
he was involved in were the
(local) elections which were held a
month after you left India and your activities were consisted of canvassing for
the Congress
and assisting in organising the youth for the elections. In 2010,
you also attended party meetings and fundraising, contributing
financially
towards the
You devoted most of your time while you were in
India to party activities.
information you provided to the Department orally is relevant because, on the
basis of shifts and changes in your evidence as
presented at various stages to
the Department and to the Tribunal, including the inconsistencies between your
evidence to the Department
and your evidence at the review stage, the Tribunal
may disbelieve your claims and find that you have not been truthful and/or
set out above (at [57]) in relation to Particular 1, in post-hearing
submissions counsel for the Applicant pointed out that insofar
particular referred to oral evidence of the Applicant to the delegate it was not
within the s.424A(3) exceptions, but also
accepted that it was not information
that had to be put to the Applicant under s.424A(1) of the Act.
light of this concession the only issue raised in relation to Particular 5
was (as discussed above in relation to Particular 1),
a suggestion that a
lack of clarity in this Particular contributed to a conclusion that there had
been a failure to give clear particulars
in the letter as a whole.
for the Applicant submitted that deficiencies in this paragraph (in particular a
suggested lack of clarity in the references
” in describing the Applicant’s evidence about
his political activities) were relevant to a conclusion that there was
to give clear particulars in the s.424A letter as a whole (
[48]). It was submitted that the way the particulars were provided made it
difficult for the Applicant to understand the relevance
of this item of
information.
is, undeniably, some lack of clarity in the references to
” in describing the
Applicant’s claims about his party activities in India. However such lack
of clarity in the wording
and infelicities of expression in Particular 5 do
not establish a failure to give “
clear particulars
information that was subject to the s.424A(1) obligation.
regard to the format and content of the letter, including the fact that distinct
issues were raised by the Tribunal in each
Particular, any lack of clarity in
Particular 5 is not such as to demonstrate jurisdictional error involving a
failure to comply
with s.424A of the Act in the manner contended for in either
ground two or three of the Further Amended Application.
Particular 6
Particular 6
is as follows:
of your application for a protection visa you submitted a medical certificate
stating that you were admitted on 29 April
2008 and discharged on
1 May 2008. The letter states that while you were in hospital you were
undergoing FESS (diagnosis and treatment
of diseases of the nose and sinuses
using endoscopes and CT scans (see http://www.entkent.com/FESS.html)) and SMR
operation (a common
operation used to overcome nasal obstruction when due to a
distortion in the mid line cartilage or septum of the nose
(http://www.ent-surgeon.co.uk/operations/septoplasty.htm.)).
At the hearing
when you were asked about the nature of your injuries during the
2005 attack, you claimed that when you were attacked
you were beaten on the
head. You made no mention of suffering any injuries or trauma to your nose.
However, when the contents of
the medical certificate were put to you, you
claimed that as a result of the beating your nose was blocked and you required
treatment for the blockage.
Applicant conceded that the information in the medical certificate provided by
the Applicant was within the s.424A(3)(b) exception.
discussion of Particular 5 above is in point. Any lack of clarity in this
paragraph is not such as to affect the extent or manner
of the Tribunal’s
compliance with s.424A(1) in relation to those items of information that are
within that section.
Whether illogical or irrational reasoning
1 in the Further Amended Application is as follows:
that it was not satisfied the applicant is a person in respect of whom Australia
has protection obligations, the Refugee
Review Tribunal fell into jurisdictional
error by engaging in a process of reasoning that was illogical, irrational and
on findings or inferences of fact support by logical
are no particulars to ground 1. In submissions counsel for the Applicant
submitted that three aspects of the Tribunal’s
reasoning involved
illogical or irrational reasoning or were based on a factual basis for which
there was no evidence such as to
constitute jurisdictional error.
concern was raised about the Tribunal’s finding in relation to whether the
Applicant had witnessed his older brother’s
death. It was submitted that
there was no basis in the evidence for the Tribunal’s finding that the
Applicant’s younger
brother had claimed to be “
” (in other words, the sole witness) to the murder of his older
brother in circumstances where the transcript of the younger
hearing (as set out at [80] above) revealed that he claimed, “
” As discussed above, it was submitted that the younger
brother did not say to the Tribunal (differently constituted) that
only witness or “
the witness
” to his brother’s murder.
was also submitted that the Applicant had not in fact claimed that he was
the witness
” or the sole witness to his older
brother’s murder. Rather, the Tribunal was said to have made this
suggestion at the
Tribunal hearing. Reference was made to the part of the
transcript of the Tribunal hearing (Transcript p.38) in which the Tribunal
to the Applicant:
But I thought you said, you said to the delegate that you were targeted because
you were a witness to the case?
[APPLICANT]
That you are an eyewitness to the case and that’s why they wanted you?
[APPLICANT]
Yes, that’s true.
“Okay, I have a problem with this because your brother said the same
thing. Your brother came to Australia and said to the
Department and the
Tribunal that he was the eye witness to your brother’s case and that he
was the only eye witness to his
brother’s murder, he never mentioned that
any of the other brothers were there. You’re saying the exact opposite.
were saying you were the only one there, none of the other brothers were
there. So who was there? I don’t know.
Applicant submitted that there was thus no evidentiary basis for the
inconsistency identified by the Tribunal between what the
Applicant and his
younger brother had each said about the death of their older brother and that
insofar as the Tribunal could be
said to have made its decision on this basis
(as it was one of the planks in the Tribunal’s reasoning in relation to
credibility),
this was sufficient to establish jurisdictional error on the basis
of illogicality or irrationality irrespective of which test in
Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship v SZMDS and Another
(2010) 240 CLR 611
was adopted.
it was submitted that even if an inference could be drawn that it was open to
the Tribunal to find that the younger brother
and the Applicant had each claimed
that they were “
the witness
” to their older brother’s
murder, that in itself could not be taken to undermine the Applicant’s
credibility.
This submission was put on the basis that a claim by the younger
brother to be the sole witness to his brother’s death could
only undermine
a claim by the Applicant to have been the sole witness to that event if the
Tribunal had come to the view that the
younger brother was credible in this
regard. It was pointed out that in the Applicant’s case the Tribunal had
made no finding
in relation to the credibility of his younger brother. It was
submitted that it was not logical for the Tribunal to conclude on
the basis of
the mere existence of contradictory evidence that the credibility of the
Applicant’s claim was diminished.
it was submitted that the Tribunal’s reasoning in relation to the letter
from Dr Jahangeer was illogical and irrational.
On the one hand the Tribunal
was said to have held that the genuineness of both the court order and the
letter from Dr Jahangeer
were doubtful, but on the other hand to have
relied on the truth of the letter from Dr Jahangeer in having regard to the
no mention of the court case had been made in the Applicant’s
application for protection or his Departmental interview and
in finding that his
explanation for why he was not aware of having been an accused, the subject of a
police search or a court case
brought by the police was implausible.
Applicant submitted that the fact that irrationality or illogicality may be the
foundation for a finding of jurisdictional error
in the context of a decision of
the Tribunal has been confirmed by the High Court in
Re Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Applicant S20/2002
[2003] HCA 30
was contended that while in
differing views were expressed as to
what was necessary for the grounds of illogicality or irrationality to be made
out (by Crennan
and Bell JJ at [130] – [131], Heydon J at [78]
and Gummow ACJ and Kiefel J at [51] – [53]), whatever view was
to be taken
of the necessary requirements, they were satisfied in the present
case. It was accepted that this ground of review did not sanction
review, but submitted that this was not a case in which merits review was
Applicant submitted that each of these aspects of the Tribunal reasoning raised
in submissions sufficed to establish jurisdictional
error. It was submitted
that this was not a case in which it could be said that the decision was one
that could otherwise have been
reached on logical and rational grounds. It was
pointed out that the Tribunal relied on a number of elements in coming to its
including the matters raised in this ground. It was submitted that it
could not be assumed that the balance of the elements relied
on by the Tribunal
would necessarily have supported the Tribunal’s conclusion as to the
Applicant’s credibility and “
an unfavourable view taken upon an
otherwise minor issue may be decisive
Re Refugee Review Tribunal
and Another; Ex parte Aala
(2000) 204 CLR 82
[2000] HCA 57
Gleeson CJ).
Applicant acknowledged that the ground of illogicality or irrationality would
only be made out in an exceptional case (see
Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship v SZOCT and Another
(2010) 189 FCR 577
[2010] FCAFC 159
SZOOR v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
(2012) 202 FCR 1
However it was submitted that this was an exceptional case, given
the emphasis placed by the Tribunal on the existence of the Applicant’s
younger brother’s contrary evidence in circumstances where such evidence
was said not to exist in reality. This lack of logic
was also said to have
infected two of the other bases for the Tribunal’s finding on credibility
and to have rendered the Tribunal’s
decision one that no rational or
logical decision-maker could arrive at on the same evidence.
for the Applicant submitted that (insofar as necessary) this ground could be
seen as involving a challenge to the Tribunal’s
ultimate finding of
non-citizen to whom Australia owed protection
obligations under the Refugees
Convention. This argument was put on the basis that in finding it was so
satisfied, the Tribunal
had engaged in a process of reasoning that was
illogical, irrational and not based on findings or inferences of fact based on
grounds. It was submitted that such a challenge to the
” finding of fact could involve scrutiny not only of
the Tribunal’s findings on questions of law but also its
evidentiary
intermediate
of fact (see
Applicant S20
at [53] – [60] per McHugh and
Gummow JJ).
First Respondent disputed whether the Tribunal’s decision contained any of
the deficiencies which the Applicant purported
to identify. In any event, it
was submitted that even if there had been a lapse in the Tribunal’s
reasoning process of the
nature contended for by the Applicant this was
insufficient to demonstrate jurisdictional error. The First Respondent also
that by this ground the Applicant sought to challenge intermediate
findings of fact and that questions of illogicality and irrationality
relevant to intermediate findings of fact, but rather to decisions in relation
to the state of satisfaction required under
s.65 of the Act (see
the First Respondent submitted, jurisdictional error has not been established on
any of the bases contended for in ground 1 of
the Further Amended Application.
Crennan and Bell JJ (who with Heydon J formed the
majority) stated (at [130] – [131]):
context of the Tribunal’s decision here, “illogicality” or
“irrationality” sufficient to give
rise to jurisdictional error must
mean the decision to which the Tribunal came, in relation to the state of
satisfaction required
under s65, is one at which no rational or logical
decision-maker could arrive on the same evidence. In other words, accepting,
the sake of argument, that an allegation of illogicality or irrationality
provides some distinct basis for seeking judicial review
of a decision as to a
complaint that the decision is
“clearly unjust” or
“arbitrary” or “capricious” or
“unreasonable” in the sense that
the state of satisfaction mandated
by the statute imports a requirement that the opinion as to the state of
satisfaction must be
one that could be formed by a reasonable person. The same
applies in the case of an opinion that a mandated state of satisfaction
been reached. Not every lapse in logic will give rise to jurisdictional error.
A court should be slow, although not unwilling,
to interfere in an appropriate
involved here an issue of jurisdictional fact upon which different minds might
reach different conclusions. The complaint
of illogicality or irrationality was
said to lie in the process of reasoning. But, the test for illogicality or
irrationality must
be to ask whether logical or rational or reasonable minds
might adopt different reasoning or might differ in any decision or finding
made on evidence upon which the decision is based. If probative evidence can
give rise to different processes of reasoning
and if logical or rational or
reasonable minds might differ in respect of the conclusions to be drawn from
that evidence, a decision
cannot be said by a reviewing court to be illogical or
irrational or unreasonable, simply because one conclusion has been preferred
another possible conclusion.
stated (at [78] and [86]):
was one on which minds might differ. The Federal Court evidently operated on
one assumption or conclusion about that issue.
The Tribunal operated on another.
The difference was one of degree, impression and empirical judgment. It did not
stem from an error
in logic by the Tribunal member. The difference could not be
said to reveal an absence of any basis whatsoever for her conclusion.
difference between the Federal Court and the Tribunal may be put thus. The
Federal Court thought that the first respondent's
explanation for not seeking
asylum in the United Kingdom was "perfectly plausible". There are pejorative
meanings of the word "plausible",
but they are not the meanings which the
Federal Court was conveying. The Federal Court was saying that the explanation
was "capable
of being believed" or "apparently believable". The Tribunal,
however, did not believe it. Something can be capable of being believed
actually being believed. For the Tribunal member to withhold belief from
something which is "perfectly plausible" but which
she did not find to have been
satisfactorily explained and which she found not to be probable is not
minority, Gummow ACJ and Kiefel J, stressed that the ascertainment of
upon the treatment
of the requirement
” of satisfaction within
s.65 of the Act (at [37]), emphasised the distinction between jurisdictional
fact and other facts (at
[39]) and found that the Tribunal had erred in acting
on an assumption for which there was no basis in the evidence, that there was
logical connection between the evidence and the reasons
that it had made a “
critical finding by inference not supported on
logical grounds
” (at [50] – [53]).
Applicant submitted that in
McKerracher J had expressed the
view that while Heydon J had reached the same conclusion as Crennan and
his Honour’s reasoning was consistent with
the minority view expressed by Gummow ACJ and Kiefel J. On the
contrary, McKerracher
J made the point that the approach of Heydon J
was consistent with that of Crennan and Bell JJ (not with
that of Gummow ACJ and Kiefel J).
McKerracher J
(with whom Reeves J relevantly agreed) stated in
, none of the three majority judges discerned illogicality in the
reasoning of the Tribunal. The test which emerged as to the circumstances
which illogicality would give rise to jurisdictional error emphasises that a
decision cannot be said by a reviewing court to be
illogical or irrational or
unreasonable simply because one conclusion has been preferred to another
possible conclusion (Crennan
and Bell JJ at [131]). As stated subsequently (at
there may be varieties of illogicality and irrationality, a decision will not be
illogical or irrational if there is room
for a logical or rational person to
reach the same decision on the material before the decision maker. A decision
maker might be
said to be illogical or irrational if only one conclusion is open
on the evidence, and the decision maker does not come to that conclusion,
a decision to which the decision maker came was simply not open on the evidence
or if there is no logical connection between
the evidence and the inferences or
conclusions drawn.
said by Heydon J
(at [78]), cited above (at [72]), in my view, while
differently expressed,
is not at odds with what was said by Crennan and Bell
. Illogicality such as to amount to jurisdictional error will not be
shown where the point is merely one upon which reasonable minds
may differ or
where it cannot be said that there is no evidence before the Tribunal upon which
the decision could be based. Illogicality
will not amount to jurisdictional
error in every case. It must be such as to affect the decision. See, for
at [84] per Nicholas J and
at [55] per Rares
(Emphasis added)
other words, as was said in
(at [131]) per Crennan and
Bell JJ, illogicality sufficient to amount to jurisdictional error will not
be shown if the impugned finding
is one on which reasonable minds may differ.
As Rares J stated in
(at [6]) “[e]
mphatic judicial
disagreement
” with a decision-maker’s reasoning does not suffice
to make out this ground. It is the case that, as his Honour indicated
(at [11]), “
the dividing line between what is not rational or
logical reasoning and a mere error of fact is far from clear
However, relevantly, his Honour concluded (at [15]):
approach to irrationality or illogicality dictated by the authorities in the
High Court appears to be that even if the decision-maker’s
articulation of
how and why he or she went from the facts to the decision is not rational or
logical, if someone else could have
done so on the evidence, the decision is not
one that will be set aside. It is only if no decision-maker could have followed
path, and despite the reasons given by the actual decision-maker, that the
decision will be found to have been made by reason of
a jurisdictional
these principles to the present case, while minds may differ about the
interpretation of the precise claim made by the younger
brother at his Tribunal
hearing (having regard to his use of the indefinite article
”) and how to characterise what the Applicant claimed to
the Tribunal, it cannot be said that there was
evidence before the
Tribunal on which the decision could be based or that its findings were not open
on the evidence. The decision
is not illogical or irrational simply because one
conclusion is preferred to another possible conclusion. The decision reached by
the Tribunal was open on the evidence. There was a logical connection between
the evidence before the Tribunal and the conclusions
drawn. In finding that the
Applicant’s evidence was inconsistent with his younger brother’s
evidence to the Tribunal
(differently constituted) in relation to his location
and role at the time the older brother was killed, the Tribunal did not have
regard only to the statements of the Applicant and of the Applicant’s
younger brother. It also took into account the letter
from Fr Joseph Maria
which confirmed that the younger brother was “
the eyewitness
to the murder of the brother and (as the Tribunal observed) did not contain any
other information to indicate, even tentatively,
that any other member of the
family had witnessed the shooting. In other words, the Tribunal had regard to
all of the information
provided to the Tribunal (differently constituted) by the
Applicant’s brother in relation to his case, including the information
contained in Fr Joseph Maria’s letter, in finding that this cast
serious doubt
” on the Applicant’s key claim he was the
only eyewitness to his brother’s murder and that he did not know if any
other member of the family had witnessed the incident.
addition, in relation to the issue of whether the Applicant had claimed that he
the witness
” to his older brother’s murder, as
stated in its findings and reasons the Tribunal had regard not only to what was
at the Tribunal hearing, but also to the Applicant’s claim at the
Departmental interview that he was the only member of his
family who had
witnessed the murder of his brother and had come to his rescue and after he was
shot. There is no evidence to show
that this is not an accurate account of what
occurred at the Departmental interview. Moreover, while the Tribunal used the
only eye witness
” in relation to the exchange at
the Tribunal hearing, that must be seen in the context of all the claims made by
the Applicant
(including his claim at the hearing that he was the only family
member who came to his brother’s help (Transcript p.20)) as
well as his
failure to mention the presence and involvement of any other family member.
was evidence before the Tribunal such that the decision not to grant a
protection visa was open to it, even if a different decision-maker
made a different decision in relation to this or on any of the other three
matters relied on by the Applicant. The decision
does not display a lapse in
the Tribunal’s reasoning process such as to ground a finding that it was
illogical or irrational.
has not been established that the Tribunal’s decision was one which no
reasonable decision-maker could arrive at on the same
at [3], [15] and [84] – [85]). Having regard to
all of the evidence given by or on behalf of the younger brother, including
Joseph Maria’s evidence and the evidence given by the Applicant, it has
not been established that this was a situation in
which only one conclusion, to
which the Tribunal did not come, was open on the evidence. It cannot be said
that the Tribunal’s
decision was not open on the evidence or that there
was no logical connection between the evidence and the inferences or conclusions
drawn and the other matters to which the Tribunal had regard in considering
whether it had the state of satisfaction required under
was not a jurisdictional error for the Tribunal to have regard to
inconsistencies without making an adverse credibility finding
brother or for it to reject the Applicant’s claims about being the
eyewitness and being targeted as such.
The Tribunal did not simply reject the
Applicant’s credibility on the basis of the inconsistency with his
evidence. Its concerns in relation to this aspect of the
Applicant’s claims extended to inconsistencies in the Applicant’s
own evidence and gaps and unconvincing aspects of his evidence about the lawyer
representing his family and the location and availability
of court documents.
has not been established that the Tribunal’s findings in this respect were
illogical or irrational or that the decision was
one that no rational or logical
decision-maker could have made on the same evidence (
at [130] and
at [15]). Nor was the decision one for which there was no evidence
before the Tribunal upon which the decision could be based (see
[85] per McKerracher J).
has it been established that there was such illogicality and irrationality in
the Tribunal’s reasoning in relation to the
letter from Dr Jahangeer
as to constitute jurisdictional error in the sense considered in
. It cannot be said that the Tribunal’s decision was one that
no rational or logical decision-maker could have arrived at on
evidence. For the Tribunal to point out flaws in the Applicant’s evidence
was not illogical or irrational, let alone
such as to demonstrate jurisdictional
has not been established that there was illogicality or irrationality
constituting jurisdictional error. Ground one is not made
The “prescribed period” issue
four in the Further Amended Application is as follows:
In making a
decision on the review adverse to the applicant prior to the expiration of the
“prescribed period” referred
section 424B
, the Tribunal
did not comply with the requirement to “invite” the applicant to
comment on or respond to information under
section 424A
“invite” the applicant to appear under
section 425
and in doing so committed jurisdictional error.
set out above, the Tribunal initially wrote to the Applicant under
Act on 13 May 2011. That letter, which was apparently posted to the
Applicant, invited him to respond by 30 May 2011. He
did so. He is
recorded as having told a Tribunal officer that he had more information to
submit which he hoped to send in two to
three weeks. On 20 June 2011 he
provided further information and supporting documentation.
the date for response or comment specified in the letter of 13 May 2011 did
not allow the full prescribed period. For this
reason the Tribunal issued a new
letter on 4 August 2011. It was given to the Applicant by hand and
advised him to disregard the earlier letter. It put to him the
same information
in the same terms as the 13 May 2011 letter and gave him until
18 August 2011 to comment or respond or to seek an
extension of time if he
could not provide comments or a response by 18 August 2011.
Applicant responded by letter received by the Tribunal on 15 August 2011.
He stated that he relied on his earlier responses of
30 May 2011 and
20 June 2011, made some additional submissions and provided further
evidence. He did not seek any extension of time.
The Tribunal made its
decision on 17 August 2011. A copy of the decision was posted to the
Applicant by letter of that date.
Applicant contended that the Tribunal fell into jurisdictional error in making
its decision prior to the expiration of the “
” in that it did not comply with the requirement to
” the Applicant to comment or respond to information
and/or to appear under
of the Act.
of the Act the Tribunal had an obligation to invite the Applicant to
comment on or respond to information which it considered would
be the reason or
part of the reason for affirming the decision under review. By reason of
of the Act, the information was to be given within a specified period
which in relation to the letter of 13 May 2011 was at the end
14 days after the day on which the invitation was received under reg.4.35
Migration Regulations 1994
to the First Respondent, the first s.424A letter dated 13 May 2011 was sent
on 16 May 2011 by registered post to the last
address for service given by
the Applicant. This is not disputed by the Applicant. Hence, under s.441C(4)
of the Act this letter
was taken to have been received 7 working days after
the date of the document, that is, on 24 May 2011. By reason of reg.4.35
s.424B(2), the “
prescribed period
” ended at the end of
7 June 2011. However the first s.424A letter invited the Applicant to
respond by 30 May 2011.
is not in dispute that the second s.424A letter was given to the Applicant by
hand on 4 August 2011 and that pursuant to s.441C(2)
of the Act it was
taken to have been received on that date. Accordingly, by reason of reg.4.35
and s.424B(2), the “
prescribed period
” ended at the end of
18 August 2011. This was the date specified in the letter. However the
Tribunal’s decision was
dated 17 August 2011. This was the date the
Tribunal was taken to have made the decision under
of the Act.
is no suggestion that the Applicant in fact sought an extension of time to make
any further response or comment in relation
to the s.424A letter of
4 August 2011 or to provide further information to the Tribunal. No issue
arises as to when the Tribunal
functus officio
Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship v SZQOY and Another
(2012) 206 FCR 25
FCAFC 131).
Rather, the Applicant submitted that in making a decision before
the prescribed period expired the Tribunal failed to “
the Applicant under s.424A and/or
of the Act.
Applicant submitted that it was clear that the legislature intended that the
Tribunal be required not to make its decision before
the prescribed period had
expired. Counsel for the Applicant pointed out that the obligation to
of the Act had been interpreted by the
High Court as being part of the overall duty of the Tribunal to conduct a review
of a decision
of the Minister in relation to a claim for refugee status
NAFF of 2002 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
and Indigenous Affairs and Another
(2004) 221 CLR 1
[2004] HCA 62
McHugh, Gummow, Callinan and Heydon JJ at [27]). It was acknowledged that it
was clear from
of the Act that the Tribunal was not to be constrained by
formality in the way it operated and that this was reflected in the provisions
of Division 4 of
However it was submitted that the Tribunal’s own
conduct in a particular case may provide an intimation as to what the Tribunal
itself held to be the necessary steps to be taken to properly conduct the review
in question. In
their Honours stated (at [27]):
of the overall duty to review was the duty to invite the appellant to give
evidence and present arguments:
The duty to review therefore entailed
a statutory duty to consider the arguments presented and in that way to afford
the appellant
procedural fairness. That implied that if the Tribunal thought
that the arguments had been presented so inadequately that the review
be completed until further steps had been directed and performed, it could not
be peremptorily concluded by the making
of a decision before that direction was
complied with or withdrawn.
the Tribunal member had indicated at the conclusion of the Tribunal
hearing that the Tribunal would write to the appellant about
inconsistencies in his evidence and had stated “[s]
o what I will do is
to write to you in the next couple of days and you will have 21 days in
which to respond to my questions and to
put any more information that you wish
to the Tribunal
” (at [11]). However no such letter was ever sent.
Rather, 20 days after the hearing the Tribunal sent the appellant a letter
stating that it had “
considered all the material relating to
” and had “
made its decision
”. The Tribunal
later handed down a decision affirming the delegate’s decision not to
grant a protection visa (
at [11]). The High Court held that the
Tribunal had fallen into jurisdictional error in making its decision without
sending the foreshadowed
letter seeking a response.
for the Applicant acknowledged that the present case was not on all fours with
. However it was pointed out that in
French CJ and Kiefel J had referred to
in finding that
where an invitation had been issued under s.424A “
it may be that such
an invitation, once issued, amounts to a binding indication by the Tribunal that
the review process will not be
concluded until the applicant has had an
opportunity to respond
was submitted that a conclusion that the Tribunal could not make its decision
before the prescribed period had expired was also
consistent with the other
provisions in Division 4 of
of the Act in relation to invitations under
s.424A (in particular ss.424B and 424C).
Relevantly,
s.424B(2) of the Act is as follows:
invitation is to give information, or comments or a response, otherwise than at
an interview, the information, or the comments
or the response, are to be given
within a period specified in the invitation, being a prescribed period or, if no
period is prescribed,
a reasonable period.
for the Applicant conceded that it was hard to see the fact that the Tribunal
made its decision prior to expiration of the
time stipulated in the
4 August 2011 letter as a breach of s.424B(2), because s.424B(2) does not
to appear to place any requirement
on the Tribunal, or at least none in relation
to when it could make its decision. It was nonetheless submitted that it was
that a breach of s.424B could not constitute jurisdictional error (see
SZLWQ v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship and Another
[2008] FCA 1406
SZEXZ v Minister for Immigration, Multicultural
and Indigenous Affairs
[2006] FCA 449).
any event, the Applicant pointed out that there is no discretion under s.424B to
reduce the time for response to a period less
than the prescribed period.
Section 424C(2)
provides that if an Applicant has been invited to provide information, comments
or a response and “
does not give the comments or the response before
the time for giving them has passed
the Tribunal may
make a decision on the review without taking any further action to obtain the
Applicant’s views on the information
Applicant submitted these provisions indicated an intention that the
prescribed period
” in s.424B was a
being a window for response the legislature intended to afford the Applicant.
It was submitted that had the legislature contemplated
that a review decision
could be made before the end of the prescribed period, provision would have been
made in s.424C for the Tribunal
to do so (as is the case in relation to
decisions of the delegate under s.63).
it was submitted that an aspect of the “
opportunity
for in s.424A of the Act was a requirement that the Tribunal give the Applicant
a minimum period within which to
provide comment or response, namely the
prescribed period
”. It was contended that this was not a
single opportunity to provide a single response or comment, but rather a
prescribed period
” during which the Applicant may provide
several responses or comments.
Applicant pointed out that in
(at [37]) Jacobson J had
identified the original objective of s.424B(2) as being to ensure that once the
invitation to comment or
respond had been issued, the Applicant had “
reasonable period of time in which to provide the information or
”. His Honour also said that consideration must be given to
the part that subsection played “
in the codified regime of procedural
fairness contained in Div 4 of
” (at [42]). It was
submitted that this
remained applicable in spite of subsequent
amendment to the Act.
Applicant also submitted that while s.424C(2) allowed the Tribunal to put to an
end the review process, irrespective of whether
or not the Applicant had
provided a response or comment (so that it need not wait indefinitely) the
Applicant was allowed a minimum
time to provide that response. In support of
this proposition it was pointed out that the Tribunal was not at liberty to
a response within a period less than the “
”, but rather that it could only request a response to a s.424A
letter within the “
prescribed period
” or, if no period was
prescribed, a reasonable period. In other words it was contended that the
Tribunal could extend the
time for response but that it could not limit it,
because the “
prescribed period
” was a minimum period. As
this was said to be all the procedural fairness Division 4 of
afforded an
Applicant before the opportunity to respond was automatically revoked by the
operation of s.424C(2) it was submitted
that it ought not to be interpreted (as
the First Respondent was said to have suggested) as providing the Applicant only
shot. Rather, it was submitted that it ought to be interpreted as
allowing the Applicant the full benefit of the limited period
within which he
could give a response or comment.
Applicant also submitted that it could not be assumed that the Applicant would
not have sought to lodge further submissions or
material with the Tribunal or an
extension of time to do so (s.424B(4)). Reference was made to the fact that the
Applicant had lodged
submissions in relation to the particulars of information
set out in the s.424A letter on three discrete dates. It was said to be
that the Applicant was doing everything he could to obtain further supporting
documentation from overseas and to put that material
before the Tribunal as and
when it became available and that his reply was not a once and for all effort.
Thus it was contended
that it could not be assumed that had the Tribunal not
made its decision before the period stipulated in the 4 August 2011 letter
had expired, the Applicant would not have sought to lodge further material with
the Tribunal.
addition, it was submitted that an invitation to respond or comment under s.424A
could not be perfunctory, but must be a real opportunity.
In the present case
it was said that there was no real opportunity because the particulars of
information which were required to
be given were not clearly given or given at
all and that for each of the particulars of information that were given, their
was not explained as far as was reasonably practicable or at all.
it was submitted that by making its decision within the prescribed period the
Tribunal had failed to comply with the procedural
requirements set out in
ss.424A, 424B and 424C, because although it had taken the step of issuing an
”, it had not afforded the Applicant the full
opportunity
” to respond and therefore it did not complete
the process of review in the way it had itself recognised to be necessary.
the alternative, the Applicant submitted that there had been a failure by the
Tribunal to “
” the Applicant within
of the Act.
The Applicant submitted that
, as interpreted by the High Court in
did not merely require a letter of invitation to be issued, but also
required that the Tribunal afford the Applicant an opportunity
to be heard.
was submitted that even if the Court was of the view that the Tribunal was not
required under s.424A to put to the Applicant the
information it purported to
put in the 4 August 2013 letter, it could nonetheless be said that at the
end of the Tribunal hearing
the Tribunal was of the view that it was necessary
for a letter to be sent to put to the Applicant inconsistencies that had been
identified. Hence it was contended that the Tribunal could be said to have
discharged its function of review only once this process
was complete.
Applicant submitted (in an echo of the concerns raised in the context of grounds
2 and 3) that by issuing an invitation that was
prolix, difficult to comprehend
and not fully effective in explaining the relevance of the perceived
inconsistencies, and then by
issuing its decision prior to expiration of the
period stipulated in the 4 August 2011 letter, the Tribunal failed to
undertake the
steps that it had itself set out for completion of the review.
Applicant acknowledged that some response had been provided by the time the
Tribunal issued notice of its decision. However it
was submitted that, for the
reasons raised in relation to grounds 2 and 3, the s.424A letter never
effectively put the information
to the Applicant in the first place so that
there could be a meaningful response. The Applicant reiterated the contentions
the s.424A letter was confusing, that it was difficult to identify the
particular items of evidence said to be in conflict and that
it did not always
explain the relevance of the information to a reasonably practicable extent. In
such circumstances it was submitted
that it could not be said that the Applicant
ever had the opportunity to provide a true response to all of the relevant
matters such
that the Tribunal could complete the steps necessary to finalise
the review. It was suggested that even if the Applicant’s
handwritten
notes of 30 May 2011, 20 June 2011 and 15 August 2011 were
regarded as notionally in response to the 4 August 2011 s.424A
was evident that the content of these notes did not in fact provide a
substantive response in that they were not truly
responsive in many respects, as
was recognised in the Tribunal’s reasons.
Applicant contended that ss.424A and
were mandatory requirements which had
to be complied with in the exercise of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction (see
Re Refugee Review Tribunal; Ex parte Aala
(2000) 204 CLR 82
per Gaudron and Gummow JJ at [58] and
at [77], [136] and
[208]) and that there was no proper basis to assert that relief should be denied
on discretionary grounds.
the First Respondent submitted, no breach of
or 424A has been established
on the basis contended for in Ground 4 of the Further Amended Application.
is convenient to consider
first. The Applicant attended a Tribunal
hearing. It has not been established that there were any
” in respect of which the Applicant was not given the
opportunity required by
at the Tribunal hearing. None have been
identified and nor are any apparent.
can it be said that in this case the Tribunal’s conduct indicated that the
review could not be completed until after the
expiration of the period set out
in the letter of 4 August 2011. Even if the issue of the invitation of
4 August 2011 is to be seen
as a binding indication that the review process
would not be concluded until the applicant had an opportunity to respond (see
at [9]), in this case the Applicant responded on 15 August
2011. I am not persuaded that anything that occurred at the Tribunal hearing
prevented the Tribunal from completing the review before the expiration of the
time for response provided in the letter of 4 August
2011 in circumstances
where the Applicant had been given and had taken the “
opportunity to
at [9]) to the matters raised by the Tribunal
in writing.
contrary to the Applicant’s contentions about a lack of clarity in the
letter of 4 August 2011, for the reasons given
in relation to grounds 2 and
3, I am not persuaded that the invitation was such that there could be no
meaningful response and hence
the review was never completed. No failure to
comply with
of the Act or error of the kind identified in
been established.
issue of whether ss.424A, 424B and 424C or the requirements of natural justice
compel a conclusion that the Tribunal could not
make a decision on the review
until the prescribed time had expired is more problematic. For the reasons that
follow, while I incline
to the view that in particular circumstances an
Applicant may be denied procedural fairness (outside the constraints of
of the Act) if a Tribunal makes its decision prior to the expiration
of the prescribed period for response specified in a s.424A
letter, this is not
such a case.
the provisions of the
Migration Act
should not prevent the Tribunal from making
a decision at the time that it did in the particular circumstances of this case.
is relevant to have regard not only to
but also to
of the Act.
is contained in Division 3 of
of the Act which applies to decisions of
the Minister and relevantly provides:
decision about visa may be made
sections 39
(criterion limiting number of visas), 57 (give
applicant information), 84 (no further processing), 86 (effect of limit on
and 94 (put aside under points system) and subsections (2) and (3)
of this section, the Minister may grant or refuse to grant a visa
at any time
after the application has been made.
The Minister is not to refuse to grant a visa after inviting the applicant to
comment on information and before whichever of
the following happens first:
the comments are given;
the applicant tells the Minister that the applicant does not wish to comment;
the time in which the comments are to be given ends.
is no equivalent provision in Division 4 of
of the Act.
However, pursuant to
of the Act the Tribunal may exercise all the
powers and discretions conferred by the Act on the person who made the decision
review (that is, the delegate of the Minister).
(1) and (2) and
(1) and (2) are as follows:
(1) The Tribunal may, for the purposes of the review of an RRT-reviewable
decision, exercise all the powers and discretions
that are conferred by this Act
on the person who made the decision.
The Tribunal may:
affirm the decision; or
vary the decision; or
if the decision relates to a prescribed matter--remit the matter for
reconsideration in accordance with such directions or recommendations
Tribunal as are permitted by the regulations; or
set the decision aside and substitute a new decision.
If the Tribunal:
varies the decision; or
sets aside the decision and substitutes a new decision;
decision as varied or substituted is taken (except for the purpose of appeals
from decisions of the Tribunal) to be a decision
of the Minister.
To avoid doubt, the Tribunal must not, by varying a decision or setting a
decision aside and substituting a new decision, purport
to make a decision that
is not authorised by the Act or the regulations.
(1) If a person is:
invited in writing under
section 424
to give information; or
invited under
section 424A
to comment on or respond to information;
invitation is to specify the way in which the information, or the comments or
the response, may be given, being the way the Tribunal
considers is appropriate
in the circumstances.
If the invitation is to give information, or comments or a response, otherwise
than at an interview, the information, or the
comments or the response, are to
be given within a period specified in the invitation, being a prescribed period
or, if no period
is prescribed, a reasonable period.
(1) If a person:
is invited in writing under
section 424
to give information; and
does not give the information before the time for giving it has passed;
Tribunal may make a decision on the review without taking any further action to
obtain the information.
If the applicant:
is invited under
section 424A
to comment on or respond to information; and
does not give the comments or the response before the time for giving them has
Tribunal may make a decision on the review without taking any further action to
obtain the applicant's views on the information.
, Division 4 of
of the Act is taken to be an
exhaustive statement of the requirements of procedural fairness in relation to
the matters it deals
with to the exclusion of the common law natural justice
hearing rule (
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
Affairs v Lat
(2006) 151 FCR 214; [2006] FCAFC 61 at [59] – [67];
SZCIJ v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2006] FCAFC
essence, the Applicant submitted that the Tribunal failed to meet the
procedural requirements
while it had issued an invitation it had not afforded him the full
opportunity
” to respond and therefore did not complete the
process of review in the way it had recognised to be necessary.
Applicant did not identify any “
” requirements in
(beyond reiterating the contention about the lack of clarity in the
particulars of the information). However even if (as discussed
relation to grounds 2 and 3) there was some lack of clarity in the
this would not of itself mean that the Tribunal had not completed its review.
It has not been established that there was
a failure to comply with a
” requirement of
of the Act. There is no
suggestion that the invitation of 4 August 2011 was not given in accordance
of the Act. Under ground 4 the assertion of jurisdictional
error is based on the fact that the Tribunal made its decision before
expiration of the “
prescribed period
” referred to in
of the Act. The jurisdictional error established under ground 3 is a
separate issue.
its widest, the Applicant’s contention in relation to
prescribed period
” referred to in
was a minimum
period and that the Tribunal was not “
” to make a
review decision until after the prescribed period had expired.
Section 424B
of the Act deals with the requirements for the written
invitation.
Relevantly, it provides that an invitation under
to comment or respond to
information must specify the way in which the comments or the response may be
given (being the way the Tribunal
considers is appropriate in the
circumstances). If that way is not at an interview, then this is to be within
the prescribed period
(or if no period is prescribed, a reasonable period).
requirements and effect of a failure to comply with
have been considered
in a number of cases. The obligations imposed by
are directed to
ensuring that an Applicant has an adequate opportunity to provide comments on or
a response to a
letter (see
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v
SZIZO and Others
[2009] HCA 37
(2009) 238 CLR 627
[2009] HCA 37
French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan and Bell JJ).
concerned a
letter which gave the Applicant more than the prescribed
period of time to respond. The Minister conceded that the invitation was
, but argued that there was no jurisdictional error. The
Applicant had attended a hearing and had responded to the
Jacobson J pointed out (at [30]) that:
question of whether a breach of
gives rise to jurisdictional error is
to be answered by having regard to the language of the section and the scope and
the whole statute; the question is whether it was a purpose of the
legislation that an act done in breach of the provision should
be invalid;
Project Blue Sky v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
(1989) 194 CLR 355
, [93]; see also
at [73], [205].
indicated, his Honour was of the view that the “
object, or at least one
is apparently to ensure that after
the invitation is issued, the applicant has a reasonable, albeit relatively
short, period of time
in which to provide the information or comments to the
” (at [37]) and that it was relevant to have regard to the
played in the codified regime of procedural fairness in Division 4
of the Act (at [43]). Jacobson J also made the point that
the issue of whether the breach complained of gave rise to jurisdictional
cannot be answered by simply posing the question of breach or no
breach; it is necessary to consider whether in the particular circumstances
breach had that result
” (at [48]). His Honour found that the breach
in question did not give rise to jurisdictional error but that, in any event,
he was wrong he would have refused relief as the appellant had suffered no
injustice (at [51] – [53]). Relevantly in this
4 August 2011 specified the correct prescribed period.
M v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
(2006) 155 FCR
[2006] FCA 1247
, Tracey J considered a contention that a failure to
comply with
(the equivalent of
in relation to specification
of the prescribed period to respond in a
letter meant that there was no
lawful invitation by the Migration Review Tribunal.
was acknowledged that there was no suggestion that “
all breaches of the
procedural requirements imposed by the Act would give rise to jurisdictional
” (at [32]). Tracey J found (at [34]) that the procedural
obligation imposed by
(the equivalent of
imperative terms
” so that any failure to comply with that section
would result in invalidity (see
). His Honour made the point that
(the equivalent of
was not of the same nature. As His Honour
stated (at [35]):
of the Act is, on its face, a more flexible provision. It is designed to
avoid extended delays in the decision making process in
circumstances where the
Tribunal chooses or is required to seek additional information or comment from
an applicant. If there is
a prescribed period that period is to be specified in
the invitation. Otherwise a reasonable period limitation is imposed. By
of the Act the Tribunal may extend a prescribed period for a prescribed
further period. The burden of any temporal requirement falls
on an applicant.
There is no requirement that an applicant respond to an invitation. No
imperative obligation is, in terms, imposed
on the Tribunal by
Buchanan J went further in expressing the view that
did not establish the kind of obligation on the Tribunal which could lead to
statutory breach or jurisdictional error. As his Honour stated
on its face directs that ‘information or comments are to be given
within a period specified in the invitation’. It does
not, in terms,
impose a direct obligation on the RRT about the terms of the invitation (cf
– ‘the invitation is to specify ...’). The
consequence of any failure to specify a period is that the facility
proceeding to a decision in the absence of the information might not be
available but I do not see
as establishing the kind of obligation
on the RRT which could lead to either statutory breach or jurisdictional error.
A circumstance
of this kind (failure to specify a period and consequent
inability to rely on
does not fall within any of the reasoning in
. As it happens the
information was given. It was brought to the attention of the appellant. She
had an opportunity to deal with
it. It cannot be said that the information was
not given before the time for it had passed
(s 424C(1)(b)).
In my view no
‘breach’ of
occurred and, in any event, any failure
to comply with its strict terms did not, in the circumstances of this case at
least, amount
to jurisdictional error on the part of the RRT. The
Minister’s latest written submissions drew attention to judgments of this
Court to similar effect (
SZEXZ v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
and Indigenous Affairs
[2006] FCA 449
M v Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs
[2006] FCA 1247
(2006) 155 FCR 333
remarks remain applicable notwithstanding subsequent amendment to
with the view taken in these cases, it cannot be said that any failure to comply
amounts to a jurisdictional error. Rather, it is necessary to
consider the particular circumstances of the case to determine whether
particular circumstances there is a breach which gives rise to jurisdictional
error. Moreover, even if there may be said
to be a jurisdictional error arising
out of a breach of
, the court may exercise its discretion not to grant
relief where an applicant had suffered no “
reason of (for example) a misstatement of the prescribed period (see
at [50] – [53],
at [38] and also see
SZLPO v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship (No 2)
(2009) 177 FCR 29
[2009] FCAFC 60
this case, notwithstanding that the prescribed period was understated in the
letter, the applicant effectively had a period of considerably more
than the prescribed period to provide comments or response.
letter gave him the correct prescribed period. He provided comments or response
on three separate occasions. He did not seek additional
time to respond. It
has not been established that there was any denial of natural justice arising
from the Tribunal’s failure
to specify the correct prescribed period in
consistent with the approach taken to
by the Federal Court, (in
particular in
), and having regard to the fact that that section is
not expressed in terms which impose an obligation on the Tribunal (let alone
obligation expressed in mandatory terms) I am not satisfied that
itself imposes a mandatory statutory obligation on the Tribunal not to make a
review decision until after the expiration of the
prescribed period.
do any of the other provisions of the Act lead to the result that the Tribunal
had no power to make its decision when it did,
in the particular circumstances
of this case.
First Respondent raised the issue of the effect of
of the Act. It is
relevant to consider this provision before turning to
of the Act.
Section 63(1)
empowers the Minister (and, by extension, his delegates) to make a
decision on an application for a visa at any time after the application
made, subject to a number of restrictions. Relevantly,
restraints on the decision-maker as to the circumstances in which a decision to
refuse to grant a visa may be made.
Section 63(3)
limits this power in
circumstances where an applicant has been invited to comment on information. In
such circumstances the Ministerial
delegate is not to refuse to grant a visa
before one of three events happen. One such event is the giving of comments on
the information.
imposes a restraint on the decision-maker’s
power to refuse to grant a visa.
paragraphs in
are expressed in a disjunctive fashion. If an applicant
gave comments before the time provided for comments to be given has ended,
restraint imposed by the subsection (that is, not to refuse to grant a visa)
would be lifted.
of the Act, a decision to refuse to grant a protection visa is an
RRT-reviewable decision. For the purposes of the review of an
RRT-reviewable
decision the Tribunal may “
exercise all the powers and discretions that
are conferred by the Act on the person who made the decision
(s.415(1)).
Relevantly it may, among other things, affirm the decision to
refuse to grant a visa
(s.415(2)).
any restraint imposed on the Tribunal by the combination of these provisions
would not have prevented the Tribunal from making
its decision at the time that
it did, given that the event referred to in
of the Act had occurred.
The Applicant had given his comments.
this, Division 4 of
of the Act contains specific obligations
which must be met by the Tribunal in conducting its review (including,
of the Act). As indicated,
deals with the
requirements of the invitation.
Section 424C
deals with the situation
where the Applicant has failed to respond to an invitation. However
is permissive in form. It permits the Tribunal to make a decision
without taking any further action to obtain the Applicant’s
views on the information if the Applicant does not give the comments
response before the time for giving them has passed. In effect, it does impose
a restraint on the Tribunal, insofar as the
Tribunal could not proceed to make a
decision on the review until after the time for giving the comments or the
response had passed
if the Applicant had not given the comments or the
does not impose such a restraint in circumstances
where, as here, the Applicant has in fact given comments or response. There is
nothing in the language of
which imposes a restraint on the Tribunal
from proceeding to make a decision on the review until after the time for giving
or a response has passed in circumstances where the Applicant has
provided the comments or the response within the prescribed period.
such restraint exists only if the Applicant had
given the comments or
the response.
as occurred in this case, an applicant gave comments or response before the time
in which the comments or response were to be
given had passed and the Tribunal
wished to affirm the decision to refuse to grant the visa, neither
would impose a restraint on the Tribunal from proceeding to make a
decision on the review until after the time for giving the comments
had passed.
and critically, in the circumstances of this case the Applicant was not denied
natural justice by the Tribunal proceeding
in this manner (see
[36]). The Applicant in effect had two opportunities to respond to the
information put to him under
of the Act. Both letters contained the same
information. He provided a response to the Tribunal’s first letter of
2011 on 30 May 2011. When he attended at the Tribunal’s
registry, he requested and received further time to submit more information.
did this on 20 June 2011. The Tribunal then re-issued its letter on
4 August 2011. The Applicant provided a written response
on 15 August
2011. Contrary to the Applicant’s contention, the fact of there having
been such response was not in some way
contingent on the quality of the response
assessed retrospectively.
in the response of 15 August 2011 the Applicant adopted his earlier
responses. By way of postscript he said “
I apologise for the delay of
this letter. Because, my all documents was with my friend’s hand, on
14/08/2011 I received from
him, really sorry
”. Importantly, he did
not seek additional time to make further comments or to provide further
information. Nor did he indicate
that any further information was forthcoming.
Nor is there any suggestion that he subsequently sought to make a further
or to provide further information to the Tribunal. There is no
evidence before the Court to support any claim that he was denied
fairness because the Tribunal made its decision before the expiration of the
prescribed period.
there may well be circumstances in which the fact that the Tribunal made a
decision before the expiration of the prescribed
period would involve a denial
of procedural fairness, this is not such a case. No jurisdictional error has
been established in the
circumstances of this case.
has not been established that
(or any combination
thereof) operated as an inviolable restraint on the Tribunal’s
until after the prescribed period
for giving the comments or response had passed in circumstances where the
Applicant had in fact
given his comments and response to the Tribunal’
letter. In the absence of any denial of procedural fairness the Tribunal
was authorised under the
Migration Act
to proceed to make a decision on the
review at the time that it did.
four is not made out.
I am wrong and the Tribunal should be seen as having committed a jurisdictional
error by proceeding to make a decision the day
before the prescribed period for
response to the second
letter expired, were it not for the separate
the exercise
of the Court’s discretion (cf.
Ex parte Aala
at [104]) as I am satisfied that the Applicant has
suffered no injustice as a result of the timing of the Tribunal decision. He
to the information on three occasions. He did not indicate that any
further information or response was forthcoming.
as jurisdictional error has been established on one of the bases contended for
in ground three of the Further Amended Application
the matter should be remitted
to the Tribunal for redetermination according to law.
that the preceding two hundred and sixty-three (263) paragraphs are a true copy
of the reasons for judgment of Barnes FM
Date: 5 April 2013
RTF format (753 KB)
Signed PDF/A format