Harford & Spalding [2021] FamCA 636; (27 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Harford & Spalding
[2021] FamCA 636
File number(s):
SYC 3026 of 2020
Judgment of:
HENDERSON J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
FAMILY LAW –
PRACTICE AND
– Application for summary dismissal of the
husband’s application seeking to set aside consent orders pursuant to
79A(1) and a Binding Financial Agreement pursuant to
section 90K
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) – Discussion of principles applying to
applications for summary dismissal – Where the husband has an arguable
to set the consent orders aside pursuant to
section 79A(1)
of the Act and
to set aside the BFA under
section 90K
of the Act on the basis of the
wife’s failure to disclose the value of some assets in her possession or
misleading the Court
– Application for summary dismissal dismissed.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Rules
Cases cited:
Beck & Beck
[2004] FamCA 92
(2004) FLC 93-181
Bigg v Suzi
[1998] FamCA 14
(1998) FLC 92-799
Ebner & Pappas
[2014] FamCAFC 229
(2014) FLC 93-619
[2021] FamCAFC 110
Lindon v The Commonwealth (No. 2)
[1996] HCA 14
(1996) 136 ALR 251
Lysaght Building Solutions Pty Ltd (t/as Highline Commercial
Construction) v Blanalko Pty Ltd
[2013] VSCA 158
(2013) 42 VR 27
Pelerman v Pelerman
[2000] FamCA 881
(2000) FLC 93-037
Ritter & Ritter
[2020] FamCAFC 86
(2020) FLC 93-957
Spencer v Commonwealth of Australia
[2010] HCA 28
(2010) 241 CLR 118
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Ms Christie SC
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Newnhams Solicitors
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Friedlander
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Licardy & Co Solicitors
SYC 3026 of 2020
MR SPALDING
HENDERSON J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The wife’s Application in a Case filed 21 January 2021 for summary
dismissal of the husband’s Initiating Application
filed 27 November 2020
and Amended Initiating Application filed 11 March 2021 is dismissed.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Harford & Spalding
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
1 This is an application by Ms Harford (“the wife”) seeking to
summarily dismiss an Initiating Application filed on 27
November 2020 and
amended on 11 March 2021 by Mr Spalding (“the husband”) seeking the
following orders:
1. That the property Orders made on 29 May 2020...be set
aside and/or varied pursuant to
section 79A(1)(a)
section 79A(1)(b)
different order be made/substituted as follows;
2 That Order 2 made 29 May 2020 be set aside and in its place an order be
substituted [t]hat; “that within 14 days of the making
of this order
pursuant to
section 79A
Family Law Act 1975
, the wife pay to the trust
account of the lawyers for the husband the sum of $2,150,000”.
2. That pursuant to section [90K(1)(a)] of the
Family Law Act 1975
Financial Agreement pursuant to
section 90C
Family Law Act 1975
into between the parties and dated 28 May 2020 be set aside.
3. That the wife pay to the husband the sum of $1,740 per week by way of spousal
maintenance commencing from 1 June 2020 by way of
a lump sum payment calculated
to the date of this order and weekly thereafter until 31 May
3 The material read for the applicant wife is as follows:
(1) Case outline of the wife filed 17 June 2021;
(2) Application in a Case of the wife filed 21 January 2021;
(3) Affidavits of the wife filed 21 January 2021 and 18 May 2021;
(4) Financial Statement of the wife filed 23 December 2020;
(5) Response to Initiating Application of the wife filed 23 December 2020. This
is the original Initiating Application and it is
an amended application the
husband now relies upon;
(6) Consent Orders made by Loughnan J on 29 May 2020, together with the
transcript of proceedings before his Honour; and
(7) A copy of the Binding Financial Agreement dated 28 May 2020 and various
documents, being letters and annexures and the like.
4 Although I read the wife’s material, consistent with authority I have
not relied on her evidence in my decision save that
which the husband relied
upon and have only taken into account the evidence he submitted to the
5 For the respondent husband:
(1) Initiating Application of the husband filed 27
November 2020;
(2) Amended Initiating Application of the husband filed 11 March 2021;
(3) Response to an Application in a Case filed by the husband on 24 February
(4) Affidavits of the husband filed 24 February 2021 and 22 April 2021 together
with annexures;
(5) Financial Statement of the husband filed 16 November 2021;
(6) Written submissions;
(7) The balance sheet tendered to Loughnan J when the orders were made, which
appears at page 65 of the wife’s tender bundle,
and the conditions of
employment letter (“COE letter”) from J Company, undated, concerning
the prohibition on on-selling
J Company brand products whilst employed by them
also in the wife’s tender bundle;
(8) Paragraph 8.4 of the wife’s affidavit of 18 May
6 Ms Christie SC represented the applicant wife, and Mr Friedlander of
counsel represented the respondent husband.
7 The husband relied upon his assertions of the wife’s fraud,
suppression of evidence and/or failure to give relevant evidence
and failure to
disclose and submitted that such failures and/or suppression led to a
miscarriage of justice within the meaning of
section 79A(1)(a)
Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”).
8 The husband relied upon similar arguments to those raised in his 79A
application in his submission that the Binding Financial Agreement
(“BFA”) be set aside for fraud and non- disclosure pursuant to 90K
of the Act.
9 The BFA must be set aside before Order 3 of the husband’s Amended
Initiating Application, which seeks a spouse maintenance
order, can be made by
the Court. The BFA dealt with the parties’ right to seek maintenance from
each other. Until that agreement
is set aside there is no jurisdiction in the
Court to make an order for maintenance.
10 The husband asserted, in his affidavits, that he had relied upon the
following information provided by the wife when entering into
the consent orders
and signing the BFA:
(1) He accepted the value attributed by the wife to the
clothing and accessories in her possession, including international designer
clothing and J Company clothing;
(2) That the wife’s values of the international designer clothing and J
Company items in her possession as disclosed by her
were false and
misleading;
(3) He accepted her statement that as an employee of J Company she was unable to
on-sell items she had bought at a significant discount
from her employer whilst
still employed and had accepted the truth of the COE letter she had provided to
him on this issue and that
this prohibition on selling affected the value of
those items in the wife’s possession;
(4) That the wife has set about on a course of conduct post the making of the
consent orders and signing of the BFA to sell some
of her J Company items which
is inconsistent with her evidence of a prohibition on her of selling those items
whilst employed by
(5) That the wife had no other assets or interest in any asset such as bank
accounts and the like other than as disclosed in her
material and on the balance
sheet and he has subsequently discovered she did have other assets;
(6) That the wife refused to provide him with a schedule of her J Company brand
and other designer clothing in her possession and
that at paragraph 4 of his
affidavit filed 24 February 2021:
It is now known after the making of the
Final Property Orders [on] 29 May 2020 that the clothing is of significant value
as some have
been sold and she has taken steps to list some other items of her
clothing including J Company items for auction with a significant
prospective
(7) That the wife failed to disclose the value of her
tax losses, an B Bank account, an NAB account and a bank account with D Bank
at the date of making of the consent orders and signing the
11 The husband asserts this conduct by the wife grounds his claim that she
has suppressed evidence, has misled the Court and/or perpetrated
a fraud upon
the Court. That the wife’s conduct has led to a miscarriage of justice in
that the Court was misled as to the
value of assets in her possession as at the
date of making the consent orders as she failed to disclose relevant information
gave false evidence within the meaning of
section 79A(1)(a)
of the Act.
12 The husband also asserts he cannot comply with the order that he is to
establish his own self-managed superannuation fund (“SMSF”)
of the super splitting order provided for in the consent orders and thus within
the meaning of
section 79A(1)(b)
of the Act the orders entered into between the
parties cannot be carried out in part.
SHORT, RELEVANT CHRONOLOGY
13 The parties commenced cohabitation in 1988 and
married in 1990.
14 They have two children, Mr K, born in 1994, and Mr H, born in 2000.
15 The wife commenced employment at J Company in 2001.
16 The husband was in the building industry and was declared bankrupt in
17 The parties separated on a final basis on 7 February 2017.
18 The parties remained separated under the same roof and physical separation
did not occur until 16 December 2019.
19 The parties attended a mediation with Mr L on 23 March 2020. A balance
sheet was prepared for that mediation and that balance
sheet was tendered at the
hearing before Justice Loughnan when consent orders were made on 29 May
20 The parties engaged in negotiations. Consent orders were signed by the
parties on 28 May 2020.
21 On 28 May 2020, the husband and wife signed a BFA pursuant to
section 90C
of the Act and a release was signed pursuant to
(NSW) by the husband on the same date.
22 On 29 May 2020, Loughnan J made orders in accordance with the consent
orders signed by the parties on 28 May 2020 after hearing
submissions and
receiving as a joint tender the balance sheet. Ms Christie SC represented the
wife and Ms Warda represented the husband
at that time.
23 There has been a partial carrying out of the consent orders.
24 The husband commenced proceedings to set the consent orders and BFA aside
in November 2020.
25 The husband says he cannot presently earn an income.
26 The wife earns an income of $800,000 per annum.
27 The law in this area is well-settled and
difficult to apply.
28 Section 45A of the Act governs matters for summary dismissal as their
Honours note in the decision of
[2021] FamCAFC 110
29 The law is clear at least in one aspect of such applications, namely that
the Court has regard to the evidence of the party whose
case it is sought be
summarily dismissed, and only that evidence, and takes that evidence at its
highest. As explained in the decision
Beck & Beck
[2004] FamCA 92
Beck & Beck
”) at [20]:
...an application for summary dismissal must be
determined on the basis only of the material put forward by the respondent (to
application)...
30 The principle comes from
Lindon v The Commonwealth (No 2)
[1996] HCA 14
136 ALR 251
”) where Kirby J said at 256:
To secure such relief, the party seeking it must show
that it is clear, on the face of the opponent’s documents, that the
lacks a reasonable cause of action...or is advancing a claim that is
clearly frivolous or vexatious.
(Citations omitted)
31 That material may include material filed
by the applicant and in this matter I note the husband has relied upon paragraph
the wife’s affidavit of 18 May 2021, the balance sheet tendered to
his Honour and annexed to the wife’s material and
the COE letter from J
Company concerning a prohibition on the wife on-selling merchandise she has
purchased from the company whilst
she is employed by them and that such conduct
may lead to a dismissal from employment. It is the totality of the
respondent’s
evidence before the Court and only that evidence which I am
to have regard to in coming to a decision.
32 Section 45A(2) of the Act is as follows:
(2) The court may make a decree for one party against
another in relation to the whole or any part of a proceedings
(a) the first party is defending the
proceedings or that part of the proceedings; and
(b) the court is satisfied that the other party has no reasonable prospect of
successfully prosecuting the proceedings or that
part of the
proceedings.
33 In so doing I must consider subsection (3) of section 45A of the Act which
is as follows:
(3) For the purposes of this section a defence, or
proceedings or part of proceedings need not be;
(a) hopeless; or
(b) bound to fail;
to have no reasonable prospect of
34 In addition to the summary dismissal power, section 45A(4) of the Act
gives the Court power to dismiss proceedings that are frivolous,
vexatious or an
abuse of process and that section is as follows:
The court may dismiss all or part of proceedings at any
stage if it is satisfied that the proceedings or part is frivolous, vexatious
an abuse of process.
35 Further, subsection (7) of section 45A of the Act permits the Court to
take action under this section on its own initiative.
Family Law Rules 2004
provides the following:
A party may apply for summary orders after a response
has been filed if the party claims, in relation to the application or response,
(a) the court has no jurisdiction;
(b) the other party has no legal capacity to apply for the orders sought;
(c) it is frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process; or
(d) there is no reasonable likelihood of success.
their Honours confirmed that section 45A of the
Act applies to applications for summary disposal of proceedings.
38 At paragraph 13 that:
...a court may make a decree for one party, as to the
whole or any part of the proceedings, where the Court “...is satisfied
that the other party has no reasonable prospect of successfully prosecuting the
proceedings or that part...” (s 45A(2) of the
Act). The proceedings need
not be “hopeless” or “bound to fail” for the section to
apply (s 45A(3) of the
39 Their Honours also found at paragraph 16:
...the cautions against the too ready inclination to
summarily dispose of proceedings expressed by Kirby J in
Lindon v The
Commonwealth (No. 2)
[1996] HCA 14
(1996) 136 ALR 251
at 255–256 remain relevant.
40 The applicable law has changed consequent upon section 45A of the Act
commencing in 2018.
41 A more recent decision of the important principles a court must have
regard to in a summary dismissal application is the decision
[2020] FamCAFC 86
(2020) FLC 93-957
42 At paragraph 26 of
their Honours said that section 45A of
the Act requires the Court to “consider whether the husband had no
reasonable prospects
of success in prosecuting his application pursuant to s
43 At paragraph 27, “[t]here is in our view considerable benefit in
revisiting those principles by reference to the decisions
of the High Court of
Australia and intermediate Courts of Appeal...” That the “full force
and effect of the applicable
principles is [found] by considering the cases from
which the principles are derived”, such as
where Kirby J
said at 256:
To secure such relief, the party seeking it must show
that it is clear, on the face of the opponent’s documents, that the
lacks a reasonable cause of action or is advancing a claim that is
clearly frivolous or vexatious.
44 Similarly, as referred to at paragraph 27 of
, cases such as
Ebner & Pappas
[2014] FamCAFC 229
(2014) FLC 93-619
Lysaght Building Solutions Pty Ltd (t/as Highline
Commercial Construction) v Blanalko Pty Ltd
[2013] VSCA 158
(2013) 42 VR 27
Commonwealth of Australia
[2010] HCA 28
(2010) 241 CLR 118
are also cases from which the
principles are derived.
Ebner & Pappas
the Full Court held that an order for summary
dismissal on the basis that the application discloses no reasonable cause of
was interlocutory.
46 Their Honours say, at paragraph 66 in
, that in a summary
dismissal application:
The determination of the issue must only take into
account the material on which the respondent seeks to make out the case, or as
often expressed takes the respondent’s case “at its highest”
unless the respondent’s version is inherently
incredible or
unreliable.
their Honours noted that the primary judge had found that
the husband had an arguable case and in that circumstance the judge ought
have summarily dismissed his application.
48 The older principles in decisions such as
Beck & Beck
[1998] FamCA 14
(1998) FLC 92-799
Bigg v Suzi
[2000] FamCA 881
(2000) FLC 93-037
”) that can be
re-visited are set out in
Beck & Beck
“(a) The power for summary dismissal is a
discretionary one.
(b) Relief “is rarely and sparingly provided”.
(d) A weak case or one that is unlikely to succeed is not “sufficient to
warrant termination”.
(e) “If there is a serious legal question to be determined, it should
ordinarily be determined at a trial”.
(f) “If notwithstanding the defects of pleadings, it appears that a party
may have a reasonable cause of action which it has
failed to put in proper form,
a Court will ordinarily allow that party to reframe its pleadings”.’
In determining an application of this nature ... the rule ... is that if a
version of the facts put forward by the respondent is
not inherently incredible,
then in the absence of any opportunity for cross-examination it is incumbent
upon the court to proceed
on the basis that the respondent's version will
ultimately be accepted at the trial of the action (see
Webster v Lampard
[1993] HCA 57
(1993) 177 CLR 598
INTERPLAY BETWEEN THE CONSENT ORDERS AND THE BFA
49 The Binding Financial Agreement deals with the
parties’ rights and obligations in relation to spouse maintenance and each
gave away that right pursuant to the terms of the BFA. The consent orders deal
with the division of their property, including a division
superannuation, which is a self-managed superannuation fund of which the wife
was the trustee.
HUSBAND’S EVIDENCE
50 The evidence to support the husband’s case
in relation to the s 79A application and to set aside the BFA is contained in
the following documents:
(1) Initiating Application of the husband filed 27
November 2020;
(2) Amended Initiating Application of the husband filed 11 March 2021;
(3) Response to an Application in a Case filed by the husband on 24 February
(4) Affidavits of the husband filed 24 February 2021 and 22 April 2021;
(5) Financial Statement of the husband filed 16 November 2021;
(6) Written and oral submissions;
(7) The balance sheet tendered before Justice Loughnan at the time of making the
consent orders which document appears at page 65
of the wife’s tender
(8) Paragraph 8.4 of the wife’s affidavit of 18 May 2021; and
(9) The COE letter from J Company.
51 I do not have the transcript of the proceedings before his Honour before
me as the husband did not rely upon this transcript.
INABILITY TO CARRY OUT THE ORDERS
52 The husband asserts he cannot set up a new
self-managed superannuation fund as was contemplated by the consent orders and
this is a ground for setting those orders aside. That argument went nowhere
as the evidence he provided to support that assertion,
being a report from M
Accountants dated 18 August 2020 and annexed to his affidavit at annexure
“S”, did not support
an inability to do this, rather that it was not
financially advantageous for him so to do, and that is a very different
53 At page five of the report the summary of advice to the husband is
“Do not establish a SMSF”.
54 At page 6 of the advice, “[a]fter careful consideration we do not
believe a SMSF is in your best interest due to the following
reasons...”
55 The advice sets out 11 reasons why not to establish such a fund and that
in not establishing a fund the husband will avoid additional
administrative
requirements, legal obligations and save costs. However the advice does not
state the husband is unable to set up
such a fund. That ground was effectively
abandoned at the hearing by Mr Friedlander.
CLAIM PURSUANT TO SECTION 79A(1)(A) OF THE ACT
56 Following the pathway set out in
what is the husband’s arguable case to support his claim that the consent
orders ought to be set aside under section 79A of
57 His case is based on the following:
(1) The husband accepted the value attributed by the
wife to the clothing and accessories in her possession, including international
designer clothing and J Company clothing, and that the wife’s values of
the international designer clothing and J Company items
in her possession and
disclosed by her were false and misleading and that the wife’s Financial
Statement of 15 May 2020 made
no reference to those items;
(2) That the wife refused to provide him with a schedule of her J Company and
other designer clothing in her possession and that
at paragraph 4 of his
affidavit of 24 February 2021:
It is now known after making the Final
property Orders [on] 29 May 2020 that the clothing is of significant value as
some have been
sold and she has taken steps to list some other items of her
clothing including J Company items for auction with a significant prospective
(3) He accepted that as an employee of J Company she was
unable to on-sell items she had bought at a significant discount from her
employer whilst still employed and had accepted the truth of the COE letter she
had provided to him on this issue which affected
the value of those items in the
wife’s possession and that this was false and misleading;
(4) That the wife has set about on a course of conduct post the making of the
consent orders and signing of the BFA to sell some
of her J Company items which
is inconsistent with the prohibition on her of selling those items and is
evidence of misleading the
(5) The Court has approved the consent orders on a misapprehension of the
parties’ financial positions and due to the wife’s
disclose, the giving of false and misleading evidence and her suppression of
relevant evidence this has resulted in a
miscarriage of justice; and
(6) That the wife perpetrated a fraud on the Court by her false assertion of the
value of some of her fashion items, including J
Company items, in the balance
sheet as nil and that this is grounds for setting aside the
SETTING ASIDE ORDERS
58 Sections 79A(1)(a) and (b) of the Act, which the
husband is relying upon to set aside the consent orders, is as follows.
59 79A(1), grounds on which an order can be set aside or varied:
(1) Where, on application by a person affected by an
order made by a court under section 79 in property settlement proceedings,
court is satisfied that:
(a) there has been a miscarriage of justice by reason of fraud, duress,
suppression of evidence (including failure to disclose relevant
information),
the giving of false evidence or any other circumstance; or
(b) in the circumstances that have arisen since the order was made it is
impracticable for the order to be carried out or impracticable
for a part of the
order to be carried out...
the court may, in its discretion, vary the order or set the order aside and, if
it considers appropriate, make another order under
section 79 in substitution
for the order so set aside.
60 The husband effectively abandoned his case that the orders could in part
no longer be carried out under the provisions of section
79A(1)(b) of the
The balance sheet
61 The balance sheet
appearing at page 65 of the wife’s tender bundle, annexure “D”
to the wife’s affidavit
of 21 January 2021, and referred to at paragraph 4
of the husband’s affidavit filed 22 April 2021 disclosed the following.
62 The husband asserted the wife’s J Company handbags were worth $1
million, her international and J Company designer clothing,
$1,162,000, her J
Company and international designer coats including exotic furs, $625,000, J
Company boots and international designer
shoe collection, $162,000.
63 The wife asserted her handbags were worth $101,312, her J Company and
international designer coats including exotic furs, $62,000,
J Company boots
and international designer shoe collection $5,000, and her J Company and
international designer clothing, nil.
64 The balance sheet has notes in relation to the items disclosed by the
parties and these notes form part of the balance sheet.
At Note 1 the wife
describes her reasons for the value she has placed on bags, for example, in that
the items she is able to purchase
are seconds.
65 At Note 2 the husband says:
For full list of items refer to ‘Harford Clothes
& Other Items Schedule’ prepared by the Wife as at June 2014. Husband
contends that the Wife’s clothing collection has grown substantially to
date (as per images taken by the Husband).
(As per the original)
66 The husband then breaks down what he
says is the value of clothes in use by the wife and those she has in storage
which he values
at a total of $1.162 million and the wife’s value is
67 The wife’s Note states that “In any event, the wife is not
permitted to re-sell her J Company clothing whilst an employee
68 Note 3 is the husband’s explanation of his value of the
“predominantly long coats and exotic skinned items” referred
the attached schedule prepared by him and that the balance of the coats are
accounted for in Item 2. The wife responded to
the husband’s value.
69 In Note 4 the husband refers to the full list of shoes schedule as
prepared by him and the wife responds to that schedule.
70 In Note 5 the husband refers to the full list of jewellery schedules
prepared by him and the wife responds to that schedule.
71 In Note 11 the husband complains the wife has not provided disclosure of a
NAB account which at 30 June 2019 had a balance of $0.99.
72 Notes in relation to Items 18, 19 and 21. These items relate to stock
options, a share portfolio and a NAB account in the wife’s
account the husband asserts the wife has not disclosed. The wife responds at
Item 18 that in the past she “received
stock options as a result of her
employment” and that “her current holding is Nil”. At Item 19,
does not have a share portfolio” and at Item 21 that she
“no longer operates any NAB accounts”.
73 At the Note to Item 37 the wife responds to the husband’s assertion
that she has failed to disclose taxation losses carried
Allegations the wife has failed to disclose bank accounts in
74 The husband makes a bare assertion at paragraph 8
of his affidavit filed 24 February 2021 that the wife did not disclose assets
held by her in an overseas bank being D Bank. There was no documentation or
annexures to his affidavit to support this assertion
or any explanation
proffered why he believed this to now be the case.
75 The only reference to this ground is his affidavit filed 22 April 2021 at
paragraph 14 where he says “[a]nnexure “S”
to the applicant
wife’s affidavit sworn 21 January 2021 is not a document from D Bank
[sic]”. The husband is correct
in his commentary about annexure
“S” however he does not disclose any document or other evidence in
his material to support
his bald assertion that the wife has such a bank
account. The best his evidence reaches is that the wife said to him on 16
2019 “All the money is in a European Bank...I have learnt how it
is done (send money overseas)”.
76 Accepting this evidence at its highest, it is inconsistent with the
balance sheet. The balance sheet disclosed over $2 million
in bank accounts in
the wife’s name in Australia being four B Bank accounts, two CBA accounts,
six Westpac accounts including
a Euro account and an ANZ account. Thus
“all the money” was not in a European bank account at the time the
orders were
entered into. Accepting the husband’s evidence at its highest,
all that has been pleaded is an assertion of a failure to disclose
account with D Bank based upon what the wife said to him in December 2019 which
statement is inconsistent with the extent
of money in banks in the wife’s
name disclosed by her. The husband has no reasonable prosects of successfully
prosecuting a
case to set the orders aside for a failure to disclose pursuant to
section 79A of the Act on this evidence and his evidence is inherently
unreliable.
77 Further, annexure “S” to the wife’s affidavit of 21
January 2021 is headed “Your portfolio as of 19 March
2020” with the
J Company logo on the letterhead:
Participant: Ms Harford
Your grants/your accounts
Statement of your cash accounts
...01 STOCKPLAN CASH ACCOUNT IN EUR: Balance 0.00 EUR
Statement of your securities accounts
Category – Vehicle – Quantity – Option gain/Acquisition gain
– Current value: You currently hold no securities
from your rights.
78 Page two of that document is a series of transactions on this portfolio.
79 This annexure is a document in relation to her employment and includes a
stock cash account and a securities account or share portfolio
as referred to at
Items 18, “stock options” and 19, “share portfolio”, in
the balance sheet. The husband
asserted a total value of these items at
$500,000 in the balance sheet and the wife asserted nil. The wife responded to
these notes
in the tendered balance sheet and said in respect of Item 18
“the Wife has in the past received stock options as a result of
employment. Her current holding is Nil”. At Item 19 the wife responds
“the Wife does not have a share portfolio”.
Annexure “S”
to the wife’s affidavit of January 2021, which the husband referred to in
his material, supports the
wife’s position of disclosure and not the
husband’s case of a failure to disclose.
80 At paragraph 15 of his affidavit filed 22 April 2021 affidavit the husband
Since the making of the final property orders I have
discovered a screen shot taken of a print out of an email from Ms N at B Bank
the wife’s email account ... on 17 July 2019 referring to a Premier
Account which the wife was proposing to open...[t]he
applicant wife has never
disclosed any premier account in B Bank.
81 This screenshot is attached to the husband’s affidavit at annexure
“F”. The screenshot says as follows:
Good Morning Ms Harford,
I hope you have been well. I was just sending you an email to see when you are
ready to make the transfer and do the special account
82 This is not evidence of an account having been opened. At best it is
evidence that supports an intention so to do. This evidence
does not support the
husband’s case that the wife failed to disclose a Special B Bank account,
only that some years ago she
may have had an intention to open such an account.
The husband has no reasonable prosects of successfully prosecuting a case to set
the orders aside for a failure to disclose pursuant to section 79A of the Act on
this evidence and it is inherently unreliable. I
note the wife disclosed four
separate B Bank accounts in the balance sheet.
83 The wife disclosed in the balance sheet she had had a NAB account some
time ago as the husband said she had in 2019 and had closed
it. The husband has
no reasonable prospects of successfully prosecuting a case to set the orders
aside for a failure to disclose
pursuant to section 79A of the Act on this
Assertion of Relying on the wife’s value of items when
entering into the consent orders leading to a miscarriage of justice
84 At paragraph 7 of his affidavit of 24 February
2021 the husband says:
The wife disclosed her J Company Boots and International
Designer Shoe Collection at a significantly reduced value to its true market
value in the Balance Sheet presented to His Honour Justice Loughnan. When the
property orders were made by his honour on 29 May 2020
I relied on the
wife’s assertion of Nil value. Her Financial Statement she swore on 15 May
2020 makes no reference to her J
Company Boots and International Designer Shoe
Collection as her asset of any value.
8. The wife did not disclose assets held by her in an overseas bank being the D
Bank [sic]. I am now aware that the wife had transactions
through D Bank [sic]
in Country C...
9. The wife disclosed the value of her tax losses in her name as Nil in the
Balance Sheet presented to His Honour Justice Loughnan
when the property orders
were made by his honour on 29 May 2020 whereas she has substantial tax losses
which she can take advantage
(As per the original)
85 These paragraphs do not correctly state
the wife’s assertion of value on the balance sheet as the wife did place a
of some of those items in the joint balance sheet such as boots, furs and
handbags. His Honour and the husband and wife relied upon
the balance sheet, it
being a joint tender, and thus I do not see that a failure by the wife to
disclose certain items in her Financial
Statement can support the
husband’s case of the wife failing to disclose relevant material for she
did disclose this information
in the balance sheet. Relevant information can be
disclosed in multiple documents.
86 In his affidavit filed 22 April 2021 the husband said that the wife had
unique expertise as to valuing new and old fashion given
the positions she held
the industry. The husband said the wife told him during the marriage, at
paragraph 3:
“Part of my job is to monitor auction sales and
other sales information of second hand and possible fake reproductions of J
Company items”
87 Further, that she said “My clothes are worth nothing. No one is
ever going to buy them”, that she had acquired or
purchased more than
1,000 items of international designer clothing in Australia and on multiple
overseas trips.
88 Annexed to his affidavit and marked “A” is a list prepared by
the wife dated 17 August 2014 of her clothing and jewellery
at that time. It is
a document headed “Clothes Complete List (draft) Ms Harford” and is
11 pages with some 45 items
on each page. This list was prepared for an
insurance claim against F Company for water ingress.
89 The husband says at paragraph 4 of his affidavit of 22 April 2021:
...When final property orders were made on 29 May 2020
because of her actual and claimed experience and expertise of international
designer clothing I believed and relied upon her repeated statements to me that
“My international designer clothing had no
commercial value”. My
estimate of $1,162,000 million in Item 2 of the Balance Sheet...is based on the
list of purchase prices
of her international designer clothing which she gave to
me for the water ingress insurance claim against F
90 The husband annexed to his affidavit filed 22 April 2021 at paragraph 4,
annexure “B”, a schedule of what he says was
the value of clothing,
fabrics and accessories stored at F Company on 16 March 2017 and the total is
91 It is clear from these paragraphs of the husband’s affidavit that he
had come to his own assessment of the value and quantity
of the wife’s
international and designer clothing, including J Company clothing, in her
possession before entering into the
consent orders given this is the basis of
how he reached his value for those items in her possession. It is clear from the
own material, the balance sheet and the husband’s notes to
the balance sheet that he was aware of the extent of the wife’s
and had formed a view as to its value and quantity.
92 The husband now says to the Court that he accepted the wife’s value
of the items in her possession at that time and entered
into the consent orders
on this basis.
93 However this case is inconsistent with the evidence which is that he did
not accept her values when entering into the consent orders.
The husband put
forward his own values and then entered into the consent orders despite the
significant difference in those values.
94 Accepting his case on this issue at its highest, the evidence is that:
(1) He accepted the wife’s values given her
expertise in the industry;
(2) This was a decision he took in light of what he knew at the time which was
that he disputed the value of her items and the quantity
of items she had
(3) That he tendered a document to the Court with the dispute as to values
clearly shown; and
(4) He entered into the orders notwithstanding these disputes.
95 The husband had equal input with the wife into the creation of the balance
sheet and each were legally represented before his Honour
and at the mediation.
There is no evidence of any valuations by independent sources of these contested
items and the husband was
at liberty to obtain his own independent valuations.
His evidence that he accepted the wife’s values when entering into the
consent orders given her expertise in the industry is inherently unbelievable
and unreliable given the evidence he relied upon when
the orders were made in
96 The husband had an opportunity to question all the items the wife put on
the balance sheet and the value she ascribed thereto and
if he disagreed with
the figures or quantity disclosed by the wife, as he clearly did from a reading
of the joint balance sheet,
he had his remedies including withdrawing his
consent to the making of the orders. The husband has no reasonable prospects of
successfully
prosecuting a case pursuant to section 79A of the Act to set the
orders aside on the basis that he relied upon the wife’s values
entering into the consent orders.
97 Despite Mr Friedlander submitting the husband was
“influenced” by the wife regarding the value of items in her
I could find no evidence to support that submission in the
husband’s affidavit. The husband said he relied on her values due
“expertise” not her “influence” over him and, accepting
this evidence at its highest, it cannot support
a case of duress within the
meaning of the section or even “influence”. The husband has no
reasonable prospects on this
evidence of successfully prosecuting a case
pursuant to section 79A of the Act to set the orders aside for duress.
The assertion that the wife has set about on a course of
conduct to sell her J Company items whilst still an employee of J
98 At paragraph 5 of his affidavit filed 22 April
2021 the husband says he “retained some items of the wife’s
international
designer clothing”, including J Company clothing, “as
part of the property settlement”. There is no specific mention
items in the husband’s possession on the balance sheet nor of their value.
There is an agreed value of the husband’s
personal clothing at $35,350 at
Item 25 and he says this value is based on the purchase price of the items, see
paragraph 4 of the
husband’s affidavit of 22 April 2021.
99 At paragraph 7:
I had no personal use for many of the non-clothing items
retained by me from the property settlement and contacted a representative
Auctioneers in Sydney. I intended to sell many items of handbags, furniture and
jewellery...P Auctioneers arranged for a photographer
to come to the Suburb Q
storage facility and I met with a photographer who introduced himself as Mr G on
100 At paragraph 13 of the husband’s affidavit filed 24 February 2021:
I shall be seeking to have subpoenas issued to P
Auctioneers in Suburb R and T Photography to obtain evidence to corroborate the
that the wife has commenced the process to list and sell items of her
International Designer Clothing (including J Company clothing)
after the orders
were made on 29 May 2020.
101 There was no subpoenaed material produced at the hearing from P
Auctioneers Suburb R or any evidence from T Photography.
102 The evidence is that on 6 August 2020 the husband attended the F Company
facility at the request of the parties’ youngest
son to assist him in
moving heavy furniture which belonged to the wife. Paragraph 8.4 of the
wife’s affidavit of 18 May 2021
upon which the husband relies is as
I did not give [my] son permission to have Mr Spalding
attend at the storage unit where my personal items were being stored and until
reading Mr Spalding’s affidavit, I was not aware that Mr Spalding was
present or that he had entered the storage unit where
my personal items were
being stored, or that he had received copies of the photographs. Had I known
that this was the intention I
would not have agreed to have my personal items
photographed.
103 From this paragraph it is clear the wife was not present when her
personal items were being photographed, has not received a copy
photographs that were taken by Mr G and had no input into what was to be, or
what should not be, photographed at the time.
104 The husband continues in his affidavit that whilst at that storage
facility he observed a number of items of international designer
clothing which
were items held by the wife in her apartment that had not previously been held
in her storage facility at Suburb Q.
He says at paragraph 8 of his affidavit of
22 April 2021:
Included in the items were some I recognised from their
label as being J Company products in our matrimonial residence prior to our
separation.
105 At paragraph 9:
Whilst I was at the F Company Suburb Q storage unit I
observed that the photographer Mr G who worked with P Auctioneers and whom I
met about one week earlier when he had photographed my items[,] arrived and took
photographs of items including the wife’s
items of international designer
clothing and including items of J Company clothing.
106 That paragraph reads to me that a week earlier the husband and Mr G had
photographed his international designer and J Company
fashion items and that the
following week the husband was at the wife’s storage unit without her
knowledge and Mr G was photographing
some of her international designer items
which included J Company clothes.
107 The husband continues at paragraph 10:
The photographer...said to me words to the effect
“I have been asked to take photographs for a catalogue for an auction sale
by P Auctioneers of Ms Harford’s clothing”. I then asked the
photographer “While you are here would you also take
some photographs of
some of my items that I want to include in my upcoming auction” and he
said “Yes” and I took
some of my items from my storage shed and
watched him photograph them.
108 The husband has had two stints at having his items photographed, first on
31 July 2020 and again on 6 August 2020.
109 Paragraph 10 continues:
I subsequently received copies of the items photographed
by Mr G on about 10 August 2020 which included the items of the wife’s
clothing which I observed from their labels comprised about 20% of the
wife’s J Company designer clothing and the balance was
of other items of
the wife’s international designer clothing. Annexed hereto and marked
“D” is a copy of the photographs
taken by Mr G on or about 6 August
2020 of the wife’s international designer clothing and some other items of
hers and mine.
Items numbered 176, 183, 185, 190 to 196 inclusive, 198, 200,
201, 476, 477, 482, 483, 494, 501, 504, 506, 508 to 510 inclusive[,]
518, 519 and 523 to 543 inclusive are my items. The rest of the items belonged
to the wife and included J Company dresses
where I had observed the J Company
labels. Items 406 and 410 are photographs alongside boxes which I recognise as
J Company boxes.
110 There are no discernible labels on any alleged J Company or other dresses
in the annexed photos. There are labels on scarves
which are the
husband’s items at 196, 198, 200 and 201. They cannot be read. The boxes
that the husband refers to are clearly
there but I cannot see from the
photographs what labels are on those boxes, however I must accept the
husband’s evidence at
its highest and I accept what he says as to the
labels on the items being correct and that there are J Company items included in
the photographs.
111 Paragraph 11:
My on line auction took place on 25 August 2020 of the
items referred to in annexure “C”. I watched the on line auction
my computer. Annexed hereto and marked “E” is a schedule of the
sale prices of the auctioned items of the wife’s
international designer
clothing retained by me pursuant to the court orders on 29 May 2020. About 13
items did not sell.
(As per the original)
112 Annexure “E” to the
husband’s affidavit of 22 April 2021 indicates the husband received from
auction about $28,000-odd
for all the clothing sold in two lots, $40,645 for the
jewellery, $114,600 for the J Company bags, $4,170 for “luxury
bags-general”,
and decorative arts, $19,600, a total of some $207,008.
113 Paragraph 12 of the husband’s affidavit filed 22 April 2021 says:
To the best of my knowledge and belief an auction of the
applicant wife’s international designer clothing has not yet taken
as after my auction took place on 25 August 2020...I forwarded an email to the
applicant wife on 3 September referring to her
lying about not being able to
sell J Company clothing. The items of international designer clothing
photographed to be listed for
auction on behalf of the wife appear to be items
of a lesser value of the items retained by her in any
114 At paragraph 13 he says:
The wife asserted and I relied on her assertion and
evidence that she was unable to sell any J Company items and this was
115 Going now to the husband’s case that he relied upon the COE letter
that the wife was prohibited from selling her J Company
designer wear, that to
do so may mean dismissal from her position yet post the consent orders and BFA
she has set about on a course
of conduct to do that very thing.
116 The evidence of such a course of conduct or intention or both by the wife
to sell is only found at paragraph 10 of the husband’s
affidavit filed 22
April 2021 where the husband says Mr G told him, “I have been asked to
take photographs for a catalogue
for an auction sale by P Auctioneers of Ms
Harford’s clothing”. The wife has never asserted she was unable to
international designer clothing. It is the sale of the J Company
clothing that is prohibited.
117 The husband received photographs from Mr G of not only his own items but
also the wife’s items of which some were J Company
items. The evidence
from paragraph 8.4 of the wife’s affidavit of 18 May 2021 that she was not
present when these photographs
of her personal items were taken, had no
knowledge what photographs were being taken and has not received a copy of the
photographs
from Mr G is also relevant. The evidence is that the husband has not
received a catalogue in which the wife’s J Company clothing
was listed for
sale and he says at paragraph 12 of his affidavit of 22 April 2021:
To the best of my knowledge and belief an auction of the
applicant wife’s international designer clothing has not yet taken
118 He further says he wrote to her on 3 September 2020 “referring to
her lying about not being able to sell J Company clothing”,
affidavit at paragraph 12 talks about selling international designer clothing
which she is entitled to do.
119 There is no evidence the wife planned to auction her J Company clothing.
The only evidence on this issue put forward by the husband
is the conversation
between the husband and Mr G where Mr G said “I have been asked to take
photographs for a catalogue for
an auction sale by P Auctioneers of Ms
Harford’s clothing” and the husband receiving photographs of the
items including J Company items from Mr G in a format suitable for
inclusion in an auction catalogue.
120 Taking the husband’s case at its highest I accept:
(1) The wife’s J Company clothing together with
other international designer clothing was photographed by Mr G in a format
for inclusion in an auction catalogue;
(2) J Company clothing falls into the category of international designer
(3) That the wife led evidence she could not on-sell her J Company clothing and
items whilst an employee of J Company and to do so
would put her employment in
(4) That no auction of the wife’s photographed J Company items or any
photographed international designer items has taken place
at any time after the
orders were made and the BFA entered into, including after the husband wrote to
her on 3 September 2020 accusing
her of lying on this issue. The husband further
said at paragraph 12 of his affidavit of 22 April 2021:
The items of international designer clothing
photographed to be listed for auction on behalf of the wife appear to be items
of a lesser
value of the items retained by her in any
(5) There is no prohibition on the wife selling her
international designer clothing whilst an employee of J
121 On this evidence, and taking it at its highest, Mr G photographing the
wife’s international designer clothing including
J Company clothing has
raised a suspicion in the husband that the COE letter of prohibition of
on-selling is incorrect and/or that
the wife lied to the Court on this issue and
that she intends to auction her J Company clothing and items whilst still
employed by
that company. Do those suspicions support an arguable case which a
court should determine?
122 Going to the J Company policy document provided by the wife to the
husband being annexure “B” to the wife’s
affidavit filed 18
123 The document is headed “J Company Second Choice Policy” and
consists of five categories: “objective”;
“application”;
“roles and responsibilities”; “definitions”; and
“procedure”.
124 Page two of the document asserts the objective is to “provide
employees the opportunity to purchase products at reduced
125 At point “5” under the heading “PROCEDURE” the
last point is as follows:
Resale of a second choice item is strictly prohibited
126 Point “5.1” is headed “Policy Breaches”:
Abuse or non-compliance of the Second Choice Policy and
Procedure will mean exclusion for all future Second Choice or Staff Sale
activities.
Depending on the severity of the breach may also result in
disciplinary action, which may include termination of employment or contract
breach of J Company Code of Conduct.
The on-sale of any items purchased during Second Choice may result in
disciplinary action and/or instant dismissal for breach of
J Company Code of
127 There is no evidence or submission made by the husband that the J Company
document provided by the wife is not legitimate, rather
that she has in some way
lied to him and the Court. The fact that some of her J Company items were, in
the absence of the wife,
photographed by Mr G does not support an arguable case
that the wife either intended to sell the items or that she in some way lied
the Court about the import of the COE document. This is particularly so where no
auction of any of the wife’s international
designer clothing, or J Company
clothing and items, has taken place and where there is no prohibition on her
selling international
designer clothing. On this evidence the husband’s
arguable case, at its highest, is a suspicion of a possibility of the wife
intending to sell her J Company items including clothing at some point in time.
128 I find this evidence is inherently incredible and unreliable for the
following. As Ms Christie SC submitted, it “beggars
belief” that the
wife would put her lucrative employment with J Company in jeopardy for the sale
of items worth some weeks
of her salary given she earns a salary of $800,000 per
annum. When I couple that inherently incredible evidence with the
evidence that no auction of any of her international designer
clothing or items, let alone J Company clothing or items, has taken
evidence put forward by the husband to ground his arguable case is also
unreliable. His evidence at its highest and as
a matter of law establishes that
the husband has no reasonable prospect of successfully prosecuting his claim to
set the orders aside
on this ground. The wife may not always be employed by J
Company and there will then be no prohibition on her selling her J Company
in those circumstances.
Assertion of wife’s failure to disclose the value of her
items when entering into the consent orders leading to a miscarriage
129 The husband’s case is that the wife misled
the Court as to the value of her designer clothing including J Company clothing
in her possession as she asserted the value was “NIL” on the balance
sheet and failed to include such items in her Financial
130 The husband alleges at paragraph 2.3 of his affidavit filed 24 February
2021 that the wife failed to provide a full schedule of
her coats and clothing
in her possession or control, including her international designer clothing and
J Company clothing. This complaint
is repeated at paragraph 4 of the
husband’s affidavit filed 22 April 2021 where the husband asserts:
There were attempts to agree on an independent valuer of
the wife’s international designer clothing but the wife never disclosed
complete list of such clothing in her possession or control and there was no
agreement as to who could value the items as set forth
in the annexures to the
Tender Bundle to the wife’s affidavit sworn 21 January 2021
131 The husband further asserts in that paragraph that:
When the final property orders were made on 29 May 2020
because of her actual and claimed experience and expertise of international
designer clothing I believed and relied upon her repeated statements to me that
“My international designer clothing had no
132 At paragraph 2.7 of the husband’s affidavit of 24 February 2021, he
says he relied upon the wife’s asserted valuation
of her J Company and
international designer clothing and that he seeks to adduce evidence, when the
matter comes for trial, that
the wife sold her international designer clothing
for “valuable consideration after the Orders were made” and that she
“has taken steps to resell her J Company clothing” whilst still an
employee of J Company.
133 The husband says at paragraph 3 of his affidavit of 24 February 2021
there was a “miscarriage of justice by reason of the
fact that the wife
represented the value of her J Company and International Designer Clothing as
nil in the Balance Sheet”
and her Financial Statement of 15 May 2020 made
no reference to those items at all.
134 Further, at paragraph 4:
It is now known after the making of the Final Property
Orders [on] 29 May 2020 that the clothing is of significant value as some have
been sold and she has taken steps to list some other items of her clothing
including J Company items for auction with a significant
prospective value.
6. The wife asserted and the husband relied on her assertion and evidence that
she was unable to sell any J Company items and this
135 The only evidence of J Company and other international designer items
being sold is the sale of items in the husband’s possession
which items
were not included as an asset on the balance sheet and to which no value was
136 Paragraph 11:
My on line auction took place on 25 August 2020 of the
items referred to in annexure “C”. I watched the on line auction
my computer. Annexed hereto and marked “E” is a schedule of the
sale prices of the auctioned items of the wife’s
international designer
clothing retained by me pursuant to the court orders on 29 May 2020. About 13
items did not sell.
(As per the original)
137 Annexure “C” shows both J
and international designer clothing were sold by
the husband.
138 Annexure “E” to the husband’s affidavit of 22 April
2021 indicates the husband received from auction about $28,000
in two lots for
the clothing, $40,645 for the jewellery, $114,600 for the J Company bags, $4,170
for “luxury bags-general”,
and decorative arts, $19,600, a total of
some $207,008.
139 Accepting this evidence, it is clear that the international designer
clothing in the husband’s possession had a value. Although
the husband
does not directly state in his material and nor were submissions made to this
effect, on this evidence the Court can
draw an inference that similar items in
the wife’s possession have a value as well. On this evidence the husband
has an arguable
case that international clothing in the wife’s possession
has a value and that for the wife to have ascribed “NIL”
on the balance sheet is potentially the wife misleading the Court or failing to
disclose material evidence leading to
a potential miscarriage of justice.
140 Going now to the husband’s application to set aside the BFA.
141 The test to set aside a BFA under section 90K of the Act is as
Circumstances in which court may set aside a
financial agreement or termination agreement
(1) A court may make an order setting aside a financial agreement or a
termination agreement if, and only if, the court is satisfied
(a) the agreement was obtained by fraud (including non-disclosure of a
material matter); or
(aa) a party to the agreement entered into the agreement:
(i) for the purpose, or for purposes that included the purpose, of defrauding
or defeating a creditor or creditors of the party;
(ii) with reckless disregard of the interests of a creditor or creditors of
the party; or
(ab) a party (the agreement party ) to the agreement entered into the
(i) for the purpose, or for purposes that included the purpose, of defrauding
another person who is a party to a de facto relationship
with a spouse party;
(ii) for the purpose, or for purposes that included the purpose, of defeating
the interests of that other person in relation to
any possible or pending
application for an order under section 90SM, or a declaration under section
90SL, in relation to the de facto
relationship; or
(iii) with reckless disregard of those interests of that other person; or
(b) the agreement is void, voidable or unenforceable; or
(c) in the circumstances that have arisen since the agreement was made it is
impracticable for the agreement or a part of the agreement
to be carried out;
(d) since the making of the agreement, a material change in circumstances has
occurred (being circumstances relating to the care,
welfare and development of a
child of the marriage) and, as a result of the change, the child or, if the
applicant has caring responsibility
for the child (as defined in subsection
(2)), a party to the agreement will suffer hardship if the court does not set
the agreement
(e) in respect of the making of a financial agreement--a party to the
agreement engaged in conduct that was, in all the circumstances,
unconscionable;
(f) a payment flag is operating under Part VIIIB on a superannuation interest
covered by the agreement and there is no reasonable
likelihood that the
operation of the flag will be terminated by a flag lifting agreement under that
(g) the agreement covers at least one superannuation interest that is an
unsplittable interest for the purposes of Part VIIIB.
(1A) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(aa), creditor , in relation to a party
to the agreement, includes a person who could reasonably
have been foreseen by
the party as being reasonably likely to become a creditor of the party.
(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(d), a person has caring responsibility
for a child if:
(a) the person is a parent of the child with whom the child lives; or
(b) a parenting order provides that:
(i) the child is to live with the person; or
(ii) the person has parental responsibility for the child.
(3) A court may, on an application by a person who was a party to the
financial agreement that has been set aside, or by any other
interested person,
make such order or orders (including an order for the transfer of property) as
it considers just and equitable
for the purpose of preserving or adjusting the
rights of persons who were parties to that financial agreement and any other
(4) An order under subsection (1) or (3) may, after the death of a party to
the proceedings in which the order was made, be enforced
on behalf of, or
against, as the case may be, the estate of the deceased party.
(5) If a party to proceedings under this section dies before the proceedings
are completed:
(a) the proceedings may be continued by or against, as the case may be, the
legal personal representative of the deceased party
and the applicable Rules of
Court may make provision in relation to the substitution of the legal personal
representative as a party
to the proceedings; and
(b) if the court is of the opinion:
(i) that it would have exercised its powers under this section if the deceased
party had not died; and
(ii) that it is still appropriate to exercise those powers;
the court may make any order that it could have made under subsection (1) or
(c) an order under paragraph (b) may be enforced on behalf of, or against, as
the case may be, the estate of the deceased party.
(6) The court must not make an order under this section if the order
(a) result in the acquisition of property from a person otherwise than on just
(b) be invalid because of paragraph 51(xxxi) of the
Constitution
142 I have found that the husband has an arguable case under section 79A of
the Act that the wife misled the Court or failed to disclose
the value of items
in her possession being international designer clothing leading to a potential
miscarriage of justice. This finding
may also support an arguable case to set
the BFA aside on the ground set out in section 90K(1)(a) which is as follows:
(1) A court may make an order setting aside a
financial agreement or a termination agreement if, and only if, the court is
(a) the agreement was obtained by fraud
(including non-disclosure of a material matter)
143 Thus the wife’s application for summary dismissal of the
husband’s application under section 79A and section 90K of
the Act must
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
forty-three (143) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
Judgment of
the Honourable Justice
Dated: 27 August 2021
RTF format (567 KB)
Signed PDF/A format