Buchanan and National Disability Insurance Agency (Practice and procedure) [2025] ARTA 2410 (12 November 2025)
Buchanan and National Disability Insurance Agency (Practice and procedure)
[2025] ARTA 2410 (12 November 2025)
Applicant/s: Janet Buchanan
Respondent: National Disability Insurance Agency
Tribunal Number: 2025/0045
Tribunal: General Member S Gooch
Place: Adelaide
Date: 12 November 2025
The substantive application for
review is dismissed pursuant to
Administrative Review
Tribunal Act
(Cth) on the ground that it has no reasonable prospect of
Statement made on 12 November 2025 at 1:38pm
DISABILITY INSURANCE SCHEME – Practice and Procedure – application
for dismissal of application for review –
‘no reasonable prospect of
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
– application dismissed.
Legislation
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
(Cth) s42B(1)
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
National Disability Insurance Scheme Legislation Amendment Act
No. 44, 2013
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Becoming a Participant) Rules
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Becoming a Participant)
Rules 2016 (Cth);
rr 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, Schedule A
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Becoming a Participant)
Amendment Rules
Brickhill and National
Disability Insurance Agency
[2025] ARTA 707
Barthel and Australian
National University (Compensation)
[2019] AATA 548
Secondary Materials
Explanatory Memorandum –
National Disability Insurance Scheme
Bilateral Agreement between the Commonwealth of Australia and the State of
South Australia on the National Disability Insurance Scheme,
2018 and Commitment
renewal dated 10 September 2023
Statement of Reasons
Buchanan has applied to the Administrative Review Tribunal (
the Tribunal
for review of a decision of the CEO of the National Disability Insurance Agency
) to affirm an earlier decision that Ms Buchanan did not meet
the access criteria in
subsection 21
National Disability Insurance Scheme
the NDIS Act
). This decision meant Ms Buchanan was
unable to become a participant in the National Disability Insurance Scheme
decision that a person does not meet the access criteria is a reviewable
section 103(1)
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
) the Tribunal has jurisdiction to review such a decision once internally
reviewed by the Agency.
is before me today, however, is the respondent’s application for summary
dismissal of Ms Buchanan’s review application
on the basis it has no
reasonable prospect of success. The respondent contends the Tribunal should
exercise its discretion, pursuant
to section 101(1)(b) of the
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2013 (
the ART Act
), to dismiss the application.
Buchanan opposed that application.
parties made written submissions with respect to the application to dismiss and
a hearing was held on 31 October 2025 for final
oral submissions.
the reasons set out below the Tribunal dismisses Ms Buchanan’s application
for review.
Buchanan has made a number of requests for access to the Scheme since its
first of these appears to have been made on 14 December 2017 when Ms Buchanan
was 64 years of age.
this access request was made way of data transfer from State disability services
to the Agency as part of transitional
arrangements in place at the commencement
of the Scheme.
28 February 2018 and 28 March 2018 the Agency sent Ms Buchanan letters seeking
further information about her impairments to ascertain
whether she met all the
Scheme access requirements.
Appended to both these letters was a standardised form for a treating
professional to complete. It appears these were never completed
26 April 2018 a further letter was sent to Ms Buchanan advising her the Agency
was unable to progress her application without the
necessary further information
already requested.
The respondent
advises this application was closed as a
although no final letter
has been provided to that end.
Buchanan advised the Tribunal that she did not supply the requested further
information as she had been advised by an officer of
the Agency that Scheme
services would cease to her as soon as she turned 65 years of age. As she was
four months away from 65 at
the time of the first letter, she believed there was
little point in pursuing an application. Unfortunately, the information Ms
relied on was incorrect.
Buchanan again submitted an access request form to the Agency on 21 January
2021, along with a completed treating professional
letter dated 28 January 2021 this access request was refused on the basis Ms
Buchanan (then 67 years of age) did not meet the access
criteria in section 22
of the NDIS Act (the age
criterion).
Buchanan submitted a further application for access to the Scheme on 28 May
She was 70 years of age at
11 July 2024 a delegate of the CEO advised Ms Buchanan that her application did
not meet the access criterion in section 22 of
the NDIS Act (the age criterion)
the original decision
9 October 2024 Ms Buchanan requested an internal review of the original
decision, and on 21 November 2024 another delegate affirmed
that decision
the decision under review
Ms Buchanan made an application to the Tribunal for review of this decision on 5
December 2024.
discretion to dismiss – legal principles.
101(1) of the ART Act provides that:
The Tribunal may, at any time, dismiss an application made to the Tribunal if
the Tribunal is satisfied that the application:
(a) Is frivolous, vexatious, misconceived or lacking in substance; or
(b) Has no reasonable prospects of success; or
(c) Is otherwise an abuse of the process of the Tribunal.
discretion is in essentially the same terms as the previous s42B(1) of the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth) which governed the former
is a discretion provided for so that the Tribunal may protect its own processes
in pursuit of its objectives.
have had regard to the principles to be applied in exercise of the discretion as
discussed by Senior Member French in the matter
Brickhill and National
Disability Insurance Agency
principles have been distilled from many previous decisions of the former
Tribunal and include that:
(a) The power is discretionary and only to be used in a clear case where the
Tribunal is satisfied that it has the requisite material
and the necessary
assistance from the parties to reach a definite and certain conclusion.
(b) It is a discretion that is to be used sparingly and cautiously in relation
to cases that are so untenable they cannot possibly
succeed. If a legitimate
purpose could be achieved by allowing the application to continue, it ought to
proceed. However, if an
application can serve no purpose for the Applicant, it
should not continue.
(c) The Tribunal will exercise the discretion to decide a determinative question
of law if it is satisfied the point is clear. When
it examines the evidence
pursuant to an application to exercise the discretion in relation to a question
of law, it does so for the
purpose of determining if an arguable case for review
is disclosed, not tor the purpose of making findings of fact.
(d) In determining if it has no prospect of success the Applicant’s case
must be taken at its highest.
(e) The summary dismissal Applicant (in this case the National Disability
Insurance Agency) bears the practical onus of establishing
that the substantive
Applicant’s case is so obviously untenable that it cannot succeed.
(f) The policy that lies behind the discretion is to enable the Tribunal to
terminate a review at a preliminary stage when it is
a futility to avoid the
delay and public costs that would be associated with its continuation.
also bear in mind the seriousness of a summary dismissal for the applicant in
that in proceeding with a dismissal, the Tribunal
‘curtails merits review
of the decision contested by an
applicant’.
reason the discretion must be used cautiously.
is no argument before the Tribunal that Ms Buchanan’s application is
frivolous, vexatious or otherwise an abuse of process.
This is a genuine
application made by a person who would be very much assisted by services the
Scheme has to offer.
the dismissal application is bought on the basis that Ms Buchanan’s
application has no prospect of success and pursuant
to section 101(1)(b) of the
ART Act, the Tribunal’s dismissal discretion is enlivened.
The Respondent’s position on the access
respondent’s position is that the legislation is clear in
to the Scheme may only be granted if a prospective participant meets all the
access criteria in section 21 of the NDIS Act;
21 requires that the CEO is satisfied a prospective participant meets the age
requirement in section 22, the residence requirement
in section 23 and the
disability or early intervention requirements in sections 24 and
relation to the age requirement, section 22 of the NDIS Act provides ‘a
person meets the age requirements if the person was
aged under 65 when their
access request was made’.
decision under review is the decision dated 21 November 2024 in relation to Ms
Buchanan’s access request dated 28 May 2024.
Ms Buchanan was over 65 at the time of this access request, she simply did not,
as a matter of fact, meet the age requirement in
section 22 and therefore could
not meet the access criteria in section 21.
was the respondent’s position that if the Tribunal were to accept the
applicant’s argument that an earlier application
when the age criteria was
met was sufficient for the purpose of section 22, or that the age requirement
did not apply to particular
persons, this would defeat the legislative intention
of the Act and negate the whole purpose of having any age limit at
The applicant’s position on the access issue
Buchanan does not dispute the fact that she was over the age of 65 at the time
of her third application.
applicant has put significant time and effort into researching and presenting
her argument in relation to her access request,
focussing significantly on the
process that was available to persons, such as herself, in the transition period
from State based
disability care to the NDIS at the commencement of the Scheme.
was not initially clear to the Tribunal precisely the nature of Ms
Buchanan’s submissions. At various times it appeared
the submissions
included suggestions:
the applicant’s first application from 2017 was still undetermined and was
therefore open to be pursued now;
as an application had been made at some time in the past when the applicant met
the age requirement this should be sufficient
to meet the age requirement now;
for transitional applicants, such as Ms Buchanan, the age requirement should not
final hearing Ms Buchanan’s advocate clarified that they were simply
seeking that the Tribunal apply the same process to
Ms Buchanan’s current
application that was applied to applicants, such as herself, at the commencement
of the Scheme. It was
their argument that those persons, in receipt of State
disability services and transferring to the Scheme, were a particular cohort
people for which particular processes were established and for which (for the
sake of fairness) those processes should continue
to be applied.
argue that evidence they have obtained by way of Freedom of Information requests
establishes that persons older than 65 years
of age were transitioned onto the
Scheme, with some not having their first plans made until they were over
If at that time the Agency
found it acceptable to have persons over the age of 65 joining the Scheme, they
should continue to apply
that same approach to members of that particular cohort
Ms Buchanan was a member of that cohort of persons in receipt of State
disability services who were intended to transfer onto the
Scheme, the Agency
should apply the same approach to her current application as was intended then.
Consideration
applicant has gone to a great deal of effort in investigating and setting out
their submissions in relation to processes in place
at the time of Ms
Buchanan’s first application. In deference to this effort and for
completeness I have given consideration
to amendments to the NDIS Act and the
Access Rules since these were first enacted.
the NDIS Act first commenced, section 22 was in the following
22 Age requirements
(1) A person
meets the age
requirements
(a) the person was aged under 65 when the access request in relation to the
person was made; and
(b) (b) if the National Disability Insurance Scheme rules for the
purposes of this paragraph prescribe that on a prescribed date
or a date in a
prescribed period the person must be a prescribed age—the person is that
age on that date.
(2) Without limiting paragraph (1)(b), National Disability
Insurance Scheme rules made for the purposes of that paragraph:
(a) may prescribe that a person must be a prescribed age on a prescribed
date or a date in a prescribed period only if the person
resides in a prescribed
area of Australia; and
(b) may prescribe different ages and different dates in relation to
different areas of Australia.
relation to this section the Explanatory
Clause 22 sets out the age requirements a person must satisfy in order to
become a participant in the NDIS launch. The first age requirement
person is under the age of 65 on the date the access request is made (subclause
22(1)). This applies in the context of
the NDIS launch across all jurisdictions.
This requirement implements part of recommendation 3.6 of the Productivity
Commission report and reflects that the NDIS is one part
of a broader system of
support in Australia with people over the age of 65 able to access the aged care
system. Those people who
are receiving support under the NDIS and turn 65 can
choose either to remain in the NDIS or to move to the aged care system.
Furthermore, the Commonwealth has agreed with some host jurisdictions that
the NDIS will be initially implemented in that launch site
in relation to
certain age cohorts only. Accordingly, subclauses 22(1) and 22(2) allow the NDIS
rules to prescribe additional age
requirements, including that a person must be
a specified age on a particular date in a particular prescribed area of
section was amended as follows by the
National Disability Insurance Scheme
Legislation Amendment Act
No. 44, 2013 but without significant
amendment to effect.
Paragraph 22(1)(b)
Repeal the paragraph, substitute:
(b) the person satisfies any other requirements in relation to age that
are prescribed by the National Disability Insurance Scheme
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Becoming a Participant)
as in force on 1 July 2013 addressed the issue of when a person
meets the age requirements pursuant to section 22 of the NDIS Act.
It is in the
following form:
Part 3 When does a person meet the age
requirements?
3.1 Generally, a person
meets the age
requirements
if the person was aged from birth up to 65 when the
access request in relation to the person was made.
This summarises paragraph 22(1)(a) of the Act.
3.2 However, additional age requirements apply to persons in South
Australia and Tasmania as set out below.
3.3 A person who resides in South Australia will
meet the age
requirements
(a) for an access request made before 1 July 2014—the person was
aged under 6 on 1 July 2013 (this includes children born after
1 July 2013);
(b) for an access request made between 1 July 2014 and 30 June 2015 (or
made before 1 July 2014 and decided by the CEO on or after
2014)—the person was aged under 14 on 1 July 2014 (this includes children
born after 1 July 2014); or
(c) for an access request made on or after 1 July 2015 (or made before 1
July 2015 and decided by the CEO on or after 1 July 2015)—the
aged under 15 on the date of the access request.
This is made for the purposes of paragraph 22(1)(b) of the
3.4 A person who resides in Tasmania will
meet the age
requirements
only if the person is:
(a) aged at least 15, and under 25, on the date the access request was
(b) aged under 25 on 1 July 2013.
This is made for the purposes of paragraph 22(1)(b) of the
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Becoming a Participant) Amendment Rules
2017 amended the 2013 Rules by substituting the following Table in Schedule
A of the Rules.
A person meets the residence requirement if they reside in...
at the following time (the date mentioned in row 1 is the
‘relevant date’ for South Australia)...
The additional age requirements for the person are...
South Australia
on or after 1 January 2016.
the person is under 15 on the date the access request is made.
South Australia
on or after 1 July 2016.
the person is under 18 on 1 January 2017.
Barossa, Light and Lower North
Playford, Salisbury and Port Adelaide Enfield (East
on or after 1 January 2017.
No additional age requirements (the person is under 65 on the day of the
access request)
Tea Tree Gully
Limestone Coast
Murray and Mallee
on or after 1 April 2017.
No additional age requirements (the person is under 65 on the day of the
access request)
Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island
Southern Adelaide
Eyre and Western
Yorke and Mid North
on or after 1 July 2017.
No additional age requirements (the person is under 65 on the day of the
access request)
Remainder of South Australia
on or after 1 October 2017.
No additional age requirements (the person is under 65 on the day of the
access request)
are no other relevant amendments to these Rules and the South Australian Table
in Schedule A of the current Access Rules is
in the same form as set out above.
can find no evidence in these historical versions of the NDIS Act or Access
Rules which support a finding that Parliament ever intended
the age requirement
in section 22 of the Act to be flexibly applied, except insofar as to include
younger persons in relevant ‘launch’
have considered the
Bilateral Agreement between the Commonwealth of Australia
and the State of South Australia on the National Disability Insurance Scheme,
Commitment renewal dated 10 September 2023
and can find no
provisions which might affect application of section 22 of the NDIS
acknowledge Mr McKay’s contention that the data received from the NDIA
under Freedom of Information provisions suggests that
initial plans were made
for persons over 68 years of age, but I do not consider the evidence provided
confirms with certainty when
the access requests for those persons were first
note the statistical information provided by the NDIA as at 31 December
indicates that at that date
there were 29 active participants in South Australia who were over the age of 65
(with or without a plan).
The next table indicates that there were 17 active
participants in South Australia over the age of 65 with an approved plan. This
suggests some 8 persons still awaiting plan development. This says nothing
decision before me is the decision made on 21 November 2024 to reject an access
request made on 17 May 2024.
legislation requires a prospective participant be under the age of 65 at the
date an access request is made.
Ms Buchanan was 70 years of age at the date of her access request. This is a
matter of fact that is not contested by the applicant.
makes no difference that Ms Buchanan made an earlier request (in 2017) when she
was under the relevant age. That request was closed
and the applicant has
conceded at hearing it was not their intention to attempt to re-open that
application.
Ms Buchanan cannot meet the age requirements, her request to join the Scheme as
a participant simply cannot succeed. The Tribunal
is bound to make its decisions
according to law on the basis of the evidence before it. On the basis of the
evidence before the
Tribunal the decision must be that Ms Buchanan does not and
cannot meet the access requirements under section 21 of the NDIS Act.
application for review of the reviewable decision is untenable and has no
prospect of success.
I have reached this conclusion I must grant the respondent’s request for
dismissal of the application for review pursuant
to section 101(1)(b) of the ART
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
T1C of the T-documents at page
T3 and T4 of the
T-documents
T5 of the T-documents
Respondent submissions at
T7 of the T-documents
T8 of the T-documents
T10 of the T-documents
T1 of the T-documents
[2025] ARTA 707
Barthel and Australian
National University (Compensation)
[2019] AATA 548
T1G, T1I, T1L and T1M of the
T-documents
National Disability
Insurance Bill – Explanatory Memorandum
T1L of the T-documents
Section 22 of the NDIS
RTF format (12.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format