URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1970/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mutual Life and Citizens' Assurance Company Limited v Evatt [1970] UKPCHCA 2; (1970) 122 CLR 628 (16 November 1970)
PRIVY COUNCIL
MUTUAL LIFE & CITIZENS' ASSURANCE CO. LTD. v. EVATT
[1970] UKPCHCA 2
(1970) 122 CLR 628
Privy Council
Lord Reid(2), Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest(2), Lord Hodson(1), Lord Guest(1)
and Lord Diplock(1).
Negligence - Duty of care - Statements - Liability for unsound advice -
Relationship between parties - Information and advice given
by companies to
inquirer about financial stability of associated company - Whether essential
for liability that giving advice part
of defendants' business - Holding out of
possession of skill and competence.
1970, July 1, 2, 6, 20-22; November 16. 16:11:1970
APPEAL from the High Court of Australia.
November 16.
The judgment of LORD HODSON, LORD GUEST AND LORD DIPLOCK was delivered by
LORD DIPLOCK : -
The appellants are defendants to an action brought against them in the
Supreme Court of New South Wales by the respondent, Mr.
Evatt, claiming
damages for negligent information and advice given to him gratuitously by the
appellants. New South Wales still preserves
the system of pleading current in
England a hundred years ago between the passing of the Common Law Procedure
Acts, 1852-1862 and
the passing of the Judicature Act, 1875, and expounded in
the famous third edition of Bullen & Leake Precedents of Pleading.
Evatt's declaration contains three counts substantially in the same form - the
first against The Mutual Life and Citizens'
Co. Ltd., the second
against The M.L.C. Ltd. and the third against the two companies jointly. To
each of these counts the
companies demurred upon the ground that the
facts alleged in the count did not disclose any cause of action known to the
demurrer was dismissed by the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales (Wallace P. and Walsh J.A. ; Asprey
J.A. dissenting)
SR (NSW) 50
; 86 WN (Pt 2) 183 ;
(1967) 69 SR (NSW) 73
; 87 W.N. (Pt 2) 165. .
On appeal to the High Court
of Australia
this judgment was upheld by a
majority of the High Court (Barwick
C.J., and Kitto and Menzies JJ. ; Taylor
JJ. dissenting)
[1968] HCA 74
(1968) 122 CLR 556
. It now comes before this Board
by special leave granted by Her Majesty in Council.
2. Special leave was granted because, as has been common ground at the
hearing before their Lordships and in the courts below, what
is really at
issue between the parties upon the demurrer does not depend upon the
procedural niceties of the system of pleading followed
in New South Wales but
upon a question of substantive law of outstanding importance in the
development of that branch of the law
of tort which was expounded in the
speeches in the House of Lords in Hedley Byrne & Co. Ltd. v. Heller & Partners
. (at p630)
3. In each of the courts in which the demurrer has been heard attention has
been confined to the first count in which Mr. Evatt
sues the first appellant
(hereinafter called "the company") alone. Their Lordships do not think that it
would be helpful to set out
this count ipsissma verba. It was amended during
the hearing in the Supreme Court of New South Wales by inserting an additional
in the middle of the count which resulted, as a matter of grammar, in
an unintended alteration in the meaning of a subsequent phrase.
In the High
Court of Australia, which has no jurisdiction to allow amendment of the
declaration, counsel for Mr. Evatt was very sensibly
permitted to put an oral
gloss upon some of the actual words and phrases appearing in the declaration
so as to enable the Court to
rule upon the actual question of substantive law
which was in issue between the parties rather than that the matter should go
upon the technicalities of preJudicature Act pleading. This might not have
been permissible at the time of the third edition of Bullen
& Leake. But a
hundred years have passed since then ; and their Lordships have followed the
example of the High Court in interpreting
the first count of the declaration
in the light of the explanations given orally by counsel in the High Court,
and have themselves
accepted further explanation of its intended meaning where
this has appeared to them to be necessary in order to isolate and define
point of substantive law which the parties wish to have determined. (at p630)
4. In the light of these explanations the facts relied upon by Mr. Evatt as
constituting his cause of action against the company
may be stated as follows
(1) Mr. Evatt was a policy holder in the company.
(2) He was seeking from the company information and advice
concerning the financial stability of another company,
H.G. Palmer (Consolidated) Ltd. (herein called "Palmer")
and as to the safety of investments in Palmer.
(3) The company and Palmer were subsidiary companies of
The M.L.C. Ltd.
(4) By virtue of that association the company had better
facilities than Mr. Evatt for obtaining full, complete and
up-to-date information concerning the financial affairs of
Palmer, though at the time of the inquiry by Mr. Evatt
it was not in actual possession of such information.
(5) The company had in its employ officers who were capable
of forming a reliable judgment upon information obtained
concerning Palmer's financial affairs.
(6) Mr. Evatt knew the facts stated in (3), (4) and (5).
(7) The company by itself, its servants and agents informed
and advised Mr. Evatt that Palmer was and would
to be financially stable and that it would be safe
further to invest therein.
(8) The company supplied that information and advice without
Mr. Evatt intended to act thereon in making a decision
whether to retain investments already existing in Palmer
and whether to invest further therein.
(9) The company supplied the information and advice
negligently.
(10) In reliance on the information and advice supplied by the
existing in Palmer and invested further sums therein
whereby he lost the value of the investments together with
interest thereon. (at p631)
5. The allegation in (9) that the company supplied the information and advice
"negligently" is an assertion of a breach of a duty
of care owed by the
company to Mr. Evatt. But under the common law system of pleading still in
force in New South Wales the plaintiff
in an action for negligence must allege
facts from which if they and no other facts were proved at the trial, the law
will deduce
a duty of care. The question for their Lordships is whether the
facts stated in (1) to (8) are in themselves sufficient to give rise
owed by the company to Mr. Evatt to take care in giving him the information
and advice which he sought. (at p631)
6. The question is thus different from that which arises under the modern
system of pleading in England upon an application to strike
out a statement of
claim as disclosing no reasonable cause of action. There the question is
whether it would be open to the plaintiffs
upon the pleadings to prove facts
at the trial which would constitute a cause of action. See Dorset Yacht Co. v.
(1970) 2 WLR 1140
. (at p631)
7. Mr. Evatt does not allege that at or prior to the time of his inquiry the
company carried on the business of supplying information
or advice on
investments to its policy holders or to anyone else, or that the company had
claimed, professed or represented to him
or to anyone else that it possessed
any qualification, skill or competence to do so greater than that possessed by
the ordinary reasonable
man. Nor does he allege that at the time of his
inquiry the company undertook or represented to him that it would make use of
facilities to obtain full, complete or up-to-date information concerning
the financial affairs of Palmer or that it would obtain
and communicate to him
the opinion of officers in its employment who were capable of forming a
reliable judgment on such information
if obtained. Nor does he allege that at
the time the company supplied him with the information and advice it
represented to him that
it had done any of these things. (at p632)
8. Counsel for Mr. Evatt concedes that, if in order to establish a duty of
care owed by the company to Mr. Evatt it will be necessary
to establish one or
other of these facts in addition to those set out in (1) to (8) above, the
company's demurrer should succeed.
The question in this appeal is whether or
not it is so necessary. (at p632)
9. The several speeches in Hedley Byrne & Co. Ltd. v. Heller & Partners Ltd.
[1963] UKHL 4
(1964) AC 465
have lain at
the heart of the argument
in the courts of
Australia and before their Lordships' Board. That case broadened the category
of relationships
between one man and
another which give rise to a duty at
common law to use reasonable skill and care in making statements
opinion. Prior
to Hedley Byrne
[1963] UKHL 4
(1964) AC 465
it was accepted law in England
that in the absence of contract
the maker of a statement of fact or
owed to a person whom
he could reasonably foresee would rely upon it in a
matter affecting
his economic interest, a duty
to be honest in making the
But he did not owe any duty to be careful, unless the relationship
between him and the person
who acted upon it to his economic detriment
within the category of relationships which the law classified
as fiduciary.
Byrne (1) decided that the class of relationships
between the maker of
the statement and the person who acted
upon it to his economic
detriment which
attracted the duty to be careful
was not so limited, but could extend to
relationships which
though not fiduciary
in character possessed other
characteristics. (at
10. In Hedley Byrne
[1963] UKHL 4
(1964) AC 465
itself and in the previous English cases on
negligent statements which were analysed
in the speeches,
with the notable
of Fish v. Kelly
[1864] EngR 478
(1864) 17 CBNS 194
(144 ER 78) , Derry v. Peek
[1889] UKHL 1
(1889) 14 App Cas 337
and Low v. Bouverie
(1891) 3 Ch 82
, the relationship
possessed the characteristics (1) that the maker of the statement had made
in the ordinary course
of his business
or profession and (2) that the
subject-matter of the statement called for the exercise
of some qualification,
or competence
not possessed by the ordinary reasonable man, to which the
maker of the statement was
known by the recipient to lay
claim by reason
his engaging in that business or profession. (at p633)
11. In the United States of America, where the development of this branch of
the common law of negligence had anticipated the English
decision in Hedley
[1963] UKHL 4
(1964) AC 465
, the American Restatement of the Law of Torts (2nd) vol.
III, par. 552, which
was referred
to by Lord Devlin (1964) AC, at p 531
Lord Pearce (1964) AC, at p 539 specifies as a necessary characteristic
relationship
which gives rise to a duty of care
on the part of the maker of
the statement that he should be a person who makes
it a part of his
or profession to supply
for the guidance of others in their business
transactions information of the kind
contained in the
statement and that the
should be made by him in the course of that business or profession.
12. A requirement that the existence of a similar characteristic is necessary
in order to attract a duty of care is not stated unequivocally
in any of the
speeches in Hedley Byrne
[1963] UKHL 4
(1964) AC 465
. But those speeches, like all
judgments under the common-law
system must be
understood secundum subjectam
materiam. The fact that
the characteristics were present in the relationship
the maker and
the recipient of the statement under consideration in
Hedley Byrne
[1963] UKHL 4
(1964) AC 465
made it unnecessary
for those who expressed the
reasons for their decision of the case to direct their minds to the question
the terms in which
the reasons were expressed
would have called for
some qualification in their application to cases where those
characteristics
absent - as they are in the
instant appeal. The speeches in Hedley Byrne
[1963] UKHL 4
(1964) AC 465
cannot thus be determinative
in themselves of whether or not the
of these characteristics in the relationship between the
the recipient is
necessary in order to give rise to a duty of
care at common
law. (at p633)
13. Their Lordships accordingly conceive it to be their task in the instant
appeal to examine that question as one of principle
in the light of the
earlier development of this branch of the law of negligence in the cases which
preceded, and were for the most
part referred to, in Hedley Byrne
[1963] UKHL 4
, as well as in the light of the speeches in Hedley Byrne themselves.
14. The instant appeal is concerned with a statement consisting of
"information and advice concerning the financial stability of
company . . . and as to the safety of investments therein". In regard to this
subject-matter, viz. financial stability
and safety of investment, no
distinction need be drawn between "information" and "advice" and it is
convenient to use the latter
word. Such advice to be reliable (i.e. to be of a
quality upon which it would be reasonable for the advisee to rely in
determining
his course of action in a matter which affected his economic
interests) calls for the exercise on the part of the adviser of special
and competence to form a judgment in the subject-matter of the advice, which
the advisee does not possess himself. The problem
to be solved arises in that
field of human activity which calls for the services of a skilled man. (at
15. The proposition stated in the maxim spondet peritiam artis et imperitia
culpae adnumeratur is one of the oldest principles in
English law. The duty
imposed by law upon those who followed a calling which required skill and
competence to exercise in their calling
such reasonable skill and competence
as was appropriate to it lies at the origin of the action of assumpsit itself.
It was first
applied to artificers "for it is the duty of every artificer to
exercise his art right and truly as he ought" (Fitzherbert Natura
(1534) 94D) It was later extended to all other occupations which involve the
doing of acts calling for some special skill
or competence not possessed by
the ordinary man. The standard of skill and competence was that which is
generally possessed by persons
who engage in the calling, business or
profession of doing acts of that kind for reward. The duty to conform to the
standard was
attracted by engaging in that particular calling, business or
profession because by doing so a man holds himself out as possessing
necessary skill and competence for it. To undertake to do an act requiring
special skill and competence for reward was also a
sufficient holding out by
the obligor to the obligee. But the doing of the act gratuitously by a person
who did not engage in the
calling, business or profession, did not attract the
duty to exercise skill and competence : Shiells v. Blackburne
[1789] EngR 2412
(1789) 1 H Bl
[1789] EngR 2412
, at p 96) . See also the references to the relevant
cases in the speeches in Hedley Byrne of Lord Hodson
(1964) AC, at p 510 and
Lord Pearce (1964) AC, at pp 537-538 . (at p634)
16. Where advice which calls for the exercise of special skill and competence
by the adviser is not to be based exclusively upon
facts communicated to him
by the advisee no relevant distinction can be drawn between the ascertaining
by the adviser of the facts
upon which to base his judgment as to the advice
to be given, and the forming of that judgment itself. The need for special
and competence extends to the selection of the particular facts which
need to be ascertained in order to form a reliable judgment
identification of the sources from which such facts can be obtained. (at p635)
17. As in the case of a person who gratuitously does an act which calls for
the exercise of some special skill and competence, a
duty of care which lies
upon an adviser must be a duty to conform to an ascertainable standard of
skill and competence in relation
to the subject-matter of the advice.
Otherwise there can be no way of determining whether the adviser was in breach
of his duty of
care. The problem cannot be solved by saying that the adviser
must do his honest best according to the skill and competence which
possesses, for in the law of negligence standards of care are always
objective. The passages in the judgment of Cozens-Hardy
M.R. in Parsons v.
Barclays & Co. Ltd.
(1910) 103 LT 196
, at p 199 and of Pearson L.J. in the
Court of Appeal
(1962) 1 QB 396
pp 414-415 in Hedley Byrne itself, which
were quoted with approval in the House of Lords make it clear that a banker
reference is not required to do his best by, for instance,
making inquiries from outside sources which are available to
him, though
would make his reference more reliable. All that he is required to do is to
conform to that standard of skill and
and diligence which is
generally shown by persons who carry on the business of providing references
of that kind. Equally
excuse to him to say that he has done his
honest best, if what he does falls below that standard because in fact he
the necessary
skill and competence to attain to it. (at p635)
18. The reason why the law requires him to conform to this standard of skill
and competence and diligence is that by carrying on
a business which includes
the giving of references of this kind he has let it be known to the recipient
of the reference that he
claims to possess that degree of skill and competence
and is willing to apply that degree of diligence to the provision of any
which he supplies in the course of that business, whether
gratuitously so far as the recipient is concerned or not. If he supplies
reference the law requires him to make good his claim. (at p635)
19. It would not in their Lordships' view be consonant with the principles
hitherto accepted in the common law that the duty to
comply with that
objective standard should be extended to an adviser who, at the time at which
his advice is sought, has not let
it be known to the advisee that he claims to
possess the standard of skill and competence and is prepared to exercise
diligence which
is generally shown by persons who carry on the business of
giving advice of the kind sought. He has given the advisee no reason to
suppose that he is acquainted with the standard or capable of complying with
it or that he has such appreciation of the nature and
magnitude of the loss
which the advisee may sustain by reason of any failure by that adviser to
attain that standard as a reasonable
man would require before assuming a
liability to answer for the loss. (at p636)
20. But if it would not be just or reasonable to require him to conform to
this objective standard of care which would be incumbent
upon a person who
carried on the business of giving advice of the kind sought, there is in their
Lordships' view no half-way house
between that and the common law duty which
each man owes his neighbour irrespective of his skill - the duty of honesty.
No half-way
house has been suggested in the argument in the instant appeal or
in any of the decided cases. That the duty was confined to that
of honesty was
decided, as their Lordships think rightly, in Low v. Bouverie
(1891) 3 Ch 82
The judgment of Lindley L.J. in that
case no doubt treated Derry v. Peek
[1889] UKHL 1
(1889) 14 App Cas 337
as going further than it was subsequently held to have
gone in Nocton v.
(1914) AC 932
; but Bowen L.J. did not fall into
that error, and the decision itself was approved in Nocton v. Ashburton
Lord Haldane (1914)
AC, at p 950 with whom Lord Atkinson concurred. It was
also referred to without any indication of dissent
by Lord Shaw of Dunfermline
(1914) AC, at p 968 . In Hedley Byrne
[1963] UKHL 4
(1964) AC 465
, Le Lievre v. Gould
(1893) 1 QB
, which concerned
a practising surveyor, and Candler v. Crane,
Christmas & Co.
(1951) 2 KB 164
, which concerned practising
accountants, were
overruled ; but Low v. Bouverie
(1891) 3 Ch 82
so far from being
overruled was cited without disapproval
by Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest
AC, at p 502 and accepted as correctly
expressing the law by Lord Hodson
(1964) AC, at p 513
. (at p636)
21. In Low v. Bouverie
(1891) 3 Ch 82
it was made plain to the defendant, who
was trustee of a settlement, that the information
sought from him as to
encumbrances upon
the life interest of his cestui que trust was required by
the inquirer for the purpose of
enabling him to make a decision upon a
business transaction and that he would rely upon that information. The trustee
informed the
inquirer of the existence of certain
encumbrances but omitted to
mention six prior mortgages whose existence he had forgotten, though
recited in the deed by
which he had been appointed trustee of the settlement
four years before. The only skill and competence
on his part which was called
for to enable him to provide accurate information was the ability to
appreciate the need to look at
the deed of appointment. (at
22. In their Lordships' view the crucial distinction between this case and
those cases which it was held in Hedley Byrne
gave rise to a
duty of care as well as honesty (viz. Cann v. Willson
(1883) 39 Ch D 39
Lievre v. Gould
(1893) 1 QB 491
, Candler v. Crane, Christmas & Co.
, Woods v. Martins Bank Ltd. (5) and Hedley Byrne
(1964) AC 465
itself), is that
the trustee in Low v. Bouverie
(1891) 3 Ch 82
did not hold
himself out to the inquirer as
being prepared to supply in the course
business information of the kind sought.
He had made no claim to any skill or
which the law could require him to
make good. (at p637)
23. The carrying on of a business or profession which involves the giving of
advice of a kind which calls for special skill and
competence is the normal
way in which a person lets it be known to the recipient of the advice that he
claims to possess that degree
of skill and competence and is willing to
exercise that degree of diligence which is generally possessed and exercised
who carry on the business or profession of giving advice of the
kind sought. The American Restatement of the Law of Tort (2nd) confines
duty of care in giving advice to persons who make it part of their business to
supply advice ; though later tentative redrafts
suggest that the duty also
attaches where the adviser has a financial interest in the transaction - a
situation which is not relevant
to the instant appeal. Lord Denning M.R. also
so confined it in his dissenting judgment in Candler's Case (1951) 2 KB, at pp
180 where, after stating that the persons subject to a duty of care in
giving advice are "those persons such as accountants, surveyors,
valuers and
analysts whose profession and occupation it is to examine books, accounts and
other things, and to make reports on which
other people - other than their
clients - rely in the ordinary course of business", added "herein lies the
difference between these
professional men and other persons who have been held
to be under no duty to use care in their statements, such as promoters who
issue a prospectus : Derry v. Peek
[1889] UKHL 1
(1889) 14 App Cas 337
(now altered by
statute) and trustees who answer inquiries about the trust
funds : Low v.
(1891) 3 Ch 82
. These persons do not bring, and are not expected to
bring, any professional knowledge or
skill into the preparation of their
: they can only be made responsible by the law affecting persons
generally, such as
contract, estoppel, innocent misrepresentation
This dissenting judgment was referred to with approval in Hedley Byrne
speeches of Lord Hodson (1964) AC, p 509
, Lord Devlin (1964) AC, p 530 and
Lord Pearce (1964) AC, p 538 . (at p638)
24. While accepting this as the common case giving rise to the duty of care
their Lordships would not wish to exclude the case where
the adviser, although
not carrying on the business or profession generally, has, at or before the
time at which his advice is sought,
let it be known in some other way that he
claims to possess skill and competence in the subject matter of the particular
comparable to those who do carry on the business or profession of
advising on the subject matter and is prepared to exercise a comparable
and competence in giving the advice. Here too, by parity of reasoning, the law
should require him to make good his claim. But
the mere giving of advice with
knowledge, as in Low v. Bouverie
(1891) 3 Ch 82
, that the inquirer intends to
rely upon it does not,
of itself, in their Lordships' view, amount to such a
claim. (at p638)
25. The converse of this is the case where a person who does carry on a
business or profession which involves the giving of advice
of the kind sought
by the inquirer, does so in circumstances which should let it be known to a
reasonable inquirer that he was not
prepared to exercise in relation to the
particular advice sought that degree of diligence which he would exercise in
giving such
advice for reward in the course of his business or profession.
Casual advice given by a professional man upon a social or informal
is the typical example, of which Fish v. Kelly
[1864] EngR 478
(1864) 17 CB NS 194
(144 ER 78)
provides an illustration among the decided
cases. (at p638)
26. There are two passages in the speeches in Hedley Byrne
[1963] UKHL 4
(1964) AC 465
which have been particularly relied upon,
in the argument
before their
Lordships and in the majority judgments in each of the courts
amounting to a decision that
the law imposes
a "duty of care" upon a person
who gives advice to another on a subject matter
requiring skill and competence
diligence, so long
as he knows or ought to have known that the other
intends to rely upon it in
a matter affecting his economic interests,
notwithstanding
that the adviser neither carries on the business of giving
advice of that
kind nor has let it be known in some other
way to the advisee
at or before the time his advice is sought that he claims to possess
comparable skill and competence and is
prepared to exercise
a comparable
diligence. (at p638)
27. The passage in Lord Reid's speech is that in which he poses the courses
of action open to a reasonable man upon being asked
for advice on a matter
requiring skill and competence and diligence. It reads as follows (1964) AC,
"A reasonable man, knowing that he was being trusted or
that his skill and judgment were being relied on, would, I
think, have three courses open to him. He could keep silent
or decline to give the information or advice sought : or he
could give an answer with a clear qualification that he accepted
no responsibility for it or that it was given without that
reflection or inquiry which a careful answer would require :
or he could simply answer without any such qualification.
If he chooses to adopt the last course he must, I think, be
held to have accepted some responsibility for his answer
being given carefully, or to have accepted a relationship
with the inquirer which requires him to exercise such care as
the circumstances require." (at p639)
28. This is not the language of statutory codification of the law of tort but
of judicial exposition of the reasons for reaching
a particular decision upon
the facts of the case. (at p639)
29. Read out of the context in which the whole argument in Hedley Byrne
[1963] UKHL 4
(1964) AC 465
proceeded, viz. advice given
in the course
of a business or
profession which involved the giving of skilled, competent and diligent
advice, these words are wide
sustain Mr. Evatt's case in the
instant appeal. But in their Lordships' view the reference
to "such care as
the circumstances
pre-supposes an ascertainable standard of skill,
competence and diligence with which
the adviser is acquainted or has
represented
that he is. Unless he carries on the business or profession of
giving advice of that
kind he cannot be reasonably expected to know
any and if so what degree of skill, competence or diligence is called for,
a fortiori, in their Lordships' view, he cannot
be reasonably held to have
accepted the responsibility of conforming to a standard
of skill, competence
and diligence of which he
is unaware, simply because he answers the inquiry
with knowledge that the advisee
intends to rely on his answer. (at p639)
30. This passage should in their Lordships' view be understood as restricted
to advisers who carry on the business or profession
of giving advice of the
kind sought and to advice given by them in the course of that business. (at
31. The other passage relied upon by counsel for Mr. Evatt occurs in the
speech of Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest. It reads as follows
(1964) AC, at pp
"My Lords, I consider that it follows and that it should
now be regarded as settled that if someone possessed of a
special skill undertakes, quite irrespective of contract, to
apply that skill for the assistance of another person who
relies upon such skill, a duty of care will arise. The fact that
the service is to be given by means of or by the instrumentality
of words can make no difference. Furthermore, if in a sphere
in which a person is so placed that others could reasonably
rely upon his judgment or his skill or upon his ability to make
careful inquiry, a person takes it upon himself to give
information
or advice to, or allow his information or advice to be
passed on to, another person who, as he knows or should know,
will place reliance upon it, then a duty of care will arise." (at p640)
32. This passage states a conclusion which follows from a consideration of
the decided cases previously examined by Lord Morris
in which advice or
information was given by a person in the course of carrying on a business or
profession which involved giving
such advice or information for reward. The
dichotomy between the two parts of this passage would appear to be between
skilled persons
who "undertake" to give skilled advice or information "quite
irrespective of contract", and persons placed "in a sphere" in which
could reasonably rely upon his skill, judgment or "ability" to make careful
inquiry - an expression which, in the context
of "careful" inquiry cannot mean
merely that he has an "opportunity" to make inquiry which a skilled person
would realize was necessary
but an unskilled person would not. In their
Lordships' view the reference to the sphere in which the person is placed
should be understood
in this context as referring to that sphere in which were
placed the persons referred to in the cases previously discussed by Lord
Morris in which the adviser had been held, or in his expressed opinion should
have been held, to be subject to a duty of care, viz.
that of carrying on a
business or profession of giving advice or undertaking inquiries of that kind.
33. In Mr. Evatt's declaration as originally framed before amendment in the
Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
it contained no
allegation that the company was in any better position than Mr. Evatt himself
to give reliable advice concerning
the financial stability of Palmer or as to
the safety of investments therein. The fact that the company gave the advice
without disclaimer
of responsibility and with the knowledge that Mr. Evatt
intended to rely upon it in making a decision about his existing and future
investments in Palmer was relied upon as sufficient in itself to attract the
duty of care. It is implicit in the allegation that
the advice was given by a
corporation "by itself its servants and agents" that the giving of such advice
was not ultra vires the
company's powers; but it is not implicit that it in
fact carried on or held itself out as carrying on the business of giving
as distinct from mere honest advice of this character. Before their
Lordships' Board counsel for Mr. Evatt has expressly disavowed
implication ; though there are passages in the judgments of Kitto and Menzies
JJ. in the High Court of Australia which suggest
that this disavowal may not
have been so explicit in the courts below. The corporate character of the
defendant may therefore be
ignored. The legal position would be no different
if the defendant were a natural person not subject to the doctrine of ultra
34. For the reasons already given, the declaration in its original form,
which appears to be based upon the passage in Lord Reid's
speech in Hedley
[1963] UKHL 4
(1964) AC 465
which has already been cited, does not, in their
Lordships' view, disclose any
cause of action.
35. The amendments introduced in the Court of Appeal state the respects in
which it is alleged that the company was, and was known
by Mr. Evatt to be, in
a better position than he was to give reliable advice upon the subject matter
of his inquiry. They were in
a better position than he was to obtain from an
outside source information, not alleged to be already in their possession,
the financial affairs of Palmer, and, if such information were
obtained they had officers in their employment who had the necessary
competence to form a reliable judgment concerning Palmer's financial affairs
if the company had chosen to use their services
to do so. It is not however,
alleged that it was to any officer possessed of this skill and competence that
Mr. Evatt addressed his
inquiry to the company for its advice ; nor is it
alleged that the officer or servant of the company to whom his inquiry was
addressed undertook or represented to Mr. Evatt that any such
inquiries would be made of any outside source or that any officer of
company possessed of the relevant skill and competence would be consulted. (at
36. The facts alleged if proved at the trial would establish no more than
that the company could have provided Mr. Evatt with reliable
advice if it had
chosen to make the inquiries requisite to provide the material necessary to
form a reliable judgment and had required
its skilled and competent officers,
who ex concessu were not employed for that purpose, to divert themselves from
their ordinary
employment to exercise their skill and competence upon the
information so obtained. (at p641)
37. The same could be said of the successful defendant in Low v. Bouverie
(1891) 3 Ch 82
. The requisite inquiry which he failed
to make, viz. to
inspect his own deed of appointment, indeed, involved no recourse to outside
sources. If he did not realize the
need to do so or its significance when
inspected he could have consulted his solicitor. As respects
recourse to
outside sources of
information the same might be said of any banker giving a
reference in the actual course of his business,
for, as already pointed
although by virtue of his carrying on that business the law does impose upon
him some duty of care,
that duty does not extend
to making inquiries of
outside sources. (at p642)
38. In their Lordships' view these additional allegations are insufficient to
fill the fatal gap in the declaration that it contains
no averment that the
company to the knowledge of Mr. Evatt carried on the business of giving advice
upon investments or in some other
way had let it be known to him that they
claimed to possess the necessary skill and competence to do so and were
prepared to exercise
the necessary diligence to give reliable advice to him
upon the subject matter of his inquiry. In the absence of any allegation to
this effect Mr. Evatt was not entitled to assume that the company had accepted
any other duty towards him than to give an honest
answer to his inquiry nor,
in the opinion of their Lordships, did the law impose any higher duty upon
them. This is in agreement
with the reasoning of Taylor J. in the High Court
of Australia with which the judgment of Owen J. is also consistent. (at p642)
39. As with any other important case in the development of the common law
Hedley Byrne
[1963] UKHL 4
(1964) AC 465
be regarded as intended
to lay down the
metes and bounds of the new field of negligence of which the gate is now
fall to be ascertained
step by step as the facts of
particular cases which come before the courts make it necessary to
them. The instant appeal
is an example; but their Lordships would emphasize
that the missing characteristic of the relationship
they consider to be
essential to give rise to a duty of care in a situation of the kind in which
Mr. Evatt and the company
themselves when he southt
their advice, is not
necessarily essential in other situations - such as, perhaps, where the
a financial interest in
the transaction upon which he gives his
advice. (Cf. W. B. Anderson & Sons Ltd. v. Rhodes (Liverpool)
Restatement of the Law of Torts, Tentative Redraft.) On
this, as on any other metes and bounds
of the doctrine of Hedley
[1963] UKHL 4
their Lordships are expressing no opinion. The categories of negligence
are never closed and their Lordships' opinion in the
appeal, like all
judicial reasoning, must be understood secundum subjectam
materiam. (at p643)
40. For these reasons their Lordships will humbly advise Her Majesty that the
appeal be allowed. In accordance with undertakings
given when special leave to
appeal was granted, there will be no order as to the costs before their
Lordships' Board and the orders
for costs below will not be disturbed. (at
The dissenting judgment of LORD REID and LORD MORRIS OF BORTH-Y-GEST was as
The main question in this appeal is whether the appellant company owed any
duty of care to the respondent when, in response to
his request for
information and advice about the financial stability of another company
referred to as Palmer, it gave to him an
opinion that Palmer were financially
stable. The appellant accepts the principles laid down by the House of Lords
in Hedley Byrne
& Co. Ltd. v. Heller & Partners Ltd.
[1963] UKHL 4
(1964) AC 465
certain circumstances such a duty can arise although
there is no contract
between the parties, but maintains that no such
duty could arise in the
present case. The present case is complicated
by the fact
that the appeal
arises on a demurrer and that there
is a dispute as to the meaning and effect
of the respondent's pleading.
The Supreme
Court of New South Wales gave
judgment for the
plaintiff (the present respondent) on the demurrer and the
of Australia
by a majority dismissed an appeal from that judgment.
If we agree with the majority of the High Court with regard to
the principles
involved, it would not in our judgment be proper for
the Board to reverse the
decision of the Australian courts on
the grounds that
the respondent's
pleading appears to the Board to
be defective. That is a matter which must
chiefly depend on the
practice in the
courts of New South Wales - a matter
with which the
Australian courts are familiar but we are not. (at p643)
2. As the facts have not been investigated and there is a dispute as to the
meaning of the respondent's allegation, it is not possible
to set out the
alleged facts except in the most general way. The respondent had certain
investments in Palmer and he had in mind
to invest further in that company. He
was a policy holder in the appellant insurance company. The appellant and
Palmer were associated
in that they were both subsidiaries of another company.
The appellant was in a position to obtain information about Palmer's affairs
which was not available to the respondent. And the appellant had officers in
its employment who were capable of forming a reliable
judgment upon
information which the appellant could obtain from Palmer. So the respondent
sought advice from the appellant about
the safety of his investments in
Palmer. The appellant, knowing that the respondent intended to act on its
advice, gave him advice
which caused him to leave his existing investments
with Palmer and to make further investments in that company. That advice
out to be bad advice with the result that the respondent lost a large
sum of money. The respondent's case is that if the appellant
had taken that
amount of care which was reasonable in the circumstances its advice would have
been different and he would not have
lost his money. (at p644)
3. In our judgment it is not possible to lay down hard and fast rules as to
when a duty of care arises in this or in any other class
of case where
negligence is alleged. When in the past judges have attempted to lay down
rigid rules or classifications or categories
they have later had to be
abandoned. But it is possible and necessary to determine the principles which
have to be applied in determining
whether in given circumstances any duty to
take care arises. (at p644)
4. In this class of case the first principle is that no duty beyond the duty
to give an honest answer can arise when advice is given
casually or in a
social context, and the reason is that it would be quite unreasonable for the
inquirer to expect more in such circumstances
and quite unreasonable to impose
any greater duty on the adviser. The law must keep in step with the habits of
the reasonable man
and consider whether ordinary people would think they had
some obligation beyond merely giving an honest answer. (at p644)
5. It may be going too far to say that a duty to take care can only arise
where advice is sought and given in a business or professional
context, for
there might be unusual cases requiring a wider application of this principle.
But for present purposes we think that
the appropriate question is whether
this advice was given on a business occasion or in the course of the
appellant's business activities.
The solution of this question may be
difficult where advice is given by an individual, but here the advice is
alleged to have been
given by a company. It must in fact have been given by
some individual. If it was given by the company that must mean that the
who gave the advice must have had general or special authority from
the company to give it, or at least that the company must have
held him out as
authorized to give it. It is not suggested that this company was so limited by
its memorandum and articles that it
could not give such authority. We are
unable to see how a company can authorize the giving of such advice otherwise
than as a part
of its business activities. So long as a company does not act
ultra vires it is for the company to determine the scope of its business.
appears to be quite common practice for businesses to perform gratuitous
services for their customers with the object of retaining
or acquiring their
goodwill. If they incur expense in doing so it has never so far as we are
aware been suggested that such expense
is not a business expense. And we think
that where companies do perform such service both they and their customers
would be surprised
to learn that the company is under no obligation to take
any care in the matter. (at p645)
6. The ordinary rule, that a defendant can only be liable for loss which was
caused by his acts or omissions, appears to us to afford
the answer to a
number of questions discussed in argument. If the plaintiff acted reasonably
in seeking the advice of the defendant
and made it clear to the defendant that
he intended to rely on the advice with regard to a certain matter, then it
could properly
be said that by giving the advice the defendant caused the
plaintiff to act as he did. If however the plaintiff acted unreasonably
taking or following the advice then it was his own fault if he suffered loss
and it would be unnecessary to consider whether the
defendant owed any duty of
care when giving the advice. Accordingly we are only concerned with a case
where the plaintiff acted reasonably.
In this case the respondent alleges that
he was aware that the appellant had special facilities for obtaining the
necessary information
and was in a position to give reliable and up-to-date
advice, and was aware that he intended to act on the appellant's advice. So
taking care would have caused the appellant to give different advice, these
allegations would enable the respondent to prove that
the appellant's failure
to take care caused his loss. (at p645)
7. Much of the argument was directed to establishing that a person giving
advice cannot be under any duty to take care unless he
has some special skill
competence qualification or information with regard to the matter on which his
advice is sought. But then
how much skill or competence must he have? Even a
man with a professional qualification is seldom an expert on all matters dealt
with by members of his profession. Must the adviser be an expert or specialist
in the matter on which his advice is sought? And when
it comes to matters of
business or finance where those whose business it is to deal with such matters
generally have no recognized
formal qualification, how is the sufficiency of
the adviser's special skill or competence to be measured? If the adviser is
in a business context to advise on a certain matter and he chooses to
accept that invitation and to give without warning or qualification
appears to be considered advice, is he to be allowed to turn round later and
say that he was under no duty to take care because
in fact he had no
sufficient skill or competence to give the advice? (at p646)
8. It must be borne in mind that there is here no question of warranty. If
the adviser were to be held liable because his advice
was bad then it would be
relevant to inquire into his capacity to give the advice. But here and in
cases coming within the principles
laid down in Hedley Byrne
[1963] UKHL 4
(1964) AC 465
only duty in question is a duty to take reasonable care before giving
can see no ground for the distinction that
a specially skilled man
must exercise care but a less skilled man need
not do so. We are
accept the argument that a duty
to take care is the same as a duty to conform
to a particular standard
of skill. One must
assume a reasonable man who has
that degree
of knowledge and skill which facts known to the inquirer
statements made by
the adviser) entitled him to expect of the
adviser, and then inquire whether such a reasonable man could have
advice which
was in fact given if he had exercised reasonable
care. (at p646)
9. Then it was argued that an adviser ought not to be under any liability to
exercise care unless he had, before the advice was
sought, in some way held
himself out as able and willing to give advice. We can see no virtue in a
previous holding out. If the inquirer,
knowing that the adviser is in a
position to give informed advice, seeks that advice and the adviser agrees to
give it we are unable
to see why his duty should be more onerous by reason of
the fact that he had previously done the same for others. And again, if the
previous conduct of the adviser is relevant, would it be sufficient that, in
order to attract new customers or increase the goodwill
of existing customers,
he had indicated a general willingness to do what he could to help inquirers,
or must he have indicated a
willingness and ability to deal with the precise
kind of matter on which the inquirer seeks his assistance? (at p646)
10. In our judgment when an inquirer consults a business man in the course of
his business and makes it plain to him that he is
seeking considered advice
and intends to act on it in a particular way, any reasonable business man
would realize that, if he chooses
to give advice without any warning or
qualification, he is putting himself under a moral obligation to take some
care. It appears
to us to be well within the principles established by the
Hedley Byrne Case (1) to regard his action in giving such advice as creating
special relationship between him and the inquirer and to translate his moral
obligation into a legal obligation to take such care
as is reasonable in the
whole circumstances. (at p647)
11. In Hedley Byrne
[1963] UKHL 4
(1964) AC 465
their Lordships were not laying down rules.
They were developing a principle which
flows, as in
all branches of the tort
of negligence,
from giving legal effect to what ordinary reasonable men
habitually do in certain
circumstances.
Admittedly there is nothing in Hedley
Byrne's Case
[1963] UKHL 4
(1964) AC 465
which governs this case. The principles
indicated must be
developed from time to time to cover new cases, and we have
to set out what we believe to be a
proper development to meet
present case. We are unable to construe the passages from our speeches
in the judgment of the
majority in the way in which
they are there construed.
In our view they are consistent with and support
the views which we have
expressed in the present
case. We do not think that it would be useful
to quote expressions from
speeches used without having in
mind circumstances
we have here. Earlier authorities were explained in that case and,
one exception, we do not propose
to add to those explanations.
12. We must however deal with Low v. Bouverie
(1891) 3 Ch 82
because the
appellant argued that the respondent could not succeed
if that case was
rightly decided. We do not agree. We see nothing
wrong with the decision
although the judgments are to some extent
coloured by a view of the effect of
Derry v. Peek
[1889] UKHL 1
(1889) 14 App Cas 337
which was held in Hedley Byrne & Co.'s
[1963] UKHL
(1964) AC 465
to be erroneous. In Low v. Bouverie
(1891) 3 Ch 82
moneylender, proposed to lend money to a relative of
Bouverie who had
interests in a trust of which Bouverie was a trustee.
So at the instigation of
the borrower he wrote to Bouverie
asking whether those
interests were
mortgaged. In reply Bouverie mentioned
two mortgages but failed to mention
others which he had
forgotten about. So
Low lent money but lost it because the
borrower became
bankrupt and there was nothing left of the borrower's
in the trust
after payment of the mortgages which Bouverie had forgotten
mention. (at p647)
13. In the first place Bouverie was not acting in any business capacity. He
was acting in his private capacity as a trustee in a
family trust and we have
already said that in our view there is in general no duty to take care imposed
on an adviser who is not
acting in the course of his business or professional
activities. And secondly it appears from the judgments of Lindley and Bowen
L.JJ. that Bouverie's letters to Low were not unequivocal statements that
there were no other encumbrances. "They are quite consistent
with the view
that the encumbrances mentioned by the defendant were all he knew of or
remembered" (1891) 3 Ch, at p 103 ; "I think
that his language would be
reasonably understood as conveying an intimation of the state of his belief,
without an assertion that
the fact was so apart from the limitation of his own
knowledge;" (1891) 3 Ch, at p 106 so it was not reasonable for Low to act on
Bouverie's letters without taking further steps to check the information. (at
We think that the judgments of the majority in the High Court are consistent
with the views which we have expressed as to the principles
which should
govern the present case. We are therefore of opinion that the appeal should be
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter