Coote v Forza Marketing Pty Ltd, in the matter of Coote [2025] FCA 1370 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Coote v Forza Marketing Pty Ltd, in the
matter of Coote
[2025] FCA 1370
File number(s):
NSD 5 of 2025
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– review of
Registrar’s decision not to set aside bankruptcy notice –
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
whether bankruptcy notice served on second applicant – reg 102(1)(d)
Bankruptcy Regulations 2021
(Cth) – whether lien on judgment
debt prevented compliance with bankruptcy notice – whether power to extend
compliance with bankruptcy notice
Legislation:
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Bankruptcy Regulations
(Cth) reg 102(1), (3)
Federal Court (Bankruptcy) Rules 2016
(Cth) Sch 1
Cases cited:
Bechara v Bates
[2021] FCAFC 34
(2021) 286 FCR 166
Firth v Centrelink
[2002] NSWSC 564
(2002) 55 NSWLR 451
Forza Marketing Pty Ltd v Sie
[2023] NSWSC 658
Kingdom of Spain v Infrastructure Services Luxembourg S.à.r.l.
(Security for Costs)
[2024] FCAFC 113
General Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Commercial and Corporations
General and Personal Insolvency
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr A Maroya
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Keleher Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr D Robens
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Harrington Hall
NSD 5 of 2025
IN THE MATTER OF JOHN COOTE AND AI GEK SIE
First Applicant
FORZA MARKETING PTY LTD (ACN 134 280
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
originating application filed 6 January 2025 be dismissed.
applicants pay the respondent’s costs of the application, including the
review under
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth), as agreed or taxed.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
originating application filed on 6 January 2025, the applicants seek to set
Bankruptcy Notice
BN273618 issued on 4 October 2024 on two
grounds: (1) as at the date of issuance of the Bankruptcy Notice, the respondent
set aside a lien placed over judgment monies payable to the respondent;
and (2) the Bankruptcy Notice was not properly served on
a claim for interim relief, the applicants also seek an extension of time for
compliance with the Bankruptcy Notice to 30 June
2025, pursuant to
s 41(6A)(b) of the
Bankruptcy Act
(Cth), on the
basis that an application has been made to the Court to set aside the Bankruptcy
respondent opposes the application on the basis that the originating application
has been filed out of time, and the statutory
precondition to the Court’s
exercise of discretion to extend time for compliance with the Bankruptcy Notice
has not been satisfied.
20 March 2025, Registrar Morgan dismissed the application to set aside the
Bankruptcy Notice (
Registrar’s decision
). No costs order was
interim application, the applicants seek a review of the Registrar’s
decision pursuant to
Federal Court of Australia Act
), and that the operation of that decision
be stayed pending determination of the application.
NATURE OF THE REVIEW
Delegated judicial power
35A(5) of the
provides: “A party to proceedings in which a
Registrar has exercised any of the powers of the Court under subsection (1) may,
within the time prescribed by the Rules of Court, or within any further time
allowed in accordance with the Rules of Court, apply
to the Court to review that
exercise of power.”
is no dispute that the power exercised by the Registrar was one which had been
authorised by s 35A(1) of the
. No party identified the
relevant authorisation under subsection (1).
the present case, the delegated power (to set aside a bankruptcy notice and to
extend time for compliance with the notice) is prescribed
Court (Bankruptcy) Rules 2016
(Cth), Schedule 1,
, items 1 and 4: see
s 35A(1)(h) of the
Hearing de novo
35A(6) provides that: “The Court may, on application under subsection (5)
or of its own motion, review an exercise of
power by a Registrar pursuant to
this section and make such order or orders as it thinks fit with respect to the
matter with respect
to which the power was exercised”. The review is not
predicated on any error committed by the Registrar. It is a hearing
, in which the matter is considered afresh on the evidence and on the
law at the time of the review, that is at the time of the
Bechara v Bates
[2021] FCAFC 34
(2021) 286 FCR 166
the case of delegated judicial power, the Registrar’s order takes effect
as an order of the judges of the Court, but on the
basis that a judge may be
asked to make an order in place of the exercise of delegated authority:
Bechara v Bates
at [3]. The delegated exercise of power is
effectively undone or revoked and a decision by a judge is made in its place:
Bechara v Bates
the stay sought, if there is a concern about steps being taken by a party
based upon the Registrar’s order, then interim
relief could be sought
pending the outcome of the review. However, the nature of the review means that
matters can be addressed when
the decision is made on review because inherent in
the nature of the delegation is a reservation by the Court of an ability to
the order by way of review and make whatever order may have been made by
the officer in the exercise of the power of delegation:
the review results in a different conclusion by a judge from that
reached by the Registrar, then an order is required to bring
the operation of
the existing order to an end. The Court, on review, does not determine that the
earlier order was made without authority.
The Court makes a new order to replace
the Registrar’s order in the exercise of the power of review which is a
condition of
the delegation. The fact that the nature of the review conducted by
the Court is a
review does not mean that the review
proceeds as if no order had been made by the registrar:
a matter of fact, it may be difficult to distinguish between a review
application and an application to set aside the Bankruptcy
Notice: cf.
Kingdom of Spain v Infrastructure Services Luxembourg S.à.r.l.
(Security for Costs)
[2024] FCAFC 113
. One is an indirect, and the
other a direct, means of asking the same question,
, whether the
Bankruptcy Notice should be set aside. The difference, of course, is the
existence of the Registrar’s order, but
that does not operate to alter the
nature of the judicial enquiry.
LIEN OVER JUDGMENT MONIES
The claimed lien
subject of the dispute between the parties is the Supreme Court of New South
Wales proceeding 2020/00197321 (
Forza Marketing Pty Ltd v Sie
Supreme Court proceeding
10 March 2023, a principal of McInnes Wilson Lawyers (MW Lawyers) informed the
parties to the Supreme Court proceeding that there
were unpaid legal costs in
respect of work done by MW Layers for the benefit of
Pty Ltd (and another), the plaintiff in the proceeding (and the respondent
in the present proceeding). MW Lawyers claimed “an
equitable right (or
lien) over the fruits of any judgment, costs order or settlement sum which is to
be obtained by the Plaintiff
in due course”, in the order of $136,105.50
21 June 2023, judgment was handed down in the Supreme Court proceeding in favour
of Forza in the amount of $26,478.50 plus pre-judgment
interest (after set-off)
judgment monies
email dated 31 May 2024, MW Lawyers confirmed that they maintained the lien over
the judgment monies.
applicants claim that Forza has not “resolved or set aside” the lien
over the judgment monies.
respondent responds that: (i) the lien is in dispute, which is a matter between
the respondent and its former solicitors; (ii)
in any event, the lien is not a
debt owed to the first applicant, so that
does not apply (that is, there is no set-off or cross demand equal to or
exceeding the amount of the judgment debt); and (iii) the
first applicant has
not paid the judgment monies to the respondent (or the former solicitors of the
respondent).
Does the lien prevent payment of the judgment debt?
question to be resolved is whether the unresolved solicitors’ lien
prevents payment of the judgment debt by the applicants
to the respondent.
my view, it does not.
there is an order of the Supreme Court on 21 June 2023 that directs the (then)
defendants to pay the (then) plaintiff the judgment
sum. It was not explained
how the operation of the lien defeats that order.
it was not explained how payment of the judgment debt to the respondent would
negate or undermine the equitable right that resides
in the lien. The
solicitor’s right exists over the amount of a judgment (including an order
of costs) in favour of the client,
which amount is either in the possession of
the solicitor, in the court, or otherwise owed to the client but not paid into
Firth v Centrelink
[2002] NSWSC 564
(2002) 55 NSWLR 451
and (c)]. The
location of the monies owed does not alter the right.
in any event, it was not explained why the judgment debt could not have been
paid: (a) in court, as it ultimately was by order of
Lindsay J of the NSW
Supreme Court on 21 February 2025 after negotiation between the parties, and now
held in the respondent’s
solicitors’ trust account pursuant to later
orders of the Supreme Court; or (b) directly to Harrington Hall Lawyers, as
in the Bankruptcy Notice.
it was not explained how the failure of the respondent to set aside the lien
(over judgment monies payable to the respondent) should
lead to the conclusion
that the Bankruptcy Notice should be set aside. If the purported reason is the
operation of the lien, which
the applicants claim prevents them from paying the
judgment debt, that is wrong for the three preceding reasons. Furthermore, the
applicants expressly disclaimed reliance on
and the prospect of a counter-claim, set-off or cross-demand to deny the
commission of an act of bankruptcy.
SERVICE OF THE BANKRUPTCY NOTICE ON THE SECOND
4 October 2024, the Bankruptcy Notice was issued by the Official Receiver naming
the applicants as the debtors, in the amount of
$33,669.54.
Bankruptcy Notice requires payment of the debt within 21 days after service of
the notice (or the making of arrangements to the
(Forza’s) satisfaction). It indicates that payment of the debt can be made
to Harrington Hall Lawyers (Canberra).
Bankruptcy Notice was served by email (and letter) addressed only to the first
applicant on 13 December 2024.
respondent accepts that it has not purported to serve the second applicant with
the Bankruptcy Notice, but that she may be taken
to have been served: (a) on 13
December 2024, given she has instructed solicitors to file the present
application, thereby admitting
that the Bankruptcy Notice has come to her
attention; or (b) at least by 6 January 2025, at which point the respondent says
instructions
were held on behalf of the second applicant to make the present
application. In the first scenario, the applicants have not complied
Bankruptcy Notice within the given 21 day period, and are out of time by which
they can seek an extension of the time for
compliance with the notice.
respondent foreshadowed in its
notice of opposition
filed on 7 February
2025 that it intended to seek an order for substituted service at the hearing of
the application. That order
is not pressed.
questions arise from these circumstances: (1) Was the notice served on the
second applicant in circumstances where it is accepted
that it was served by
email addressed to her co‑habitant partner? (2) If so, when was it served
(for the purposes of computing
the time for compliance with the notice and
thereby determining whether the Court has jurisdiction to set aside the
Bankruptcy Notice
or extend time for compliance)? (3) If not, should the notice
be set aside?
Service by email address of the first applicant
relation to the
first question
, the applicants rely on reg 102(1)(d)
Bankruptcy Regulations
(Cth), which provides
relevantly as follows:
102 Service of documents
(1) Unless the contrary intention appears, if a document is required or
permitted by the Act or this instrument to be given or sent
to, or served on, a
person (other than the Inspector-General, the Official Receiver or the Official
Trustee), the document may be:
(d) sent, in accordance with the information technology requirements in
subsection (3) of this section:
(i) by a kind of electronic communication that transmits the document to a
facility maintained by the person for receipt of electronically
transmitted
documents; or
(ii) by a kind of electronic communication such that, in the ordinary course of
events, the document could be reasonably expected
to be received by the person.
requirements of reg 102(3) of the
Bankruptcy Regulations
presently relevant.
applicants’ argument on service is twofold: (i) service was not effected
in accordance with reg 102(1)(d); and (ii) the
respondent accepted in its
notice of opposition that it had “not purported to serve the Second
Applicant with the Bankruptcy
relation to the
first aspect
, the respondent argued that the kind of
electronic communication mentioned in both reg 102(1)(d)(i) and (ii) must
be “maintained
by the person” (“the person” being the
person to be served). I do not accept that submission for three reasons.
it is at odds with the text of the regulation, which expressly requires that the
kind of electronic communication be maintained
by the person in
reg 102(1)(d)(i), but not in reg 102(1)(d)(ii).
it is at odds with the context of reg 102(1)(d)(ii), which by
contradistinction with reg 102(1)(d)(i) is intended to be expansive.
imply such a requirement into reg 102(1)(d)(ii) would be to limit that expanse
in a way that would render the reasonable expectation
of receipt otiose. That
is, delivery of a document to a kind of electronic communication that transmits
the document to a facility
maintained by the person carries with it the
reasonable expectation of receipt by the person who maintains the facility.
the argument ignores the disjunctive conjunction (“or”) that sits
between reg 102(1)(d)(i) and (ii), which thereby presents
two separate
options. It is not necessary to satisfy both in order to serve a document in
accordance with reg 102(1)(d).
question is then one of fact:
., whether the Bankruptcy Notice was
sent by a kind of electronic communication such that, in the ordinary course of
events, the document
could be reasonably expected to be received by the second
applicant (reg 102(1)(d)(ii)).
find that, by sending the Bankruptcy Notice by email addressed to the first
applicant via the first applicant’s email, in
the ordinary course of
events, the document could be reasonably expected to be received by the second
applicant, in the following
circumstances: (i) the first applicant is the
husband of the second applicant; (ii) the second applicant was co-habiting with
first applicant and their children at the time that the document was sent to
the first applicant; (iii) the Bankruptcy Notice is
addressed to both
applicants; and (iv) the subject of the Bankruptcy Notice is a judgment debt in
proceedings to which both applicants
were parties.
those circumstances, on the basis that the email facility is maintained by the
first applicant, it is reasonable to expect that
the first applicant would bring
the Bankruptcy Notice to the attention of the second applicant. On that basis,
the Bankruptcy Notice
was sent by a kind of electronic communication such that,
in the ordinary course of events, it
reasonably expected to be
received by the second applicant.
note that, while it was accepted that the Bankruptcy Notice was served on the
first applicant by means of the email addressed to
the first applicant, there
was no evidence as to who maintained the email facility. Therefore, I cannot
find that it was maintained
by the second applicant. At the same time, I cannot
assume the contrary,
, that it was
maintained (otherwise)
by the second applicant. Given my finding on the accepted basis that the email
facility is maintained (at
least) by the first applicant, the absence of that
evidence is of no moment.
Furthermore,
the fact that another mode of service was possible,
102(1)(a) of the
Bankruptcy Regulations
, but not utilised, is of no
moment. There is no hierarchy in reg 102, preferencing one mode of service
over another, nor a necessity
to exhaust one mode before proceeding to
relation to the
second aspect
of the applicants’ argument on
service, the respondent’s ‘concession’ that it did not purport
to serve the
second applicant with the Bankruptcy Notice should be seen in light
of the reasonable expectation that the Bankruptcy Notice could
be received by
the second applicant by means of delivery to the second applicant’s email
address. In that light, the concession
should be seen as an absence of intention
serve the second applicant (
, by other means).
Contrary to the submission of the applicants, there is no absence of intention
to serve the Bankruptcy Notice on
the second applicant for the purposes of
reg 102(1)(d) of the
Bankruptcy Regulations
, should that be required
by the regulation, although the test is one of reasonable expectation of receipt
of the document by the
the hearing of the application, there was some discussion of the distinction
between serving a document on a person and bringing
a document to the attention
of a person. It is not necessary to resolve that debate as a matter of theory.
The relevant question
is whether the requirements of reg 102(1)(d)(ii) are
satisfied. In my view, they are.
Accordingly,
I find that service on the second applicant was effected by sending the
Bankruptcy Notice to the email address of the
first applicant on 13 December
2024. In view of that finding, it is not necessary to entertain the possibility
of service (
, satisfaction of the requirements of
reg 102(1)(d)(ii)) on a later date. It was accepted by all parties that, at
the very latest,
the Bankruptcy Notice was brought to the attention of the
second applicant by 6 January 2025, at which time, the applicants’
representative was instructed to file an application to set aside the Bankruptcy
may be that the accepted fact of receipt shortly after service on the first
applicant contributes to the assessment of the reasonableness
of the expectation
that the Bankruptcy Notice could be expected to be received by the second
applicant by means of the first applicant’s
email address. However, the
factors that subsisted at the time the document was served on the first
applicant are sufficient to warrant
the reasonableness of the expectation. It
must be remembered that it is necessary to assess what “could be”
(not “would
be”) reasonably expected. This is a lower
No extension of time for compliance with Bankruptcy
relation to the
, the applicants seek an extension
of time for compliance with the Bankruptcy Notice to 30 June 2025, noting
that the judgment sum
was paid into court as per the orders of Lindsay J on 21
February 2025. In view of my finding on service, the time for compliance
the Bankruptcy Notice (21 days) expired before the application to set aside
the Bankruptcy Notice was filed (6 January 2025).
the application was brought outside the 21 day compliance period, the
statutory pre‑condition in
s 41(6A)(b)
Bankruptcy Act
is not met. Accordingly, the Court does not have jurisdiction to set aside the
Bankruptcy Notice or extend the time for compliance
for any reason.
means that, even if I were of the view that the unresolved lien was a reason to
set aside the Bankruptcy Notice, the Court would
not have jurisdiction to do
observe that, if I had found that ‘constructive’ service of the
Bankruptcy Notice took place on 6 January 2025 (which
I do not by reason of
the finding of earlier service), such that the application to the Court was made
within time, and the Court’s
discretion to extend the time fixed for
compliance was enlivened, notwithstanding that the grounds of the application to
the Notice have no merit, there may still be utility in granting an
extension of time to allow compliance with the requirements of
the Notice, thus
avoiding the commission of an act of bankruptcy as per
Bankruptcy Act
. This demonstrates the disjuncture between that enquiry
and the grounds of the application to set aside the Bankruptcy Notice (which
not rely on
s 40(1)(g)).
Service as a reason to set aside Bankruptcy Notice
the answers to the first two questions, it is not necessary to answer the
third question
Nevertheless,
I note that the applicants accept that the Bankruptcy Notice was properly served
on the first applicant, but not on
the second applicant (even by 6 January
2025), who was described as “the present” or “the real”
in this proceeding. In maintaining that the Bankruptcy Notice should
be set aside on that basis, the applicants’ argument presents
inconsistency: namely, that the Bankruptcy Notice should be upheld in relation
to the first applicant, but set aside as
against the second applicant. It was
not explained how the Bankruptcy Notice should be both set aside and upheld, nor
how the manner
of service might undermine the validity of the notice, as
distinct from affecting the running of time for the purpose of compliance
the notice (with the result that there is no act of bankruptcy for the purposes
Bankruptcy Act
CONCLUSION AND COSTS
originating application filed on 6 January 2025 is to be dismissed. The
applicants are to pay the respondent’s costs of
the application, including
the review under s 35A(5) of the
, as agreed or taxed.
its notice of opposition, the respondent foreshadowed that it would seek an
order for indemnity costs “given the wilful disregard
of the clearly
established law on the time to file the application”. That claim was not
pressed at the hearing of the application.
I certify that the preceding fifty-five (55)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 13 November 2025
RTF format (399 KB)
Signed PDF/A format