Barrett & Winnie [2021] FamCA 625; (26 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Barrett & Winnie
[2021] FamCA 625
File number(s):
BRC 13257 of 2007
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PROPERTY – JUSTICE
AND EQUITY – Whether it is just and equitable to make property adjustment
orders – Where
the applicant contends that property has been dealt with by
ante-nuptial or post-nuptial settlements made in relation to the marriage
the meaning of
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) – Where the
parties separated almost 16 years ago – Where there has been extensive
involvement and contributions
made by third parties over a very lengthy
period subsequent to the subject marriage – Where the applicant has made
no contribution
of any significance to the property of the trusts – Where
the applicant already holds approximately 95 per cent of the value
the property interests held by the parties.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
Ascot Investments Pty Ltd v Harper
148 CLR 337
[1981] HCA 1
Bell Lawyers Pty Ltd v Pentelow
(2019) 372 ALR 555
[2019] HCA 29
Browne v Dunn
(1893) 6 R 67
Burnett v Burnett
Hargreaves v Hargreaves
[1926] P 42
Kennon v Spry
(2008) 238 CLR 366
[2008] HCA 56
Mallard & Mallard
[2011] FamCA 876
Mayne & Mayne
(2011) FLC 93-479
[2011] FamCAFC 192
Meller v Meller
(1967) 10 FLR 12
Omacini & Omacini
(2005) FLC 93-218
[2005] FamCA 195
Prinsep v Prinsep
[1929] P 225
R v Ross-Jones; Ex parte Green
(1984) 156 CLR 185;
[1984] HCA 82
Rollings & Rollings
[2009] FamCAFC 87
Stanford v Stanford
(2012) 247 CLR 108
[2012] HCA 52
Smith v Smith
[1970] 1 WLR 155
Stephens & Stephens & Anor (Enforcement)
FLC 93-425;
[2009] FamCAFC 240
Summitt & Summitt and Ors (Re-opening)
Trevi & Trevi
(2018) FLC 93-858
[2018] FamCAFC 173
Turnbull and Turnbull
(1991) FLC 92-258
[1990] FamCA 157
Young v Young (No 1)
[1962] P 27
Woodcock v Woodcock
(1997) FLC 92-739
[1997] FamCA 5
Woodland and Todd
(2005) FLC 93-217
[2005] FamCA 161
Justice Peter Nygh,
Section 85A:
Is it of much use?
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
22-26 March 2021; 14 May 2021
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Morrow Petersen Solicitors
Counsel for the Respondents:
Solicitor for the Respondents:
Tubaro Lawyers
BRC 13257 of 2007
First Respondent
Second Respondent
MS C WINNIE
Fourth Respondent
Fifth Respondent
D PTY LTD PTY LTD
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. Save for the admission into evidence the Westpac documents and the
documents concerning the applicant’s superannuation interests,
annexed to the affidavit of Mr H filed in support of the Application in a Case
filed on 22 April 2021, that application is otherwise
2. The Further Amended Application for Final Orders filed on 18 March 2010 be
3. Any party seeking any order with respect to costs of the proceedings is to
file and serve an Application in a Case in accordance
rule 19.08(2)(b)
Family Law Rules 2004
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Barrett & Winnie
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
1 Mr Barrett (“the applicant”) and Ms Winnie (now Wells)
(“the first respondent”) finally separated as long
6 October 2005, now almost 16 years past. Having married in 1991 they divorced
on 23 December 2006.
2 In April 2007, at the applicant’s instigation and insistence that he
receive the whole of the title to the residential property
at F Street, Suburb G
by way of property settlement, the applicant and the first respondent entered
into an informal (and thus non-binding)
property settlement involving that
transfer. As a result the applicant has had the exclusive occupation of the F
Street property
ever since, and continues to live there with his now wife and
12 year old daughter of that marriage. The F Street property has an
agreed value
for the purpose of these proceedings of $725,000, subject to mortgage.
3 On 19 November 2007 the applicant commenced these proceedings against the
first respondent for property adjustment orders pursuant
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”). It appears from the
evidence of the applicant that he was prompted to bring proceedings by learning
of a substantial profit being achieved by B Pty Ltd, the third respondent
(“B Pty Ltd”), upon the sale of a commercial
property in M town
known as the N Centre, as will be further discussed.
4 The second to sixth respondents have been joined as parties to the
proceedings on the applicant’s contention that property
held by one or
other of those respondents, or in which they have an interest, ought form part
of the property to be dealt with by
orders in these proceedings. In summary and
paraphrased form, the applicant contends that the Court should make property
orders with respect to property dealt with by what are to be
characterised as
ante-nuptial or post-nuptial settlements, in the form of
discretionary trusts, made in relation to the marriage within the meaning
of the Act. Further or alternatively, that such orders (and associated
orders pursuant to
of the Act) may be made consistent with principles
expressed by the High Court in
5 In my judgment, for the reasons which follow, taking into account the
relevant matters referred to in
of the Act (as required by
the just and equitable requirement in
, even if any or
all of the discretionary trusts to be discussed can be characterised as
“settlements” within the meaning
, it would not be just and
equitable to make the orders sought by the applicant. The confluence between the
sheer length of time since
final separation which occurred in October 2005, and
the respective contributions of each of the first respondent herself; each
her now adult children, Mr Winnie (“the second respondent”) and
Ms C Winnie (“the fourth respondent”), and
first respondent’s now husband, Mr K over that substantial period,
renders the conclusion that it would not be just and
equitable, nor appropriate,
for property adjustment orders to now be made even if the applicant could
establish that any property
of the second to sixth respondents is amenable to
orders. As will also be further explained, I am not satisfied, in any event,
the applicant establishes the case that any property interests of the
second to sixth respondents are amenable to the orders sought
by the applicant.
Dramatis Personae
6 The first respondent has three now adult children
from a previous relationship, Mr Winnie, Ms C Winnie and Mr O. Mr Winnie and Ms
C Winnie are both joined to this proceeding and are the second and fourth
respondents respectively. That is primarily due to the
roles that Mr Winnie and
Ms C Winnie hold in the various entities associated with the first respondent
also joined to this proceeding.
7 The first of those entities, B Pty Ltd, is the third respondent. Each of
the first respondent, Mr Winnie and Ms C Winnie are executives.
The first respondent and Mr Winnie are the only shareholders and each
holds one share beneficially. B Pty Ltd is the trustee company
for the Winnie
Family Trust.
8 The second entity, E Pty Ltd Pty Ltd, is the fifth respondent (“E Pty
Ltd”). It is now deregistered. Prior to being
deregistered, Mr Winnie and
Ms C Winnie were executives and E Pty Ltd was the corporate trustee of the P
Family Trust, having replaced
the first respondent by Deed dated 8 January 1996.
9 In relation to these entities and the sixth respondent, counsel for the
respondents appeared for all of the named respondents save
and except for the
fifth respondent which is now deregistered. For the assistance of the Court
counsel for the respondents provided
Dramatis Personae
of the parties and entities involved.
10 I am satisfied that the
Dramatis Personae
provided is accurately
sourced to the evidence in this case. I incorporate it (as per the original) in
these reasons for judgment
as part of my findings and for convenience that
appears as “Schedule A” to these reasons for judgment.
11 The only qualification upon that document which was raised by counsel for
the respondents during final submissions concerns the
definition of beneficiary
within the Trust Deed governing the Winnie Family Trust. As counsel for the
respondents pointed out the
definition of beneficiary is extremely broad and
does not in fact exclude, as counsel originally understood, the second
respondent,
Mr Winnie as a
beneficiary.
12 I interpolate here that it was in this context that counsel for the
respondents also pointed out in submissions, by reference to
the Trust Deed for
the Winnie Family Trust, governing the appointment and removal of trustee, that
the power cannot be exercised
by the appointor in their own
13 On the first day of trial the Court was provided with a Proposed Minute of
Order as to the orders sought by the applicant. For
ease of reference it is
convenient that this document be admitted and marked Exhibit 41.
14 The “Applicant’s Revised Summary of Argument for Final Hearing
Commencing on 22 March 2021” was filed on 22 March
2021, the first day of
trial. Counsel for the respondents helpfully prepared, in response to that
document, a detailed schedule setting
out the factual inaccuracies contained in
the applicant’s document or matters asserted in the applicant’s
document which
were not supported by the evidence. Having reviewed both
documents I accept the substance of the submissions made by the
respondent’s
counsel as contained in counsel’s schedule subject only
to any express finding to contrary effect in these reasons.
15 Without unnecessarily repeating all of that discussion it is convenient
for reference purposes that the schedule prepared by counsel
for the respondents
detailing the inaccuracies be admitted and marked Exhibit 42.
Relationship history
16 The applicant was born in 1959 and is currently
62 years of age. He is a qualified professional, although presently works as a
technician.
17 The first respondent was born in 1951 and is currently 70 years of age.
She is an executive. The first respondent holds degrees
in science and
humanities and has worked as a health professional, educator and professional
and since about 2000 as an executive
and consultant.
18 The parties commenced cohabitation in either 1989 on the applicant’s
or 1990 on the
first respondent’s
19 The applicant describes the period of cohabitation as being “in
excess of 16 years”.
would seem to overstate things somewhat. By his own account the applicant
initially spent significant periods working overseas
in South East Asia and in
the Pacific subsequent to cohabitation first commencing and it is not in issue
that in the latter part
of the period prior to final separation the applicant
was working in Sydney. Moreover, the first respondent provides evidence, which
accept, of regular volatility in the relationship leading to various periods of
separation. Indeed on one of these occasions, in
early 1992, the applicant
formed the view that the relationship was over but she records a subsequent
reconciliation.
20 One striking example given by the first respondent as to the volatility
in, and tenuous nature of, the relationship even from early
stages is her
evidence as to her purchase of the property known as Q Street, Suburb R from her
sister in February 1990, that purchase
being placed in both names of the
applicant and the first respondent, but her subsequent refinancing of that
property into her sole
name only about six months after its
21 As already noted the first respondent has three children from her previous
marriage, namely Mr Winnie born in 1978; Ms C Winnie
born in 1980; and Mr O born
in 1984. There were parenting proceedings in this Court in relation to parenting
arrangements for those
children, the effect of which was, it appears, that the
children spent time between both parents’ households.
22 The relationship between the applicant and the first respondent produced
one child, Ms I, born in 1995 and who is thus now 26 years
of age. Notably, Ms I
was only 10 years of age when the parties finally separated in 2005. Final
parenting orders made by consent
on 13 July 2007 reflect that for a period of
but occasionally stayed with the applicant for short
23 However, there would appear to be no issue that from 2007 when Ms I was
only about 12 years of age the first respondent thereafter
undertook a sole
parenting role with respect to Ms I. Moreover, from then the whole of Ms
I’s financial needs were met by the
first respondent albeit that the
applicant may have made some relatively minor contribution for a limited period
to private school
fees for Ms I. Other than that Ms I’s financial support
fell entirely to the first respondent as did the discharge of parenting
responsibility and her upbringing from when Ms I was 12 years of age.
24 The first respondent married Mr K in 2007, shortly following her divorce
from the applicant in these proceedings. There are no
children of that
relationship.
25 The applicant also remarried and has another child from that marriage aged
approximately 12 years.
History of litigation
26 As already noted, the applicant commenced these
property proceedings by an Application for Final Orders filed on 19 November
At that stage the application named only the first respondent as a
respondent to it. It was on 28 April 2008 that the applicant filed
Application for Final Orders joining Mr Winnie and B Pty Ltd as trustee for the
Winnie Family Trust as the second and
third respondents, respectively, to these
proceedings. The other respondents were subsequently joined.
27 I do not propose to set out in detail the tortured path this litigation
has taken since its commencement. Some of that history,
but not all of it, is
set out in the reasons for judgment I delivered at an interlocutory stage of
these proceedings on 21 September
2018, including reference to my own
contribution to delay via administrative error concerning the delivery of those
reasons, and
reasons I delivered on 26 November 2020.
28 However, in circumstances where it appears to be one of the
applicant’s contentions that it is largely conduct of the respondents
is responsible for the extraordinary delay that has attended these proceedings,
relevant to the just and equitable consideration
of property adjustment orders
now being made, it is necessary to record some observations about the
applicant’s conduct of
this litigation.
29 Orders made by consent on 8 September 2008 required the applicant to file
and serve Further and Better Particulars relevant to
his Amended
Application for Final Orders filed on 28 April 2008 by 8 December 2008.
That did not occur and time for compliance was
extended a number of times,
(a) Orders made by consent on 12 December 2008 extended time for compliance to
5 February 2009;
(b) Orders made on 5 February 2009 extended time for compliance to 26 March
(c) Orders made on 27 March 2009 extended time for compliance to 20 May
(d) Orders made on 21 May 2009 extended time for compliance for a fourth time to
28 May 2009 (Order 1). Those orders also relevantly
2. Should the [applicant] not comply with
Order 1 of these Orders the Application for Final Orders filed on 19 November
2007 be dismissed.
30 On 29 May 2009, there having been no compliance by the applicant and no
appearance by either party, orders were made by Bell J
dismissing the
applicant’s Application for Final Orders filed on 19 November 2007. I note
that the reference to the applicant’s
application being filed on
19 November 2007 appears to have been a recurring reference error, as the
applicant filed an Amended Application
for Final Orders on 28 April 2008 and it
was his non-compliance with orders to particularise that application which led
to the dismissal.
The orders made by Bell J on 29 May 2009 also directed
the applicant’s solicitor to write a letter to the Registrar of the
Court “providing an explanation” for the applicant’s continued
failure to comply.
31 On 3 July 2009 the applicant filed an Application in a Case seeking that
“the orders made on 29 May 2009 be vacated or discharged
grounds such orders represent a miscarriage of justice”. Alternatively,
the applicant sought that the hearing of 29
May 2009 be reopened. The affidavit
of the applicant’s solicitor filed in support of that application annexed
a copy of a letter
setting out the reasons for the applicant’s failure to
comply as required by Order 2 of the orders made on 29 May
32 The first respondent opposed the applicant’s application. In the
event, orders were made on 10 July 2009 discharging the
orders of 29 May
33 On 18 March 2010 the applicant filed a Further Amended Application for
Final Orders, this time seeking to join an additional three
respondents, namely
Ms C Winnie, E Pty Ltd and D Pty Ltd Pty Ltd. The applicant filed Points of
Claim in relation to the joinder
on 17 March 2010.
34 I interpolate here that the respondents have maintained a position
throughout these proceedings that the applicant’s application
for property
settlement orders ought be dismissed. The respondents have also maintained a
number of alternate positions, being that
the applicant’s application as
against the second to sixth respondents be dismissed, or that the second to
sixth respondents
be removed as parties to the proceedings.
35 No active steps were taken by the applicant to progress his application.
On 2 December 2012 trial directions were made by Registrar
S. It seems that the
applicant’s solicitor did not appear on the day those directions were
made. The trial directions were
later suspended by Registrar S on 5 March 2013.
Those orders included a notation to the following effect:
was no compliance by any party with the Trial Directions. Enquiries regarding
valuation were made by the Respondents.
36 Orders were then made by consent on 19 November 2013 which provided for
any of the parties to seek any outstanding Application
in a Case be listed by 24
January 2014 (Order 2). Failure to do so would see any outstanding Application
in a Case to “stand
dismissed” (Order 3). The respondents then
sought that an Application in a Case filed on 20 April 2010 be listed for
Orders were made by Registrar S on 31 January 2014 for the applicant to
file material in response and an Amended Statement of Facts
and Contentions, and
for the application to be listed on a date to be fixed.
37 The Application in a Case filed on 20 April 2010 was listed to be heard by
Bell J on 10 June 2014. It was later adjourned to be
heard by me on 8 December
2014. The applicant did not file any material in response, nor an Amended
Statement of Facts and Contentions.
At the hearing on 8 December 2014, then
counsel for the applicant sought an adjournment on the basis that the
applicant’s case
had not been adequately prepared. That is obviously at a
point more than
seven (7) years
after the proceedings had been commenced.
In the event an adjournment was granted and orders were made (amended on 11
December 2014)
which provided a timeline for the filing of material. The
applicant did not file any of the material required by those orders prior
March 2015, being the date which the hearing of the Application in a Case had
been adjourned to.
38 Orders were made by me on 9 March 2015 which provided for certain
documents to be served on the applicant personally, given concerns
that he may
be unaware of what had been occurring in the proceedings.
39 Orders and reasons were delivered by me on 21 September 2018 affording the
applicant yet another opportunity to comply with previous
orders to file and
serve any proposed amended pleading and affidavit in support, and listing the
matter to 20 November 2018.
40 Orders were made by consent on 19 November 2018 vacating the hearing
listed for the next day. Those orders provided directions
for valuations of real
property, entities and personal effects and for the matter to be listed in some
four months for review. It
was listed for review on 23 October 2019, a hearing
which was again ultimately adjourned by consent the day prior.
41 The matter was then listed to 12 March 2020. On 11 March 2020 orders were
made by consent vacating the mention and setting out
the timeline for the filing
of material to ready the matter for trial.
42 On 26 August 2020, and prior to the next hearing before me on 6 October
2020, the respondents filed an Application in a Case again
seeking that the
applicant’s application for property settlement orders be dismissed. On 6
October 2020, following hearing
the solicitor for the applicant and counsel for
the respondents, I made orders to facilitate response material being filed by
applicant and for the applicant to file a then foreshadowed application to
adjourn the proceedings pursuant to s 79(5) of the Act.
Both applications were
listed to be heard on 20 November 2020.
43 It bears emphasis that the application foreshadowed by the applicant to
adjourn the proceedings pursuant to s 79(5) was said to
be based upon the
current COVID-19 pandemic and the effect it was having on property values, in
particular upon a commercial property
in Brisbane and a commercial property in
Tasmania owned by the sixth respondent. The point of emphasis is that in
the face of the
Court again taking active steps to progress this matter finally
to a trial after the proceedings had been on foot to that point for
thirteen (13) years, it was the applicant who was foreshadowing yet another
application to adjourn the proceedings.
44 In the event, on 20 November 2020, following exchanges between the Bench
and the respective legal representatives, when it was
made clear to the
applicant that these proceedings had to be brought to a conclusion, the parties
consented to the matter being set
down for final trial in lieu of either
application being heard and determined. Orders were made by consent which
provided for various
properties to be valued, the applicant’s evidence to
be limited to various affidavits already filed, affidavit material to
by the respondents and for the matter to be set down for trial for five days
commencing 22 March 2021. Relevantly, one of
the orders made by consent was in
the following terms:
(8) Should the [applicant] default in the compliance of any of these Orders, the
Initiating Application for final orders stands dismissed.
45 In the event, following the completion of the evidence heard at the end of
five days of trial on 26 March 2021, the applicant filed
an application for
reopening of the evidence on 22 April 2021 which application was heard on 14 May
46 The point of emphasis for present purposes is that I reject any
proposition to the effect that responsibility for the extraordinary
these proceedings and their progression can be sheeted home to the respondents.
The applicant has been dilatory in prosecuting
his application and his
contribution to such extraordinary delay is, in my judgment, relevant to
considerations of justice and equity.
Application to reopen evidence heard on 14 May 2021
47 As noted, the trial proceeded for five days
commencing on 22 March to 26 March 2021 when judgment was then reserved. Whilst
was reserved, on 21 April 2021 the applicant filed an Application in a
Case to reopen the evidence which application was heard on
14 May 2021.
48 The applicant sought to reopen the evidence at trial concerning the
following matters:
(a) The identification of the amount of the applicant’s pre and
post-separation superannuation;
(b) The application of funds received by the applicant from the sale of two
investment properties owned as at separation –
relevant to a question of
add-backs and the payment of legal fees discussed further below;
(c) The quantum of liability or potential liability for capital gains tax from
the sale of certain investment properties;
(d) The applicant’s parenting contributions over a period of about two
post-separation; and
(e) Whether the applicant participated in giving guarantees or mortgages to
Westpac to support borrowings, a topic further discussed
49 The principles in relation to an application to reopen evidence once
judgment has been reserved are well settled in a number of
authorities.
50 In general the discretion to reopen a hearing and allow fresh evidence is
engaged where:
(a) The fresh evidence was not easily available at the time of the trial and
could not be discovered despite the exercise of due
(b) The fresh evidence is so material that the interests of justice require
(c) If believed, the fresh evidence would most probably affect the result of the
(d) There would be no prejudice to the other party by reason of its introduction
at a late point in time.
51 On the hearing of the application the further evidence concerning the
parenting aspect became nugatory when it was accepted by
the parties that the
Court could proceed on the basis that the applicant continued to play a role
with Ms I post-separation for a
period of about two years, but ceased to do so
thereafter. That is, it became unnecessary to adduce any additional evidence in
respect on the stated acceptance by the parties as to these being agreed
52 Also in the course of argument it was accepted by counsel for the
respondents that the unsatisfactory state of the evidence as
at trial concerning
documents obtained from Westpac (“the Westpac documents”) had
the potential for the Court to proceed
on an erroneous basis without the
additional documents, that is, additional Westpac documents attached to an
affidavit of the solicitor
for the applicant, Mr H. It was thus acknowledged
that those documents could be received into evidence by consent, although debate
remained as to the interpretation of them as will be discussed.
53 What remained then was a dispute as to the superannuation documents and
the documents going to legal fees expenditure.
54 With respect to the superannuation documents it is obvious that in
circumstances where the parties separated as long ago as they
did that the
applicant’s superannuation, given his ongoing employment in the 16 years
or so since separation, would be enhanced.
Receipt of documents for this purpose
was strictly unnecessary once that fundamental concept is accepted. Moreover,
specific amounts
held were of marginal relevance given that in the period under
discussion the applicant increased his superannuation at the same
time as the
first respondent was, for years, wholly supporting the child of the
relationship in both a financial and parenting
contributions-sense. On that
basis the superannuation documents were not of particular significance but it is
reasonable that they
be received by way of further evidence.
55 In relation to the question of capital gains tax the documents sought to
be adduced were obviously available to the applicant at
the time of trial and in
any event could not advance the case much because of the historical nature of
the transactions in respect
of sales completed many years ago, as will be
discussed. That is, there was in reality no evidence, even with the additional
being correspondence from 2012, of there being any real likelihood of
there being any burden visited upon the applicant for capital
gains tax. On that
basis that aspect of the application fails.
56 Finally, with respect to the question of add-backs and the payment of
legal fees, the respondents legitimately objected on the
basis that this was not
in fact the subject of admissible evidence sworn to by the applicant. That is,
there was no direct evidence
from the applicant. Moreover, inevitably if this
topic were reopened there would be prejudice to the respondents unless the
entailed first, the applicant giving direct evidence and the
respondents then having the opportunity to undertake further
cross-examination.
57 For these reasons the application to reopen is granted to the limited
extent of enabling the Westpac documents and the superannuation
attached to the affidavit of the solicitor for the applicant to be received as
part of the evidence in the case. Otherwise
the application with respect to
potential capital gains tax and the question of expenditure on legal fees is
Credit issues
58 Whilst the applicant did not advance any medical
evidence in his affidavit filed on 18 November 2020 the applicant deposes
health issues and medications he takes for them including daily
medication for depression. However, it was not suggested by the applicant
his depression or any of his other health conditions impact upon his cognitive
abilities in terms of giving evidence and there
was, as noted, no medical
evidence to this effect.
59 Making due allowance for the applicant suffering from some health
conditions, including depression, I have to observe that I found
the applicant
to be an unimpressive and thus an unconvincing witness.
60 Cross-examination of the applicant yielded the conclusion that in many
instances he advanced matters of fact which did not withstand
scrutiny. I accept
the submission on behalf of the respondents that cross-examination established
that much of the applicant’s
affidavit evidence was overstated or
61 I also accept the proposition that generally the applicant’s
evidence ought not be accepted where it is contradicted by another
given the findings I refer to below concerning the respondents’ witnesses,
unless otherwise established by a document.
As to such document or documents the
topic of the Westpac documents is an exception further addressed below.
62 The applicant was prone to be disparaging of the first respondent by
making scandalous and offensive assertions about her which
were gratuitous in
the sense that none of them were supported by any evidence and were not in fact
part of the case the applicant
advanced. For example, there was this
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: Mr Barrett, you mention
in paragraph 7 of this affidavit two family trusts: the Winnie Family Trust
the P Family Trust. You see that?
[THE APPLICANT]: Yes. Yes. Yes.
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: And then in paragraph 8, you go on and say that
E Pty Ltd was in – and you know E Pty Ltd was
the trustee of the P Family
[THE APPLICANT]: Yes.
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: You go on to say that E Pty Ltd was the trustee
involved in the [first respondent’s] [business]
and provided services and
premises to that [business], don’t you?
[THE APPLICANT]: Yes. Yes.
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: And you say it’s for the purposes of
income tax splitting?
[THE APPLICANT]: Well, in my opinion, anywhere where [the first respondent]
could not declare tax, she did. In my opinion - - -
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: Isn’t that just generally an Australian
pastime, Mr Barrett?
[THE APPLICANT]:
In my opinion, she’s a tax avoider.
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: Okay. Thanks for that?
[THE APPLICANT]: Absolutely.
(Emphasis added)
63 In a similar vein was the exchange that occurred when the applicant was
cross-examined about the assertion in his affidavit that
favourable terms were
negotiated with Mr T in respect of the purchase of the N
The exchange was as
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: Do you know what the
favourable terms that were negotiated with Mr [T] were or was that something
somebody’s just told you?
[THE APPLICANT]: Well, basically, I was told she was sleeping with the man. So
there’s obviously - - -
64 I note in passing that there is no evidentiary foundation for the
assertion that the purchase of the N Centre was negotiated on
favourable terms
and certainly no credible evidence identified by the applicant for his
scurrilous assertion.
65 In relation to the purchase of the N Centre discussed further below there
is an example of the applicant’s approach being
what I consider to be
obstructive in cross-examination in first disagreeing with a proposition put but
then ultimately accepting
it. There was this
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: You accept, don’t
you, from the documents you’ve seen in this proceedings, that the
acquisition
of the N Centre by B Pty Ltd was more than 100 per cent financed,
[THE APPLICANT]: No. I don’t agree.
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: How do you say it wasn’t 100 per cent
[THE APPLICANT]: It might have been 100 per cent financed through different
channels, through different means.
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: Why did you not just agree with me at my first
question then?
[THE APPLICANT]: It was - - -
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: Are you just deliberately trying to be
difficulty, Mr Barrett?
[THE APPLICANT]: Definitely not, Mr Hackett.
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: I see. So you accept it was 100 per cent
[THE APPLICANT]: As far as I know, yes.
(As per the original)
66 Cross-examined about the feature that a property referred to as Q Street,
Suburb R was initially purchased in both names but within
six months was
refinanced by the first respondent into her own name, the applicant asserted
that his signature on that document transferring
it from joint names to the
first respondent’s sole name must have been a
by the first
respondent. There was this relevant
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: Yes. So the property
was transferred from your joint names back to her sole names within six months.
Do you agree?
[THE APPLICANT]: That’s what it says on here.
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: Thank you. You weren’t paid any money for
that transfer, were you?
[THE APPLICANT]: I wasn’t even aware it went back into her name.
have forged my signature.
(As per the original) (Emphasis added)
67 The applicant’s evidence then morphed into the assertion that the
first respondent has on other occasions forged his signature
and he could not
say with certainty whether that was the case in this instance. Having asserted
it remained a possibility that the
first respondent had forged his signature
there was then this
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: Mr Barrett, may I
suggest to you that the property was transferred back to [the first respondent]
within six months because the two of you had then separated?
[THE APPLICANT]: Well, I went overseas at that stage to do a contract in South
East Asia so I was away for approximately six months.
So how that property got
transferred into her name, I have no idea. I wasn’t even in the
HIS HONOUR: This is soon after 1990, isn’t it, [counsel for the
respondents?]
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: It’s in 1990, your Honour. The transfer
into their joint names was in February 1990 and into
respondent’s] single name in August [...] month.
HIS HONOUR: And is it suggested there was a separation before?
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: Paragraph 14 of [the first respondent’s]
affidavit is what I was putting, your Honour.
At that time, Mr Barrett, may I suggest that when you were home from overseas,
you and [the first respondent] would argue a lot.
You would pack up and leave.
That’s right, isn’t it?
[THE APPLICANT]: Yes.
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: And the effects of these arguments accumulated in
her, [the first respondent], refinancing the property
into her name only about
six months after it was purchased. Correct?
[THE APPLICANT]: No. I had no idea.
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: I see. So in respect of the title deed which is
in evidence before his Honour and the mortgage in
favour of [Bank 1] stated on
both transactions, they were complicit in this fraud in forging your signature,
[THE APPLICANT]: No idea.
[COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS]: I see. Thank you.
68 It was only when the legal representatives of the respondents presented
relevant documents to the applicant in cross-examination
did the applicant
finally withdraw his assertion that the
first respondent may have forged his
signature on the transfer.
interpolate here that I do not accept the applicant’s assertion that the
first respondent had otherwise forged his signature
on documents at any time,
including Annexure ...W6 to the affidavit of the first respondent filed on
28 January 2021.
69 Cross-examination of the applicant revealed that despite the appearance
cast by the affidavit that the applicant was well aware
of, and faithfully
reporting, factual matters this was not so. Contrary to the affidavit evidence,
cross-examination revealed that
the applicant had very limited knowledge of the
affairs of E Pty Ltd as trustee for the P Family Trust and of B Pty Ltd as
of the Winnie Family Trust. The applicant’s assertion that E Pty
Ltd was the service trust of J Firm had no foundation and
was later established
to be wrong by the applicant’s own solicitor’s cross-examination of
the second respondent. Likewise,
the applicant’s assertion in his
affidavit as to the third respondent undertaking
“property...development”
was demonstrated to be without foundation.
70 The applicant was obliged to concede in cross-examination, by reference to
title searches and documents presented to him, that
a number of his assertions
as contained in his affidavit were simply wrong. For example, the assertion in
his affidavit
acquisition of a joint property at Suburb U given that the only property that
the applicant and first respondent ever purchased
in joint names was Q Street,
Suburb R earlier referred to, which was in fact reconveyed into the first
respondent’s sole name
after about six months given the then breakdown of
the relationship.
71 The applicant’s assertion in his
that the first
respondent purchased V Street, Suburb G in a company name was conceded by him as
being wrong upon being shown the
relevant title
which search established
that the property had been purchased by the fourth respondent, Ms C Winnie,
personally. Likewise, the applicant’s
assertion of a contribution in the
form of him having provided a mortgage over his property at BB Street, Suburb CC
to facilitate
the acquisition was also established to be wrong which the
applicant accepted once shown a title
V Street, Suburb G was
acquired on 3 May 2001 and the applicant did not acquire BB Street, Suburb CC
until subsequently.
72 I accept, as will be further discussed, that the Westpac documents
evidence that it is more probable than not that the applicant
was a co-borrower
(with Ms C Winnie) in respect of V Street, Suburb G.
73 An example of the applicant’s overstatement was his assertions in
relation to his property at Suburb
owned at the outset and his
failure to volunteer that at the time the property was encumbered by a
74 It seems to me that cross-examination revealed a preparedness on the part
of the applicant to overstate things in his affidavit
evidence. For example, in
his affidavit discussing the business and the company EE Pty Ltd, obviously
designed to provide the applicant
with some employment, the applicant failed to
mention the important fact that this enterprise was funded by the first
respondent.
Moreover that the business was closed after the applicant was
charged and convicted of firearms offences in relation to that business.
applicant also failed to mention that his legal fees incurred with respect to
the criminal proceedings against him were paid,
at least as to half, by the
first respondent.
75 In a similar vein was the impression the applicant created in his
affidavit as to the payment of Ms I’s private school fees
subsequent to
separation.
In cross-examination
the applicant conceded that he did not in fact pay for half of his
daughter’s school fees in the post-separation
His contribution to
school fees was limited and he did not otherwise provide any financial support
whatsoever for Ms I.
76 The applicant attempted in both his affidavit evidence and oral evidence
to attribute responsibility and sole responsibility to
the first respondent for
the fact that he had effectively no caring responsibility for Ms I beyond about
two years post-separation
when she was only about 12 years of age.
Notwithstanding conceding in cross-examination that he had spent more than
$250,000 on legal
fees to pursue these proceedings, it is clear that he did not
agitate any matters concerning parenting proceedings despite his complaints
it was the first respondent’s conduct precluding him having a
relationship with Ms I. Notably, at the same time as spending
money on legal
fees the applicant was not making any contribution whatsoever to the financial
support of Ms I. Whilst the N Centre
will be discussed further below, the
applicant conceded in cross-examination that his
as to the applicant
having provided some financial support for the acquisition of the N Centre by
the third respondent was simply
That concession was made
after being shown the actual finance facility and title searches of his
properties.
77 In contrast to the assessment of the applicant, I did not have the same
reservations concerning the evidence of the first respondent
or the second
respondent, Mr Winnie or the fourth respondent, Ms C Winnie.
78 Annexure ...W1 to the affidavit of the first respondent filed on 19 March
2021 is a letter dated 20 January 2021 from Dr FF, a
medical oncologist who has
undertaken care of the first respondent for advanced breast cancer since 11
March 2020. That letter refers
to the first respondent having struggled with her
treatment and diagnosis and that “[t]reatment has affected her
cognitively,
emotionally and physically”. I do not accept the criticisms
advanced in the submissions of the solicitor for the applicant
to the effect
that the first respondent displayed some selective ability of recall when it
suited her. In my judgment the first respondent
displayed a careful approach to
giving her evidence and in circumstances where allied to cognitive affects such
a long period has
elapsed since events under discussion it was understandable
that the first respondent did not always have complete recall of all
79 I was keenly aware, in approaching my assessment of the first respondent
as a witness, that she has been subjected to some adverse
credit findings in the
past in relation to litigation including the fair work proceedings which will be
referred to. It is also the
fact that the first respondent was deregistered.
Notwithstanding the resulting caution with which I approached the assessment, I
am satisfied that the first respondent gave careful and truthful answers
and that both her affidavit and her oral evidence overall
is reliable. At the
very least I prefer the first respondent’s evidence to that of the
applicant where there exists any conflict
which cannot be resolved by commercial
property to contemporaneous documents.
80 Likewise, save and except for one significant matter, I found each of Mr
Winnie and Ms C Winnie to be convincing and reliable witnesses.
Again, I prefer
their evidence, respectively, where there is any departure between their
evidence and that of the applicant and the
applicant’s version is not
independently supported by documentation.
81 The significant matter referred to concerns the documents sourced to
Westpac, including Exhibit 15 and the Westpac documents annexed
to the affidavit
of the applicant’s solicitor relied upon in the reopening of the evidence
on 14 May 2021. In my judgment,
the Westpac documents overall establish,
contrary to the evidence of Mr Winnie and Ms C Winnie, that it is more probable
that the applicant signed documents with Westpac as a co-borrower in
respect of the purchase of V Street, Suburb G, discussed below,
and that the
applicant signed a limited guarantee for a limited period of operation when the
N Centre was refinanced, also discussed
further below.
82 In summary, the Westpac documents evidence that in April 2001 the
applicant was a
co-borrower for the purchase by Ms C Winnie of V Street,
Suburb G. There is no suggestion the applicant actually contributed any money.
Moreover, it would appear that in 2005, when the third respondent was
refinancing the N Centre, the applicant provided limited guarantees
$400,000 with respect to the refinancing, for a limited period, and may have
also provided some security over his property
at W Street, Suburb G again for a
limited period. Importantly, balanced against this, the applicant’s
evidence is clearly wrong
insofar as he has asserted a role played by him in the
acquisition of the N Centre in the first place.
83 Doubt exists over whether the applicant actually granted a mortgage over
his W Street property to Westpac on the basis of title
my judgment the onus was upon
the applicant to clearly establish the complete
picture with respect to the Westpac documents, but this he failed to do. The
is less than clear, even with the Westpac documents admitted on the
reopening. However, I proceed by giving the applicant the benefit
Chronology of relevant events – findings
84 The following findings resonate with the just and
equitable requirements in each of s 79 and s 85A of the Act, and with the s
assessment.
85 As already noted, the first respondent was born in 1951 and is thus now 70
years of age, whilst the applicant was born in 1959
and is aged 62 years; both
have repartnered and the applicant has a daughter aged 12 years from his current
relationship.
86 The second respondent was born in 1978 and the fourth respondent was born
87 In 1982 the P Family Trust was
established.
88 In 1984 the P Family Trust purchased the property known as the Suburb GG
unit on behalf of the first respondent and her
89 In 1987 the first respondent acquired her interest in the business then
trading as J Firm.
90 In late 1988 the property known as the HH Region unit was purchased by the
first respondent. The applicant maintains that the parties
cohabitation at the HH Region unit although this is disputed by the first
respondent. In the event, it appears to be acknowledged
that cohabitation
commenced in late 1988 or early 1989 by both parties and nothing turns on any
difference. Notably, cohabitation
of the parties throughout the relationship was
in various properties to which the applicant made no financial contribution.
91 Accepting that it was in 1989–1990 that the applicant and first
respondent commenced cohabitation, it is to be noted that
in the early period of
their cohabitation there was an interruption to it by reason of the applicant
undertaking work in South East
Asia for two separate periods of six months each.
92 On 1 August 1989 the first respondent sold the HH Region unit and
purchased a commercial property at JJ Street, Suburb
93 In 1989 the applicant sold a residential property he owned in Suburb DD,
he says, for approximately
albeit that the evidence
establishes that it was subject then to a
In cross-examination
the applicant was not in a position to refute the proposition that the net
proceeds amounted to no more than
approximately $40,000 when account was taken
of the mortgage.
The applicant
contends that he provided the net sale proceeds of the Suburb DD property to the
first respondent at her request for
a loan. The first respondent contends
that the applicant provided the proceeds of sale to his own
I accept the evidence of
the first respondent in preference to that of the applicant. I do not accept
that the applicant contributed
any funds from the sale of the Suburb DD property
to the relationship.
94 It bears emphasis in this context to point out that the applicant
acknowledged in
cross-examination that, leaving aside his own investment
properties, the parties kept their finances completely separate and the
made no direct financial contribution to the acquisition of the
various properties acquired in the course of the relationship. Nor
did he make
any contribution to the maintenance or outgoings of those properties in which
the parties resided, as will be further
Q Street property
95 In around February 1990 the applicant and the
first respondent purchased Q Street, Suburb R from the first respondent’s
albeit that the first respondent alone funded the purchase. The first
respondent’s evidence, which I accept, is that the purchase
was funded by
mortgage from Bank 1 that she met any costs associated with the purchase and the
applicant made no contribution to
applicant’s evidence that he did contribute to the purchase, but he does
not “recall how much [he] put
I prefer the evidence
of the first respondent.
96 Q Street, Suburb R was initially purchased in joint names, though as
earlier referred to was transferred into the first respondent’s
in August 1990.
respondent says, and I accept, that this was as a result of the applicant rarely
being home (as he was working overseas
at the time) and frequent arguments when
he was home.
respondent refinanced the mortgage with Westpac in
97 The first respondent sold Q Street, Suburb R in mid-1992 and purchased a
property at LL Street, Suburb MM and a unit in Suburb
The first respondent says
that she funded the purchase of both by way of mortgage secured over the Suburb
GG unit and by funds received
I accept that evidence.
No contribution of any kind was made by the applicant to the acquisition.
Change of trustee
98 In 1991 the applicant and first respondent
married. Also in 1991 the first respondent became the sole trustee of the P
Family Trust
and registered a change of trustee on the title of the Suburb GG
Suburb PP property
99 In 1993, the first respondent sold the Suburb GG
The first respondent used
the sale proceeds received, in combination with a loan, to fund the purchase of
the property at OO Street,
The first respondent says
that she purchased OO Street, Suburb PP to support the applicant in his work as
a businessman at the time.
accept that evidence. Again, no financial contribution to the acquisition or
maintenance of OO Street, Suburb PP was made by the
100 OO Street, Suburb PP was transferred to E Pty Ltd in May 1999, prior to
being sold by E Pty Ltd in April
101 On 4 January 1994 the first respondent financed
the applicant into operating QQ Pty Ltd and the conduct of a business as its
That business
ultimately failed, as earlier referred to. Whilst it is unclear how much capital
was lost, the point of emphasis is
that it was the first respondent who
assisted the applicant financially with respect to this business, as well as
with the applicant’s
legal fees in his consequent criminal
proceedings.
102 As already noted, it was in 1995 that the only
child of the relationship, Ms I was born.
Transfer to the P Family Trust
103 On 11 April 1996 each of LL Street, Suburb MM
and Suburb NN unit were transferred by the first respondent to the P Family
Winnie Family Trust
104 On 21 September 1998 the third respondent
company was incorporated and the Trust Deed for the Winnie Family Trust was
From incorporation of the company each of the first respondent and
her son, Mr Winnie were executives and each were 50 per cent shareholders.
the terms of the Trust Deed for the Winnie Family Trust the first respondent was
the appointor and the range of beneficiaries
included the spouse of the first
respondent.
105 On 10 May 1999 the first respondent transferred each of OO Street, Suburb
PP and JJ Street, Suburb KK to E Pty Ltd as trustee
for the P Family
106 In July 1999 Suburb NN unit was sold and a property at RR Street, Suburb
SS was purchased by the fifth respondent for
Deregistration and business
107 On 22 December 1999 the first respondent was
deregistered following disciplinary proceedings commenced by a professional
organisation.
Thereafter the first respondent pursued an appeal to the
Queensland Court of Appeal (which was unsuccessful) and a likewise unsuccessful
application for special leave to the High
108 The first respondent deposes that in this period, in about early 2000,
she and the applicant were “living separate lives”
and effectively
separated under the same roof.
accept the first respondent’s evidence in this respect.
109 In 2000 arrangements were made, in circumstances where the first
respondent was unable to continue to practice as a professional,
business partner, Mr TT to undertake the business pending the qualification of
Mr Winnie, the second respondent to undertake
the business in his own
V Street property
110 In May 2001 the fourth respondent, Ms C Winnie,
purchased V Street, Suburb G for $650,000. It is Ms C Winnie’s evidence
that the purchase was funded by $200,000 provided to her by the P Family Trust,
which had been received from the sale of OO Street,
Suburb PP, and a loan from
Westpac obtained in her name.
111 It is the applicant’s case that he “signed documents in [his]
name that were required by Westpac for the purposes
of” the purchase of V
Street, Suburb G, which were either a guarantee or provision of BB Street,
Suburb CC owned by him as
Ms C Winnie denies
this was the case and says that while she obtained a mortgage from Westpac to
fund the purchase of V Street, Suburb
the applicant did not provide
a guarantee and could not have provided BB Street, Suburb CC as security as he
did not own the property
112 The Westpac documents, part of the evidence the subject of reopening on
14 May 2021, confirm that the applicant signed Westpac
documents as a
co-borrower with respect to the loan from Westpac for V Street, Suburb G. Ms C
Winnie is therefore incorrect in denying
that the applicant signed any documents
from Westpac for the loan, although Ms C Winnie is correct that BB Street,
Suburb CC was
not given as security. Notably though, the applicant made no
contribution to loan repayments and indeed made no contribution to the
maintenance or conservation of V Street, Suburb G despite his occupation of
113 Ms C Winnie sold V Street, Suburb G in June 2004 for
Suburb CC property
114 In September 2001 the applicant and the first
respondent purchased BB Street, Suburb CC. It was purchased in the
applicant’s
sole name and subject to a mortgage in favour of
This was a rental
property. Thus it was that, keeping his finances separate, the applicant
retained rental income from BB Street,
Suburb CC whilst residing in V Street,
Suburb G as referred to, without making any financial contribution to V Street,
115 The mortgage over BB Street, Suburb CC was discharged on 8 March 2004,
prior to separation.
116 In late 2006, following separation, the applicant sold BB Street, Suburb
CC. From the sale proceeds $160,762 was paid to the applicant,
$11,127 to the
applicant’s solicitor and $11,000 to the applicant’s
solicitor’s trust account.
It is the applicant’s evidence that the amounts paid to his solicitor were
on account of legal fees in this
proceeding.
UU Street, Suburb VV
117 In December 2001 the third respondent purchased
commercial premises at UU Street, Suburb VV for $440,000 funded by Westpac with
borrowings of $450,000.
W Street property
118 In March 2003 the applicant purchased Lots 9 and
11 W Street, Suburb G which were on one title for
This property was
purchased in the applicant’s sole name and subject to a mortgage in favour
of Cooperative 1.
That mortgage
was subsequently refinanced by the applicant with Credit Union 1.
119 The first respondent deposes that the lots could not be sold separately
because of an encroachment and she arranged for an easement
to be registered
over one of the lots to deal with the encroachment such that the two lots could
be sold separately.
2003 the first respondent arranged for her son, Mr O to purchase one of the
lots for $160,000 whilst the applicant retained
120 In early 2008, following separation, the applicant sold W Street, Suburb
G. From the sale proceeds the mortgage was discharged,
$150,000 was paid to the
applicant, $616 to the applicant’s solicitor and $22,895 to the
applicant’s solicitor’s
121 During cross-examination by counsel for the respondents, while the
applicant said he could not be sure about the amount paid to
solicitor’s trust account from the sale proceeds or whether it was on
account of legal fees in this proceeding, the applicant
conceded that his
solicitor would not have charged him $22,000 for a residential
conveyance.
Commercial premises, Suburb BBB
122 In January 2004 the third respondent purchased
the property known as the “[commercial premises WW]” at Suburb BBB
for $1 million with the purchase price being fully financed by a combination of
the vendor of the property, Mr CCC providing vendor
finance and Westpac
The DDD Trust
123 On 12 March 2004 the DDD Trust was established
with the first respondent as its trustee.
124 In June 2004 the fourth respondent, Ms C Winnie
sold her V Street property
the purchase of the property known as EEE Street was undertaken by the
fourth respondent, Ms C Winnie as to a three quarters
interest and by the
first respondent as trustee for the DDD Trust as a one quarter
As the fourth
respondent explains, she agreed to put one quarter of her EEE Street property in
the name of the DDD Trust as a means
of protection of Ms I and her
As the fourth respondent
explains, she considered that “morally right” in circumstances where
the first respondent’s
sale of OO Street, Suburb PP to the P Family Trust
had assisted the fourth respondent to buy V Street, Suburb G and therefore to
make a profit on the sale of that property, that allowed her to buy the EEE
Street property.
As the fourth
respondent points out Ms I is the sole beneficiary of the DDD Trust.
125 I interpolate here that some submissions by the applicant’s
solicitor appeared to urge the proposition that title to this
property be
conveyed to Ms I rather than maintaining a contention that it forms part of the
property available for division.
126 It is the first respondent’s evidence that she did not contribute
funds to the purchase of the EEE Street
However, Ms C Winnie
says that given the assistance she received from the P Family Trust to purchase
V Street, Suburb G, which was
funded by the sale of OO Street, Suburb PP, the
title of the EEE Street property was such that Ms C Winnie held a three quarters
interest and the first respondent as trustee of the DDD Trust held a one quarter
127 Ms C Winnie currently resides in the EEE Street property with her three
children. It was valued by the single expert valuer at
$1,950,000 on 9 December
and is subject to a
mortgage of about
$1,672,787.
F Street property
128 In June 2004 the applicant and the DDD Trust
purchased the F Street property.
The property was subject to a mortgage in favour of Westpac. This is the
property as already referred to which was the subject of
the informal settlement
agreement subsequent to separation and which the applicant still retains. Again,
the applicant made no contribution
to the acquisition of this property or its
maintenance until it was transferred to him.
129 On the first respondent’s case, in April 2007 and subsequent to
final separation she and the applicant agreed that the F
Street property would
be transferred to the applicant and that would “be the final property
settlement” between them.
On that basis, F Street property was transferred to the applicant in August
130 The applicant currently continues to reside in the F Street property with
his wife and daughter. It was valued by the single expert
valuer at $725,000 on
15 December 2020,
and is subject
to a mortgage of about
The N Centre
131 On 13 August 2004 the third respondent purchased
a commercial shopping centre known as the N Centre at M town from the company
FFF Pty Ltd , a company associated with Mr CCC, for $8,970,000 with greater than
100 per cent funding from Westpac, Co-operative
2 and guarantees from Mr
This property received
particular focus in the applicant’s case.
132 The first respondent worked in a consultancy role with Mr T at the time
of the purchase.
It is clear
that the first respondent’s business association with Mr T was
instrumental in this transaction occurring. It is
clear from the evidence of Mr
Winnie, which I accept, that Mr Winnie had a pivotal role in structuring the
transaction to enable
it to proceed.
133 The purchase price was met by:
(a) Transfer of the commercial premises WW, which the third respondent had
purchased from Mr T in January 2004 for $1 million, which
Mr T wanted to
purchase back.
The Commercial
Premises WW was written down to an agreed value of $700,000 for the purpose of
this transfer;
(b) Loan from Westpac, which was secured by mortgages over a unit owned by B Pty
Ltd and a property owned by E Pty Ltd, and guarantees
from Mr Winnie, Ms C
Winnie and E Pty Ltd. There was also a guarantee provided by GGG Pty Ltd Pty Ltd
as trustee for two trusts associated
with Mr T to the value of $3
Mr Winnie says, and I
accept, that this guarantee was required to provide the equity required for the
loan from Westpac;
(c) Loan of $450,000 from Mr HHH/The Cooperative 2, with whom Mr Winnie and Ms C
Winnie worked closely, to meet the “transaction
costs” of the
134 The guarantee provided by Mr T was released in mid-2005 as a result of
property being sold to reduce debt and the N Centre increasing
135 During cross-examination by counsel for the respondents, the applicant
conceded that he had not contributed any funds, directly
or indirectly, to the
purchase of the N Centre.
However, the applicant maintains his position that either property owned by him
was required to be mortgaged, or he was required
to provide a personal
guarantee, as security for the loan from Westpac used to fund the purchase of
the N Centre.
Mr Winnie and Ms C
Winnie deny that this was the
136 Exhibit 15 is a Request to Release Security from Westpac dated 25 October
2005. It is signed by B Pty Ltd, E Pty Ltd and each
of the first respondent, Mr
Winnie, Ms C Winnie and Mr O. On page one of that document, it is said to
request that Westpac release
any security held over the following:
$320 Limited
guarantee by Mr Barrett
Mortgage by Mr
Barrett over 11 W Street, Suburb G from B Pty Ltd atf the Winnie Family
Mortgage by Mr
Barrett over BB Street, Suburb CC to be fully released including Title
$130 Limited
Guarantee by Mr Barrett
(As per the
137 In December 2004 the fifth respondent sold the
Suburb KK property.
138 In 2005 the second respondent obtained his professional
registration.
139 On 25 August 2005 the second respondent, Mr Winnie, was appointed as the
appointor of the P Family Trust. The applicant seeks
in these proceedings to
have that appointment set aside pursuant to s 106B of the Act.
140 As already noted, it was on 6 October 2005 that the applicant and the
first respondent separated.
141 Subsequent to separation, on 28 November 2005 the sixth respondent was
incorporated. It bears emphasis in this respect that it
was not until 1 December
2006 that the JJJ Trust was settled with the sixth respondent being appointed as
its trustee.
142 Also subsequent to separation, in December 2005, the UU Street, property
was sold by the third respondent.
Commercial Road property
143 In July 2006 B Pty Ltd purchased the property at
KKK Street, Suburb LLL
the sale of the N Centre, and using the proceeds received, a multi-level
building was constructed on the property at a
cost of $5 to $6 million,
which Mr Winnie says was less than the “normal cost” to construct
the building as Mr K did
not charge “the normal 10% - 20% builder’s
margin” for the build.
accept that evidence.
144 KKK Street, Suburb LLL was valued by the single expert valuer on 4
February 2021 for $6.7 million (treating related party leases
as vacant) or $7.4
million (subject to existing
145 In 2006 a property at Suburb MMM was purchased
by the third respondent for $550,000 and later sold in 2009 for
Sale of Suburb CC property
146 As earlier referred to, it was on 3 November
2006 the applicant sold his Suburb CC
147 On 1 December 2006 the JJJ Trust was settled
with the sixth respondent being appointed its trustee.
NNN Street property
148 In December 2006 PPP Pty Ltd, together with the
sixth respondent and the third respondent purchased the property at Suburb
Suburb OOO.
149 In 2007 the second respondent obtained
professional registration and took control of the business J Firm. Notably, the
is now owned by a company which is not a party to these proceedings.
Despite that, the applicant seeks to have the business or its
value included as
property available for distribution.
Informal property settlement
150 In April 2007 the first respondent received a
telephone call from the applicant shortly prior to her marriage to Mr K. On the
first respondent’s version, which I accept, the applicant demanded that
the 50 per cent interest in the F Street property which
he did not already own
be transferred to him under threat that her upcoming wedding would be ruined.
The first respondent agreed
and provided a transfer to the applicant which at
that stage the parties seemingly treated as being in full settlement of any
151 In 2007 the first respondent married Mr K .
152 In July 2007 the sixth respondent purchased a
100 per cent shareholding in QQQ Pty Ltd thereby acquiring the Commercial
in Tasmania. That commercial property has since been operated by a
combination of the first respondent, Mr K and the second respondent,
Post-N Centre Sale
153 In August 2007 the third respondent sold the N
Centre at M town for a significant profit. As deposed to by the fourth
the property was sold for $17.5 million yielding a capital gain of
$6,893,507 which was distributed to the beneficiaries of the Winnie
Trust. As the fourth respondent explains the net proceeds of sale largely went
to pay down debt but also to fund new purchases.
For example, the sale proceeds
from the N Centre retired the debt upon the EEE Street property and on 21
September 2007 the third
respondent purchased property at Suburb SS for $405,000
from sale proceeds of the N Centre distributed to the third respondent. Also,
21 November 2007 the third and sixth respondents purchased the remaining 50 per
cent of the NNN Street property from PPP Pty
154 On 19 November 2007 as has already been noted the applicant commenced
these proceedings.
155 In December 2007 the third respondent purchased a property at RRR Street,
Suburb SSS.
156 In February 2008 the applicant sold his W Street
157 On 12 March 2008 the third respondent purchased the Commercial premises
for $7 million.
158 Funds were also applied to the construction of a multilevel building at
KKK Street, Suburb LLL.
159 As is notorious, the world saw the onset of the global financial crisis
from 2007/2008. Detailed in the affidavits of Mr Winnie
and Ms C Winnie are the
substantial impacts the global financial crisis and associated economic downturn
had on the respondents.
Likewise detailed are the efforts of each of the first
respondent, Mr Winnie, Ms C Winnie and Mr K to stave off financial collapse.
accept that evidence. In summary, properties were sold at a loss and in the
aftermath of the global financial crisis, their financial
affairs were desperate
and for a significant period it appeared that all would be lost.
160 On 5 February 2008 a Deed was entered into in respect of the Winnie
Family Trust whereby the first respondent was replaced as
appointor by Mr
Winnie, the second respondent. The applicant targets that event as one to be set
aside pursuant to s 106B of the
161 On 23 April 2009 the second respondent was appointed as an executive of
the company known as J Firm Pty Ltd which operates a business
and which is not a
party to these proceedings.
162 In September 2009 the third respondent sold the Suburb MMM, as already
referred to.
163 From late 2009 into early 2013 relevant respondents were involved in
proceedings commenced by the Fair Work Ombudsman against
QQQ Pty Ltd.
164 [PARAGRAPHS 164-167 REDACTED]
165 [PARAGRAPHS 164-167 REDACTED]
166 [PARAGRAPHS 164-167 REDACTED]
167 [PARAGRAPHS 164-167 REDACTED]
168 In September 2014 the NNN Street property was sold for $3,500,000. The
proceeds were applied to outgoings and debt reduction as
well as to the purchase
of other properties including financial assistance of $55,000 to Ms I and her
now husband to purchase their
169 From 1 July 2018 the company TTT Pty Ltd, a company controlled by the
second respondent, Mr Winnie, has undertaken the management
of the Commercial
Disputed issues as to property interests to be
170 It is convenient to begin this discussion by
reference to the applicant’s claims concerning property interests held by
171 Subsections (1) and (2) of s 85A of the Act relevantly provide as
(1) The court may, in proceedings under this Act, make such order as the court
considers just and equitable with respect to the application,
for the benefit of
all or any of the parties to, and the children of, the marriage, of the whole or
part of property dealt with by
ante‑nuptial or post‑nuptial
settlements made in relation to the marriage.
(2) In considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (1), the
court shall take into account the matters referred
to in subsection 79(4) so far
as they are relevant.
172 Some perhaps obvious points need to be made about the terms of s 85A.
173 First, the section
the making of orders where the
provision is engaged as distinct from requiring orders to be made upon
fulfilment of stated conditions.
174 Second, subsection (1) makes it clear that for any orders to be made
pursuant to this section the orders must be considered “just
equitable”. As the High Court makes clear in
in an analogous
context in dealing with s 79(2) of the Act, it is not possible to chart the
metes and bounds of what is or is not
just and equitable, but plainly the
interests and rights of third parties must be carefully considered.
175 Third, the section facilitates orders being made with respect to property
“dealt with by
ante-nuptial or post-nuptial settlements made in
relation to the marriage”. What constitutes a “settlement” and
more specifically what constitutes a settlement “made in relation to the
marriage” may not necessarily be a straight
forward determination in a
given case.
176 Next, and of crucial importance in the circumstances of this case, as
subsection (2) makes plain, what order (if any) should be
made follows the
taking into account of the matters referred to in s 79(4) so far as they
are relevant.
177 It is clear that the invocation of s 85A is driven by the just and
equitable requirement and the matters referred to in s 79(4).
That is, s 85A
does not have independent operation to include property the subject of a nuptial
settlement in advance of these matters
being considered. It is the other way
178 It would appear obvious that for a settlement to come within the scope of
the section it must have a nuptial
179 For an ante-nuptial settlement it will not be enough simply that the
settlement was made prior to the parties’ marriage.
To constitute an
ante-nuptial settlement it must be made in contemplation of a specific
Turnbull and
undertook a review of relevant authority concerning s 85A of the Act and,
extrapolating from those authorities, expressed
the view that in order to
qualify as a “nuptial settlement” the following elements are
(a) The settlor must have brought the settlement into existence because of a
particular marriage; and
(b) The marriage must be subsisting with a reasonable expectation that it will
181 In that case Baker J concluded that the trust came into existence not
because of the marriage, but rather because its demise was
a possibility, if not
a probability at the time of its creation. On that basis Baker J concluded that
the settlement was not a post-nuptial
settlement in relation to the marriage of
the parties.
182 Writing extra-curially, the eminent author and jurist Justice Peter Nygh
observed this in relation to third parties and s 85A
Quite apart from any constitutional limitation, it is
obvious that the Family Court, in the exercise of its powers under s 85A, should
not do anything which might deprive a third party of a vested right, prevent
such a party from exercising such a right or in any
way impose a burden on such
a party which did not exist previously under the terms of the trust.
This means that the Court cannot adversely affect the rights of a third party,
under a trust arrangement, who is not a party to the
marriage or a child of that
marriage. Nor could the Court order a trustee, whether a party to the marriage
or not, to do anything
or perform any act which was inconsistent with his or her
obligations under the terms of the trust. Finally, the Court could not
restructure the property of the trust in such a manner as to deprive or
adversely affect the rights of bona fide creditors of the
trust or company.
As the decision of the High Court in
Re: Ross-Jones and Marinovich
indicates a “third party” comprises relatives of the spouses
including relatives who have taken a close interest in the
matrimonial affairs
of the spouses. There is no distinction to be drawn between innocent bystanders
and interfering relatives. Thus,
as sometimes happens, where relatives outside
the nuclear family of the spouses have entitlements to loan accounts under the
trust, they not only cannot be deprived of that entitlement, but the
trust cannot be stripped of its assets if this would endanger
the rights of the
holders of such loan accounts.
183 I interpolate here that Kiefel J, in
Kennon v Spry
, a judgment
upon which the applicant seeks to place particular emphasis, recognised that s
85A(1) required there to be a sufficient
association between the property the
subject of a settlement and the marriage the subject of the proceedings at the
time when the
determined the application of the property settled
under s 85A(1) of the Act. Kiefel J observed:
219. There is another feature of the Act introduced in
1975 which informs a reading of s 85A and which reflects the focus of the
as being on the property dealt with by the settlement. An important
aspect of the Act, so far as concerns settlements of property,
requires the Court to make orders respecting property by reference to the
contributions of the parties to the marriage
to property which is accumulated in
the course of the marriage...
184 In this context it bears emphasis that the parties’ marriage
effectively ended with their final separation in October 2005
now almost 16
years ago followed soon after by their divorce. Viewed another way, the property
which is the focus of the applicant’s
claims for relief is clearly not the
same property as existed upon any settlement via a trust or indeed as existed at
the time of
the parties’ final separation. Moreover, as has already been
emphasised, what exists today is the product not sourced to the
subject marriage
between the applicant and the first respondent, but is the product of the
extensive involvement and contributions
of the first respondent and the
other respondents involved and their efforts over a very lengthy period
subsequent to the subject
marriage, during which the applicant has made no
relevant contribution.
Kennon v Spry
emphasis is given in the judgments to the feature
of the assets of the trust in that case being acquired by or through the efforts
of a party or parties during their
Kennon v Spry
the husband’s legal ownership of the assets
as sole trustee and the wife’s interest as a beneficiary of the trust were
found to have provided a proper basis for orders made by the trial judge that
required the husband to pay to the wife a substantial
sum in circumstances where
the source of payment of such an amount was the trust assets sourced entirely to
the marriage, without
contribution by third parties. Importantly, French CJ
80. [The wife’s] right to due consideration as an
object of the Trust could also be taken into account in determining whether
was just and equitable to make an order under s 79 on the basis that the assets
of the Trust were property of the marriage. As
noted in the preceding section
the equitable entitlement of the children and other existing beneficiaries to
due consideration could
also be taken into account in making that judgment...
187 In this case, having regard to the findings I have recorded in tracing
the chronology of relevant events and the further findings
recorded below in
dealing with s 79, I am not persuaded that it would be just and equitable to
make orders under s 79 in respect
of trust assets even if the conditions
identified in
Kennon v Spry
could be fulfilled. Each of the relevant
trusts and property interests will now be addressed.
EEE Street property – DDD Trust
188 It is not in issue that the one quarter interest
in this real property held by the first respondent as trustee for the DDD Trust
is worth $487,500 and that the three quarter interest held by the
fourth respondent, Ms C Winnie, is worth $1,462,500 yielding a
gross value of $1,949,500. It is also not in issue that the amount of the
current mortgage liability with respect to this
property is $1,672,787.
189 The differences between the parties are, first, the inclusion at all of
this property as property of the applicant and the first
respondent and the
applicant’s apparent contention that the property ought be included at its
full value without any mortgage
debt being brought to account.
190 As is noted in the
Dramatis Personae
the DDD Trust was established
on 12 March 2004. It plainly was established to benefit Ms I given that she is
the named eligible beneficiary.
191 Reference has already been made to the affidavit evidence of Ms C Winnie,
which I accept, as to her acquisition of this property
and the attribution of a
one quarter interest in the property for Ms I in the circumstances and for the
reasons which Ms C Winnie
identifies.
192 The legal interest in the EEE Street property has always been held in the
shares of one quarter to the first respondent as trustee
for the DDD Trust and
three quarters to the fourth respondent, Ms C Winnie.
193 The first respondent does not have the ability to procure beneficial
ownership of any of the property of the DDD Trust including
the EEE Street
194 Whilst as explained by Ms C Winnie in her affidavit the acquisition of
this property was funded initially by her from funds realised
from the sale of V
Street, Suburb G, it is clear on Ms C Winnie’s evidence, which I accept,
that she has re-mortgaged the property
to advance funds to each of the Winnie
Family Trust, the JJJ Trust and J Firm after the initial mortgage was discharged
by the Winnie
Family Trust.
195 There is no evidence of the applicant making any contribution whatsoever
to this property. To the contrary, for a significant
period he resided in the
property without contributing anything to its maintenance.
196 There is no legal basis, whether pursuant to s 85A or otherwise, for this
property to be treated as property of the first respondent
and/or the applicant
for the purpose of s 79 of the Act.
197 One of the orders sought by the applicant in relation to the DDD Trust is
that Ms I be appointed as its trustee. Ms I is not a
party to these proceedings.
There is no evidence that she has ever been put on notice of any orders sought
by the applicant in relation
to her appointment as trustee. There is no evidence
that she consents to that and in any event there is no juridical source of power
for this Court to make such an order with respect to the DDD Trust in these
circumstances.
198 It is completely contrary to the applicant’s case that this
property be included as property of the parties or either of
them that he
ultimately seeks an order that Ms I be appointed as trustee of the DDD Trust.
199 There is no basis to include either the DDD Trust nor the EEE Street
property as property interests available for consideration
in the s 79 process
nor to make any orders in respect of those interests.
200 On the history of dealings in respect of the EEE Street property and the
DDD Trust it can be concluded that at least indirectly
these assets represent a
potential financial resource to the first respondent to the extent that these
assets have historically been
used for funding to assist other entities of the
respondents.
Winnie Family Trust
201 In contrast to the applicant’s pleadings
or particulars as advanced in either his Further Amended Application
Orders filed on 18 March 2010 or his Amended Statement of Facts and
Contentions filed on 26 October 2018, as at trial the applicant
maintained any case to the effect that any of the subject trusts, including the
Winnie Family Trust, can be characterised
as shams or the mere alter ego or
puppet of the first respondent. That previous contention appeared to fall away
in the face of the
evidence of each of the first respondent, the second
respondent, Mr Winnie and the fourth respondent, Ms C Winnie as to the very
substantial contributions made by each of them, as well as by Mr K and their
brother, Mr O to the property of the Winnie Family
Trust since its
establishment.
202 I have recorded my acceptance of the evidence of each of Mr Winnie and Ms
C Winnie respectively. Without detailing that evidence,
which is unnecessary,
the simple point is that each of those parties have devoted their working lives
to the financial interests
of the respondents or their associated entities in
one way or another including in respect of the Winnie Family Trust. Ms C Winnie
has engaged on a full-time basis with either the business or other entities
within what might be described as the UUU Group since
1997 and in the case of Mr
Winnie that has occurred from even earlier. Most fundamentally, the evidence of
both of these witnesses
confirms their substantial roles concerning the N Centre
which appears to be the primary focus of the applicant in these proceedings.
203 In this respect nothing in the terms of the Trust Deed dated 21 September
1998 establishing the Winnie Family Trust expresses
it to be a settlement in
relation to the marriage of the applicant and first respondent within the
meaning of s 85A of the Act. That
has some significance in circumstances where
the beneficiaries of this Trust include the adult children of the
first respondent.
In my judgment, even if the Winnie Family Trust could be
characterised as a settlement in relation to marriage within the meaning
85A of the Act, in all of the circumstances of this case it would not be just
and equitable to make orders with respect to the
property of the Winnie Family
Trust nor should an order be made, taking into account “the matters
referred to in subsection
79(4) so far as they are relevant”. These
matters include the findings I have already recorded in addressing the
of central events and the further discussion below of the s 79(4)
assessment.
204 In this respect the applicant seeks to emphasise by reference to
documents obtained from
including the
documents agreed to be received on the reopening of evidence, that the applicant
made what is submitted to be a “pivotal”
contribution to the N
205 The case advanced at trial, prior to the reopening, was that the
applicant had provided security for funding the
acquisition
Centre in the first place. The solicitor for the applicant went so far as to
suggest that the applicant could be construed
as a “joint venturer”
with respect to the N Centre.
206 When viewed as a whole, the Westpac documents make it clear that the
applicant did not in fact provide any security or play any
role at all in
respect of the initial acquisition of the N Centre by the third respondent. What
these documents indicate, although
this is not entirely clear, is that the
applicant provided two limited guarantees, perhaps supported by a mortgage,
similarly limited
to the extent of the guarantees, for a short window of time
when the N Centre was refinanced so as to replace the guarantee originally
provided by the vendor Mr T.
207 It has to be said that the evidence in this respect is most
unsatisfactory. It was in my judgment for the applicant to prove the
he made as to the Westpac documents and what they actually evidence. There are
reasons to be circumspect about those documents
because they appear to contain
some obvious errors. For example, the documents appear to indicate that Westpac
proceeded on the mistaken
footing that the applicant was a trustee of the DDD
Trust. He was never a trustee of the DDD Trust. The references to the giving
a mortgage is not corroborated by the title search of the property.
208 Putting the Westpac documents at their highest and interpreting them for
the benefit of the applicant, it would appear that the
letter of offer is dated
followed by a
request for a release of security dated October
The Westpac documents
thus indicate that if securities were in fact given by the applicant it was for
a short period for a matter
of months and in a total limited amount of $400,000.
Exhibit 15 is the Westpac document indicating a release of securities given
25 October 2005.
209 It ought be noted that there is no evidence to suggest, and indeed
evidence the other way in the form of title searches, that
mortgage security was
in fact taken by Westpac over any property owned by the applicant.
210 It follows, in my judgment, that the highest the case can be put for the
applicant is that he made a relatively modest contribution
to securing the
refinancing of the N Centre via security given for a modest amount for an
extremely limited amount of time which
did not involve him in actually
contributing any funds. Significantly, in no way can the applicant be
characterised as a “joint
venturer” or as having played any role at
all in the acquisition of the N Centre in the first place. Clearly, viewed in
the dye was already cast upon its acquisition in terms of the N
Centre proving to be a profitable venture, by the time that the applicant
all involved in any subsequent Westpac refinancing as discussed.
211 With respect to the Winnie Family Trust the evidence establishes that the
first respondent has never had control of the Winnie
Family Trust as she has
always been one of two or more executives of the trustee and it is clear on the
evidence of Mr Winnie and
Ms C Winnie, which I accept, that any degree of
influence the first respondent has had over the trustee from time to time has
over time with the increasing involvements of other participants. Plainly
the first respondent has benefitted from the Winnie Family
Trust since its
creation, as have other members of her family, but this was obviously always in
contemplation by the formation of
the Winnie Family Trust itself.
212 Clause 7 of the Trust Deed deals with the appointment and removal of the
trustee of the Winnie Family Trust. The power of appointment
contained in that
clause has never been exercised. The evidence establishes that that power is
presently held by the second respondent.
213 One of the orders the applicant seeks is the setting aside of the Deed by
which the first respondent appointed the second respondent,
Mr Winnie, as
appointor in order that the first respondent may appoint herself as trustee
and thereby distribute some or all of the
Winnie Family Trust’s assets to
the applicant. However, reference to clause 7(5) of the Trust Deed confirms
that an appointor
of the Winnie Family Trust is prohibited from appointing
themselves as trustee.
214 In my judgment the applicant has made no contribution of any significance
to the property of the Winnie Family Trust. The overwhelming
contributions have
been made by the first respondent and, significantly, third parties to the
215 In terms of value, another aspect which is disputed, the value adopted by
the respondents of $471,648 is arrived at in the manner
explained by Ms C Winnie
in her affidavit. In summary, Ms C Winnie who has been responsible as a
financial controller and executive
within the respondent entities now for many
years deposes in her affidavit evidence that the figure adopted by the
respondents is
arrived at by reference to accounts prepared to 28 February 2021
(shortly prior to trial) save that Ms C Winnie has adjusted the
Balance Sheet
taking into account the valuations obtained for the purpose of these proceedings
in lieu of the book values recorded
in the accounts.
216 Importantly, there was no challenge to Ms C Winnie’s evidence in
this respect. She was not cross-examined about her methodology
nor was it put to
her in cross-examination that there was some other different methodology to be
applied to arriving at the proper
217 The applicant ought not be permitted to advance a contention in respect
of the value of the Winnie Family Trust that was not put
to any witness in the
respondents’ case, in particular Ms C Winnie, in challenging the value
relied upon by the respondents.
In my judgment, applying the rule in
the applicant
cannot properly advance these contentions without having put them to Ms C Winnie
in cross-examination.
218 I therefore accept that the value of the Winnie Family Trust ought be
taken as $471,648, but for the reasons already expressed
I do not accept it is
to be treated as property of the parties to the marriage or either of them at
219 In this respect not only does the applicant assert a different present
value for the Winnie Family Trust but the applicant effectively
adds back into
the pool for which the applicant contends the distributions made by the Winnie
Family Trust from the sale proceeds
of the N Centre sold in August 2007. There
is no legal basis for taking this approach either by reference to ownership or
the reality
that the sale proceeds from a transaction some 14 years ago have not
been retained, but have been deployed in the manner evidenced
respondents’ case.
220 Further, it appears the solicitor for the applicant proceeds on a
mistaken understanding that the Winnie Family Trust owes money
on loan account
to the first respondent. That is wrong. The first respondent owes money to the
Trust as is set out in Annexure “[...]4”
to the affidavit of Ms C
P Family Trust
221 The P Family Trust was established by Trust Deed
dated 1982, some seven years before the applicant and the first respondent first
met. The P Family Trust was established by the first respondent’s father
and by its terms it was obviously established for
the benefit of the first
respondent and her sister. This settlement cannot be characterised as one made
“in relation to the
marriage” of the first respondent and the
applicant within the meaning of s 85A of the Act.
222 There is no evidence of the applicant having made any contribution
whatsoever to any of the property of the P Family Trust at
223 Clause 21 of the Trust Deed provides, in summary, that no part of the
income or capital of the Trust Fund is payable to any person
who has transferred
property to the trustee. As has already been noted, on 11 April 1996 the first
respondent transferred LL Street,
Suburb MM and Suburb NN unit to the P Family
Trust and on 10 May 1999 the first respondent transferred JJ Street, Suburb
Street, Suburb PP to the fifth respondent as trustee for the P Family
224 The first respondent has never been the appointor of the P Family Trust.
The applicant has never been a beneficiary of the P Family
Trust, even whilst
married to the first respondent.
225 The first respondent has never had the ability to procure beneficial
ownership of any assets held in the P Family Trust at any
226 Notably, the financial statements in evidence closest to the time of
separation record the P Family Trust as having a net value
I accept that the P
Family Trust presently has no value.
227 As recorded in the
Dramatis personae
JJJ Trust was established by Deed dated 1 December 2006, post-dating the
final separation and very shortly prior to the divorce.
The JJJ Trust cannot be
characterised on any view as a settlement in relation to the marriage of the
first respondent and the applicant
within the meaning of s 85A of the
228 Moreover, the first respondent has never been the appointor of the JJJ
Trust, that position being occupied by her husband Mr K.
The first respondent
has always been one of two or more executives of the trustee. There is no
evidence of the first respondent having
exercised control over the JJJ Trust to
the extent that it could be characterised as the first respondent’s alter
229 No contribution whatsoever has been made by the applicant to the JJJ
Trust or its property at any time. In any event, the JJJ
Trust is of no value.
On the unchallenged evidence of Ms C Winnie it presently has a net negative
value of ($532,893).
this evidence and reject the applicant’s attempts to advance some other or
different values on a basis or bases not
put in cross-examination of Ms C
Notional add-backs
230 As already noted, subsequent to separation the
applicant sold two properties in his name. On 3 November 2006 he sold BB
Suburb CC and on 28 February 2008 he sold W Street, Suburb G. The
applicant received sale proceeds of $171,762 with respect to BB
Street, Suburb
CC and $172,984 with respect to W Street, Suburb G, a combined total of
$344,746. The respondents contend that in
accordance with established principles
these sums ought be notionally added-back for the purpose of the s 79(4)
assessment.
231 The principles in relation to the notional adding-back of capital which
in fact no longer exist are set out comprehensively, by
reference to authority,
by Murphy J in
, a judgment with which the Chief Justice and I
232 Put simply, each of the subject real properties were properties to which
the first respondent can be seen to have made a substantial
contribution, at the
least indirectly, until their disposal. They were properties which, but for
their disposal, would obviously
have been available for s 79 adjustment. The
disposal of those properties post-separation means that, as discussed in the
authorities,
the applicant has accessed for himself exclusively capital that
would otherwise be available to both parties in the s 79 adjudication.
233 In meeting this claim for notional add-backs the applicant appears to
conflate the principles concerning the premature distribution
of capital by one
party with principles governing the notional adding-back of expended legal
234 It fell to the applicant to explain, if he could, the use made of the
capital he received for him to avoid the notional adding-back
of these sums in
accordance with established principles.
235 Notwithstanding his efforts to adduce further evidence in the reopening
of the proceedings on 14 May 2021 I am not persuaded that
the applicant
establishes any evidentiary foundation to avoid the notional adding-back of the
sum sought to be added-back by the
respondents.
236 At all material times pre and post-separation it appears that the
applicant was in employment deriving income from that source.
applicant’s evidence does not descend to any particularity at all as to
the use of his income vis-à-vis the use
of the premature distribution of
capital to himself as regards legal fees or anything else.
237 The applicant’s evidence at trial was that he had spent more than
$150,000 on legal fees with respect to these proceedings
with the business VVV
Firm and more than $100,000 on them with his current solicitor. As at trial the
applicant otherwise did not
adduce any evidence as to what he did with the
capital referred to. In the further evidence application it appeared that some
amount of it may have been used for the purchase of a motor vehicle but,
again, it is not explained why it was necessary to resort
to capital as opposed
to income for such acquisition.
238 There was an attempt in the reopening to establish that the applicant had
spent less than $150,000 in legal fees with VVV Firm
and there was reference to
him spending funds on what is described as the “[...] Proceedings”
relating to a structure
which the applicant sought to characterise as a
matrimonial asset. However, there is no direct evidence from the applicant to
what becomes a hypothetical case about his use of funds. It may well
have been open to the applicant to use earnings to meet identified
expenses. He
may not have used his earnings but that is the very point concerning his onus of
proof and his need to provide evidence
to allow the Court, in its discretion, to
determine on complete evidence whether or not there ought be any reduction in
the claimed
239 The applicant simply failed, even in the attempted reopening, to provide
any direct evidence as would disturb the proposition
that the total amount of
capital prematurely distributed to himself ought be notionally added-back. In my
discretion that is the
approach that I take.
240 The final category of notional add-backs concerns the total of additional
borrowings made by the applicant against the mortgage
over the F Street property
totalling $54,474. These borrowings are established by reference to the email
from the applicant’s
solicitor on 16 March 2021 which was admitted into
241 The applicant contends that an amount of
$150,000 be included in the property pool with respect to this business.
242 As is submitted by the respondents, the business was owned by the first
respondent until she was deregistered in December 1999.
There is no evidence as
to its value at that time or indeed its current value. There is thus no basis
for the notional adding-back
of any sum as no sum is sourced to any
243 Upon her deregistration the first respondent was unable to continue to
conduct a business. Her then associate or business partner,
Mr TT took over the
business until transferring it to the second respondent in
244 Since 1 July 2014 the business has been owned by J Firm Pty Ltd which is
not a party to these proceedings.
245 The applicant demonstrates no legitimate basis for there to be the
inclusion of $150,000 (or any amount) on account of the business
in the property
interests falling for consideration under s 79.
Superannuation
246 It was not in issue at trial that the present
value of the applicant’s superannuation interests via two schemes of
superannuation
totals $311,283.
247 However, part of the reopening of the evidence on 14 May 2021 which I
have allowed included the historical details of the applicant’s
superannuation closer to the time of the parties’ separation.
248 The present values of the applicant’s superannuation is a matter of
fact. It is trite that in the s 79 process the property
interests of the
parties are taken as at the time of trial or more particularly the making of
249 In circumstances where the parties separated as long ago as 2005 it would
be obvious that the applicant has contributed to his
current superannuation
value by his employment over the approximate 16 year period since
separation.
250 However, it does not follow that his superannuation ought be included in
some different amount or by reference to what existed
as at separation. This is
for a couple of important reasons.
251 First, in terms of assessing contributions which will be discussed below,
whilst undoubtedly the applicant has contributed to
his superannuation since
separation, he has done so in circumstances where, as previously referred to, he
has had the sole use and
occupation of the F Street property to which the first
respondent substantially contributed; and he has paid no child support with
respect to Ms I in circumstances where she was only about 10 years of age
when the parties finally separated. Beyond some responsibility
for caring for Ms
I for about a two year period post-separation, and some modest contributions for
a brief period to her private
school fees, the whole of the responsibility for
Ms I’s parenting and financial support has fallen to the first
respondent.
252 In summary then, whilst it is relevant to consideration of the question
of contributions that the applicant has enhanced the value
superannuation, the offsets or balancing factors referred to are likewise
relevant in that assessment.
Cash at bank
253 The respondents include the amount of $40,544
for this item by reliance upon the applicant’s Financial Statement filed
15 March 2021 at item 37. There is simply no evidence to underpin the
assertion made by the applicant that this item should be taken
in the amount of
$10,000. I therefore adopt the respondents’ value for this item.
Conclusion re: property pool
254 It follows from the foregoing discussion that I
am satisfied that the property interests of the parties or either of them,
held or which in the applicant’s case he has had the benefit of,
are as contended for by the respondents in Exhibit 1 as follows:
ASSETS – REAL
Description
F Street, Suburb G
ASSETS – Misc
Cash at bank
Motor vehicles
Household contents
Tools of trade
First Respondent
Jewellery, furniture and personal
Proceeds of sale of W Street, Suburb G – paid to
applicant on settlement
Proceeds of sale of BB Street, Suburb CC – paid
to applicant on settlement
Proceeds of sale of BB Street, Suburb CC – paid to
solicitors for the applicant Trust Account on
Proceeds of sale of Chattel 1
Borrowings against F Street, Suburb G to repay
wife’s car loan
Additional borrowings against F Street, Suburb
LIABILITIES
Mortgage – F Street, Suburb
SUPERANNUATION
Super fund 1
Super fund 2
TOTAL NET ASSETS (including
superannuation)
Percentages held by each
First Respondent
255 I reiterate my conclusion that the various trust assets cannot
legitimately be treated as property available for adjustment but
represent a
financial resource or financial resources of the first respondent.
Assessment of contributions – s 79(4) of the Act
256 I have already, throughout the preceding
discussion of the chronology of events, recorded various findings relevant to
the assessment
of contributions within the meaning of s 79(4) of the Act and
will not restate them.
257 I have recorded my preference for the evidence of the first respondent to
that of the applicant where their versions diverge.
The extent of the
non-financial contributions claimed by the applicant in the form of domestic
support of the family and emotional
support of the first respondent is
disputed by the first
respondent.
258 That noted, I accept that within the constraints of the sporadic
separations during the relationship, and the applicant’s
absences from the
household for work overseas initially and in Sydney in the latter stages of the
relationship, the applicant did
make non-financial contributions of some
substance. I accept his evidence that he contributed via cooking, the purchase
of groceries
and the purchase of take away meals for the family and this
occurred in the context that the household included, from time to time
the relationship, the first respondent’s older children from her
previous marriage as well as the child of the relationship,
Ms I. In final
submissions the solicitor for the applicant characterised these as “minor
efforts” and acknowledged that
the applicant did not make any significant
financial contributions during the
259 Of course balanced against the applicant’s non-financial
contributions are those of the first respondent. I accept the first
respondent’s evidence to the effect that, in addition to her own
non-financial contributions, some assistance was also provided
by her own mother
from time to time. More significantly I accept that, increasingly, her older
children were, during the relationship,
able to meet their own needs. Obviously
Mr Winnie attained his majority in 1996, not long into the relationship and well
before final
separation so that for much of the period he was independent.
Likewise that became so for each of Ms C Winnie and Mr O.
260 One extraordinary feature of this case, in terms of contribution, is that
the applicant ceased to provide any meaningful support,
whether financial or
non-financial, in respect of Ms I beyond 2007 when she was 12 years old. Ms I
was from that time raised and
supported financially and otherwise effectively
solely by the first
respondent.
261 It matters not whether this was, as the applicant would have it, by
reason of some conduct by the first respondent. The first
respondent denies that
conduct and the fact is that the applicant spent substantial legal costs in
pursuing property proceedings
but apparently made no application in respect of
parenting orders. Moreover, the applicant made no financial contribution via
support for Ms I throughout her expensive teenage years.
262 It follows that overwhelmingly the assessment of non-financial
contributions within the meaning of s 79(4) favours the first respondent.
263 In terms of financial contribution I have detailed the foregoing property
transactions that occurred in addressing the chronology.
The applicant
acknowledges in his evidence that he and the first respondent kept their
finances separate. In conjunction with this,
the applicant acknowledges that he
made no relevant financial contribution to the acquisition or maintenance or
outgoings in respect
of any of the residences in which he and the
first respondent resided during the relationship. Plainly then this allowed
the applicant
to accumulate his rental properties and to maintain his rental
income derived from them together with earnings from employment, largely
own purposes.
264 Whilst the evidence lacks sufficient particularity to enable this to be
quantified in dollar terms, it is a clear inference that
at the outset of the
relationship the first respondent’s financial position overall was
superior to that of the applicant.
In his affidavit the applicant is at some
pains to emphasise the thriving nature of the first respondent’s business.
from that business the first respondent held the business premises at
Suburb KK and the HH Region
In comparison the
applicant owned the Suburb DD property said to be worth $77,000 but which was
mortgaged by an unspecified amount.
He otherwise had a car and some modest
265 As already noted, the applicant acknowledges that he and the first
respondent kept their finances separate. Moreover, he acknowledges
that he was
not called upon to make any financial contribution to maintaining any of the
residences in which he and the first respondent
resided over the course of the
relationship. These features enabled the applicant to accumulate property in his
own name prior to
separation, as already referred to. The properties acquired by
the first respondent or others in which the applicant and first respondent
resided included, over time, the HH Region unit, OO Street, Suburb PP, V Street
and EEE Street.
266 To this may be added the observation that there is no evidence that the
applicant made any relevant contribution to the acquisition
of the F Street
property, originally acquired by the applicant and the DDD Trust. There is no
evidence that the applicant made any
contribution to mortgage repayments or any
other outgoings with respect to the F Street property prior to it being
transferred to
the applicant by way of the informal property settlement.
267 As to that, it is well settled by authority that such a transfer does not
have binding effect.
268 That noted, the fact of the making of the informal agreement and its
consequences is plainly relevant to the determination of
what is just and
equitable in the circumstances of the case.
269 Post-separation, some 16 years ago now, the applicant has enhanced his
superannuation interests in circumstances where he has
paid no financial support
for Ms I leaving that entirely to the first respondent. In the same period he
has enjoyed the sole use
and occupation of the F Street property, albeit that he
has been responsible for mortgage payments and outgoings with respect to
270 I have already explained, by reference to the Westpac documents, that
putting the case at its highest for the applicant he made
a modest contribution
to the refinancing of the N Centre liability on a limited basis and for a short
term. Importantly, contrary
to the case he initially advanced, he was not a
“joint venturer” in terms of having participated in the acquisition
the N Centre asset in the first place. As already noted, the applicant had
nothing to do with the acquisition of the N Centre as
an investment. Compare
that to the position of the first respondent and each of Mr Winnie, Ms C Winnie
and Mr K as set out in the
respondents’ affidavits, which evidence I
271 The applicant holds, or has received the benefit of, approximately 95 per
cent of the value of the property interests held by
the applicant and first
respondent as earlier identified. The respondents contend that in these
circumstances there is no basis to
further adjust property interests in the
applicant’s favour.
272 In my judgment, the assessment of contributions results in the conclusion
that it would not be just and equitable, nor appropriate,
within the meaning of
s 79 of the Act, to make orders further adjusting any property interests in
favour of the applicant.
Section 75(2) factors
273 As already noted, the first respondent has
turned 70 years of age and the evidence of her oncologist is that she is subject
treatment for a serious and chronic cancer condition.
274 The first respondent’s income is modest but of course she has, as I
have already referred to, significant financial resources
available to her in
the form of property held by the various trusts and other entities referred
275 In comparison to the first respondent’s position, the applicant is
somewhat younger at 62 years of age and his current income
earning capacity
is superior.
276 In my judgment there is no basis to make any adjustment of the existing
property interests of the parties or either of them by
reason of any assessment
of relevant s 75(2) factors.
Justice and equity
277 For the reasons already explained I am not
satisfied that it would be just and equitable to make property adjustment orders
sought by the applicant. The applicant’s application ought be
278 The parties ought have the opportunity to
address any questions of costs by reference to these reasons.
279 Without pre-empting anything at all, one of the matters potentially
needing to be addressed emanates from the decision of the
High Court in
Bell Lawyers Pty Ltd v
feature that throughout these proceedings, until the trial itself, the
respondents, all with common interests, were represented
by J Firm/the second
and fourth respondents.
280 Of course the parties ought have the opportunity to make submissions
question of any costs
sought as a result of the outcome of these proceedings, in the event that any
application for costs is forthcoming.
I certify that the preceding two hundred
and eighty (280) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment
of the Honourable
Dated: 26 August 2021
“SCHEDULE A”
(Husband) Mr Barrett DOB ...1959
First Respondent
(Wife) Ms Winnie (now K) DOB ...1951
Relationship
Cohabitation: 1989
Married: 1991
WWW DOB ...1995
Separated: 06.10.2005
Divorced: 23.12.06
Second Respondent
Mr Winnie DOB ...1978
Son of Wife from
prior marriage.
Professional & executive of J Firm Pty
Executive of Third & Fifth Respondents
Third Respondent
Executives: First, Second and
Fourth Respondents
Shareholders: First & Second
Respondents
Trustee: of the Winnie Family Trust
The Winnie Family Trust
Deed dated 21 September 1998 (after
cohabitation)
Settlor: Mr BBBB
Trustee: B Pty
Beneficiaries: (a) Fourth Respondent & Mr O (a
(b) Any parent, child or grandchild of any person in
(c) Any spouse, widow or widower of any person in (a) &
Appointor: First Respondent (removed and replaced by Second
Respondent by Deed dated 5 February 2008)
Clause 7(5): Precludes
appointor appointing self as trustee.
Fourth Respondent
Ms C Winnie DOB ...1980
Daughter of
First Respondent from prior marriage.
Professional & executive of J
Firm Pty Ltd.
Executive of Third, Fifth & Sixth Respondents.
Fifth Respondent
E Pty Ltd Pty
Status: Deregistered.
Executives: Second & Fourth Respondents
and Mr O (a non-party, 1984), First
Respondent ceased on
Shareholders: Ms CCCC (First Respondent’s mother) &
First Respondent
Trustee: of the P Family Trust
P Family Trust
Deed dated 1982 (prior to
cohabitation)
Settlor: Mr DDDD
Trustee: First Respondent & Ms
EEEE initially. First Respondent alone by Deed dated 1 July 1991. First
Respondent removed by
Deed dated 8 January 1996 and E Pty Ltd Pty Ltd
Beneficiaries: (a) Second Respondent
(c) Mr FFFF [removed by Deed dated 1.7.91] and replaced with
(d) Mr GGGG [removed by Deed dated 1.7.91]
(f) First Respondent [subject to clause 21]
(g) Ms EEEE
[removed by Deed dated 1.7.91]
(h) All the children (other than named
above), grandchildren and remoter issue of Mr GGGG [amended to First
Respondent by
Deed dated 1 July 1991]
(i) The next of kin of the last to
die of the beneficiaries
(j) Such other person nominated by the Trustees
prior to the Distribution Date
Appointor: Mr GGGG. Following his
death, Ms CCCC (Cl 23). She was replaced by the Second Respondent by Deed dated
25 August 2005.
Clause 21: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
Deed expressed or implied no discretion or power by this
conferred on any person or on the Trustee shall be exercised and no
provision of this settlement shall so operate
as to cause any part of the
income or capital of the Trust Fund to become payable to or applicable for
the benefit of
the Settlor or any other person who has given transferred or
made over any investments to the Trustee to be held on the
herein contained.
Settlement by First Respondent: Transferred property to the
trust in March 1999 at a value of $425,000 and further property at
of $560,000.00 in May 1999.
Sixth Respondent
: D Pty Ltd Pty Ltd (incorporated after
separation)
Executives: First & Fourth Respondents.
Executives: Mr K 28.11.05 to 11.08.17 and Second Respondent 29.05.11 to
Shareholders: First Respondent & Mr K
Trustee: of the
The JJJ Trust
Deed dated 1 December 2006 (after
separation)
Settlor: Second Respondent
Trustee: D Pty Ltd Pty
Beneficiaries: First Respondent and Mr K and B Pty
Appointor: Mr K
The DDD Trust
Deed dated 12 March 2004
Settlor: Mr
Trustee: First Respondent
Beneficiary: Ms WWW, children or
grandchildren of Ms WWW, spouses of children or grandchildren of Ms
Principal: First Respondent
[2008] HCA 56
(2008) 238 CLR 366
25 March 2021, p.392 lines
Transcript 25
March 2021, p.393 line 44 to p.394 line
Affidavit of the applicant
filed on 26 October 2018, paragraph
respondent’s Case Outline filed on 5 March 2021, page 2; affidavit of the
first respondent filed on 28 January
2021, paragraphs 7, 8 and
Affidavit of the applicant
filed on 18 November 2020, paragraph
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraphs 11–14 and Annexure
for example, affidavit of the applicant filed on 18 November 2020, paragraph
Affidavit of the
applicant’s solicitor filed on 3 July 2009, Annexure [Mr
Stephens & Stephens & Anor (Enforcement)
[2009] FamCAFC 240
Summitt & Summitt and Ors (Re-opening)
[2009] FamCA 365
Mallard & Mallard
[2011] FamCA 876
and the authorities referred to
in those judgments.
Transcript 22 March 2021, p.74 lines
Affidavit of
the applicant filed on 26 October 2018, paragraph
Transcript 22 March
2021, p.79 lines
Transcript 22
March 2021, p.78 lines
Transcript 22
March 2021, p.87 lines
Transcript 22
March 2021, p.88 lines
Transcript 22
March 2021, p.94 lines
Affidavit of
the applicant filed on 26 October 2018, paragraph
Affidavit of the
applicant filed on 18 November 2020, paragraphs 7 and
Affidavit of the
applicant filed on 18 November 2020, paragraph
Affidavit of Ms C
Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, Annexure
Exhibit 10.
Affidavit of
the applicant filed on 18 November 2020, paragraph
Affidavit of the
applicant filed on 18 November 2020, paragraph
Transcript 23 March
2021, p.114 lines
Affidavit of
the applicant filed on 18 November 2020, paragraph
Transcript 23 March
2021, p.115 lines
Affidavit of
the first respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph 7 and Exhibit
Affidavit of the
applicant filed on 18 November 2020, paragraph
Transcript 22 March
2021, p.98 line 37.
Transcript 22 March 2021, p.98 line 39 to p.99 line
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph 12; Transcript 24 March 2021,
lines 19–28.
Transcript 22 March 2021, p.84 line 47 to p.85 line
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, Annexure
Affidavit of the first respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, Annexure
Affidavit of the first respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraphs
16–17 and Annexures ““[...]W2” and
““[...]W3”.
Affidavit of the first respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph 20 and Annexure
““[...]W4”.
Exhibits 33 and 35.
Exhibits 8 and 31; affidavit of the first respondent filed on 28 January 2021,
paragraph 36 and affidavit of the second respondent
filed on 28 January
2021, paragraph 7.
Affidavit of Mr Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph 7; affidavit of Ms
C Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph 36; affidavit of Mr Winnie filed
on 28 January 2021; paragraph
5; and affidavit of the applicant filed on 18
November 2020,
paragraph 17.
Affidavit of the first respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph 37; affidavit of Mr Winnie filed
on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of Ms C Winnie
filed on 28 January 2021, paragraphs 21 and
Affidavit of the
applicant filed on 18 November 2020, paragraph 20. See also Transcript 22 March
2021, p.96 lines
Transcript 24
March 2021, p.219 lines
Affidavit of
Ms C Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph 21; Transcript 24 March 2021,
p.219 line 46 to p.220 line 1; Transcript
24 March 2021, p.221 lines
Affidavit of
Ms C Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph 22; Annexure
“[...C]W2”.
Exhibit 10.
Transcript 22 March
2021, p.72 lines 9–14.
Affidavit of Ms C Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph 34; affidavit of the applicant
filed on 18 November 2020,
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Transcript 22 March
2021, p.71 lines
Affidavit of
Ms C Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph 24; affidavit of the second
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of Ms C Winnie
filed on 28 January 2021, Annexure
“[...C]W2”.
Affidavit of Ms C Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, Annexure
“[...C]W3”.
Affidavit of Ms C Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraphs
Affidavit of Ms C
Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of Ms C
Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph 72 and Annexure
““[...C]W3”.
Affidavit of Mr HHHH filed on 18 March 2021, Annexure
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Exhibit 37; affidavit
of the first respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph 54.
Affidavit of Mr HHHH filed
on 18 March 2021, Annexure
Exhibit 19.
Affidavit of
Ms C Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of the first
respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of Mr Winnie
filed on 28 January 2021, paragraphs 6 and
Affidavit of Mr
Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, Annexure
Affidavit of Mr Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, Annexure
Affidavit of Mr Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of Mr
Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph 26.
Affidavit of Mr Winnie
filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph 33; affidavit of Ms C Winnie filed on 28
January 2021, paragraph 33.
Transcript 22 March 2021, p.78 line 44 to p.79 line
Affidavit of the
applicant filed on 18 November 2020, paragraph 58; Transcript 22 March 2021,
p.78 lines 44–45 and Transcript
23 March 2021, p.116 lines
Affidavit of Mr Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph 30; affidavit of
Ms C Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of Ms C Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of Mr Winnie
filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of Mr Winnie
filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of Mr JJJJ
filed on 18 March 2021, Annexure
Affidavit of Ms C Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of Ms C
Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraphs
of the first respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraphs 53 and
Affidavit of Mr
Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraphs
of Ms C Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraphs
Affidavit of Mr
Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of Ms C
Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
Affidavit of Mr
Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph
[2012] HCA 52
(2012) 247 CLR
See, for example,
Prinsep v Prinsep
[1929] P 225
Young v Young (No 1)
[1962] P 27
Meller v Meller
(1967) 10 FLR 12
Hargreaves v Hargreaves
[1990] FamCA 157
Justice Peter
Section 85A: Is it of much use?
(1986) 1 AJFL 10
[1970] 1 WLR 155
Ascot Investments Pty Ltd v Harper
(1981) 148 CLR 337
R v Ross-Jones; Ex parte Green
156 CLR 82.
See, for example, French CJ at [66] and [69] and Gummow & Hayne JJ at
Exhibits 15 and
Affidavit of the
fourth respondent filed on 19 March 2021, Annexure
“[...C]W4”.
Omacini & Omacini
[2005] FamCAFC 104
(2005) FLC 93-218
Mayne & Mayne
[2011] FamCAFC 192
Trevi & Trevi
[2018] FamCAFC 173
(2018) FLC 93-858
Affidavit of
Mr Winnie filed on 28 January 2021, paragraphs 3 and
See, for example,
affidavit of the first respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraphs
26 March 2021, p.49.
Affidavit of the first respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraph 45; and
affidavit of the fourth respondent filed on 28 January
2021, paragraphs
of first respondent filed on 28 January 2021, paragraphs 6 and
See, for example,
Woodcock v Woodcock
[1997] FamCA 5
(1997) FLC 92-739
Woodland and Todd
[2005] FamCA 161
Rollings & Rollings
[2009] FamCAFC
[2019] HCA 29
(2019) 372 ALR
RTF format (985 KB)
Signed PDF/A format