Zhang v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs [2021] FCCA 2030 (27 August 2021)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Zhang v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2021] FCCA 2030
File number(s):
BRG 379 of 2020
Judgment of:
JUDGE JARRETT
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Migration ––
Student (Temporary) (Class TU) (Subclass 500) visa – extension of time
– dismissed with
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth), cl 500.212
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
18 March, 2021
Date of hearing:
18 March, 2021
The Applicants:
Solicitor for the Respondents:
Sparke Helmore
BRG 379 of 2020
YUEYING WANG
Second Applicant
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP, MIGRANT
SERVICES AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
JUDGE JARRETT
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The application for an extension of time filed on 28 May, 2020 is
2. The second applicant pay the first respondent’s costs of and
incidental to the application fixed in the sum of $3,737.
REASONS FOR
JUDGE JARRETT:
1 By their application filed on 2 July, 2020 the applicants seek an extension
of time pursuant to
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) within which
they seek judicial review of a decision of the second respondent made on 12
March, 2020. That decision affirmed
a decision of a delegate of the first
respondent to refuse to grant the applicants Student (Temporary) (Class TU)
(Subclass 500)
2 The second applicant was the primary applicant for the visa and the first
applicant applied for a visa on that basis of his membership
of the second
applicant’s family group.
3 The first respondent submits that the application for an extension of time
should be refused with costs because the proposed application
for judicial
review is not sufficiently arguable to make it necessary in the interests of the
administration of justice to extend
4 The second applicant is a citizen of China. She
arrived in Australia on 4 August, 2018 as a dependant on her husband’s
Skill (Subclass GK) (Subclass 482) visa.
5 On 29 March, 2019 she applied for a Student (Temporary) (Class TU)
(Subclass 500) visa based on her enrolment in a Diploma of Leadership
Management that was due to commence on 15 April, 2019 and conclude on 12 April,
2020. Her husband, the first applicant, was
included in the application as a
6 On 3 June, 2019 a delegate of the first respondent refused to grant the
applicant her visa on the basis that she did not meet cl.500.212
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth). The delegate was not satisfied that
the second applicant intended genuinely to stay temporarily in Australia.
7 On 22 June, 2019 the applicants applied to the second respondent for review
of the delegate’s decision. On 27 November, 2019
the second respondent
invited the second applicant to provide certain information concerning her
application. The second applicant
responded to that request by submitting a
completed “Request for Student Visa Information” form.
8 Because the second respondent could not make a decision favourable to the
applicants on the review application on the papers, on
11 February, 2020 it
invited the applicants to attend a hearing scheduled for 12 March, 2020. On
that day the applicants appeared
before the second respondent to give evidence
and present arguments. They were assisted by an interpreter in the Mandarin and
languages. At the conclusion of the hearing, the second respondent gave
an oral decision and affirmed the delegate’s decision
not to grant the
applicants the visa.
9 On 16 July, 2020 the second respondent published written reasons for its
decision. In those reasons the second respondent recorded
that the issue before
it was whether the second applicant intended genuinely to stay in Australia
temporarily. It recorded that
it put to the second applicant the contents of
the Provider Registration International Student Management System record
concerning the second applicant’s study.
10 The second respondent expressed concerns about the fact that the second
applicant was absent for at least a two-month period during
term time, for
which, on her own evidence, she did not have a leave of absence. When the
second applicant was asked to explain the
details of her studies, she was unable
to answer accurately the number of units she needed to complete so as to finish
or the number of face-to-face hours per week she undertook. While
the second applicant was able to nominate the nature of one subject
relating to
customer service, she was unable to nominate the name of any of the courses or
units she was undertaking other than to
say they related to leadership and
management, which was self-evident from the title of the course. The second
respondent put to
the second applicant that it appeared that the second
applicant had left her studies to attend to her grandmother in China and that,
in circumstances where she had not been granted a greater leave of absence, she
merely returned to Australia, did not resume her
studies and awaited the outcome
of the second respondent’s decision. The second respondent put to the
second applicant that
her conduct was indicative of an intention to remain in
Australia. The second applicant was unable to offer any contrary argument
that other than to say that her husband was still working and that was the
reason why they were staying in Australia.
11 The second respondent put to the second applicant that as her course was
due to finish in April, perhaps it was reasonable for
the second respondent to
think that arrangements had been made to return to China. But the second
applicant indicated that no such
plans had yet been made, suggesting that the
issue of the COVID-19 pandemic, which has caused great consternation around the
delayed her plans to return. In that regard, the second respondent
suggested that as Chinese citizens, if it was their intention
to return to
China, they could indeed travel home and would be subject to a quarantine
period. But they could return home. The
second applicant told the second
respondent that the situation was that her husband was still working and for
that reason plans had
not yet been made.
12 The second respondent had regard to the matters set out in
“Direction 69”, the material put before it by the applicants
things said by the applicants in the hearing and found that:
(a) there was advantage to the second applicant in
studying in an English-speaking country. However, in circumstances where she
undertaking her classes in Mandarin and was unable to explain the content of
such classes, the second applicant’s reasons for
studying attracted little
(b) the second applicant was unable to describe her studies in any detail;
(c) nor was the second applicant able to provide any sufficient or significant
detail concerning her intended course of study;
(d) the second applicant had not returned to China on the cessation of her
previous visa;
(e) the second applicant had ties in Australia by way of her husband. While it
accepted that the second applicant had initially
come to Australia to support
her husband, it considered that if it had really been their intention to return
to China, they would
have done so on the cessation of the previous visa;
(f) the second applicant’s conduct in remaining in Australia where her
husband continued to work did not manifest her intention
to return to China;
(g) there was no significant incentive for the second applicant to return to
13 Further, the second respondent recorded that the reasons stated in the
application for the second applicant’s studies no
longer appeared to be
valid. In circumstances where the second applicant’s evidence was that
she was likely to seek employment
with her father, where it was unnecessary to
have the Diploma for which she was enrolled, the second respondent considered
undertaking of the studies was not to aid the second applicant to
obtain employment or improve employment prospects in China. For
reasons, the second respondent considered that the course was not relevant to
her past employment as a preschool teacher
or her proposed future
employment.
14 The second respondent recorded that the second applicant had been in
Australia for approximately one year and seven months, during
which she had been
absent for 13 weeks. It recorded that she had previously been refused a visitor
visa, but that there was no evidence
to suggest that any previous visas had been
cancelled or that she had failed to comply with her visa conditions.
15 The second respondent concluded that:
(a) the second applicant’s studies were not being
undertaken for genuine purposes but rather, so that the applicants could remain
in Australia;
(b) the visa application was for reasons other than genuine student
(c) the reason for the visa application was to extend the applicants’ time
in Australia;
(d) the applicants’ use of the visa was to circumvent the intentions of
the migration program; and
(e) the visa was being used to maintain ongoing residence in
16 Consequently, the second respondent was not satisfied that the second
applicant was a genuine applicant for entry and stay as a
student, as required
by cl.500.212 of the Regulations.
THE APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
17 The applicants need an extension of time to
pursue their applications for review. They make application for that extension.
application ordinarily needs to be made within 35 days of the decision being
made. The court might extend that period if it is satisfied
necessary in the interests of the administration of justice to do so.
18 As the first respondent submits, it is well-settled that the factors to be
taken into account when considering whether an extension
of time should be
granted include: the extent of the delay; the explanation for the delay; any
prejudice a respondent might suffer
because of the delay; and, the merits of the
proposed grounds. To that list I would add the prejudice likely to be suffered
applicants if the extension was refused. The proposed substantive
application should have such prospects of success as not to render
the extension
of time an exercise in futility. If an application has no prospect of success,
an extension of time, even for a short
period, may be refused.
19 Here, the delay is 77 days. I accept that is a significant delay. In
their application, the applicants state that the delay was
Coronavirus”. The second applicant has filed an affidavit in support of
her application. But it does not
contain any explanation for the delay or why
it is necessary in the interests of the administration of justice to extend
does not expand upon the delay “caused by Coronavirus”.
She did not expand upon that in oral submissions before me.
20 Without more, I cannot be satisfied that any delay was “caused by
Coronavirus”. As the first respondent submits, it
is unclear how the
COVID-19 pandemic prevented the applicants from seeking judicial review within
the prescribed period.
21 The second matter said to be a ground for the extension of time is
“I believe this could help the administration of justice
could have more
time to make an informed decision”, but this really has no meaning. The
second applicant did not expand upon
it in the hearing before me.
22 The first respondent properly concedes that there is no and would not be
any specific prejudice to the first respondent, beyond
the public interest in
the finality of administrative decision making if the extension was granted.
23 The proposed ground of review that the second respondent wishes to pursue
is in these terms (faithfully reproduced):
1. There are other evidences that the tribunal did not
take into consideration.
2. We are unable to travel back to China due to the limited flights cause by the
coronavirus.
3. Our family needs me to return to China after I finish my study in
24 Even at an impressionistic level, none of these grounds are capable of
demonstrating jurisdictional error by the second respondent
on the facts of this
25 As it recorded at [13] of its reasons, the second respondent specifically
had regard to “all the information supplied to
the Department of Home
Affairs with the visa application and all the information supplied to the second
respondent by the second
applicant”. It had regard to the matters put by
the applicants at the hearing before the second respondent. At the hearing
before me, the second applicant did not identify anything in particular that the
second respondent had not considered. The matters
considered by the second
respondent were plainly relevant to the issue at hand.
26 The second ground is not a ground which, even if made out on the evidence,
demonstrates jurisdictional error by the second respondent.
In any event, the
second respondent considered the second applicant’s claim that she had not
yet made plans to return to China
by reason of the COVID-19 pandemic. The
second applicant accepted that, as Chinese citizens, she and her husband could
China and quarantine for the relevant period.
27 The third ground proposed by the applicants is also incapable in my view
of establishing error on the part of the second respondent.
28 The second respondent’s findings that I have set out above were
clearly open to it. The conclusions that it reached based
upon those findings
were reasonable (in the legal sense) and the way in which it reached those
conclusions is clearly expressed in
the reasons delivered by the second
respondent.
29 At the hearing before me, the second applicant
was unable to articulate any error in the second respondent’s decision.
submissions to me confirmed that she was simply interested in remaining in
30 I am not satisfied that it is in the interests of the administration of
justice for there to be an extension of time within which
the applicants might
apply to review the second respondent’s decision in this case. The
proposed grounds of review do not
disclose sufficient merit, even at an
impressionistic level, to warrant an extension of time. Moreover, the delay in
this application for an extension of time and the lack of any
explanation for that delay militates against an exercise of the relevant
discretion in favour of the applicants.
31 Accordingly, the application for an extension of time is dismissed with
costs fixed in the amount sought by the first respondent.
I certify that the preceding thirty-one (31)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge Jarrett
on 27 August, 2021.
Dated: 27 August 2021
RTF format (334 KB)
Signed PDF/A format