URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1963/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:03:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Teubner v Humble [1963] HCA 11; (1963) 108 CLR 491 (10 April 1963)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
TEUBNER v. HUMBLE
[1963] HCA 11
; (1963) 108 CLR 491
High Court of Australia
Dixon C.J.(1), McTiernan(2), Windeyer(3) and Owen(4) JJ.
Damages - Negligence - Pedestrian struck by motor car - Both parties negligent
- Apportionment of responsibilty.
Adelaide, 1962, October 5;
Sydney, 1963, April 10. 10:4:1963
APPEAL from the Supreme Court of South Australia.
1963, April 10.
The following written judgments were delivered:-
DIXON C.J. This appeal is from a judgment of the Supreme Court of South
the plaintiff in an accident which occurred at about 11.30
p.m. on 12th May
1960. (at p492)
2. The case comes to us in an unusual form. A trial of the action took place
before the late Brazel J., beginning on 16th August
1961. His Honour reserved
judgment but unfortunately died, not having delivered judgment. The action was
then put down for retrial
before Chamberlain J. from whose judgment this
appeal comes. The parties agreed that the evidence should not be recalled and
themselves with putting the transcript of the evidence taken before
Brazel J. before Chamberlain J. His Honour therefore did not
see the witnesses
but decided the case on the transcript of the evidence. A further difficulty
in the case is that the plaintiff's
injuries were of such a character that at
neither trial was he capable of giving evidence and his account of the
accident has not
been placed before the Courts. (at p492)
3. The circumstances of the accident, too, are unusual. The plaintiff was a
senior photographer, indeed it is said that he was the
head photographer, for
the Adelaide newspaper called "The News". On the day of the accident, namely
12th May 1960, a violent storm
occurred in Adelaide and the plaintiff was sent
late that day to take pictures for his newspaper of the difficulties and
devastation
caused by the storm, particularly along the coast. For that
purpose at about 10 p.m. he took a taxicab from North Terrace and drove
Largs Bay by way of Port Adelaide. On his journey back he saw a sheet of water
lying on the road through which motor traffic was
ploughing. The plaintiff
seems to have thought that this scene would provide him with material for his
newspaper, the taxi was stopped
and he took photographs. The sheet of water is
described as lying on the road in Shierlaw Terrace near Hindmarsh Bridge. The
was pulled up on the other side of the road from the sheet of water. It
parked on the eastern side, near the corner of Winwood Street
which runs west.
Shierlaw Terrace seems to be a chain wide and carries four lanes of traffic.
The plaintiff occupied somewhat over
a quarter of an hour in taking
photographs and then went to cross back to the taxi. The evidence appears to
show that it was raining
though not as heavily as it had been ; the street
lights ought to have been sufficient to show up the plaintiff. However, in
the street the plaintiff was struck by the defendant's car. (at p493)
4. The plaintiff was not called as a witness ; the accident was described by
others. The driver of the taxi said that he took the
plaintiff as a passenger
on the night of 12th May. He was not sure at what time he picked him up but it
was possibly half-past nine
or ten. He went from North Terrace where he had
picked him up, through the Port and down along the seashore to Largs Bay. The
took a few pictures of the storm damage on the seashore. They then
came back to the Port. The plaintiff took some more pictures in
St. Vincent
Street and after making some further enquiries about storm damage, the
plaintiff re-entered the taxi and was driven back
towards the city along the
Port Road. He stopped at Southwark and parked at the corner of the street
named Winwood Street on the
north-west corner. The plaintiff got out of the
car with his camera and went across the road to a very large area of water
across the Port Road. He had an overcoat on of dark grey material.
The time was about 11 p.m. There was, the witness thought, a light
taxi and a light twenty or thirty yards behind him. The witness described the
plaintiff's movements as he took photographs
and then said that the plaintiff
looked as if he was finished and started to walk across the road with his
camera in his hand. The
plaintiff got to the middle of the road, the witness
looked to his front and then heard a crash. He looked out, the plaintiff was
lying in the middle of the road, his camera was flying along the road in front
of him towards the witness. He saw a car going by
them, moving north. Through
his radio the witness sent a message to his base and told them to send an
ambulance in a hurry. He got
out of his taxi. He saw another car going
straight past. There were lights on the car but the witness did not care to
say what lights
they were. He found the plaintiff lying face down on the road,
his head to the north. His leg was twisted under him. He was lying
just off the line down the middle of the road, twenty yards back from the
taxicab. An ambulance arrived and police took
statements from people there.
The witness spoke to the driver of the other car, that is the defendant. He
said he was the driver
of the vehicle involved and he just said he had not
seen the plaintiff crossing the road. To the question, "Did you believe he"
plaintiff) "was doing something dangerous ?" the witness answered, "No.
Just crossing the road. It was raining very lightly." (at
5. It appears from the evidence that the photographs that the plaintiff took
were of cars going towards the city. He apparently
wanted photographs of cars
ploughing through the water. The tendency of the cars was to pull towards the
centre of the road to get
out of it, that is to say, to the right-hand of the
traffic as it went to Adelaide. As a result of the accident the photographs
lost and apparently were never developed. The plaintiff seems to have
been hit by the defendant's car on his left-hand side. His
injuries were very
serious and he was taken to the Adelaide Hospital. (at p494)
6. A constable of police arrived at the scene of the accident about a quarter
to twelve midnight and saw the defendant there, the
plaintiff having been by
that time moved. The defendant said to the constable that his speed before the
accident was between 20 and
25 m.p.h., that he wore spectacles, that with
spectacles his eyesight was normal and that he was wearing spectacles at the
the accident. He had received a driving test on the very day of the
accident, 12th May 1960. He had been driving in a northerly direction
time of the accident about ten feet from the western kerb. He said his
windscreen wipers were working and his lights were
working, and that the
plaintiff was about ten to twelve feet away from the vehicle when he came into
view in the light of the headlights
of his car. He told the constable that the
man rolled along the bonnet of his car and the windscreen broke and the man
appeared to
fall from the car to the road, along-side the defendant's side of
the car. The constable asked him about stopping and the defendant
eased, then went on. (at p495)
7. Another constable who attended the scene of the accident at approximately
midnight said that he talked to the defendant only
and he prepared a sketch plan on what the defendant said. There were no marks
to guide him. This showed
the camera as it lay in the road about thirty feet
south from the notional extension of the kerb of Winwood Street and about
feet from the west kerb in Port Road. The witness saw no brake or
skid marks. At that time it was still raining heavily. (at p495)
8. At the end of the plaintiff's case the defendant gave evidence. He said
that his car was a Morris Oxford. He himself was seventy-five
years of age and
until very recently his eyesight had been good and then he changed his
spectacles. At the time of the accident his
vision was good. He had been to a
police test in the morning. He had been at a Bowling Club that night. He had
had no alcohol. He
had been invited by a friend to join him in a cup of coffee
at his home at Wood Street, Millswood, and on leaving his friend's house
had re-entered his car which had been parked in the driveway and had proceeded
from there to the point of the accident. He saw
a man near the front of his
car at a point approximately seven to eight feet from his own sitting position
and roughly fifteen to
twenty degrees on his right. The witness went on to say
: "Slightly to the right of my course he was. The next instant I found his
hat, a felt one, drawn over his head, and he was holding the collar of his
coat" (the witness indicated by turning up the left lapel
of his coat and
holding his head down). "He was in that position, hurrying, when I struck him
to slide over the front corner, the top
of the lamp, he was struck" (indicating) "and he fell to the ground and a
wheel passed over
him. Front wheel I presume. I am not very clear on that
point. I felt a bump. Soon another object, which I did not know nothing of
that time, bounced on the bonnet and crashed the windscreen. It went across in
front of me. I saw a camera on the road after. I believe
now it was a camera
that I saw bounce on the bonnet. I was travelling about twenty m.p.h., not
more." In answer to a question, "Did
you have headlights on", the witness
said, "I think I must have. I had lights on on the car, but which they were I
do not know. I
would normally have the ordinary headlights on, on low beam."
He said that it was raining and that his windscreen wiper would be
The nearside of his car was about ten or twelve feet out from the kerb. He
said he was at his friend's place for probably
three-quarters of an hour. The
accident was at half-past eleven or a little later. (at p496)
9. In cross-examination the witness said that he did not see the plaintiff
cross the double line on the road. He was asked could
he see to his right at
all through the window of his car and he replied, "No". A little earlier,
after turning into Port Road, he
had closed the side window. He had had it
open all the way. He had closed it to get a little extra comfort. Immediately
the car fogged
up. He had to open it again and wipe the inside of the glass
all round. He closed the window just after turning from the "Police
around the corner. He had to open it again almost immediately. Immediately
prior to the accident it was open. He closed
it a few hundred yards previous
to the accident. It then fogged up. He opened it again. Immediately after the
accident that window
was open. "If there was no fog on the window I could see
through it if I wanted to." He said that looking ahead practically the only
clear view he had was through the semicircle made by the windscreen wiper ;
that he did not expect anyone to come from the right
at that particular part.
He remembered making a statement to an insurance adjuster some time after the
accident in which he said,
"I presume I had my headlights burning, but it has
been worrying me that I may have only had my dimmers on." Cross-examining
asked, "On thinking it over afterwards you were not quite sure whether
you had your headlights or dimmers on?" Witness answered,
"That is so. I am
still not quite sure. It might have been the alternative lights, the road
lights." By way of explanation the witness
said, "With the stress of an
accident like that, it turns over in your mind all the time. . . . I would
naturally think under normal
circumstances I would have been able to see a lot
more with the road lights. The night being dark and stormy, the lights were
to what they were on an ordinary clear night. My reckoning of it, I
came to the conclusion lights were not as bright as they would
be on a normal
night. I was not quite sure whether it was because of only having dimmers on.
It was more or less a point of conversation."
10. The plaintiff was unable to give evidence and the medical evidence showed
that when he came into the hospital he was deeply
unconscious, the right limbs
were twitching, the left ones were in spasm, the left hip socket was
fractured, the left thigh was fractured
in the upper part of the shaft with
widely displaced bone ends. His condition was extremely serious. No major
surgical procedure
was carried out so far as the head injury was concerned.
The fracture of the thigh was treated but the patient was extremely irrational
and lashed about with his active limbs, the bone ends came near to piercing
the skin and it was decided that operative fixation of
the fracture must be
undertaken. There is no point in enumerating his injuries or describing his
present condition. It is sufficient
to say that he had no memory of the
accident and in any case was not able to give evidence. Chamberlain J. said
the first the defendant
saw of the plaintiff was when he was seven to eight
feet from him and some fifteen to twenty degrees to his right. He had his hat
on and was holding up the left lapel of his coat evidently to protect his face
from the rain, and looking down, and was hurrying,
although the defendant did
not claim to know if he was running. The plaintiff was struck by the offside
headlight and was thrown
up on to the bonnet where either he or his camera
broke the windscreen. He fell on to the roadway and was run over by a wheel of
the car. The defendant's version was that he was travelling at a speed of
between twenty and twenty-five m.p.h. about twelve feet
out from the western
kerb alignment so as to keep clear of parked vehicles and that he was keeping
what he believed to be a proper
lookout. "I see no reason to doubt any of
this. However, he made two admissions on which Dr. Bray has placed great
reliance. In the
first place, approaching the scene, he was not conscious of
the presence of a street light and in fact he believed that because of
lateness of the hour the lights were off. In the second place, some time after
the accident he had made a statement to an insurance
adjuster (representing a
conflicting interest) in which he expressed some doubt as to whether he had
his headlights alight or merely
his parking lights" (1962) SASR, at pp 119-120
. (at p497)
11. His Honour found that the defendant and the plaintiff were each guilty of
negligence contributing to the results which followed.
He then proceeded to
deal with the apportionment of damages to give effect to the language of the
statute which required that the
plaintiff's damages should be reduced to such
extent as is just and equitable having regard to his share in the
responsibility for
the damage. He said, "The apportionment is between, on the
one side, a defendant driving at a very modest speed, and keeping what
no doubt he believed to be an adequate lookout in difficult circumstances, but
failing through some unconscious lapse in perception
to see a pedestrian whom
I am obliged to hold that a reasonably vigilant driver would have seen, and on
the other side a plaintiff
absorbed in his own and his employer's affairs and
in protecting himself from the weather, for the moment forgetful of his own
(1962) SASR, at p 120 . His Honour said, "I think that the plaintiff
was clearly guilty of contributory negligence such as would
have defeated his
action at common law. He set out to cross a busy highway in conditions of
difficult visibility, from a point where
pedestrian traffic would be highly
unlikely, and proceeded without any real regard to his own safety. Whatever
lights were showing
from the defendant's car, if the plaintiff had given even
an ordinary glance to his left before stepping on to the down track, he
have seen its approach and waited for it to pass. The defendant's negligence
was of a different order. The most that can be
said against him is that he
failed to see a pedestrian whom a vigilant driver should have seen. Assuming
that he was travelling at
was walking, he would have been about eighty yards away when the plaintiff
the eastern side of the road. The plaintiff should have been in his view
if he had looked sufficiently carefully, for a substantial
part of this
distance. When the plaintiff was five yards from the point where he was
struck, the defendant's car would have been
forty yards away, which at his
speed would have given him three or four seconds in which to apply his brakes
or move to the left.
In these circumstances I think he must be held guilty of
negligence, but there are a number of things that mitigate the degree of
culpability" (1962) SASR, at p 121 . His Honour then mentions the fact that it
would be at least unexpected for a pedestrian
to walk into his path from the
other track. Next, that the plaintiff was wearing a coat which when wet would
have had a tendency
to merge into the landscape. His Honour referred then to
the care required of a driver of a motor vehicle as compared with that
of a pedestrian according to certain authorities. His Honour ends
this discussion by saying, "The defendant's departure from the
standard of
care of the reasonable man was relatively slight, the plaintiff's neglect of
his own safety verged on the suicidal" (1962)
SASR, at p 122 . His Honour
found that the responsibility for the damage should be apportioned equally
between the plaintiff and
the defendant. His Honour fixed the general damages
at 5,000 pounds for pain and suffering and 6,000 pounds for what may be called
economic loss, special damages at 1,724 pounds 13s. 0d. and loss of wages at
8,695 pounds 4s. 0d. The total of damages was therefore
21,419 pounds 17s. 0d.
His Honour reduced this by half and awarded 10,790 pounds 18s. 6d. (at p498)
12. I find myself unable to agree in his Honour's observations or in the
apportionment. It must be remembered that we are not dealing
with a case in
which the learned judge appealed from had before him oral evidence by
witnesses whom he saw and heard. It is a question
of what appears from a
transcript and what conclusions should be reached. It seems to me to be going
too far to say that the plaintiff
is shown to have been almost suicidal in
what he did. All he did was to attempt to cross a road on a wet night. It was
for him to get to the other side where his taxi was and when he had,
as evidently he thought, got on to the further side of the road
advancing traffic he pulled up the lapel of his coat to shield his face from
the rain. It appears to be an ordinary case
of a motorist failing to see a
pedestrian who was in his path but in conditions where visibility was
difficult. No doubt the burden
must fall on us under s. 27a (3) of the Wrongs
Act 1936-1959 to assess the degrees of culpability on which the apportionment
rest. It is rather remarkable that his Honour should express himself so
strongly about the degree of culpability of the pedestrian
and still more
remarkable that he should nevertheless apportion the damages equally. On the
whole I think that the apportionment
should be one-third to the plaintiff and
two-thirds to the defendant. (at p499)
13. As to the quantum of damages, I am prepared to accept the figure proposed
by Windeyer J. (at p499)
McTIERNAN J. I agree in the reasons and in the conclusion of Windeyer J. (at
WINDEYER J. This case comes to this Court as an appeal from a judgment of
Chamberlain J. in an action, a running down case, in the
Supreme Court of
South Australia Teubner v. Humble (1962) SASR 117 . The appellant was the
plaintiff in the action. The trial took
place before Brazel J., who reserved
his decision, and died without delivering it. The action then came on again
for hearing before
Chamberlain J. who, with the assent of the parties, read
the transcript of the evidence given before Brazel J. The witnesses were
recalled. This necessarily placed his Honour in some difficulty. He was asked
to draw inferences of fact, to decide a contested
issue of negligence and to
determine degrees of negligence without hearing any witness. The disadvantages
are now obvious. We have
to hear an appeal on a question of fact without
having the benefit of the opinion of any judge who heard the witnesses. The
taken, although understandable, was undesirable: Bolton v. Bolton
(1949) 2 All ER 908 . But the recent decision of the Privy Council
Chee Chor v. Chua Kim Yong (1963) 1 All ER 102 had, of course, not been given
when this case was before his Honour; and the
parties made no objection to the
course taken. They apparently desired it. Although his Honour had no more
material than we have
on which to come to a conclusion, yet the case comes to
us as an appeal from his decision. We must, therefore, approach it by
considering
what his findings were and his reasons for them. His Honour's
conclusions both on the issue of liability and as to damages are attacked
both parties. (at p500)
2. The essential facts are simple. The respondent was driving his motor car
late at night in a northerly direction along the Port
Road near Adelaide. The
car came into collision with the plaintiff, who was crossing the road on foot
from east to west. The respondent
is said to have been driving at twenty or
twenty-five miles per hour. It was a wet night and visibility was much below
normal. There
had been a violent storm some time earlier, and the plaintiff, a
press photographer, had gone in a taxi cab to Largs Bay to take
photographs of
storm damage there. On his way back he noticed a large sheet of water on the
road near the Hindmarsh Bridge. He had
the taxi stop, and crossed the road to
take photographs of cars splashing through the water. He had been there for
of an hour when he set out to recross the road to where the
taxi was waiting. It was while doing so that he was hit. By reason of
injuries he has no recollection of the events and could give no evidence. The
respondent did not see him until just before the
front offside headlights of
the car hit him. He was wearing a dark overcoat with the collar turned up
against the weather. The headlights
of the car - a Morris sedan - were alight,
but whether they were on low beam, which would be usual, or were dimmed the
could not say with certainty. There was, it seems, nothing that
would have prevented him seeing the appellant sooner than he did
had he been
keeping a proper lookout, unless it was that mistiness on his windscreen
partly obscured his vision. It is not disputed
that his outlook was in fact
restricted by the rain, for he could see only through the parts of the
windscreen that were being kept
clear by the wipers. The inside of the
windscreen also was constantly becoming fogged; and in the course of his
journey he had more
than once opened the side window and wiped the inside of
the windscreen to clear it. Indeed he had opened the window only just before
the accident; he "might",he said, "have travelled a hundred feet or so"
afterwards. So that within a matter of seconds before the
collision his
attention and his outlook had apparently been somewhat diverted to the side
window and the state of the windscreen.
There was a street light near where
the accident occurred. And the appellant is said to have been standing in the
light of it when
he went to cross the road. It may be that, if the
respondent's headlights were shining brightly, the street light did not aid,
may even have hindered his seeing the appellant in time; for it is a fact
that in certain circumstances objects on a lighted roadway
are sometimes not
seen so soon in the headlights of a car as they would be if there were no
competing illumination. I do not regard
the street lighting as necessarily so
important in the appellant's favour as counsel suggested. (at p501)
3. His Honour thought both parties were negligent and that the damages that
the appellant suffered should therefore be apportioned.
He expressed his
conclusion as follows: "The apportionment is between, on the one side, a
defendant driving at a very modest speed,
and keeping what I have no doubt he
believed to be an adequate lookout in difficult circumstances, but failing
through some unconscious
lapse in perception to see a pedestrian whom I am
obliged to hold that a reasonably vigilant driver would have seen, and on the
side a plaintiff absorbed in his own and his employer's affairs and in
protecting himself from the weather, for the moment forgetful
safety" (1962) SASR, at p 120 . (at p501)
4. In the upshot his Honour decided that the damage should be apportioned
equally. He assessed the appellant's damages at 21,419
pounds 17s. 0d.; and
as, according to his finding, the appellant had to bear half of this himself,
he entered judgment for him for
10,709 pounds 18s. 6d. The appellant complains
that the assessment is inadequate and complains too of the apportionment in
shares. The respondent, by cross-appeal, contends that the respondent
was not guilty of any negligence, alternatively that the appellant's
responsibility was greater than that of the respondent, indeed that the
appellant's negligence was the sole effective cause of the
accident, and that
the assessment of damages was excessive. (at p501)
5. I agree with his Honour's conclusion that the respondent was negligent,
and that his negligence was an effective cause of the
accident. The case is
not at all like one in which a pedestrian walks from among vehicles on a busy
street into the path of an oncoming
car. In a case of that sort, if nothing
more be known, the pedestrian may sometimes fail in an action, either because
proved his case or because, his own negligence was the sole cause,
in a legal sense, of the accident. But here, whatever the explanation
respondent's failure to see the appellant in time to avoid hitting him - a
blurred windscreen, driving too fast in weather
conditions that imposed a
special need for caution, or mere inattention - it is, I think, more probable
than not that he was not
keeping a proper lookout in the circumstances and
that this negligence was a cause of the accident. (at p502)
6. Turning to the conduct of the appellant, his Honour held that he was
himself responsible to a serious degree for his injuries.
What he said was:
"The defendant's departure from the standard of care of the reasonable man was
relatively slight, the plaintiff's
neglect of his own safety verged on the
suicidal" (1962) SASR, at p 122 . Yet he found them equally at fault and
apportioned responsibility
equally. I find it hard to reconcile what he said
with what he decided. It may be that the expressions he used were prompted by
opinion expressed in relation to arguments addressed to him as to the
operation of s. 27a of the Wrongs Act (S.A.). In that connexion
he said that
"the plaintiff was clearly guilty of contributory negligence such as would
have defeated his action at common law" (1962)
SASR, at p 121 . I do not think
this is so. Moreover, I entirely agree with his Honour that this conclusion
was not necessary to
attract the operation of the Wrongs Act. The doctrine of
last opportunity, which again we heard mentioned, has really no application:
see Chapman v. Hearse
[1961] HCA 46
; (1961) 106 CLR 112, at pp 122-124 . I do not agree with
the suggestion that his Honour misconstrued
Act. I think he did
not; but his condemnation of the appellant's conduct seems over vigorous and
his description of the
respondent's
fault too mild to
justify his
apportionment of responsibility. The view that I have formed of the events of
is that, while
the appellant
is not to be acquitted of all
responsibility for the accident, there was no evidence that he was reckless
safety. It may
be that if he had been watching attentively and seen
the lights of the respondent's car, he would not have
to cross the
when he did. It is reasonable to conclude that he was imprudent. And it
is possible that, as was suggested,
did not stop to look
and did not notice
the car because he was hurrying to get back to the taxi to escape from the wet
to the newspaper office
with his photographs. But there is no sure
ground for deciding that this was so. He may have seen the
miscalculated the time
and space factors involved in getting across in front
of it, or assumed that the driver would see
and swerve out to pass him.
7. How then should the damages be apportioned? For myself, I always find
difficulty in the apportionment that the statute requires.
I am reluctant not
to accept the views of those who have had more experience of the system than I
have, although I confess I have
at times been surprised at the nicety of the
fractions in which they have been able to calculate. I therefore hesitate to
from the opinion of the learned trial judge that the damages should be
borne equally. But, as I have said, this seems scarcely to
accord with his
description of the conduct of the parties; and that description does not
accord with my own view of the facts. I
think the respondent was more at fault
than was the appellant. I agree in the apportionment of two-thirds and
one-third proposed
by the Chief Justice. (at p503)
8. I should add that we were referred by counsel to a number of decisions in
other cases of road accidents. But decisions on the
facts of one case do not
really aid the determination of another case. Observations made by judges in
the course of deciding issues
of fact ought not to be treated as laying down
rules of law. Reports should not be ransacked and sentences apt to the facts
case extracted from their context and treated as propositions of
universal application that a pedestrian is always entitled, or that
is always obliged, to act in some particular way. That would lead to the
substitution of a number of rigid and particular
criteria for the essentially
flexible and general concept of negligence. Perhaps the tendency to this has
come about because so many
common law actions are now tried by judges instead
of by juries. Judges give reasons for their decisions and their reasons get
law reports; and lawyers, accustomed to arguing from precedents, are
inclined, as this case shows, to quote the reasons that one
judge has given
for his finding of fact in one case to other judges in other cases. Lord
Somervell and Lord Denning each referred
to the unfortunate consequences of
this in Qualcast (Wolverhampton) Ltd. v. Haynes (1959) AC 743, at pp 757-759 .
And I would respectfully
echo what their Lordships said, especially the
passage quoted from the judgment of du Parcq L.J. in Easson v. London & North
Railway Co. (1944) 1 KB 421 that, "There is a danger, particularly in
these days when few cases are tried by juries, of exalting
to the status of
propositions of law what really are particular applications to special facts
of propositions of ordinary good sense"
(1944) 1 KB, at p 426 . For these
reasons I refrain from discussing in detail the cases that were cited by Dr.
Bray. I would say
only that the statement that, as he put it, the motorist and
the pedestrian are on different planes in respect of negligence is,
likely to mislead. If it means only that the degree of care that must be
exercised in any operation varies with the risk
involved, this goes without
saying. The question is one of fact. I know of no relevant rule of law except
that a man driving a motor
car must act as a reasonable and prudent man
driving a motor car would act in the circumstances: and a pedestrian must act
a reasonable and prudent pedestrian in the circumstances. Whether or
not either has done or failed to do so is essentially a question
motor car does not become anything different from what it is by calling it "a
lethal weapon". Doing so may bring home,
if it be not sufficiently obvious,
that if the driver of a motor car does not drive carefully he may kill
somebody: whereas the carelessness
of a pedestrian is a carelessness for his
own safety rather than a disregard of the safety of others. But when both are
the question is how far in the circumstances did the motorist depart
from the standard of care of a reasonable man driving a motor
car, and the
pedestrian from the standard of care of a reasonable pedestrian. (at p504)
9. Turning to the damages. The consequences of the accident for the appellant
are sufficiently described by the learned trial judge
as follows: "The
accident has deprived him of everything that made his life worth living. He
has had a leg amputated and is partially
paralysed so that he has no prospect
of living elsewhere than in bed or a wheel chair. He requires constant nursing
attention. His
intellectual processes have been damaged so that he cannot
properly take in the meaning of a printed page, and he talks with some
difficulty. He has no possibility of future employment of any sort. The pain
and misery which he has suffered and will suffer in
the future are
incalculable, but it is somewhat reassuring to notice in the report of Dr.
Sangster, who examined him in June of this
year, that he does not complain of
pain except occasional spasmodic discomfort in the hip joint of his amputated
leg, and that he
sleeps well with the help of sedatives. Apparently he derives
some pleasure from the wireless and television and can carry on a reasonably
intelligent conversation. He has been an inmate of the Home for Incurables at
Fullarton since April of 1961 except for two visits
to the Royal Adelaide
Hospital for treatment and occasional visits to his home. The only future for
him is as an inmate of this institution.
Two of the three medical men whose
opinions are available think that his expectation of life has been reduced,
and I would feel no
doubt that this is so, although no-one has attempted to
estimate to what extent. It must, however, clearly be substantial" (1962)
SASR, at pp 122, 123 . (at p505)
10. His Honour's assessment of the damages at 21,419 pounds 17s. 0d.,
included 1,724 pounds 13s. 0d. special damages. The amount
he allowed for
general damages cannot be said to be clearly inconsistent with what one might
expect for the injuries suffered, having
regard to the general pattern of
awards of general damages for personal injuries. I strongly suspect that if
his Honour had not thought
that the plaintiff should bear half of the damage
himself we would never have heard a complaint that the assessment was
inadequate.
However, we are not to look at the figure simply as if it were a
jury's verdict. His Honour arrived at it by considering very carefully
amounts he should allow for various items or heads of damage and placed a
figure against each. It thus becomes necessary to notice
the processes of
calculation he adopted. Nevertheless, it is important to remember that an
amount to be awarded for general damages
is a single amount that is
appropriate in the circumstances of the case, and that it is not the sum of
rigidly separate and independent
items. So-called principles of assessment of
damages for personal injuries can be made the subject of almost endless
discussion.
The consequences of such injuries are not all susceptible of
evaluation in money, and seeming logic can be pushed too far. Some
"principles"
are much a matter of an individual approach to a particular case.
The conventional headings, economic loss, deprivation of amenities,
and suffering, provide a convenient reminder of matters that ought not to be
forgotten. But it is not always appropriate,
I think, to consider them as if
they were distinct items in a balance sheet; for one may overlap and impinge
upon another. (at p505)
11. Broadly speaking there are, it seems to me, three ways in which a
personal injury can give rise to damage: First, it may destroy
or diminish,
permanently or for a time, an existing capacity, mental or physical: Secondly,
it may create needs that would not otherwise
exist: Thirdly, it may produce
physical pain and suffering. (at p505)
12. In the first category there is usually one element that is, up to a
point, calculable by conventional means, namely the economic
loss that a
permanent or temporary destruction or diminution of earning capacity causes.
This is commonly called "loss of earnings",
sometimes "loss of working time".
There has recently been a good deal of discussion of these descriptions in
text books and articles.
I think that the damage arises really from the
destruction of a faculty or skill, and that this is the best way in which to
its assessment. The sum that might have been earned by the exercise
of a faculty or skill then becomes the measure of the economic
value to the
individual of the faculty or skill in respect of which he has been damaged.
The destruction or diminution of a faculty
has another, and non-economic,
result because of the deprivation of the ability to participate in normal
activities and thus to enjoy
life to the full and to take full advantage of
the opportunities that otherwise it might offer. This element is commonly and
conveniently
(but not, I think, very happily) called a "loss of amenities". It
results from the destruction or impairment of a faculty, just as
does "loss of
wages". But a man's labour and skill have a market value. He can sell them. So
that compensation for loss of capacity
to earn money is susceptible of
pecuniary assessment, although it is not precisely determinable because of the
uncertainties of the
future. But a man cannot sell his capacity for enjoyment.
It has no calculable monetary value. The destruction of the one is thus
think, to be compensated on the same principles as the destruction of the
other. An injured man is entitled, it seems to me,
to have monetary
compensation for whatever is the monetary loss attributable to his incapacity
to work for what, apart from the accident,
would have been the period of his
working life. It matters not that he may have been so injured that money has
no use for him. How
he may use, and whether he himself can use at all, the
money he gets as damages for loss of what he might have earned is immaterial.
But suppose a person deprived of all his powers of mental or physical
activity: Is he to have as damages for loss of enjoyments and
amenities a sum
that exceeds the utmost that can be used to provide for his nursing, and his
comfort, that is to have money that
he can never use, which can not be used
for his benefit, and which he cannot even dispose of by will for ex hypothesi
he has been
deprived of testamentary capacity? I have considered what has been
said in the reported cases about "objective" as against "subjective"
this connexion. But, until the matter be definitely concluded by a considered
judgment of this Court or by some authority
binding on us, I am not prepared
to accept the view that damages for loss of enjoyment, loss of amenities, can
properly exceed any
sum that the injured person can in any way enjoy or which
can be used to provide him with comforts or amenities. Damages are given
compensation to the injured man for his injuries. So far as his injuries
consist of loss of enjoyment, I do not see that money
that he cannot use and
which cannot be used for him, and the possession of which can mean nothing to
him, is compensation. This case
is, of course, not of that kind. I mention the
matter, however, because of some things that were said in the course of the
and to emphasize that, in my opinion, there is a clear distinction
between damages given because money that might have been earned
earned and damages given because life cannot be enjoyed as previously it was.
The former should, I consider, be based upon
what it is considered would have
been the probable duration of the injured man's working life if the accident
had not destroyed or
impaired his capacity for work. The latter are often
considered in relation to the time for which after the accident he is likely
to live and the ways in which money can actually be used by him or used for
his benefit. It is perhaps natural to think that when
cases of personal injury
are set alongside one another the more serious physical injuries should always
attract the highest damages.
I do not think this is necessarily so. Damages
are to be awarded as fair compensation to a particular individual. What is
his case is what has to be considered. (at p507)
13. Passing from considerations arising from faculties or capacities
destroyed or diminished to those arising from specific needs
created: In most
cases the most obvious of such needs are the cost of past and future medical
and nursing attention, and of special
equipment, crutches, a wheel chair and
such like. But the list is not closed. Any requirement which arises as a
consequence, and
a not too remote consequence, of the injury, can I think be
considered. In the present case his Honour thought that the cost of
alterations
at the appellant's home, which would facilitate his staying there
on visits from the institution of which for most of his time he
inmate, should be allowed. There was no reason, I think, why that should not
be so. The main difficulty in assessing damages
for needs created is in the
impossibility of surely predicting the future. What medical attention is
likely to be needed, for how
long the injured man is likely to live - these
are things that can only be estimated. (at p507)
14. Pain and suffering fall into another category. What is usually
contemplated by the description is actual physical pain. Of all
damage this is perhaps the one that is least susceptible of monetary
assessment. But in so far as the possession of money
can in a particular case
give pleasure or provide comfort, money can properly be said to compensate for
pain and suffering. It is
of some importance that persons who calculate
damages under separate heads should bear in mind that the distress of mind and
feeling of frustration that come from an incapacity to take part in
activities are often spoken of as involved in "loss of amenities".
are not to be introduced again under the heading "pain and suffering". This
merely illustrates that, as I have said, damages
that result from personal
injuries cannot ultimately be regarded as made up of completely separate
components. I would add that I
appreciate Dr. Bray's contention that the
appellant's worry and anxiety that he is not able to provide for his wife and
a consequence of the accident. But to regard them as entering
directly into the calculation of damages would, I think, be a serious
The worry and anxiety arise because he has lost an economic capacity, his
ability to earn money. That loss is to be compensated
for by giving him such
sum as it appears reasonably represents what but for the accident he probably
would have earned. (at p508)
15. With these considerations in mind, I turn to the facts of this case and
the method his Honour adopted in making his assessment.
His Honour first took
the economic factor, which he described as "loss of wages, actual and
prospective" (1962) SASR, at p 123 .
He took into account in mitigation of
this the amount that the appellant actually received from his employer after
the accident for
a period during which he remained on the pay-roll. In this he
was, I consider, obviously quite right, having regard to the evidence
recent pronouncements of this Court. The criticism of his assessment at this
point fails. A more substantial criticism is of
the way in which he dealt with
prospective future earnings. The appellant was aged fifty years and seven
months at the date of the
accident. His Honour took as his starting point the
value at the date of trial of an annual sum of 1,570 pounds per annum (which
was what the appellant had been earning before the accident) payable weekly
until age sixty-five. Based upon figures provided by
the Government Actuary
calculated at an assumed rate of five per cent interest the figure was 14,918
pounds 16s. 0d. Five per cent
has been commonly accepted for the purpose of
such assessments. No just complaint can be made of the base figure so arrived
his Honour. But he reduced it by a third, having regard to what he
described as "the usual deduction of one-third to one-quarter
contingencies" (1962) SASR, at p 123 . This, of course, would be quite correct
if he thought that the "contingencies" that he
foresaw for the appellant in
the future justified such a reduction. But I find it hard to understand why
there should be a convention
that in all cases one is to take off a third for
bad luck, or rather for the balance of future bad luck over future good luck.
with respect, I am unable to agree in his Honour's reasons for refusing
to make any allowance for what he said was the probability
appellant's rate of pay would have gone up had he remained in his employment
until he reached the age of sixty-five. His
Honour said that the increases
that "might fairly have been expected" "may have done no more than follow the
fall in the purchasing
power of money and may well not have represented any
increase in real terms" (1962) SASR, at p 123 . But the very fact that wages
measured in money go up as the value of money declines is one of the reasons
why damages assessed in money have gone up so much in
recent times. If damages
are to be given for the incapacity to earn wages in the future they should be
assessed having regard to
the monetary wages that might have been earned in
the future. The method adopted produced only the present monetary value of
receipts of wages assumed to continue at the same rate. (at p509)
16. His Honour considered that the appellant's life had been shortened by the
accident. He does not say by how much. But apparently
he thought the appellant
would not live to sixty-five. This, his Honour thought, additionally supported
the deduction of one-third.
He referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal
in Oliver v. Ashman (1962) 2 QB 210 which he accepted as authoritative, saying
that "it is not necessary to seek for the logic of this rule" (1962) SASR, at
p 123 . I have considered that case and also Wise v.
Kaye (1962) 2 WLR 96 ,
which followed it. In each there is some variety of reasoning in the
judgments. I am not satisfied of the
correctness of the view that in assessing
damages for loss of earnings the years of life of which the injured man has
been deprived
by the injury are to be disregarded. In so far as the two
English decisions were based upon the provisions of the Law Reform
(Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1934, and on decisions that causes of actions
for curtailment of expectation of life survive for the benefit of a
man's estate, they are not applicable in South Australia. The
Survival of
Causes of Action Act 1940
(S.A.) contains an express provision,
the contrary. And I am inclined, on more general grounds, to doubt the
correctness of the decision of the Court of Appeal
on this point. It seems to
me that the monetary measure of the destruction of the skill and capacity to
earn, which the appellant
formerly had and had exercised, is not diminished by
showing that, in addition to being deprived of his capacity to earn while
he has been deprived of part of his expected span of useful earning
life. If the view of the Court of Appeal be correct then I see
no answer to
Dr. Bray's proposition that damages for loss of an expectation of life ought
not to be arbitrarily limited. However,
rather than reduce a monetary loss
flowing from destruction of a man's capacity to exercise his skill or follow
his trade for what
would have been his expected working life, I would, in a
case such as this, exclude any sum for loss of expectation of life separately
considered. But I do not think it necessary in this case to express any
concluded opinion on the question discussed by the Court
of Appeal. It can
wait until it directly arises for us. His Honour referred to it only
incidentally. Even if one accepts the doctrine
as correct, it seems to me
that, in the absence of any evidence of for how long the appellant may be
expected to live, it ought not
to be invoked to justify curtailing by
one-third the damages calculated on an assumed working life until sixty-five.
And I see no
other ground for making such a deduction. Of course, the
contingencies that might, in any event, have occured must be allowed for.
I see nothing in the evidence to suggest that for the appellant the prospects
of the future were such that adversity would be
likely so greatly to outweigh
prosperity. Against all the risks of adversity must be set the prospects of an
increase in wages and
the possibility that the appellant's ability and
willingness to work in some remunerative occupation might have continued
the age of sixty-five. Doing the best I can on the evidence, such as it
is, as to this man's health, character, age and prospects,
I see no convincing
reason for assuming that his economic loss should be assessed at less than
14,000 pounds. At that figure I would
estimate it. From it must be subtracted
the amount of wages actually received up to the date of the hearing found by
his Honour to
amount to 1,876 pounds. So that the amount of general damages
attributable to economic loss is 12,124 pounds. (at p510)
17. As to the other heads of damage considered by his Honour: He decided that
6,000 pounds should be allowed to provide for the
appellant's future care in
the Home for Incurables. This was not challenged. And I do not think that it
should be disturbed. The
damages of a more general character - for loss of the
capacity to enjoy life and destruction of so much that made life worth living,
for past and continuing pain and discomfort, for emotional disturbances, and
other sad consequences of the accident - the learned
judge allowed 5,000
pounds. I do not think this part of his Honour's assessment should be
disturbed by an appeal court. (at p510)
18. The result is that, in my view, the appellant's damages should be
assessed at 23,124 pounds (being 12,124 pounds plus 6,000
pounds plus 5,000
pounds). To this must be added 1,724 pounds.13.0., special damages, making in
all 24,848 pounds 13s. 0d. This should
be reduced by one third. So that, in my
opinion, the appellant is entitled to recover 16,565 pounds 15s. 4d. I would
allow the appeal
with costs, dismiss the cross-appeal with costs, and
substitute the above amount for that awarded by the judgment of the Supreme
Court. (at p511)
OWEN J. The appeal and cross-appeal in this case arise out of an action in
the Supreme Court of South Australia in which the plaintiff
sought to recover
damages for injuries received by him in an accident which occurred when he was
struck by a motor car driven by
the defendant. The action first came on before
Brazel J. who heard the evidence and reserved judgment. Before judgment was
however, his Honour died and, by consent of the parties, the case
was re-heard by Chamberlian J. on the transcript of the evidence
given, no oral evidence being led except as to some minor matters which are
not material to the appeal. His Honour found
that the accident was due to the
negligence of both parties in that neither of them was keeping a proper
look-out at the time. He
considered that each was equally to blame and, having
assessed the damages at 21,419 pounds 17s. 0d., awarded one-half of that sum
to the plaintiff. The plaintiff now appeals on the grounds that he should not
have been found guilty of contributory negligence or
that, if he was negligent
his share of the blame was less than that of the defendant ; and that in any
event the amount awarded was
inadequate. The defendant cross appeals on the
ground that he should not have been found to have been negligent or, in the
alternative,
that the equal apportionment of responsibility was wrong and that
the plaintiff should bear a greater share of it. A further ground
amount of damages was excessive was not pressed. (at p511)
2. The accident occurred at about 11 p.m. on the night of 12th May 1960.
There had been a violent storm during the day and the plaintiff,
photographer, had been sent earlier in the evening to take photographs of
damage done by the storm at Largs Bay. He was returning
in a taxi cab and
while driving along a road in Adelaide called Shierlaw Terrace he noticed a
large sheet of water on the roadway
through which motor cars were ploughing.
Shierlaw Terrace is a four-lane trafficway running north and south with a
roadway 65 feet
wide. The water lay on the eastern side of the road adjoining
a park which fronted it. The plaintiff took a number of photographs
going through the water and then began to walk back across the road to his
taxi cab which was parked on the western side.
It was raining heavily. He was
wearing a dark overcoat and was looking down and holding the left lapel of his
coat up to protect
himself from the rain. The defendant, an elderly man, was
driving a Morris Oxford car along Shierlaw Terrace in a northerly direction
from 20 to 25 miles per hour and about 12 feet out from the western kerb. He
said that he first saw the plaintiff when the latter
was 7 or 8 feet from the
car and slightly to its right front. The car lights were on although there is
some doubt whether they were
on high or low beam. The offside headlight of the
car struck the plaintiff and as he fell to the roadway some part of his body
run over by one of the wheels of the car. The learned trial judge was of
opinion that the defendant was negligent in failing to see
the plaintiff until
just before the moment of impact and that the plaintiff was negligent in
failing to see the approaching car.
Notwithstanding the many arguments which
were submitted on the appeal, my reading of the evidence leads me to the
conclusion that
his Honour was right in taking the view that the accident was
due to the negligence of both parties and, although I am not in agreement
all the reasons which he gave for thinking that the blame should be equally
shared, I am of opinion that in the result that
apportionment was the proper
one to make. Coming then to the question of damages, there is no doubt that
the plaintiff suffered very
serious injuries, as a result of which it
eventually became necessary to amputate his left leg at the hip joint. He also
a fractured skull and serious brain injury and is partially
paralysed with the result that he must spend his life in bed or in a
wheel-chair. He requires constant nursing attention and, apart from occasional
short visits to his home, will have to remain permanently
in a nursing
institution in which he now is. His mental processes have been affected to a
major extent. He expresses himself with
difficulty, his memory and powers of
concentration are impaired and he can only read and understand simple
statements. His expectation
of life has been reduced. The learned trial judge
dealt with damages under various heads, only two of which have been
criticized.
The first of these was the loss of earning capacity calculated as
from the date of the accident. The plaintiff had long been a photographer
employed by a newspaper published in Adelaide and was well regarded by his
employer. His net salary for the year ending 30th June
1960 appears to have
been 1,481 pounds per annum but, by the date of the trial the net salary for
the work he had been doing had
increased to about 1,750 pounds per annum. He
was nearly 51 years of age. After making a number of calculations, which are
in detail in his reasons for judgment, the learned trial judge arrived
at a figure of 8,695 pounds 4s. 0d. The only criticism made
of this is based
upon the fact that from the date of the accident up to the date of the trial,
his employer continued to pay the
plaintiff the amount which he would have
received had he remained at work. Of the amount so paid a proportion
represented workmen's
compensation payments which the plaintiff will be
required to refund out of the damages recovered by him. His Honour refused to
a claim to have included in the damages the difference between the
amount of these workmen's compensation payments and the total
amount paid to
him by his employer during this period. Counsel for the plaintiff had
submitted - as he did on the appeal - that the
amounts in question were
voluntary payments and not payments of salary. It appeared, however, that the
award under which the plaintiff
was employed provided that a contract of
employment such as he had could not be terminated by either party except on
notice as prescribed
by the award. No such notice had been given and his
Honour therefore held that the amounts paid to the plaintiff, over and above
the amount of the workmen's compensation payments, were to be regarded as
having been paid and received by way of salary. In my opinion,
this ruling was
correct. The other head of damages which is attacked is that relating to the
award for pain and suffering, the loss
of the amenities of life, the
shortening of expectation of life and what his Honour described as the "loss
of intellectual power
and personality change" (1962) SASR, at p 125 . In
respect of these matters his Honour arrived at a figure of 5,000 pounds and
it has been submitted, was inadequate. Although I have felt some doubt
whether this was sufficient, I am not satisfied that his Honour's
estimate was
wrong. I would therefore dismiss the appeal. (at p513)
Appeal allowed with costs.
Cross-appeal dismissed with costs.
Order that the judgment of the Supreme Court of South Australia be
discharged and in lieu thereof find that the total damages which
been recoverable if the plaintiff had not been at fault were the sum of 24,848
pounds 13s. 0d. ; and adjudge that the
plaintiff recover from the defendant
the sum of 16,565 pounds 15s. 4d.
Case remitted to the Supreme Court to determine how the costs of the action,
including the two trials, in that Court should be
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter