Commissioner Initiated Investigation into Vinomofo Pty Ltd (Privacy) [2025] AICmr 175 (17 October 2025)
Commissioner Initiated Investigation into
Vinomofo Pty Ltd (Privacy)
[2025] AICmr 175
(17 October 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of
Vinomofo Pty Ltd
Decision date
Case reference number
CII23/00017
(Cth) — Australian Privacy
Principles — APP 11.1— Whether reasonable steps taken to protect
personal information
— Breach of APP 11.1 — Failure to take
reasonable steps — Must not repeat or continue acts and practices found
be an interference with individuals’ privacy — Specified steps to
address interference.
Determination
find that Vinomofo Pty Ltd (
) interfered with the privacy of
individuals, whose personal information it held in the database (as described at
paragraphs [
]) within the meaning of
to take such steps as were reasonable in the circumstances to protect that
personal information from misuse, interference
and loss and from unauthorised
access, modification or disclosure, in breach of Australian Privacy Principle
(APP) 11.1.
Declarations
declare, under
s 52(1A)(a)
, that the acts and practices of
the respondent as outlined at paragraph [
], constitute an interference with the
acts and practices.
further declare under
s 52(1A)(b)
that the respondent
of the date of this determination:
security logging in all of the respondent’s Amazon Web Service’s
) environments that store personal information;
appropriate security access settings to any database that holds the personal
information collected by the respondent;
systems or controls to monitor its systems for signs of unauthorised
written policies and procedures that meet the minimum-security baseline
requirements as set out in the Industry Standards;
an independent reviewer to review the adequacy of staff with cyber security
expertise and address any shortcomings identified;
a privacy and security aware culture by implementing an appropriate training
schedule for staff.
of the date of this determination, engage a suitably qualified
independent reviewer, such as a privacy or cyber security expert
the effectiveness of the respondent’s implementation of the actions
outlined at paragraph [
.a.i.–vi]; and
a report that specifies the independent reviewer’s findings and
recommendations (
review report
of the date of the review report, provide a copy of the report to
the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
of the date of the review report, action any recommendations
contained in the report; and
to the OAIC on the steps it has taken to action the recommendations contained in
the review report within
of taking that
this matter, the respondent, an online wine wholesaler, experienced a data
breach that resulted in unauthorised access to its customers’
information.
OAIC’s investigation, and my resulting determination, concerns the
respondent’s compliance with APP 11.1, which requires
an entity that is
subject to the
to take reasonable steps to protect the personal
information that it holds from misuse, interference and loss, and from
unauthorised
access, modification or disclosure.
determination provides a clear application of APP 11.1 in the context of data
migration projects, and in particular speaks to
entities’ obligations when
using cloud infrastructure providers to house personal information. It explores
the technical and
organisational steps entities should consider to meet their
obligations under APP 11.1.
Findings and Reasons
Factual background
respondent is an online wine wholesaler. It is an Australian proprietary company
that was registered in June 2013 and its business
model involves direct
engagement with wine producers to offer online deals to its customer
The respondent holds personal
information on its customers including customers’ names, genders, dates of
birth, addresses,
email addresses and phone numbers.
The database
27 December 2018, the respondent commenced a platform transformation project
Platform Transformation Project
) to upgrade its system for managing
customer data, including customers’ personal information (
management system
implement the Platform Transformation Project, the respondent took a staged
approach to migrating the data (
Data Migration Project
) from its legacy
environment to the new production platform system (
New Production Platform
facilitate the Data Migration Project, the respondent transferred personal
information to a temporary database, a PostgreSQL database
the database
provided by AWS Relational Database
respondent initially characterised the database as a testing platform, on which
personal information was held for data migration
It later clarified that
the database was a “temporary migration database” and was not used
for the purpose of testing
nor was any testing
undertaken.
respondent submitted that it adopted a staged approach to migrate the data using
the database due to differences in the data structure
between the legacy and New
Production Platform system.
first tranche of data was transferred to the database on 15 April
respondent noted that alternative approaches were not viable because it would
have required the read-replica in the legacy database
to be queried during low
traffic hours outside of business hours, resulting in delays to the Data
Migration Project and delayed security
respondent transferred personal information to the database to facilitate the
Data Migration Project and enable ongoing reporting
throughout the Platform
Transformation Project, specifically:
profiles (including name, gender, date of birth, address, email addresses and
phone number, but excluding customer history)
on 15 and 20 April 2022; and
lists (potentially including name and email address) on 9 August
The notifiable data breach
On 25 September 2022, the respondent experienced a data breach, where an
unauthorised third party (
threat actor
) accessed and exfiltrated data
from the database (
On 17 October 2022, the respondent notified the OAIC of the Incident, which it
had assessed as an eligible data
At the time of the Incident, the database held approximately 17GB of data, which
included the personal information of approximately
928,760 individuals
(customers and members) comprising:
information: gender, date of birth;
information: name, email address, phone number, residential address; and
information: sales order history and invoice
information.
threat actor sought a ransom payment from the respondent for the data that was
exfiltrated. The data was posted for sale on the
dark web on 16 October 2022. A
sample of the data posted was subsequently sold on 20 October
response to the data breach notification, the OAIC made preliminary inquiries of
the respondent.
As a result of
those inquiries, concerns arose in relation to the respondent's privacy
practices, particularly in relation to APP
The investigation
5 April 2023, the former Australian Information Commissioner commenced an
investigation under
into the respondent’s
compliance with APP 11.1 during the period 1 January 2022 to 5 June 2023
relevant period
), which captured the time of the
initial preliminary view was issued to the respondent on 23 December 2024. The
respondent made submissions in
revised preliminary view was issued to the respondent on 28 May 2025. The
respondent made submissions in
Application of relevant law
The APPs in Schedule 1 of the
regulate the handling of personal
information by Australian government agencies and certain private sector
organisations (
APP entities
An APP entity is prohibited from doing an act, or engaging in a practice, that
breaches an APP.
practice of an APP entity is an interference with the privacy of an individual
if it breaches an APP in relation to the
personal information about an
individual.
I am satisfied that the respondent is an APP entity because it is a body
corporate that is not a small business
a registered political
party, an agency, a State or Territory authority or a prescribed instrumentality
of a State or Territory,
an annual turnover greater than $3 million in three consecutive years between
2019 and 2022.
In making this determination, I have considered the
Australian Privacy Principles Guidelines
to privacy regulatory
and material
provided by the respondent.
For the purposes of
and following my consideration of
the submissions and evidence, I am satisfied that:
acts and practices to which the investigation relates can be adequately
determined in the absence of a hearing with the respondent;
are no unusual circumstances that would warrant holding a hearing before making
this determination.
The facts and circumstances of this matter require me to consider the relevant
law, and in particular determine the answer to the
the respondent take such steps as were reasonable in the circumstances to
protect the personal information it held from misuse,
interference and loss, and
unauthorised access, modification or disclosure (
security risks
accordance with its obligations under APP 11.1?
Did the respondent to take such steps as were reasonable in
the circumstances to protect the personal information it held from security
risks, in accordance with its obligations under APP 11.1?
It is not in dispute that the Incident involved unauthorised access to personal
information that the respondent held in the database.
However, in determining whether the respondent breached APP 11.1 it is relevant
to consider what steps the respondent took to protect
the personal information
it held and whether those steps were reasonable in the circumstances to protect
the information it held
from the security risks. The steps an APP entity is
required to take to meet its obligations under APP 11.1 will depend on the
circumstances.
is not prescriptive concerning what steps will be reasonable in
the circumstances. This is an objective test that has regard to how
a reasonable
person, who is properly informed, would be expected to act in the
circumstances.
question to be determined on a case-by-case basis and the obligation is not
susceptible to reduction to fixed
That is to say, what is
reasonable is a question of fact in each individual case and includes, where
relevant, taking steps to implement
strategies in relation to:
Governance,
culture and training
policies, procedures and
Federal Court of Australia (
) has provided guidance on the approach
to be taken to determine if steps taken were reasonable in the circumstances,
albeit within
the context of corporations law
The Court has observed
that identifying steps that could have been taken, but were not taken, can be
of testing the reasonableness of what was (and
was not) done. However, the focus must always be on whether the steps that were
in their totality, were
reasonable.
This requires
consideration of whether the steps that were taken to protect personal
information from the security
were commensurate to the
risks presented in the relevant
circumstances.
Accordingly,
I adopt this analytical approach to determine whether the steps that the
respondent took were reasonable in the circumstances.
It is therefore relevant
for me to identify the following:
are the relevant circumstances?
steps were taken by the respondent to protect the personal information it held
from security risks? and
the steps taken by the respondent, in their totality, commensurate to the
security risks in relation to the personal information
Factors that may be relevant to assessing whether particular steps were
reasonable in the circumstances may include the degree of
difficulty or
practicability of any given step, and the costs associated with them.
Additionally, a step may be reasonable but unnecessary
because an APP entity is
taking other steps commensurate to the risk, to which the proposed step adds
its response to a preliminary view I provided to the respondent on this matter,
the respondent noted that the some of the legal
interpretations in adjacent case
law, as discussed at paragraph [
were developed after the time of the incident in 2022. It raised concern with
respect to risks that arise from applying standards
that were not reflective of
the applicable regulatory environment at the
acknowledge the respondent’s view, I do not accept that my analysis, given
its regard to instructive reasoning and
legislative interpretation from the
Court, imports any retrospectivity.
The relevant circumstances
In considering what steps the respondent took to protect the personal
information it held and whether such steps were reasonable
in the circumstances,
as required by APP 11.1, I have had regard to the following
circumstances:
personal information held
– the personal information stored in the
gender, date of birth, contact information and sales order history and
invoice information.
Guidelines consider that as the amount of personal information that is held by
an entity increases, so too will the steps
that is reasonable to take to protect
nature of the entity
– the respondent is a for-profit entity with, at
the time of the Incident, an income of approximately $72 million per financial
and approximately 120
I therefore consider
it to be a reasonably well-resourced entity. While the respondent has clarified
that it now has 50 employees,
for the purposes of considering whether it took
reasonable steps under APP 11.1, it is relevant to consider the nature of the
at the time the Incident occurred.
adverse consequences
– the respondent held a large amount of personal
information about its customers and members. It is generally accepted that
unauthorised access or disclosure of personal information posed a risk of harm
to affected individuals, including through identity
theft or fraud, the
publication and sale of their personal information on the dark web, and being
targeted by online scams. More
rigorous steps are generally required as the risk
of adversity
What steps did the respondent take to protect the personal
information it held from security risks?
The OAIC’s investigation considered steps the respondent had in place at
the time of the Incident to assess whether it met
the requirements of APP 11.1.
To support this consideration, the respondent provided an outline of the
technical and organisational
measures it had in place at the time of the
the respondent also raised concerns about retrospectivity, similar to those
described at paragraph [
relation to my consideration of their technical and organisational measures. It
noted that APP 11.3 – which specifies
that reasonable steps for the
purposes of APP 11.1 include technical and organisational measures – was
not in effect at the
time of the Incid
11.3 was indeed not in effect at the relevant time and I address it here only
because it was specifically raised by the respondent.
I note that APP 11.3 was
not introduced as a new requirement, as specified in the relevant Explanatory
Memorandum, but rather was
introduced ‘to give further guidance and
clarification to APP entities, and to avoid
the APP Guidelines with respect to APP 11 that were in place at the relevant
time – made under
on 22 July 2019 –
set out the reasonable steps that should be taken by an entity to secure
personal information and include
measures that would accurately be characterised
as organisational and technical. Organisational measures, for example, is an
description of: ‘governance, culture and training’ and
‘internal practices, procedures, and
measures is an accurate description of ‘ICT security’, ‘access
security’ and ‘third party
providers (including cloud
computing)’
respondent’s description of the technical and organisational measures it
had in place at the time of the Incident included:
security for the respondent’s ICT devices, including security software
(Bitfender) installed on all devices, endpoint
protection, access restrictions
based on employee level and business requirements
security measures including Single Sign-on to authentication via Google Identity
provider and multifactor authentication
of Software as a Service (SaaS) applications including data encryption within
the AWS environment and email security through Google
Enterprise Workspace
subscription
and logging measures for central internally built eCommerce business
applications and some IT applications, with periodic reviews
of authentication
logs for unexpected
Organisational
respondent required all staff to complete annual training courses in relation to
the time of the Incident, 141
employees had undertaken all or some of these
September 2021, the respondent engaged a Chief Technology Officer who was
responsible for governing the organisation’s security
principles,
monitoring vulnerabilities and ensuring employees implemented best practice in
relation to the use of technology. In
March 2022, the respondent engaged a Head
of Data & Technology Officer whose main responsibilities included data
security and
building data governance frameworks and alerts for data
respondent had an IT Policy
Data Retention and Data Destruction
that broadly set out the
respondent’s expectations in relation to the operation and use of its
network and equipment, and principles
and procedures governing the retention and
destruction of data.
In relation to the Platform Transformation Project, the respondent submitted
that it conducted a one-off risk assessment which reviewed
the SaaS application
security access layers, integration controls, and security documentation for
compliance, data handling and access
security, audit logging
capability.
Were the steps taken by the respondent, in their totality,
commensurate to the security risks?
I acknowledge that the respondent took the steps outlined in paragraphs [
], which went some way to taking the
reasonable steps required by APP 11.1. However, I am not satisfied that the
respondent took such
steps that were, in their totality, commensurate to the
security risks and reasonable in the circumstances to protect the personal
information it held.
particular, I have identified the following risks that were inherent in the
respondent’s security framework and which do
not appear to have been
appropriately addressed by the steps taken by the respondent at paragraphs [
respondent had limited ability to monitor, detect, be alerted to, respond to and
record security threats, unauthorised access
or suspicious activity occurring on
the database (see my analysis concerning security logging and access monitoring
below at paragraphs
] and paragraphs [
] respectively);
respondent failed to apply appropriate security controls proportionate to the
level of risk occasioned by the use of cloud infrastructure
(see my analysis
regarding the steps the respondent could have taken with respect to cloud
infrastructure security controls, below
at paragraphs [
respondent’s culture and business posture was not one that valued or
nurtured attention to customer privacy, as exemplified
by failures regarding its
policies and procedures, training, and cultural approach to privacy (see my
analysis addressing policies
and procedures, people and culture, below at
paragraphs [
] and paragraphs [
] respectively).
I discuss the risks inherent in the respondent’s security framework and
the steps that could have been taken to address them
further below at paragraphs
]. In undertaking this analysis, I have
had regard to the circumstances outlined at paragraph [
], and the cybersecurity and
information security standards and frameworks which existed at the time of the
Incident and applicable
ally, NIST CSF,
7000 series,
the Essential
and the Information
curity Manual (
my view, taking into consideration the relevant standards and frameworks and the
respondents’ circumstances, there were other
steps the respondent could
have taken to protect personal information from the security risks, as set out
below. Having regard to
these steps that could have been taken, but were not, I
consider that the totality of the steps taken by the respondent to protect
personal information it held were not commensurate to the risks presented in the
circumstances. In order to protect the personal
information it held from the
security risks identified in paragraph [
], the respondent could have taken the
following steps, or some combination thereof:
or additional
security logging
capability;
appropriate
cloud infrastructure security controls
access monitoring controls
to alert the respondent to suspicious or
unauthorised activity;
implementing
and using more robust security
policies and procedures
a poor culture of information security awareness and
Security logging
Unauthorised access of personal information can be detected by reviewing a
record of system activities, such as an audit log. Maintaining
a record of
system activities is often the best way for reviewing activity on a computer
system to detect and investigate privacy
According to Industry Standards, the minimum controls expected of an
organisation like the respondent with respect to security logging
all events where a user is performing read, create, modify, or delete actions to
event logs for a minimum of 1 year; and
event logs in a centralised and secure information
In the circumstances of the Incident, the respondent submitted that it had
limited security logging capability in relation to the
claimed that detailed logging was in place for its central internally built
eCommerce business applications,
but some databases, including the database
impacted by the Incident, did not have logging
Logging functionalities in an AWS database, whilst not configured by default,
can be enabled by AWS CloudTrail, which tracks actions
performed by a user,
role, or an AWS service and can log details for 90 days, including the IP
address from which a request is made,
the date and time of an
It is my view that
enabling CloudTrail would not have been a complex process, as it only required a
user to log in to their AWS account
and update the properties of the relevant
AWS database.
With the absence of security logging, the threat actor was able to gain access
to and exfiltrate the respondents customer database
without detection.
Cloud infrastructure security controls
AWS cloud environment. The database was used by
the respondent as a temporary
migration database to facilitate the Data Migration Project as part of its
Platform Transformation
Cloud computing offers a range of potential benefits to an entity, including
improvements to the entity’s cyber security posture
and mitigation of
cyber threats, particularly where the entity does not have the resources or
capability to develop its own cloud
storage. Organisations that store data in
the cloud are responsible for maintaining the appropriate security
configurations of their
infrastructure
regard to the circumstances outlined at paragraph [
], it was reasonable for the respondent
to have applied appropriate security controls to its cloud infrastructure, on
which the database
was located, by:
is isolated and not accessible via the internet;
implementing
a web application firewall for any database not isolated from the internet;
any personal information stored in the
When an AWS database is created, the default settings are set to private and the
AWS by default, also
encrypts all databases with an industry standard encryption algorithm on
The respondent has
advised that settings for AWS were not updated to support VPC by default until
11 March 2013.
at the time of the incident, the database was poorly configured
not hosted on a VPC or isolated from the internet;
not have web application firewall in place, and
not have encryption
respondent has noted that no reconfiguration of the security settings took place
before the incident. The database was created
outside of a VPC due to the legacy
nature of the AWS account, which did not have a VPC as default when it was
created in 2012. Consequently,
the respondent’s legacy databases,
including the database, were not attached to any VPC as
Access monitoring
Where an organisation stores content in an environment that is not intended to
be disclosed to the public, it is reasonable to regularly
review and monitor the
environment, to ensure the content is not being accessed by unauthorised
access monitoring detects unauthorised access to personal information. Use of
proactive security monitoring to identify possible
unauthorised access is a
reasonable step for entities that use systems or databases which hold large
amounts of personal
information.
In the circumstances of the Incident, the respondent submitted that it did not
apply access monitoring controls to its AWS environment
on which the database
was stored.
This led to the
respondent’s inability to monitor, be alerted to, and respond to
unauthorised access or suspicious activity.
on a [redacted] submitted by the respondent, the Incident occurred on 25
September 2022.
However, it was
only when a sample of data was published online on 16 October 2022 that the
respondent confirmed that its database
compromised.
light of the circumstances I have outlined at paragraph [
] it was reasonable for the respondent
to have taken steps to ensure that the following access monitoring controls were
in place to
detect anomalous activity and possible unauthorised
centralised access monitoring platform for security alerts for databases with
sensitive customer data and business-critical systems;
alerts from its monitoring platform; and
of these alerts on the basis of their criticality level (for example, alerts
rated as high or critical severity to be actioned
immediately).
Had the respondent enabled the appropriate logging and access monitoring
controls on the database, it would have been more likely
to proactively detect
and respond to the unauthorised access and exfiltration.
At the time of the Incident, the respondent failed to apply reasonable access
monitoring controls to the AWS environment which stored
the personal
information.
Policies and procedures
should document the internal practices, procedures and systems used to protect
personal information. The documentation should
be regularly reviewed and updated
and outline the personal information security measures that are established and
maintained against
the risks and threats to personal
information.
respondent provided the OAIC with a Security Audit report dated 31 August 2021.
The Security Audit report stated that formal security
policies and procedures
governing the respondent’s business operations did not
Critically, it outlined
that the respondent did not have any policies or procedures documenting
information security, security roles
and responsibilities, or the acceptable use
of assets such as laptops, emails or
While I acknowledge the respondent’s claim that it did have an active IT
Policy in place at the time of the
the occurrence of the
Incident despite the Policy brings into question its effectiveness. Similarly, I
acknowledge the respondent’s
affirmation that all staff were trained on
data protection at the time of the Incident through the privacy training module
‘Safetrac’.
the nature and volume of personal information the respondent routinely collected
for its business activities, it is my view
that it was reasonable for the
respondent to have implemented documented practices, procedures and systems to
ensure a consistent
approach to the security of personal information. Having
documented security policies and procedures is a basic security safeguard,
particularly for an organisation holding significant amounts of personal
information.
People and culture
Security policies and practices are only effective when properly and
consistently implemented and followed by employees. Security
arrangements should include appropriate training, resourcing and management
focus to foster a privacy-and security-aware
culture. Insufficient interest in
personal information security from staff, in particular senior management, can
lead to threats
to the security of personal information being ignored and not
properly attended
At the time of the Incident, the respondent’s management team responsible
for cyber security comprised of 3 individuals including
the Head of Data and
Technology and Head of Engineering. Both positions were staffed by former
engineers with no formal qualification
or certifications in cyber
Additionally, the respondent categorised its public facing privacy policy under
the title ‘The boring stuff’, noting
impressed with your commitment... But the good stuff is all up there, buddy.
[Emoji: Finger pointing up].
Since you're here, check out these links and
boring bits, if you're into that kind of
The respondent
confirmed that this content has since been removed from its privacy
I acknowledge the
respondent’s submission that this content was intended to contrast
‘serious legal and service links’
– including privacy –
with the product-focused “fun” content; and that it removed this
content to avoid misinterpretation
rather than to reflect a change in its
commitment to privacy or internal
also acknowledge the respondent’s advice in response to my preliminary
view that prior to the Incident, the respondent did
not appear to consider its
customers’ privacy as a business priority. The respondent stated that
because of COVID-19 where
offices in Victoria were shut down during extended
lockdowns, upgrading its telephone system had to take operational priority to
maintain continuity of service.
I understand that COVID-19 impacted the respondent and prompted the urgent need
to upgrade its telephone system to facilitate remote
I maintain that there was an unacceptable delay by the respondent in uplifting
its security posture prior to commencement
of the Data Migration Project and the
transfer of the first tranche of data to the database in April 2022. The
respondent was aware
of the deficiencies in its security governance and that it
needed to uplift its security posture at least 2 years prior to the Incident.
The respondent was also aware of the areas where significant security risks
existed that required urgent attention following the
Security Audit Report which
was issued a year prior to the incident.
At the time the Security
Audit Report was issued in August 2021, this was toward the end of the COVID-19
lockdowns in Melbourne,
which commenced in March
find that the during the relevant period, the totality of steps taken by the
respondent were not reasonable in the circumstances
to protect the personal
information it held from misuse, interference and loss and unauthorised access,
modification or disclosure.
Declarations
I have found that the respondent interfered with the privacy of individuals, I
have a discretion under
to make one or more
declarations. Consequently, I have made declarations at paragraphs [
] of this determination.
Commissioner
Review rights
(Cth) states that a party may apply
to have a decision under
or (1A) to make a determination reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (
). The ART provides independent merits
review of administrative decisions and has power to set aside, vary, or affirm a
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days
after the day on which the person is given the privacy determination
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
(Cth); r 5(3)
Administrative Review Tribunal Rules 2024
(Cth)). An application fee may
be payable when lodging an application for review to the ART. Further
information is available on
the ART’s website (
www.art.gov.au
) or by telephoning 1800 228
A party may also apply under
Administrative Decisions (Judicial
Review) Act 1977
(Cth) to have the determination reviewed by the Federal
Circuit and Family Court of Australia or the Federal Court of Australia. The
Court may refer the matter back to the OAIC for further consideration if it
finds the Information Commissioner’s decision was
wrong in law or the
Information Commissioner’s powers were not exercised properly. An
application to the Court must be lodged
within 28 days of the date of the
determination. An application fee may be payable when lodging an application to
the Court. Further
information is available at
https://www.fcfcoa.gov.au/gfl
www.federalcourt.gov.au/
ASIC Organisational &
Business Search, accessed 16 April 2025.
Response to First s 44(1)
Notice dated 17 July 2023 – letter from the respondent to the OAIC.
Response to First s 44(1)
Notice dated 17 July 2023 – letter from the respondent to the OAIC.
Notifiable Data Breach Form
submitted by the respondent 17 October 2022 (OAIC Reference DBN22/01026),
Response to preliminary inquiries
dated 2 November 2022 (OAIC Reference
APP-PI22/0035) and Response to First s 44(1) Notice dated 17 July 2023 –
Appendix F,
Cyber Response to customer communications.
Respondent’ s submissions
in response to the revised preliminary view dated 25 June 2025.
Respondent’s submissions
in response to the initial preliminary view dated 31 January 2025.
Response to First s 44(1)
Notice dated 17 July 2023 – letter from the respondent to the OAIC.
Respondent’s submissions
in response to the initial preliminary view dated 31 January 2025.
Response to First s 44(1)
Notice dated 17 July 2023 – letter from the respondent to the OAIC.
Notifiable data breach form
submitted by the respondent 17 October 2022 (OAIC Reference DBN22/01026).
Notifiable data breach form
submitted by the respondent 17 October 2022 (OAIC Reference DBN22/01026).
Response to First s44(1)
Notice dated 17 July 2023 – Appendix D: [redacted].
Letter from the OAIC to the
respondent – Preliminary Inquiries dated 26 October 2022.
Letter from the OAIC to the
respondent – s 43(1AA) Notice dated 5 April 2023.
Respondent’s
submissions in response to the initial preliminary view dated 31 January
Respondent’ s
submissions in response to the revised preliminary view dated 25 June 2025.
Respondent’s
submissions in response to the initial preliminary view dated 31 January
to privacy regulatory action
APP Guidelines [B.108].
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v R M Capital Pty Ltd
[2024] FCA 151
APP Guidelines [11.9].
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v Firstmac Ltd
[2024] FCA 747
Securities and Investments Commission v R M Capital Pty Ltd
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v R M Capital Pty Ltd
[2024] FCA 151
i.e., risk of misuse,
interference and loss, and unauthorised access, modification or disclosure.
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v R M Capital Pty Ltd
[2024] FCA 151
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v R M Capital Pty Ltd
[2024] FCA 151
Respondent’ s
submissions in response to the revised preliminary view dated 25 June 2025.
Notifiable data breach form
submitted by the respondent 17 October 2022 (OAIC Reference DBN22/01026).
APP Guidelines [11.8].
Respondent’s
submissions in response to the initial preliminary view dated 31 January
Response to Second
Notice dated 29 April 2024 –Privacy Fraud Safetrac Completion report.
APP Guidelines [11.8].
Respondent’ s
submissions in response to the revised preliminary view dated 25 June 2025.
Explanatory Memorandum,
APP Guidelines
(July 2019 – October 2025) [11.8].
APP Guidelines
(July 2019 – October 2025) [11.8].
Response to First s44(1)
Notice dated 17 July 2023 - letter from the respondent to the OAIC.
Response to Second s 44(1)
Notice dated 29 April 2024 – Privacy Fraud Safetrac Completion report.
Response to Second s44(1)
Notice dated 29 April 2024 – letter from the respondent to the OAIC, Table
Response to Second s44(1)
Notice dated 29 April 2024 –respondent’s IT Policy.
Response to Second s44(1)
Notice dated 29 April 2024 –respondent’s Data Retention and
Destruction Policy.
Response to First s44(1)
Notice dated 17 July 2023 – letter from the respondent to the OAIC.
NIST Cybersecurity Framework
(since 2014), ISO 27001:2013, The Australia Information Security Manual (ISM)
(since 2020), (ISM-0859
and ISM-1537).
Information Security
Standards (since1995)
Cyber Security Centre Essential Eight Maturity Model (since 2017)
Information
Security Manual (since 2016).
Guide to securing personal information
, ‘Audit logs, audit trails and
monitoring access’.
NIST Cybersecurity Framework
(since 2014), ISO 27001:2013, The Australia Information Security Manual (ISM)
(since 2020), (ISM-0859
and ISM-1537).
Response to First s44(1)
Notice dated 17 July 2023 – letter from the respondent to the OAIC.
Enabling CloudTrail logging for s3 buckets
accessed 21 November 2024.
Notifiable Data Breaches Report: January to June 2024
, Misconfiguration of
cloud-based data holdings.
is Amazon VPC
accessed 20 December 2024, NIST Cybersecurity Framework (since
2014), PR.AC-7; ISO 27001:2013, A.9.4.2; Essential Eight Maturity
NIST Cybersecurity Framework
(since 2014), PR.DS-1; ISO 27001:2022, 8.11.
Default VPC components accessed 20 December 2024
data with encryption - Amazon Simple Storage Service
accessed 20 December
Respondent’s
submissions in response to the initial preliminary view dated 31 January
Response to First s44(1)
Notice dated 17 July 2023 – Appendix D: [redacted].
Respondent’s
submissions in response to the initial preliminary view dated 31 January
to securing personal information
, Access security.
to securing personal information
, Access security.
Response to First s44(1)
Notice dated 17 July 2023 – letter from the respondent to the OAIC.
Response to First s 44(1)
Notice dated 17 July 2023 – Appendix D: [redacted].
Letter from the respondent
to the OAIC - Response to First s44(1) Notice dated 17 July 2023 –
Appendix D: [redacted].
NIST Cybersecurity Framework
(since 2014): DE.CM-3 and DE.CM-7; ISO 27001:2013, A.12.4.1.
to securing personal information
, Internal practices, procedures and
Response to Second s44(1)
Notice dated 29 April 2024, Brennan IT, ‘Security Audit Report’
dated 31 August 2021.
Response to Second s44(1)
Notice dated 29 April 2024, Brennan IT, ‘Security Audit Report’
dated 31 August 2021.
Respondent’s
submissions in response to the initial preliminary view dated 31 January
Respondent’s
submissions in response to the initial preliminary view dated 31 January
to securing personal information
, Governance, culture and training.
Response to Second s44(1)
Notice dated 29 April 2024– letter from respondent: Annexure D.
Internet Archive Wayback
Machine, Vinomofo Australia website 30 September 2022.
Respondent’s
submissions in response to the initial preliminary view dated 31 January
Respondent’ s
submissions in response to the revised preliminary view dated 25 June 2025.
Respondent’ s
submissions in response to the revised preliminary view dated 25 June 2025.
Response to Second s44(1)
Notice dated 29 April 2024, Brennan IT, ‘Security Audit Report’
dated 31 August 2021.
See, for example, ABC News,
marks 200 days of COVID-19 lockdowns since the pandemic began
, accessed 2
October 2025.
RTF format (11.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format