Bryan Parker v Hastings Deering (Australia) Limited t/as Hastings Deering - re Extension of time [2009] AIRC 973; (17 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Termination of employment
Bryan Parker
Hastings Deering (Australia) Limited T/A Hastings Deering
(U2009/3663)
COMMISSIONER SPENCER
BRISBANE, 17 DECEMBER 2009
Extension of time.
Mr Bryan Parker (the Applicant) made an application under
s.643(1)(a)
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(the Act) on the grounds that the termination of his employment by Hastings Deering (Australia) Ltd (the Respondent) was harsh, unjust
or unreasonable.
The matter was listed for conciliation, however the Respondent objected to conciliation prior to the determination of the extension
The Applicant filed his application 27 days after the date of termination or 6
over the legislative timeframe of 21 days prescribed under
of the Act. The Applicant sought an
extension of time.
Section 643(14)
of the Act provides the Commission with discretion to allow an
extension of time. The Respondent opposed the granting of the
extension of time. Directions were set in this matter seeking written submissions regarding the extension of time and a copy of the
relevant criteria for the determination, set out in the "
Brodie-Hanns
" decision was attached.
Whilst not all of the evidence, submissions and materials received have been referred to in this decision, all of such has been considered
in the determination of this matter.
Relevant legislation
The legislation relevant to this extension of time decision is as follows:
“643 Application to Commission to deal with termination under this Subdivision
(1) Subject to subsections (5), (6), (8) and (10), an employee whose employment has been terminated by the employer may apply to the
Commission for relief in respect of the termination of that employment:
(a) on the ground that the termination was harsh, unjust or unreasonable; or
(b) on the ground of an alleged contravention of
section 659
(c) on any combination of grounds in paragraph (b) or on a ground or grounds in paragraph (b) and the ground in paragraph (a).
(14) An application under subsection (1) or (3) must be lodged within 21 days after the day on which the termination took effect,
or within such period as the Commission allows on an application made during or after those 21 days.
Brodie-Hanns v MTV Publishing Ltd
(1995) 67 IR 298
the Industrial Relations Court of Australia set down principles relating to the exercise of its discretion under a similarly worded
provision of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
Brodie- Hanns
noted in s.643 were stated by Marshall J as follows:
“1. Special circumstances are not necessary but the Court must be positively satisfied that the prescribed period should be
extended. The prima facie position is that the time limit should be complied with unless there is an acceptable explanation of the
delay which makes it equitable to so extend.
2. Action taken by the Applicant to contest the termination, other than applying under the Act will be relevant. It will show that
the decision to terminate is actively contested. It may favour the granting of an extension of time.
3. Prejudice to the respondent including prejudice caused by delay will go against the granting of an extension of time.
4. The mere absence of prejudice to the respondent is an insufficient basis to grant an extension of time.
5. The merits of the substantive application may be taken into account in determining whether to grant an extension of time.
6. Consideration of fairness as between the Applicant and other persons in a like position are relevant to the exercise of the Court's
discretion.”
Sections 647 and 648 of the Act, provide that s.643(14) applications may be decided by the Commission without conducting a hearing.
The sections are in the following terms:
“647 Extension of time applications may be decided without a hearing
(a) an employee whose employment has been terminated by an employer makes an application (the extension of time application) under
subsection 643(14) requesting the Commission to allow an application to be lodged under subsection 643(1) after the period of 21
days after the termination took effect; and
(b) the proposed application under subsection 643(1) is an application:
(i) on the ground referred to in paragraph 643(1)(a); or
(ii) on grounds that include that ground;
the Commission is not required to hold a hearing in relation to the extension of time application.”
Section 648 of the Act outlines the considerations that must be taken into account in the decision not to have a hearing:
“648 Matters that do not require a hearing
(1) The Commission must, in deciding whether or not to hold a hearing for the purposes of deciding:
(a) whether to make an order under subsection 645(5) or (6) or 646(1) or (2); or
(b) whether to grant an extension of time application within the meaning of section 647;
take into account the cost that would be caused to the business of the employer concerned by requiring the employer to attend a hearing.
(2) If the Commission decides not to hold a hearing, the Commission must, before making a decision:
(a) invite the employee and the employer concerned to provide further information that relates to whether the order should be made
or the extension of time granted; and
(b) take account of any such information.
(3) If, as a result of information provided as mentioned in subsection (2), the Commission considers that it would be desirable to
hold a hearing, the Commission may do so.
(4) An invitation under paragraph (2)(a) must:
(a) be given by notice in writing to the employee and the employer concerned; and
(b) specify the time by which the information referred to in the invitation is to be provided…”
All of the above considerations have been taken into account and the matter has accordingly been determined on the papers.
Summary of the Applicant’s Submissions
The Applicant’s representative submitted the reason for the delay was entirely attributable to error on the part of the AMWU
and, in their submission, “should not be visited upon the Respondent by not allowing him his ‘day in court’.”
The Applicant made reference to the Decision
Clark v Ringwood Private Hospital
(P5279) (VP Ross, DP Drake, C Deegan)(1997) stating it stands as authority that representative error may be relied upon as an ‘acceptable
explanation’ making it equitable to allow an extension of time. The following principles were quoted by the Applicant:
“1. Depending on the particular circumstances, representative error
be a sufficient reason to extend the time within which an application for relief is to be lodged.
2. A distinction should be drawn between delay properly apportioned to an applicant’s representative where the applicant is
blameless and delay occasioned by the conduct of the applicant.
3. For example it would generally not be unfair to refuse to accept an application which is some months out of time in circumstances
where the applicant left the matter in the hands of their representative and took no steps to inquire as to the status of their claim.
A different situation exists where an applicant gives clear instructions to their representative to lodge an application and the
representative fails to carry out those instructions, through no fault of the applicant and despite the applicant’s efforts
to ensure that the claim is lodged.
4. Error by an applicant’s representatives is only one of a number of factors to be considered in deciding whether or not an
out of time application should be accepted…”
The Applicant’s representative submitted the Applicant acted promptly in pursuing his claim. It was submitted that after his
employment was terminated on 9 April 2009, the Applicant had discussions with the AMWU State Organiser Alan Lacey that same day and
instructed him to file an unfair dismissal application and instructed that he wished to be reinstated.
It was submitted that Mr Alan Lacey made a number of requests of Mr Andrew Booker of the Respondent to provide further particulars
of the reasons for termination so that the Applicant’s representatives could properly file an unfair dismissal claim.
The Applicant’s representative submitted they received some information from the Respondent on 15 April 2009. Following receipt
of that information, Mr Parker attended a meeting at the AMWU office on 21 April 2009 to provide further instructions to the AMWU
he wanted the AMWU to file an application and seek reinstatement.
Ms Fentiman submitted that after she sought further instructions from union delegates present at many of the disciplinary meetings
leading up to Mr Parker’s termination, prepared the application on 29 May 2009 and forwarded the claim to Ms Barlow of the
AMWU to file the application with the Australian Industrial Relations Commission.
It was submitted that Ms Barlow did not realise that the time limit for the application expired on 30 April 2009 until late on Tuesday
5 May 2009 (Monday 4 May 2009 was the Labor Day Public Holiday).
The application was then sent by courier to the Australian Industrial Registry and filed on 6 May 2009.
The Applicant’s representatives accepted full responsibility for this error. They submitted the error is not attributable to
any delay, equivocation, acquiescence or any fault whatsoever on the part of the Applicant. The AMWU were transparent in submitting
that representative error was an administrative error as a result of the volume of work handled by the Union and was an ‘acceptable
explanation’ for the delay.
Summary of the Respondent’s Submissions
The Respondent made a number of submissions as to why the extension of time should not be granted. It was submitted by the Respondent:
“depending upon the particular circumstances, representative error
be a sufficient reason to extend the time within which an application for relief is to be lodged. Representative error must be contextualised
and set against the Applicant’s personal role in the failure to progress the Application. A distinction must be drawn between
delay properly apportioned to the Applicant’s representative where the Applicant is blameless, and delay occasioned by the
conduct of the Applicant.”
It was submitted in the current circumstances representative error could not be relied on and further if the representative error
was accepted the Applicant showed little vigour in following up with the AMWU about the progress of the preparation of his claim.
The Respondent also submitted that representative error is only one of a number of factors to be considered in deciding whether or
not an out of time application should be accepted and the Respondent sought to rely on other factors such as an unacceptable delay,
prejudice to the employer and the merits of the application.
Considerations
The Commission is required to determine whether leave should be granted under s.643(14) of the Act. In making this determination
Brodie-Hanns”
principles referred to in the Act have been considered. The
prima facie
position is that a period of time should be complied with, unless there is an acceptable explanation for the delay, which makes it
equitable to so extend the time limit.
Action taken by the Applicant
Applicant submitted the following action had been taken:
“The applicant’s conduct since being terminated is explained above in relation to the question of whether there was an
acceptable explanation for the delay.
That conduct also serves to indicate that the applicant has actively and unwaveringly contested the decision to terminate his employment.
Further, an initial delay in obtaining particulars in relation to the reasons for termination was caused by the Respondent’s
refusal to provide those particulars.
The Respondent was put on notice on 9 April 2009 that the AMWU would file an unfair dismissal application on behalf of Mr Parker.
Mr Parker made himself available to the AMWU to provide details instructions in person and via telephone on numerous occasions and
provided clear instructions.”
The Respondent submitted the Applicant’s actions were unacceptable:
“The Applicant says he last spoke with his representatives on 21 April 2009. On the Applicant’s version of events, he
left the matter in the hands of the AWMU on that day and took no further steps to inquire about the status of the preparation of
his claim in the 9 day period remaining (from 21 April 2009 to 30 April 2009).
The Applicant’s failure to actively pursue his claim is also demonstrated by subsequent events, that is, the Applicant’s
failure to present any affidavit evidence verifying on oath the matters he now relies upon to explain his delay, and his failure
to attend the conciliation conference (either in person or by phone) on 22 June 2009.
This lack of vigour demonstrates the delay was, to a significant extent, occasioned by the conduct of the Applicant.
To the extent the Applicant relies on an alleged failure of the Respondent to provide further particulars for the reasons of the termination
as part of the reason for the AMWU’s delay in progressing the preparation of the Applicant’s Application for Relief,
the Respondent says:
(a) no such further particulars were requested; and
(b) in any event, the capacity to make an application for relief is not contingent upon full or partial disclosure of employment documentation.
In this respect, the Respondent relies on the decision of Richards SDP in
Williams v Radisson Resort Gold Coast
Generally, the possession of particularised employment documentation…is not a condition precedent for the making of an application
under the Act. Effectively, and barring subsequent motions to dismiss, all that is required for an application to be made is for
the Applicant to be motivated to challenge the decision to terminate his employment as made by his former employer.”
Prejudice to the Respondent
The Applicant’s representative referred to the Full Bench decision of
Telstra-Network Technology Group and Kornicki
where the Bench found that in the context of determining whether an out of time application should be accepted, the consideration
of prejudice to the Respondent caused by the delay in filing the application is
secondary in nature and … unlikely to be determinative of an application.”
The Applicant submitted extending time for filing by 6 days would cause minimal prejudice to the Respondent on the following grounds:
the relevant persons to provide witness evidence for determination of questions of fact are still employed by the Employer; the delay
is not such that the recollection of witness evidence would be affected by the passage of time and the Respondent was put on notice
that the application under s.643 of the Act was forthcoming.
The Respondent submitted with regard to any prejudice likely to be suffered that as the Applicant had not provided an acceptable
explanation for the delay it was not necessary to determine respond to this issue. Alternatively it was submitted that the cost and
inconvenience of defending the Application lodged out of time, would cause financial prejudice.
Further the Respondent submitted it had a right to rely upon the time limits set under the Act.
It is acknowledged that the mere absence of prejudice to the Respondent is an insufficient basis to grant an extension of time.
Merits of the Substantive Application
The merits of the substantive application may be taken into account in determining whether to grant an extension of time.
The Applicant submitted that the reason for his dismissal was outlined in the termination letter dated 9 May 2009.
The AMWU raised the following points in support of the contention the Applicant’s termination of employment is not without
merit. The Applicant had been a long serving and loyal employee for over 5 years. The AMWU submitted there was no valid reason for
the termination and there was evidence in support of the Applicant’s case. Further the AMWU submitted the Applicant was not
provided with particulars of the allegations against him and was not given an opportunity to respond to the allegations forming the
basis of the dismissal. The AMWU stated given the size of the employer’s undertaking and the availability of dedicated human
resource management specialists, the failure to properly particularise the allegations against the Applicant and allow him sufficient
opportunity to respond resulted in a denial of natural justice.
The Respondent submitted that the Applicant’s substantive application is without merit. The Respondent stated the Applicant’s
employment was summarily terminated because he stole another employee’s tools and stored the Respondent’s tools in his
tool box in contravention of company policy and that the conduct was sufficiently serious to justify summary dismissal.
The Respondent also noted that an investigation had been undertaken and the procedural steps taken to ensure fairness. It was also
noted that the Applicant was on a final written warning regarding other conduct engaged in prior to the termination because of alleged
The Full Bench determined in
Telstra-Network Technology Group and Kornicki
that the merits of the matter in determining whether an extension of time should be granted should not assume significant consideration.
Accordingly in this jurisdictional matter the Commission does not seek to determine the merits of the application, given the significant
disparity between the parties’ submissions on these merit issues and the reference to unsworn statements, therefore this element
has been deemed as neutral in the consideration of this extension of time application.
Consideration of fairness as between the Applicant and other persons in a like position
The Applicant did not make a submission regarding to the issue of fairness as between the Applicant and other persons in a like position.
The Respondent made the following submissions regarding fairness as between the Applicant and other persons in a like position:
“The Respondent submits granting an extension of time and thereby allowing the Applicant’s application for relief will
encourage other applicants to ignore the time limits imposed by the Act, in circumstances where the Applicant has not sufficiently
explained the delay.
Further, even though the delay is of 6 days, this does not weigh in favour of the Applicant, or the Respondent for that matter. Insubstantial
delay does not mean the Applicant has any less of a burden to ‘positively satisfy’ the Commission an extension of time
ought be granted.”
The AMWU submitted that the following factors should be considered in determining whether accepting the late application would be
fair in the circumstances. The Applicant has consistently and actively sought to challenge his termination, and is seeking reinstatement;
and the employer was aware of this. The Applicant has a mortgage and dependants; and the dismissal was harsh; the prejudice caused
to the Respondent would be restricted to delay and that prejudice would, in our submission, be minimal due to the limited extension
of time required. The merits of the Applicant’s substantive case, including in particular the clear denial of procedural fairness
in relation to the termination of employment, weights in favour of the Applicants requirement to have his matter assessed.
Determination
In the current circumstances, a decision to exercise the discretion pursuant to s.643(14) of the Act to grant an extension of time
would not render the prescribed time limit meaningless. The Applicant did lodge his application 6 days out of time, however there
were identified reasons for the delay outside of the Applicant’s control. Further the failure of the Applicant to confirm with
his representatives whether or not his application had been filed in the limited time frame does not prevent the granting of an extension
The Applicant had actively sought legal advice and other information in working towards the lodgement of an application in this matter
in a timely manner. Representative error due to an administrative error in the filing was an integral issue to the delay and the
Union has been transparent in this regard.
The Applicant’s representative’s error is only one of a number of factors to be considered in deciding whether or not
an out of time application should be granted. Having considered all the circumstances it is considered that granting the application
would not render the prescribed time limit meaningless.
The Respondent queried the issue of evidence in relation to the Applicant’s reasons for the delay. The AMWU provided submissions
by Ms Fentiman on the reasons for the delay. Ms Fentiman is a well known advocate before the Commission in Queensland. The Respondent
was provided with an opportunity to challenge the reasons for delay at a hearing and chose not to do so.
In consideration of all of the circumstances of this matter against the principles enunciated in the “
Brodie-Hanns”
decision, it is determined that the Commission’s discretion should be exercised to allow for the extension of the legislative
timeframe pursuant to s.643(14) of the Act. I Order accordingly.
BY THE COMMISSION:
COMMISSIONER
(1995) 67 IR 298.
Ibid, para 299.
P5279, VP Ross, DP Drake, C Deegan, page 6-7.
Respondent’s submissions paragraphs 20 – 21.
Applicant’s submissions paragraphs 23 - 27.
Respondent’s submissions paragraphs 24 - 27.
Ross VP, SDP Watson, Gay C, 22 July 1997, P3168.
Respondent’s submissions paragraphs 46 - 47.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR992035>
No downloadable files available