SunshineLoans Pty Ltd (ACN 092 821 960) v Australian Securities and Investments Commission [2025] HCATrans 70 (16 October 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 070
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Brisbane No B23 of 2025
B e t w e e n
SUNSHINELOANS PTY LTD (ACN 092 821 960)
AUSTRALIAN SECURITIES AND INVESTMENTS COMMISSION
BEECH‑JONES
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT CANBERRA ON THURSDAY,
16 OCTOBER 2025, AT 10.00 AM
MR M.D. WYLES, KC
If the Court pleases,
I appear with
MS K.A. O’GORMAN, SC
MS A.C. POGSON
for the appellant. (instructed by
King & Wood Mallesons)
MR T.M. BEGBIE,
May it please the Court, I appear with
MR P.J. MELICAN
for the respondent. (instructed by
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Begbie. The
transcript should record that the parties have consented to Justice Steward
participating in the hearing
by reading the transcript.
Yes, thank you, your Honour. Can I just note some
of us understand the circumstances.
GAGELER CJ:
With the Court’s permission, we
propose to divide this oral address between myself and Ms O’Gorman.
We commence with
the observation, as your Honour Justice Gordon
observed in
at paragraph 85, that the:
question of apprehended bias –
“an assessment (through the construct of the fair‑minded
observer) of the behaviour –
of the primary judge, and whether the appellant has been:
treated in a way that gave rise to the appearance of unfairness being present
in the exercise of state power”.
In our submission, there are two
grounds for the apprehension to arise. Put another way, there are two factors.
One, we say, is
a subset of the other. The factor which the primary judge
recognised was that his adverse view of Mr Powe’s credibility,
that Mr Powe had been an untruthful witness in his evidence,
meant that there was a real possibility of a feared deviation from his
assessment of the credibility and weight to be given to the evidence that was to
be adduced from Mr Powe at the penalty
stage of the proceeding.
Ms O’Gorman will address your Honours on that
The umbrella factor which we identify, and which I will take
your Honours to after having identified it, is that because of the primary
judge’s reasons, including his conclusions that the appellant’s
witnesses, amongst other things, gave preposterous evidence,
well‑schooled, stubbornly clung, did not seek to give their evidence
honestly – the observer can sensibly and
rationally consider that the
primary judge may have an antipathy – an indignation, even, as was
identified by Chief Justice
which cannot be excised from the primary judge’s subconscious, even where
he consciously and conscientiously seeks
Such that the
observer can fear that in dealing with the question of penalty, in particular,
what is required for specific performance,
the primary judge might be unable to
exercise that degree of neutrality required dispassionately to
weigh – particularly on
penalty – the legal, factual and
policy considerations relevant to the questions involved.
parts of his Honour’s reasons which indicate, through the language
that he has elected to use and the observations
that he has elected to make,
that he may already be well down the path of penalty without having been
addressed on it or seen all
of the evidence.
BEECH-JONES J:
that basis the basis which your notice of contention
Yes, it was.
BEECH‑JONES
Is that raised, though, on the notice
of appeal? I raise that for this reason, because when I read paragraphs 30
to 31 of your
submissions, I thought it was limited to just –
not the word “including”, in your outline of oral argument, but
limited to:
the credibility of the appellant’s witnesses, and their
As distinct from any other basis.
It is adumbrated in ground 4 of the appeal,
your Honour.
the evidence of Sunshine Loans was not
Yes, and it is the manner
in which – sorry, and in 36(a), as Ms O’Gorman
reminds me, in our submissions.
Well, that is the
second limb, but the first limb, which is the factor – as I
read 30 – was limited to:
findings of fact, as to the . . . credibility of as the
appellant’s witnesses, and the evidence they gave at the liability
But your ground of appeal is broader than
A little, not very much. The reason I say
that, your Honour, is because the way in which his Honour went about
the credibility issues
is within the context of the reasons.
That is what we say. So, can I cut
straight to the reasons, your Honours. They can be found commencing at
page 5 in the appellant’s
book of further
materials ‑ ‑ ‑
Is there an issue about whether any of the relevant reasons
are relevant to the question of penalty?
think the short answer to that is no, your Honour, because much was made in
the Full Court about this bifurcation question.
With the greatest of
respect, we submit that it is misleading to focus upon that. Amongst other
makes it clear that the fair‑minded lay observer can
form a view that there has been a loss of impartiality at any stage of
proceeding, and if that view is formed – and as this Court reminded
, once it becomes apparent that there could be a ground for
misapprehension, then the point needs to be raised, needs to be
So, in the circumstances of this particular case, which was not
unusual, where the question of contravention was going to be determined,
then penalty – or, in other cases, when the question of liability is
to be determined and then that quantum – there
it appeared from the reasons of their Honours Justices Bromwich
and Colvin, that does not present a barrier to the
lay observer reasonably
forming a view that there can be a possibility that the judge will not be able
to bring an impartial mind
to bear to the next part of the
proceeding.
That may be accepted, but there is one
difficulty, in the sense that the issue – even if one thought of the
whole thing as a
single matter and a single proceeding, the question of the
precise issue or controversy on the penalty hearing to which the apprehended
bias might relate may have been a bit premature, because that issue was never
really crystallised. It was never very clear, other
than in the abstract
allegations that there is a prejudgment of credit generally, as to what it was
precisely in the affidavit evidence
that was going to be given by Mr Powe
that the primary judge would have prejudged or have an apprehended bias in
relation to.
The way in which we put the submission,
your Honour, is this. On the penalty stage, as your Honours, with
respect, will know better
than I, from
, there is still evidence
relevant to the French factors, for example, French factor 8 at
paragraph 18 in
Now, the observer can be taken to
understand – so, if I give your Honour this example, that
evidence can go to: the extent
of the impact of the contravention; what has
been done to remediate it; in the circumstances of this case, where,
understanding that
they have lost all the appeals, they have to accept that
there was a contravention, the acceptance of the contravention; the contrition;
the steps that are now taken to ensure that a culture of compliance with the law
or with the Act is pursued within the company.
Now, in the circumstances
of this company, it is appropriate for Mr Powe to give that, because this
is not a BHP, this is –
this may never arise in the circumstances of
an enormous listed public company where the agents of the contravention are
from in‑house counsel, for example, or even the policies. So,
that is the very real concern in a case such as this, that where
when I take your Honours through his Honour’s reasons,
where – it is not so much the language that has been
What we are trying to point to – and maybe I am not
putting this very well – is that, because the judge was motivated
use the language that he did, it signals fairly, to a reasonable person, not
necessarily legally trained, that he has been motivated
to use that language.
There is a frame of mind that he has about this particular appellant.
am not giving you the exact specifics, your Honour Justice Edelman,
but I am trying to grapple with that if I can, and I am heartened
to say that is
one problem. We are not pretending that the submission is not a difficult
submission, in the sense that we are looking
at the totality of
his Honour’s reasons and then focusing upon certain aspects within
that to explain that, to see whether
that can give rise to the factor.
Your Honours, if I cannot persuade you it gives rises to a factor, well,
that is that, but that
is the way we put it.
the reasons for judgment, is not it? The reasons are the
matter of logic, I can understand that if, in a first‑stage judgment, a
judge expressed the view that this matter
must call – given what I
have found, there must be the severe penalty. If it did say that, I could
probably understand how
you would say, well, all right, there is a prejudgment
there because nobody has heard anything. You are inferring – you are
asking for inferences to be drawn from things that have been said that lead
almost the same effect as a statement like that?
Yes, particularly later on in his Honour’s reasons, because part of
the argument that was run was that if his Honour was
minded to find
contravention that there had been honest belief – and so, therefore,
there could be relief under the Credit
Act – and his Honour
went on to say that he did not have to decide honesty, but if he did have to
decide whether the company
had acted honestly, he would decide against
You accept that all facts as found and conclusions
as reached in stage (1) are binding on whoever follows
becomes difficult, does it not, because that means that – what is the
difference between any judge in stage (2)? Say
that the trial judge became
incapacitated and another judge to hear, they are bound by everything, every
finding and legal conclusion
in – they cannot revisit any of those,
they are bound by them.
Yes, so that is a given, but I can accept that
if there was a sort of extraneous statement – this deserves the most
penalty – that somewhere there is a difference in principle
there, because you would say that they would not be bound by that
because that
is not actually connected to any of the – it is entirely extraneous
to the function.
For example – I will
take your Honours to the exact paragraph in a moment – a further
judge is not bound by this judge’s
opinion that the witness was absurd, or
that the witness was preposterous. The further
judge ‑ ‑ ‑
not? Because that is a finding.
respect, I think what they are bound by is the finding that the evidence has not
been accepted. Part of the unusual aspect
of this case is why the judge wanted
to say that the evidence was preposterous, as opposed to the normal course,
saying, I have evaluated
that evidence against the contemporaneous documents and
I consider that that evidence is not acceptable, I am even surprised that
witness considered that. But the words “preposterous”,
“absurd”, “schooled” to give a certain
theory ‑ ‑ ‑
sure. Imagine if the primary judge had said: on issue X, the witness
You are bound
by that in round 2.
Yes, but that is the
finding, if I can put it that way.
Well, on issue X, I
find the evidence preposterous – why are you not bound by that? Why,
if I – say I am the second-round
judge, there is incapacity, would I
not have to accept that the findings are that this evidence was
preposterous?
Well, the finding is that the judge
considered that the witnesses do not seek to give their evidence honestly. That
was ultimately
where he went to. So, he used the descriptors about it being
preposterous, but then what he came to was his conclusion on the evidence
why he was rejecting it.
Dishonesty –
dishonestly‑given evidence.
that your witnesses were not credible.
credible. That is correct, your Honour.
the language I think his Honour used in the
conclusions.
That is right.
But then you are bound by that – any judge is bound by
Yes. No, no,
trying to work out the difference between the position of the
person – what is the difference? Unless the person has
gone so far
as to say, express, no matter what is said, I am going to impose the most severe
penalty in round 2, then I can
me – if it is convenient, I do not wish to avoid
your Honour’s
question ‑ ‑ ‑
if we can go to the reasons, because that is really where the debate comes to,
with respect.
GAGELER CJ:
So, we are in the appellant’s
book of further materials.
Yes, thank you,
your Honour, which is tab 18, I am informed, in the Court
GAGELER CJ:
We have it.
you going beyond the passages that are referred to in the Full
Yes, I am. This is not about the evidence, but
this is leading into it. If I take your Honours to paragraph 197 at
page 54, and
your Honours will see there in the second‑last full
it led one of Sunshine Loans’ directors to the absurd
proposition –
Then, if I take your Honours to
paragraph 200 at page 55, his Honour says here:
It is difficult to know whether, in this respect, Sunshine Loans had adopted
a deliberately obstruse attitude, was effectively misleading
borrowers, or was
concocting a fanciful argument to avoid liability in these
proceedings.
Then, at paragraph 206 on page 56 of the book of
further materials, your Honours will find the more mild language which I
contrast, that, simply, the submission has:
a degree of unreality about it, and critically, is contrary
the words used, as his Honour found. Can I make it
clear, I am not taking your Honours through to make any criticism of what
Honour has found. I accept
entirely ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
So, you accept that those findings are open on the evidence as part of the final
judgment on this question?
His Honour made those
findings. I have appealed – well, the company appealed –
and lost. So, yes, your Honour.
BEECH-JONES J:
reflect his Honour’s actual reasons for giving final judgment on
those issues?
Yes. Then, if we go to 245 at
page 67, his Honour considered there was:
an array of unfounded submissions –
by looking at the
files. Then, at 246, his Honour indicated that he thought, in the
The submissions that the impugned fee was one chargeable to the borrower upon
default were wholly unsustainable.
Then we go to 251, at
page 70. His Honour thought it was:
a further attempt to avoid the above conclusion –
Then, at 252, his Honour introduced the word
“disingenuous” about Mr Simmons’
What paragraph was that, please,
Paragraph 252,
your Honour, I am sorry, on page 70. Then we come over
to 268 ‑ ‑ ‑
That is “disingenuous” being used in the sense of
Yes, your Honour. And then,
at 268, on page 74 – this is the contrast –
his Honour here says that he found the evidence
“unsatisfactory”. His Honour moved from that. Then, if I take
your Honours to 290, at page 79, his Honour
introduces here
the “well schooled”
GAGELER CJ:
Sorry, what paragraph was that?
paragraph 290.
GAGELER CJ:
Do you rely on the last sentence
the witnesses stubbornly clung –
Yes, your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES
Just to be clear, it is not said that there was any breach of
procedural fairness to your client in finding this, having regard
to the way the
trial was run?
BEECH‑JONES J:
Is 292 the next one?
Sorry, your Honour. Yes, so then, after 290, your Honours will
see – just bear with me for a moment. If we go to 292, first,
if you look at the way his Honour was describing the evidence of
Mr Simmons, we see at 291:
Mr Simmons asserted that in response to a request from a
et cetera, and then his Honour moved to
the oral evidence. Justice Beech‑Jones, I think the only thing I can
say in response
to your question is there was objection to the
cross‑examination about opinion, that it was overruled. But there is no
fairness point.
BEECH‑JONES J:
the trial was conducted on – that these people were effectively
giving dishonest evidence, and his Honour was within
the boundaries of the
dispute at the trial.
Yes, it was. And then
at 293, your Honours, at page 80:
Mr Simmons clung firmly to that impossible construction of the customer
transaction logs. He was a not unintelligent person and appeared
to be able to
read and consider the words recorded –
your Honours can see the words yourselves:
I do not accept that he sought to give his evidence honestly in this
Then his Honour moves to Mr Bennetts, and he says of
Mr Bennetts, at 294: “schooled” – and then,
at 297, his Honour
Despite this, he maintained the position that although the parties had agreed
that the payment would be deferred, there was nevertheless
a default by the
then he describes an “indefensible
position”. And then at 298, on page 81:
I do not accept that Mr Bennetts sought to answer honestly the questions
put to him in relation to this issue. His approach was not
merely to take every
opportunity to advance Sunshine Loans’ case and his evidence extended to a
deliberate misconstruction
of the obvious circumstances which were in front of
Then his Honour refers to:
The absurdity of the nature of Mr Bennetts’ evidence is further
Then, if I take your Honours to
paragraph 301, at the end of 301, over on page 82 of the
On no sensible view could it be accepted that, despite the agreement, the
customer would be in default if they did not make the
I wanted to take your Honours through that
because that is the lead‑in to Mr Powe and the comments about
Mr Powe’s evidence,
which his Honour Justice Perram in
dissent set out a number of. So, we commence at 302, and then if I take
your Honours back to
the reasons of Justice Perram in the core appeal
paragraph 4. Is that the one where he draws them together, on page 37
of the judgment?
Sorry – yes,
your Honour, yes. So, what Justice Perram was looking for, we say,
was the factor, and he commenced that in
page 43 of the core appeal book,
at paragraph 31.
Do you accept that
paragraph 4 is sort of a bringing‑together of his highlights, or most
egregious of what Justice Perram
Yes, your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
Are we still looking at
Justice Derrington’s reasons, or not?
Yes. In Justice Derrington’s reasons, I have taken your Honours
up to 302. That is also at paragraph 32 in Justice Perram.
then, at paragraph 33 of his reasons, Justice Perram set out 303
But there are more paragraphs, are there
not, in Justice Derrington’s reasons?
Yes, that is correct, your Honour.
So, the ones
in relation to Mr Powe are – you rely on 268, which is
appellant’s book of further material 74.
And then you rely on 301, 302, 303, 304
you rely on the others?
In terms of,
Not for Mr Powe as
is Mr Powe. And so, his Honour – back in
Justice Derrington’s reason, we get to 312, which was also set
by Justice Perram. And at 313, which his Honour did not set
out, Justice Derrington notes:
there is no need to consider . . . were it necessary to decide
I could not accept the evidence of those witnesses on that issue.
And then, before we close Justice Derrington, can I refer
your Honours to paragraphs 315, 316 and 317 on
In what respect?
GAGELER CJ:
What do we get out of those?
his Honour there has brought everything together to say that he has formed
the view, if we look at 317, that the company had
So, just so we are clear, I want to
understand what it is about those paragraphs, rather than general matters. So,
if I go to 315,
is it the first sentence and
if your Honour goes further down:
On the findings made, it charged fees to its customers which it was not
entitled to charge . . . The fee was styled . . .
that it was charged on the default by the customer cannot be sustained
and, if it could, it would only be because Sunshine Loans
had misled its
customers –
Where the agreement, his Honour found, if the agreement had been
It is not unfair to say that Sunshine Loans has acted –
in the next paragraph, which follows from 315:
acted in a wrongheaded manner over an extended period of time and, it is
apparent, has not attempted to ascertain the true effect
That, of itself, prevents section 183 from
operating –
GAGELER CJ:
Is that said to be somehow a
deviation from a finding on the merits of the dispute before
GAGELER CJ:
What are you
taking us to?
Where his Honour is moving to
is something that he did not have to find at the contravention stage, to a lack
of honesty.
BEECH‑JONES J:
that – again, was his Honour, in doing that, did he go beyond,
did he not afford your clients procedural fairness?
No, he has afforded procedural
BEECH‑JONES J:
In other words,
that 183 was in play.
Section 183
was in play, yes. And what his Honour says is that, at 317:
were it necessary to determine whether Sunshine Loans acted honestly, I would
have to conclude that it did not.
He says that he has not, but the submission is that the fair‑minded
observer can understand all of that language together –
primary judge’s comments – and understand that this is the
judge who now has to determine what is the appropriate
deterrent in
circumstances where, on the question of the appropriate deterrent, the company
can adduce further evidence in circumstances
where that evidence will be through
And so, the real question for the observer is, in those
circumstances, can there be an impartial mind brought to bear on the question
what is appropriate to achieve the specific
deterrence?
BEECH‑JONES J:
And that submission
you just made then was directed to just the evidence of Mr Powe? I thought
you were articulating ‑ ‑
No, sorry – then I have put it very unclearly,
and I apologise, your Honour.
it on a broader basis.
On the broader basis
that the observer understands that the judge has formed the view that the
evidence given – including
the evidence of Mr Powe, but all of
the evidence given – was given in order to avoid a finding that the
company was liable
for having charged a fee that it was not entitled to
He was also asked whether he would excuse the company, and in
making his determination that he would not excuse the company, he explained
that was because he considered that, if he had to make a finding –
which he did not have to – he would not be able
to find that the
company had acted honestly.
The fair‑minded observer understands
that the judge, to pick up your Honour’s point,
Justice Beech‑Jones, was entitled
to do that. That was part of what
he was having to determine, but the language and the expressions that he has
used and the fact
that he considered and stated that he considered that what the
company had done was – he does not use the word
“knowingly”,
but it almost leaps off the page to a sensible reading,
without trying to read anything into it. This is not a circumstance, as
, where we need to parse and analyse. His Honour is
effectively saying to people that this company knowingly
contravened.
There are two slightly
different senses of apprehended bias that might be in play, though. One is the
sense of prejudgment. There
may be some difficulty with prejudgment in the
abstract level at which the penalty hearing is dealt with on appeal and in this
without descending to the particular issue for which there is
prejudgment.
The second sense is something which falls short of
prejudgment but it is an evidence of such a degree of animosity towards a person
or a company not that an issue would be prejudged, but that an issue would not
be fairly judged. That is the sense I think –
your submissions are
not really submissions of prejudgment, are they?
because we do not have a prejudgment, as your Honour has pointed out to me,
on the specific matter where we can say that
his Honour had in fact
prejudged that the penalty should be at the maximum end because he had already
formed the view that this was
deliberate conduct, because he does not say that
there has been a knowing breach, and he does not say – and I am not
critical of him for not saying that, but what he has been minded to do,
what he has been motivated to do is, we would say –
and I need to be
very careful about this, because I was there, so I am trying to put that to one
side, but he has put it in the strongest
possible terms that these people have
come along, and he has not found that they were mistaken, misguided or relied
upon the wrong
He has found that they have actively developed a
thesis, schooled themselves in it, and that is the evidence that they have
in circumstances where the questions that he was dealing with were
whether or not – and the only question for his Honour that
have allowed any of this, in a sense, was that because 31A(1)(c) provides
that you can charge a fee if it is – I think
I am getting the words
slightly wrong, but in this sense – in the nature of a fee for a
default to which they were giving their
evidence about,
his Honour – and I am not saying he could not reject their
evidence, but here, what he chose to – what
he was motivated to do,
for reasons only his Honour can know, was to express – and I do
not want to be too extreme, but verging
on disdain for the evidence that was
given and with a view that it could have sensibly been thought. In those
circumstances, does
the person in the pub think that they will get a fair go on
penalty? We would say to your Honours, no.
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Wyles, could you explain to me the difference, as a matter of principle,
between this and a magistrate or a criminal judge sitting
on a trial by judge
alone who necessarily rejects the evidence of the accused to the level of beyond
reasonable doubt – probably
a liar – finds them guilty,
thereby labelling them a murderer, rapist, fraudster, whatever they are charged
with? What is
the difference? Because as I understand the way you put it, no
magistrate or judge in those circumstances could then go on to determine
the sentence should be.
With respect, no,
your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
That is what I am asking.
Is there something about what was done here, specific to this case, beyond the
function of deciding a
final judgment on the cases that were
Yes, because – if I could
adopt your Honour’s language – beyond the function of
deciding the case was the choice
or election to indulge in language that is not
required. Certainly, if there is a judge‑alone trial of a murder, then
judge can, of course, make findings. If it was the unusual circumstance,
your Honour, where the accused chose to give
BEECH-JONES
That is not unusual in the Magistrates
No, but if it were a more superior
court – if it happens that the accused goes into the witness box and
the magistrate determines
that the accused is not to be accepted on her or his
evidence, then we are not saying that there could never be, then, that the
would impose the penalty. What we are pointing to here is that this
is an unusual case. It is a – if it was not unusual,
with respect,
we would not be here,
because ‑ ‑ ‑
just come back to the – sorry. Let us come back. So, as I
understand it, the bifurcation – you do not say
that it has to be
bifurcated. In other words, you accept, as Justice Beech‑Jones has
put to you, that it is common practice
both in criminal and civil law, necessary
for the administration of justice, that you have one judge determine liability
and penalty,
and that they are often bifurcated.
So, that is one
contend, as I understand it, that there was any prejudgment of the penalty here,
in any of the reasons of Justice Derrington,
on liability. So, the first
bucket of apprehended bias, there is no prejudgment. Your entire –
as I understand the way you
have just put it, it is based upon animosity, by
reason of the language used, in respect of issues that were before the Court and
open to be the subject of appropriate findings.
Yes, he has moved too far.
He has moved too far, your Honour, and
But when you
say “moved too far”, I mean, it is going further than was strictly
necessary to decide the particular
issues before the judge. But courts
routinely do that. If a court needs to find that a witness is not reliable, it
will often be
said, the Court will often say, I am certain that the witness is
not reliable, or the witness was extremely
unreliable.
courts will almost always go beyond what is necessary – what is the
minimum necessary – to make the finding.
But – extremely unreliable and I cannot accept that evidence in the
face of the contemporaneous evidence; I find that the witness,
cross‑examined, sought to evade the cross‑examination and I do not
accept that the answers that the witness gave
were an honest
response – all of those things, but what – maybe we are
wrong, but the language here was not that. That
was not what his Honour
chose to do.
Your Honour Justice Gordon, we would like to go
down the prejudgment path but there is nothing to, in a sense, hang our hat on,
we are driven back to the fact that, because his Honour has not said
that there needs to be a severe penalty here, so, in those circumstances,
cannot say it will make a sensible submission that there is a prejudgment, but
the distinction between the prejudgment and can
I call it the antipathy or the
indignation which was ‑ ‑ ‑
And animosity
that – Chief Justice Gleeson did not use that word in
, he used “indignation”, but we would submit to
your Honour that is we are in the same genus, if I could put it that way.
In those ‑ ‑ ‑
have another question for you. If you accept, as you have, that the bifurcation
is a pragmatic case management tool which
is often used – especially
in civil penalty cases, for example – then, picking up something that
was asked earlier, is
this not, then, premature? Because you are not going to
know what the position is until the actual imposition of the penalty hearings
arising. I mean, at the moment – or is it such that you say,
regardless of that, it is, on the facts here and the way in which
the case was
ultimately determined by Justice Derrington, that the conclusion was
inevitable?
Yes, we are saying – we would
adopt the latter, your Honour. If I go back to the bifurcation or the
splitting of the trials
point, which, of course, Justice Derrington would
never let me do, but here, one of the – and what makes this case
is that because it is in the circumstances of a case where the
appropriate evidence on penalty comes from a witness who was also
before the judge on the question of contravention.
Justice Beech‑Jones, makes this case as different case to a case
where there could be civil – for example, if
Westpac is pursued for a
civil penalty contravention, then the persons giving evidence on the penalty are
likely to be very different
to the persons who are involved in the
contravention. For example, the recent cases in the newspapers about the bond
ANZ, it would be the traders about the contravention, but that will
not necessarily be the witnesses to be giving evidence on the
penalty, because
that would be the people who have put the policies in place, and what happened,
what disciplinary proceedings there
were, et cetera.
BEECH-JONES
That is why I asked you about crime, because in crime it would usually
be the accused, and they are the offender.
accused, yes.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, that brings to it –
but as I understand it, you have, in answer to Justice Gordon’s,
questions nailed your colours
to – there is something about the
animosity as revealed by the language that takes this above all the ordinary
bifurcation,
whether it be civil or criminal. That is, as I understand, where
you landed.
Yes. The only response your Honour
has seen from me is whether it takes it above the – I suppose what we
are really submitting
to you is that
makes it clear that it is at
any point – not only
is at any point where the apprehension can arise,
BEECH-JONES J:
has to have regard to the function being performed, and this is a function of
final judgment. That is the difference between
an interlocutory hearing and a
final hearing, or a hearing on allowing evidence in, or a bail hearing, or
whatever the context.
Here, it was a final judgment.
BEECH-JONES J:
That is what I am trying to get at. What is
it about this final judgment that is the problem? And, as I understand it, I
you said, well, it is the particular animosity as revealed by the
GAGELER CJ:
What – no, go ahead.
To make good the
proposition – sorry, I keep interrupting – is that,
because it is function of the final judgment and
because it is limited to
animosity, you are right – at any point, counsel and the judge
themselves can say, I have reached
a point where either apprehended
bias – and in order for the administration of justice, I need to step
That is right.
not quibble with that at all.
Consistent with – so, the question here is, we are looking at the
language you have taken to us, giving rise to the submission
you make as to
whether it is made out. Sorry, Chief Justice.
Sorry, Chief Justice.
GAGELER CJ:
One difficulty I have
with these submissions is that if you are right about the expression of
antipathy or animosity tainting the
second stage of the hearing, must not that
same antipathy or animosity have tainted the first stage of the
His Honour put to me that I
was making an actual bias submission. We are not. I cannot make an actual bias
submission, because
until his Honour’s reasons were published there
would be no proper, sensible, rational basis to suggest. And so, I am not
with the greatest of respect, your Honour, that it has to follow that it
must have infected his reasons because, in the development
of his reasons, as we
know, recently Justice Nettle in
and also – I am
sorry, I have forgotten the three Judges who were together in
they all agreed.
So, we know from stepping through those
reasons – so, it has been in the stepping through of the reasons that
the motivation
has happened. That may be, as his Honour – and I
know I keep going back to this, maybe just because it resonated with me,
why I could never be a judge – but his Honour
Chief Justice Gleeson said it was this indignation that can happen,
you must not let the indignation get in the way of justice being perceived
to be delivered impartially.
But it must be
the indignation beyond that which was necessary to support the findings, because
otherwise Justice Derrington is
in absolutely no different position from
any other judge who is deciding the penalty hearing.
So, it is the
epithets to the extent that they travelled beyond what was necessary to make the
findings on the issues in dispute.
And you say that a subsequent judge is
not bound by those excess epithets.
What has to be – the position is – if can I just put it,
it is not a matter of acceptance – the position
his Honour found that the evidence was not credible. Having found the
evidence was not credible, he found that there was
no basis to find that the fee
was charged in circumstances where it would be permitted under the
Credit Code.
That is it, but we did not just receive that set of
reasons. Overlaid on top of it was his Honour’s finding that in
although he does not say it, by using the words “well
schooled”, he is really saying that these people actually did not
that they could charge the fee, but they did charge it anyway.
But you are not saying there is anything improper about
No, no, but I am
saying ‑ ‑ ‑
It is entirely proper for a judge to record the strength of
conviction with which they make findings, even if that strength of
travels a long way beyond what is necessary to reach the finding.
The strength of conviction is a matter of describing the
words that are used. But even describing them in that manner, that does
prevent the fair‑minded person who understands that a judge might want to
express strength of conviction – but, of
course, the
fair‑minded person will also know that how you express that strength of
position is also the subject matter of
the third edition of the
Judicial Conduct
, 3rd edition – I am sorry, I did not put that
quite right – paragraph 4.12 specifically deals with
seeking to only write
what you have to write about matters, and to not cause
unnecessary anguish – that word is not used, but unnecessary words,
because the parties to the litigation can do nothing about
So that is directed to gratuitous
observations.
your Honour.
Are we in that
We would say that – I had not
thought of it that way, but with the greatest of respect, yes. But the
observations here: several
observations about “preposterous”, not
just once; several observations about “well schooled”; several
observations
to that effect. And so that is the umbrella set which provides
the context for,
then, the direct findings about the credibility of
That is all what you meant when you
said that the judge indulged in language that is not required, is it not? It is
the same thing,
gratuitous observations.
But my lack of felicity with the English language put it a different way,
your Honour. So, that is really what it comes to.
GAGELER CJ:
That is your first point?
Yes. That is it.
Now, can I just check with – I mean, there is a whole lot of notes I
have got, but your Honours know all
of this, with the greatest of respect,
far better than I can ever learn it. This is the argument that
GAGELER CJ:
strongest case was what
Justice ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
Your strongest case, in support of putting
your argument in this way, was Chief Justice Gleeson’s
reference, was it?
There is what his Honour
had to say in
, and also the observations of Justice Hayne and
Justice Callinan in that case as well.
GAGELER CJ:
Justice Perram.
Justice Perram. I think, unless there is anything further I can assist
your Honours with on that, I will hand over to
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, thank you,
Ms O’Gorman.
MS O’ GORMAN:
Your Honours, I propose to address the Court on the second of the two
alternative apprehended deviations for which the appellant
contends, which is
the apprehended deviation from the judicial task of assessing the credibility of
and the weight to be given to
the evidence that Mr Powe is still yet to
give at the penalty hearing.
If convenient to the Court, I propose to
identify in sequence the five integers of the
test as we contend it
applies in respect of this apprehended deviation, and in the course of doing so
address, in respect of this
second apprehended deviation,
your Honours’ questions asked to my learned friend in respect of the
When the test is applied by reference to the detail of its
elements, we contend that it becomes clear that the primary judge’s
of the credibility findings concerning Mr Powe gives rise to an
apprehension that he might not be impartial in his determination
of the relevant
question, that question being the credibility of and weight to be given to
Mr Powe’s penalty evidence.
In the course of addressing the
Court on the five integers, I also propose to explain why and where the majority
erred. In essence,
the majority errors – which ASIC also makes on
this appeal, with respect – is to assume that the earlier credibility
findings will necessarily be relevant to the question of the credibility of
Mr Powe’s penalty evidence.
As I will come to, and perhaps in
addressing your Honour Justice Jagot’s initial questions, the
appellant accepts that the
credibility findings might potentially be relevant to
the question of the credibility and weight of Mr Powe’s penalty
However, the relevance of those findings, we contend, is a key issue
that the penalty court needs to determine after hearing all
of the penalty
evidence and, critically, after affording Mr Powe procedural
It is not a question that the Full Court was required to
determine or which it was in a position to determine on the below appeal,
is not a question that is capable of justifying the apprehended element of
prejudgment when combined with an element of animosity.
Indeed, ultimately we
contend that this reasoning by the Full Court serves to underscore and to
illustrate both the logic and the
reasonableness of the apprehension that the
primary judge would also overestimate the relevance of those findings to the
– the relevant question – when determining the
penalty hearing.
I thought Mr Wyles agreed with
me that all of the findings that he was taking us to in in
Justice Derrington’s judgment were
relevant on the question on
MS O’ GORMAN:
Yes, he did,
your Honour. I do not accept that concession in respect of the second
apprehended deviation, and perhaps I can expand
upon that when I address the
potential relevance aspects.
In respect of the five integers of the
test, can I turn to the first, being the relevant question which is
apprehended to be determined other than on its legal and factual
respect of the apprehended deviation with which I am concerned, it is: what is
the credibility and weight of the evidence
that Mr Powe is to give at the
penalty hearing? Of course, a necessary element of the judicial function at the
penalty hearing will
be the determination of the weight to be given to the
evidence adduced to the penalty court.
So, why, to answer
your Honour Justice Edelman’s question, is this issue not
premature – or was it not premature –
with respect to
Justice Derrington’s decision? If I can ask the Court to go to core
appeal book, page 9, in particular, paragraph
Justice Derrington’s decision. We contend that this issue
crystallised exactly the moment that his Honour Justice Derrington
found it to have been crystallised, when it became clear that Mr Powe would
be called and when it became clear that ASIC would be
cross‑examining him,
including as to his creditworthiness.
Now, we accept, of course, then,
this puts the court in a position where it does need to determine the question
of apprehension of
bias prospectively, before the penalty court has evidenced
any aspects of that apprehended bias. But we also contend that that is
appropriate, that it is appropriate for a court to make that prospective
judgment before the court purports to exercise its jurisdiction
in such a way
where that apprehension of bias is then evidenced.
Even if it does not rise to the level of
prejudgment?
MS O’GORMAN:
Yes, your Honour,
if – we would contend – if, though, there was evidence of
another apprehension of bias arising.
The primary judge’s analysis in the
recusal decision was, with respect, coming back to the first integer, rightly
the detail of the relevant question. If I can ask the Court to go to
core appeal book page 13 and to read paragraph 17.
Am I right that these paragraphs you are taking us to are
limited just to Mr Powe’s evidence? So, just so we are
Yes, your Honour.
‑ ‑ ‑ the primary judge
recused himself solely on the fact that he had to make what he saw as a second
finding in relation to Mr Powe.
Yes, your Honour.
So, that is 17 and then 19
MS O’GORMAN:
Yes, your Honour.
And when I will come to the second element of the
the factor – we limit ourselves to five findings in respect of this
second apprehended deviation – five
findings found at
paragraphs 302 to 304 – similarly limited to
Mr Powe’s evidence.
MS O’GORMAN:
Paragraph 17, we contend,
of that decision – in the middle of the paragraph –
Justice Derrington effectively identified
the question as entailing the
impartially assess that person’s credibility on further issues in the
same or any other matter.
Without taking the Court to it, can I note that
Justice Perram in the last sentence of paragraph 35, core appeal
book 45, similarly
identified the relevant question with that degree of
detail. If I could then take the Court to the ways that the majority identified
the question, starting firstly with Justice Colvin at core appeal book
page 80, paragraph 161, particularly the first sentence.
respect, we contend that Justice Colvin in a majority of his judgment is
not focused entirety on the specifics of the relevant
question, but in
paragraph 161 he certainly is. I will return to the reasons why the two
reasons that he gives for why that question
does not give rise to an apprehended
bias, with respect, should be rejected.
BEECH‑JONES
Can I just ask this, is this argument you are
making – would it be as equally valid if all the primary judge had
I do not accept the evidence of Mr Powe, I believe he lied, or I
find that he lied.
MS O’GORMAN:
your Honour, it would not.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Right. So, there is something – we are going to come to
MS O’GORMAN:
your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
something about – beyond that in the language?
your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
All right, I
understand.
MS O’GORMAN:
At paragraphs 100
to 101, at core appeal book pages 64 to 65, Justice Bromwich
summarises at a high level the question upon which
his reasoning is focused. In
those paragraphs Justice Bromwich, with respect, fails to identify and then
to focus on the specific
question whose determination Justice Derrington
had identified as at risk of apprehended bias. Instead, the analysis remains
the feared impartiality at the later stage –
come to, we contend that that analysis confuses relevance with impartiality.
Ultimately, the failure to fix the analysis
on the specific relevant question
made it difficult for the analysis of the other integers to discern from amongst
the complexity
of the procedural landscape of bifurcated civil penalty
proceedings the exact apprehension of bias to which the earlier credibility
findings gave rise.
So, is this fair? I ask that for
this question. You had a notice of contention in the Court of Appeal, did you
not, in the Full
MS O’GORMAN:
your Honour.
Is that not what his Honour is
addressing? His Honour is addressing the broader basis. His Honour
is just not focused on Powe.
This is what I asked your leader, or your
co‑senior counsel, Mr Wyle, at the start. The case that he had to
deal with, or
that the Full Court had to deal with, was not the second deviation
on its own, it was the broader first deviation. Is that not what
dealing with?
MS O’GORMAN:
Well, in identifying 100
to 101, we attempted to identify the best passages or the closest
Justice Bromwich comes to identifying
the relevant question. I do not do
that in order, in any way, to be unfair to his Honour, but simply to note
that when the analysis
is done at the higher level of granularity in respect of
the second apprehended deviation, the issues do become clearer. But when
analysis is done at the higher level, where the question is simply, can findings
be brought forward to a second stage of a proceeding,
it is at that stage of the
analysis that apprehensions of bias can, with respect, be
Turning to the second of the five limbs, then, which is the
factor which it is said might lead the judge to resolve the question
on its legal and factual merits – and this is to answer
your Honour Justice Beech‑Jones’ question:
second apprehended deviation is the fact that
the primary judge has already made
and already reached a state of actual persuasion in respect of findings as to
the credibility,
but also the character, of Mr Powe as a witness, and he
has done so in terms that are strident.
If I can, at the outset,
identify – perhaps just by reference to the paragraph
numbers – the five critical findings upon
which we rely for this
factor. These are found at the further book of materials, page 82, in
paragraphs 302 to 304 of the recusal
decision. So the first,
paragraph ‑ ‑ ‑
Sorry, could you give me those references again?
Yes, sorry, your Honour. Further of book of
materials, page 82, paragraphs 302 to 304.
GAGELER CJ:
So, we have been taken to these in that form and also in the judgment of
Justice Perram, I think.
MS O’GORMAN:
your Honour, you have. But just so that I am exactly identifying the scope
of our argument, can I just identify briefly,
Chief Justice, the first
at 302, the finding as to “schooled”; the second at 303,
“preposterous”; the third,
at 304, he gave evidence that he
perhaps, it is implied, did not actually believe; the fourth,
he gave his evidence in an attempt to avoid the conclusion that Sunshine
Loans was charging fees otherwise than on a default –
the fifth, at 304, upon which we especially rely, the last
Ultimately ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES
What was that last one again, sorry?
MS O’GORMAN:
Sorry, your Honour, 304, the last sentence, which is:
Ultimately . . . he was also not a witness who tried to give his
evidence in an honest manner.
BEECH-JONES J:
dishonest witness.
MS O’GORMAN:
Yes, your Honour, but
it is only the fifth, we concede, in which he makes a finding going to the
character of Mr Powe. But we
do especially rely upon that particular
Just so I am clear:
was also not a witness who tried to give his evidence in an honest
Why is that any different from: he
MS O’GORMAN:
Well, your Honour, we contend
that “he lied” is, in giving that evidence, he did not tell the
truth. We consider that
this last sentence:
he was also not a witness who tried to give his evidence in an honest
When combined with the other findings, evidence an apprehension by this
judge that he was of a character of not being honest.
So, if I just take your outline of oral argument at 10 and the factor, you
reached a state of actual persuasion in respect of, findings as to the
credibility and character of Mr Powe as a
MS O’GORMAN:
But you added an element, which I think needs to be added to that. You said in
“strident” terms, in your oral
submissions
Yes, your Honour, I did.
‑ ‑ ‑ because if it is credibility and
character – judges do that all the time as trial
MS O’GORMAN:
your Honour.
So, you need to add something to
paragraph 10 – I am not being critical, I am just making sure I
understand the extent of your
MS O’GORMAN:
Yes, your Honour, I do. And as I will come to, we rely upon both the
element of prejudgment which this entails, but in combination
with the element
of animosity in respect of the stridency of the terms.
BEECH-JONES J:
Right. Now, you used the phrase “character”. All the
references in 302 to 304 concern his evidence.
BEECH‑JONES J:
We are talking
MS O’GORMAN:
your Honour.
BEECH-JONES J:
Is it any different to saying
he was a dishonest witness?
MS O’GORMAN:
Well, we are
not trying to seek to avoid characterisation as a dishonest witness, we do
accept that the findings go that far.
But in differentiating this case from the
one that your Honour was referring to, we would also contend that the
language that was
used was of such a strident term that the case cannot be
limited to just a case where the witness is found to have
I think what your submission reduces to,
ultimately, does it not, is although it was not said expressly, one ought to
draw the implication
that what his Honour was finding was that whatever
Mr Powe said on the penalty hearing, on any different matter, would not be
MS O’GORMAN:
And we will come to,
your Honour – yes, that is our submission, and we will come to
the reasons why that is a logical and
reasonable apprehension. Obviously,
though, we do not go so far as to contend that the judge would actually have
engaged in that
process of reasoning at the penalty hearing.
No, but it would be – I think you have to go – when you say
“strident”, or whatever it is, I think it is a
code for something
else. Because what you are really getting to, I think, is what
Justice Edelman is putting, because the only way
you can go from the
difference between I do not accept his evidence, that evidence I find was a
lie – and you are happy with
that, as in you do not suggest that if
that had been alone in this case there would be any issue.
So, you are
saying that when you put together the 302 plus 304 findings they are
not justified, in that he was not giving honest
evidence in respect of the
evidence he gave, but there is a finding that he is a person of a character such
that it would be apprehended,
reasonably, that the primary judge would approach
the penalty hearing on the basis that either because of that character he would
never believe something Mr Powe would say or would have a strong
predisposition not to believe what Mr Powe would say on matters
unconnected
to the original findings. That is how it has to work, has it not?
With respect, your Honour, yes, it is exactly how we
seek to put it. The distinction I was seeking to draw with your Honour
Edelman was simply that we do not seek to go so far as to attempt
to prove actual bias, and we do
is an apprehension from that, that it is beyond saying: I do not accept your
evidence. And that is what “strident”
is code for, in this
MS O’GORMAN:
Yes, your Honour.
Because “strident” is really meaningless – you
know, it is just a descriptor. Stridency does not seem to me to
be relevant.
It could be non‑stridently saying: this person is of a dreadful character
and I would never believe a thing
they said and will not do so in a penalty
hearing – an example I gave, almost – then you would say,
of course this person
has an apprehension of bias.
And as we will come to though, your Honour, we do
contend that the colour of the language is relevant when assessing the animosity
which an observer might apprehend a judge to carry over into the penalty
It is only relevant for that reason, because
of the apprehension that you say goes with it.
MS O’GORMAN:
Yes, your Honour.
It is not relevant for its own
MS O’GORMAN:
And we also rely upon that reason being
why, to answer the Chief Justice’s question, why the fact of this
language would
not infect the earlier judgment, because there is no prospect of
the carryover into the judge’s then‑assessment as to
the relevant
If I can turn to the third of the five integers, there is an
apprehended risk that the making of the credibility findings concerning
Mr Powe – and this is now to pick up your Honour
Justice Jagot’s indication, with respect – might leave the
judge unable to return to the sufficiently impartial state of what we
contend needs to be the suspended judgment in which he is to
Mr Powe’s second tranche of evidence.
Our submission is that
the making of the earlier credibility findings, especially in the language in
which they were made, might
be apprehended to leave footprints in the sands of
that judicial subconscious, who was actually persuaded at to those findings, so
as to leave the primary judge unable to return to that sufficiently impartial
state of suspended judgment when he is called upon
to make that analysis in
respect of Mr Powe’s penalty evidence.
GAGELER CJ:
Does he have to come with a blank mind, so far as Mr Powe is
MS O’GORMAN:
No, your Honour, we do not
accept that he needs to come with a blank mind. We do accept that the
authorities tolerate a degree
of preconception. But we do contend that when it
comes to the assessment of his evidence, including by reasons of the procedural
fairness that he needs to afford to Mr Powe, there was a line that was
crossed in reference to these five findings such that these
preconceptions are
Do you accept that the language of this
material includes the fact that it is notably confined to assessment of his
evidence, and
that is an indicator against your case?
We accept, your Honour, that in their express literal
terms, yes, that is so. But we do contend that an observer might apprehend,
putting the number of them and the language of them together, that in fact the
primary judge had reached a position where it went
further than that, and that
he had formed a view as to the character of Mr Powe as a
GAGELER CJ:
Ms O’Gorman, that might be an
appropriate time for us to take the morning adjournment.
Thank you, your Honour.
AT 11.15 AM
SHORT ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 11.29
GAGELER CJ:
MS O’GORMAN:
your Honour. Returning to the third integer, which is the apprehended
risk, if I can note two features of the factor
which we rely upon to ground the
submission that the learned primary judge might be unable to return to the
sufficiently impartial
state of suspended judgment.
We rely on two
features. First, that findings of this kind, like findings that a witness lied,
are unusual. In our written submissions
at paragraph 31, we cite the
judgment of Justice Jacobs in
McCormack v Federal Commissioner of
[1979] HCA 18
(1978) 143 CLR 284
at 313 for that
proposition.
The second feature, though, is that the findings are
expressed in language that is extremely sceptical, we contend. And to answer
your Honour the Chief Justice’s question as to what is the best
case for this apprehended deviation, can I take the Court to
British American
Tobacco Australia Services Limited v Laurie
, found at volume 4,
tab 7 of the joint book of authorities, page 894, and in particular
ask the Court to read paragraph 145, forming
part of the judgment of
Justices Heydon, Kiefel and Bell.
GAGELER CJ:
you are picking up on the words “extreme scepticism”.
We are, your Honour. We are also picking
up on the analogy, which applies in this case, that similarly, we do not contend
the judge here used “violent language”, but we do contend that
the epithets of “preposterous”, “schooled”
“honest manner” are at the extreme end of the judicial
What is at the extreme end,
MS O’GORMAN:
Use of the descriptors
“preposterous”, “schooled” and “honest
manner”. Though, of course we
are quick to note, just as
Justice Perram was at paragraph 45 of his judgment, that we are not
being critical of his Honour in the
use of those terms.
entirely Justice Edelman’s observation that it is entirely proper for
a judge to record the strength of conviction
when a judge does reach that
strength. The submission is simply that there may be procedural consequences
for the judge having formed
– appropriately, on the
evidence – that state of actual
persuasion.
BEECH‑JONES J:
But in terms of
extreme scepticism, I think we have already – have we got to the
point where, if the trial judge had said:
I do not accept their evidence, they
were lying, there would not be a problem – that is much stronger than
extreme scepticism,
that is just outright rejection. I understand your point
Your Honour, we contend that it does,
because an element of extreme scepticism, with respect, does involve the element
of the gratuitous
use of the language, in that the judge’s finding is his
conviction was so strong that he went beyond an observation that Mr
had simply lied. His observations were, in fact, that Mr Powe was
“preposterous” in his evidence. That, with respect,
observation that is, in its scepticism, different from an observation that he
simply lied.
Often, primary judges will say: I refuse
to accept the evidence of X unless it is supported by contemporaneous
documentary evidence.
MS O’GORMAN:
your Honour.
What is wrong with that? Is that
extreme scepticism? On any view, on one bucket, on one view, it would
MS O’GORMAN:
Your Honour, we contend no, and in
fact we contend that that is a form of reasoning that Justice Jacobs was
not expressly dealing
with, but was a middle ground in the two areas he was
dealing with.
Can I just test that. Does that mean
that unless, on the second round, in your submission, that the evidence of that
witness would
have to be supported by documentary evidence before the judge
could proceed to the penalty stage?
MS O’GORMAN:
Your Honour, we would contend that it certainly might be the case that at
the penalty hearing the appellant, in calling Mr Powe,
might need to do
some deep work in order to satisfy the court that Mr Powe has given
evidence honestly. But, as I will come to,
that is a process which is orthodox
and it involves Mr Powe being cross‑examined about these matters, the
allegations being
put to Mr Powe and Mr Powe having an opportunity to
respond to them.
We do accept that there may well be a world where the
appellant, if it chooses to call Mr Powe at the penalty
hearing – which
it has – does need to, in order to be
convincing and persuasive, point to the documents that would buttress
Mr Powe at least
on specific parts of his evidence.
Might there not be a difference between a judge who expresses their reasons
by saying, I have not accepted any of this person’s
evidence unless it has
been corroborated, and the judge who said: I would not accept this
person’s evidence unless it were
corroborated. That would be a problem,
but surely the other is nothing to raise any concern, unless there is something
MS O’GORMAN:
Yes. Well, we would accept that
Johnson v Johnson
would require us to say that there is no concern
in that case, but we would contend that our facts do go further, in that it is
simply that the judge had indicated that for him to accept
Mr Powe’s evidence he needs to be so satisfied. We would contend
that the indications are slightly different.
imagine Mr Powe now coming along and giving evidence to say that I have
read this judgment and I am dismayed and embarrassed
and I have taken a whole
lot of steps to deal with this, what is there, in the primary judge’s
reasons, that suggests that
that would not be accepted at face
MS O’GORMAN:
Well, your Honour, first of all
we would accept that, indeed, that very feature of the bifurcated proceedings
and the fact that
Mr Powe has the opportunity to reflect upon the liability
here and to give evidence about that, does show exactly why the task of
assessing Mr Powe’s credibility at the liability stage is very
different from the task of assessing his credibility at the
penalty hearing and,
therefore, why the earlier credibility findings cannot be carried forward, to
use the language of the majority
or ASIC’s submission.
your Honours, we would say, though, that his findings have given rise to an
apprehension that he may not necessarily have a
sufficiently open mind in order
to assess whether, if Mr Powe were to come forward and to express such
sentiments, those sentiments
were genuinely expressed. We contend that it is
that assessment of genuineness which needs to be done at the penalty hearing
the sufficiently suspended state of judgment, with the open mind, and that
when a judge forms a state of actual persuasion of this
kind, there is an
apprehension that that suspended state of judgment will be difficult to return
But you do not have to have a – nobody
will have a fully suspended state, as in neither the primary judge nor any judge
comes to hear this. They will read this decision and say: this person lied
in giving evidence, in effect.
MS O’GORMAN:
your Honour.
Okay, so, it is okay to go into the
next hearing, knowing this person’s evidence – the evidence
they gave was false,
dishonest. You have to get something more, and the
something more has to be something that logically says, in what was said there,
there is something that allows it to be reasonably apprehended – or
it might be reasonably apprehended – that when you
are confronted
with new evidence, you are going to not approach that on its own merits, you are
going to simply apply: this person
was a liar about evidence X, therefore
they must be a liar about evidence Y. You would have to say that there is
something in the
reasons that enable that to be logically drawn, because it is
fundamental to judging that you know that a person who lies about X
necessarily lying about Y.
But if a judge did say something –
I would never believe a word this person said about anything – yes.
You have to get
from – and to me, stridency has nothing to do with
it, I have to say, it could be non‑strident, but I am just not
– and animosity, I do not really even know what that means in
this context – it has to be something in the objective
character of
what was said, surely, that leads to an apprehension that the impartial mind
might not be brought to bear on fresh evidence,
because, as I say, if I were
doing it, and I read the judgment, you would go in – of course you
would go in and say: okay,
this person has been found to be a liar about X, Y
and Z. Nothing wrong with that, though, is
MS O’GORMAN:
Your Honour, we would
contend that the appropriate state of mind for a judge when assessing
Mr Powe’s evidence at the penalty
hearing is to keep a suspended
state of judgment as to whether, for example, he has learned his lesson from the
liability hearing
and he has come to the penalty hearing with a willingness to
give evidence in an honest manner. But to
address ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
Sorry, is that a suspended state of complete open judgment or just a capacity to
accept that, bearing in mind what had been found
MS O’GORMAN:
A capacity to accept it,
your Honour, which is a capacity to be exercised, though, we accept, in a
proceeding and in a hearing
where that judge will need to listen to evidence
where ASIC may choose to put these findings and that evidence to Mr Powe in
cross‑examination.
So, perhaps if I can respond to the
questions – your Honour Justice Jagot, first, by
identifying the four of the five integers,
which we put forward as our way of
answering your Honour’s question. Your Honour
Justice Beech‑Jones, we contend our
response to the fifth integer
should address that query. If I can turn to the fourth of the five integers,
which is the logical
element, which ties together the first three integers
together by way of logic.
In our written submissions, we identify three
alternative and cumulative logical connections by which the making of the
earlier credibility
findings might prompt the fair‑minded lay observer to
apprehend that the primary judge might not consider Mr Powe’s
in a sufficiently suspended state of judgment, and we contend that
these three logical connections do differentiate the primary judge
position that a new judge would occupy in the proper exercise of the judicial
function at the penalty stage.
Where are you? Is there
a paragraph – are you trying to take us to your
submissions?
MS O’GORMAN:
Not just yet,
your Honour.
Okay. All right.
I was just indicating that we do rely upon three different
logical connections. I was proposing to address your Honours briefly
what those logical connections are before then making the submission that that
logic is not diffused, we contend, simply because
the credibility findings might
be relevant to issues in dispute at the penalty hearing. That is, we contend, a
possible relevance
– and we acknowledge their possible
relevance – will not be such as to negate or cure the apprehended
The first, then, of the three logical connections which we rely
upon, and which your Honour Justice Jagot has noted is not yet
convincing,
your Honour, but can I note that it is one of three cumulative
ones, is that we consider that there is an apprehension or a risk
apprehension that the primary judge may have been seen to have taken, by the
making of these findings in the language, an adversarial
position as against
Now, the appellant accepts that the apprehension of this
position does not relate to the classical adversarial position that defines
litigation in Australian courts. So, it is obviously different from the
position of the prosecutor,
an accused, who
prosecutes the accused in respect of that conviction.
Rather, though, we
contend the liability judge’s proper performance of his judicial oath and
the making of the credibility
findings, and the making of these findings in a
public judgment in the language that was used, does put the judge in a position
he might be apprehended to have moved out of his initial stance of
neutrality and be apprehended now to stand in opposition to
As I will come, with respect to the fifth integer, the
best illustration, we contend, of that adversarial position can become clear
when anticipating the procedure that will be embarked upon at the penalty
hearing. Because, as I will come to, if ASIC does want
to put to Mr Powe
that his evidence is as lacking in credibility now as it was at the liability
hearing, then ASIC will need to put
those propositions – the
findings, the aspects of the evidence that he gave at the liability
hearing – to Mr Powe in
cross-examination.
And when he
puts those findings, when he puts the findings made by the primary judge to
Mr Powe, ASIC will be putting to the witness
the very words of the judge
who would then be sitting in judgment, who would then be sitting to assess the
credibility of the answers
that Mr Powe was to give. And we contend that
that positioning of the judge sitting in judgment of that cross-examination
and the judge’s own findings being put to Mr Powe in the
course of cross-examination, gives rise to an apprehension as to the
adversarial
BEECH-JONES J:
But how would that be any different if
the judge had simply said Mr Powe was an untruthful witness, and then he
came along later,
and he was cross-examined and it was said, Mr Powe,
his Honour found you to be an untruthful witness in saying this, have you
cause to reflect upon that – how would that be any different to
MS O’GORMAN:
Your Honour, we contend that
the colour of it, which the observer would be alert to, is significantly
different, because the puttage
would entail a puttage of the proposition that
you simply did not lie. It is not that you gave evidence that was not true, you
evidence that was “preposterous”, and your evidence was
“schooled”, along with the evidence of your fellow
agents of this
We contend that that manner of cross-examination is apt to
indicate and create an apprehension that, in fact, the judge’s thinking
element – of an assessment of ridiculousness about the
evidence which
could be made use of by a cross-examiner at the penalty hearing.
contend that a use could be made out of the colour of those findings that could
not necessarily be made out of a finding which
we are more used to, which is
simply a finding that that evidence was a lie. That is the first of the three
logical connections,
though, to answer your Honour
Justice Jagot’s question, and we are mindful, of course, that
your Honour is not so persuaded
by the element of the language.
the other element which we rely upon concerns the cognitive anchoring argument.
The submission is that the making of the earlier
credibility findings concerning
Mr Powe gave rise to the apprehension in respect of the primary judge that
would not have arisen
in respect of any other judge because the primary judge
had reached and had publicly declared himself to have reached a state of
persuasion as the earlier findings. We contend that the process of making and
the fact of having made the findings are the
cognitive anchors. We contend that
GAGELER CJ:
That is irrespective of the language, is it not?
Yes, it is so, your Honour,
GAGELER CJ:
So, it would be exactly the
same – to go back to the questions that have been asked
repeatedly – if the judge had just
said the witness
MS O’GORMAN:
We accept that the cognitive
anchor in its abstract would be the same, your Honour, but in this case the
kind of cognitive anchor
– because we contend that the logical
connections are cumulative and operate together – is the extreme one
with the extreme
language. We accept that a finding, reaching a stage of actual
persuasion, operates similarly in respect of a finding of lying,
in respect of
laying an anchor in the cognitive process, as it does in respect of these five
But our submission in respect of all three logical connections
together is that the kind of anchor that has been set down by the
primary judge
is one in respect of the evidence being of such a particular kind, such an
extreme end of lack of credibility, that
it would make it more difficult for
that cognitive anchor to be let go of. We also
contend ‑ ‑ ‑
Sorry, can I just ask, is this anything more than another
label for apprehended not bringing the impartial mind?
Your Honour, we contend that that is the
end result, but we are attempting to elucidate what we say is the logical
connection that
gets us there.
that any judge is going to think – we would expect – would
think long and hard before making a finding that
a witness was dishonest, why
would the cognitive anchor be any different?
Your Honour, first of all, we would accept,
of course, that this judge, too, would think long and hard. We are not seeking
challenge that. All we are seeking to make good of is what the observer
would apprehend this judge’s process of reasoning
submission is nothing more than when the observer sees that the judge has made
findings with this colour and has reached a state
of actual persuasion so as to
make the findings in a binding judgment, the observer would apprehend that the
judge could not go back
to the open state of suspended judgment that is
We submit, though, that this submission stands in contrast to
the position taken by ASIC and the majority, who do not, in our respectful
submission, seem to dispute the likely weight of the cognitive anchors on the
penalty judge’s apprehended process of reasoning.
Instead, it seems that
the majority, in finding that the findings would be carried forward to the
penalty hearing stage, appear
to suggest that the earlier credibility findings
are indeed the icebergs on which the credibility of Mr Powe’s penalty
should in fact, inevitably, be shipwrecked.
That is, they
suggest that the foreshadowed process of reasoning by which the primary judge is
to take the earlier credibility findings
into account when assessing
Mr Powe’s credibility evidence is not, in itself, a deviation from an
impartial determination of
the question.
It comes back
to the question I think Justice Beech‑Jones asked you. It is about
capacity, is it not, to bring an independent
mind to it? So, as I read the Full
Court’s decisions, they are saying: there are earlier findings in
relation to Mr Powe’s
evidence; they are carried forward, because
they are the basis upon which the penalty is to be at least considered; they may
be relevant
or irrelevant, depending upon the way in which the penalty hearing
is run. The question is, is there a capacity for the judge, by
reference to the
fair‑minded observer, to bring an independent mind to that assessment of
penalty in light of those findings?
MS O’GORMAN:
your Honour, we – that is the first of the apprehended bias.
This is dealing just with Mr Powe.
MS O’GORMAN:
would say, your Honour, that in addressing the element of that position,
they may or may not be relevant. It is answering that
question – the
relevance of those earlier credibility findings to the credibility of
Mr Powe’s evidence – that
the infected impartiality is at
The submission we seek to make on this second apprehended
deviation is that at the penalty hearing, the penalty judge will necessarily
required to assess the credibility of Mr Powe’s penalty evidence.
When he or she is required to do that, that judge may
depending on how ASIC runs its case – need to assess whether or not
the earlier credibility findings are in fact
relevant to an assessment of
Mr Powe’s evidence.
So, we anticipate that a regular process
by which that would be done would be, for example, ASIC’s counsel
reviewing Mr Powe’s
affidavit at the penalty hearing – or
affidavits – and seeking to identify whether that evidence provides
counsel with a proper basis to put to Mr Powe that
Mr Powe’s evidence at the penalty hearing suffers from the same
that the primary judge found his earlier evidence to have
I just have a problem with that. If one
goes to the findings that you actually rely upon as being – what you
call the colourful
language, or whatever other descriptor you want to give
it – they were directed at particular findings in relation to the
of the fees, as I understand it, and then the criticism was made that
the evidence he had given in relation to the charging of the
“schooled” or in order to avoid a finding of contravention, and he
sought to justify his actions.
MS O’GORMAN:
That fact – that is, the fact of the
way in which the fees were charged – is the subject of the finding on
The question is, what penalty should be imposed for that conduct?
At the moment, I am just finding a disconnect, even on that basis,
between the
findings on those facts – there is no doubt those findings are
carried forward, because they are the basis for
the penalty, but I am finding
difficulty in making the logical link that you would have us
MS O’GORMAN:
Your Honour, we contend that
the question as to whether they can be carried forward to the specific question,
which needs to be
answered before the penalty question can be answered, is:
what is the credibility of Mr Powe’s penalty evidence? That is
question that the penalty court will need to answer, in exercise of its judicial
function, that requires the weighing of evidence
given to the penalty
BEECH-JONES J:
The first question might be: what is the
relevance? How does it relate to the evidence given at the earlier hearing?
to what extent is it challenged? And then you might be thinking, well,
what was said earlier about credibility, how might it affect
this? None of
which we really know, say.
MS O’GORMAN:
Your Honour, what we would contend, though, is that precise issue of the
sequence of issues is the sequence which will need to
be undertaken at the
penalty court stage. But, with respect, your Honour Justice Gordon,
in respect of the ability to carry forward
of the earlier findings, our
respectful submission is if that question is determined at the higher level of
the first stage, carried
forward to the second stage, and not answered at the
level of granularity addressed to the relevant question – the first
test – then it is not, with respect, going
to be helpful to assessment of what we contend is the apprehended bias for this
This deviation, we contend, is focused upon just the
assessment of the credibility of Mr Powe’s evidence. And so, coming
your Honour Justice Beech‑Jones’ question, we do accept
that there are very detailed forensic questions that ASIC will
need to determine
in order to ascertain whether or not those findings could in fact be relevant,
or argued to be relevant, at the
penalty stage.
So, for example, ASIC
will need to determine whether or not it will seek to contend that
Mr Powe’s evidence at the penalty
stage does in fact suffer from the
defects such that it has a basis to put the earlier findings or the earlier
evidence to Mr Powe
and so as to have a basis to then put to Mr Powe
that, in giving evidence at the penalty hearing, you were just as dishonest as
were when you gave evidence at the liability hearing.
And in assessing that submission, the judge is entitled, is he not, to
take into account the view that he formed at the earlier
MS O’GORMAN:
Well, your Honour, we
would say that it depends – and we would say it depends on the use
that ASIC seeks to make of the findings,
for example. For example, does ASIC
seek to contend to the Court that those findings as to character constitute
tendency evidence,
so that the Court should find that Mr Powe has a
tendency to give dishonest evidence?
If so, the Court will need to
determine whether it passes the burden, in section 97 of the
. Or ASIC might seek to say, no, we rely upon the evidence that
Mr Powe gave and the fact that it was dishonest as a prior inconsistent
statement, inconsistent with evidence he might seek to give at the penalty
GAGELER CJ:
Well, if the case is put that way, then the
judge has to weigh the evidence and make a determination – but why,
in weighing
the evidence, is this judge in a somehow more compromised position
than another judge, taking account of what this judge had said
in the earlier
MS O’GORMAN:
Your Honour, we contend
that when he comes to answer that question, what he will need to do is he will
need to consider the answers
that Mr Powe gives to the puttage put to him
in cross‑examination, and when doing that he will need to keep an open
to whether Mr Powe, in giving evidence at the penalty hearing, was
in fact giving evidence honestly.
But the submission is that, having
reached a state of actual persuasion that previously he was not attempting to be
a witness who
gave evidence honestly and that he had actually given evidence
that was preposterous, this judge, it is apprehended, would appear
observer not to be in that position, not to be in a state of suspended judgment
where he is then able to determine judicially
whether or not that line of
cross‑examination does give rise to an apprehension that Mr Powe is
now giving evidence that is
lacking in credibility.
We do consider it,
your Honours, significant that in the process of that
cross‑examination, ASIC will need to put to Mr Powe
propositions and give Mr Powe procedural fairness. We contend that that
means that Mr Powe needs to have an opportunity to
explain to the court
why, even though you considered me to have given evidence of a particular
extreme lacking‑honesty kind
at the liability hearing, these are the
reasons why you should consider that my spots have changed and that I am now
attempting to
give evidence to this court in a way that is contrite and in a way
that is transparent and upfront to the court.
The submission is that
that particular task, that persuasive task that Mr Powe needs to undertake,
is a heavy one, but it is made
heavier if the propositions that are put to him,
which he needs to defend, are propositions in the judge’s own language,
they are the findings that the judge made after reaching the state of actual
persuasion.
You are straying into a kind of area that
is just unanswerable. As Justice Bromwich said, human experience would say
that the reality
is it may well be easier to persuade the person who actually
wrote the judgment of a change than a person who is simply reading it
by the findings. That is just the reality of human experience.
there is any cognitive anchoring or any of these other things, it is probably
someone coming to it afresh. But none of that
seems to me to be where it is
really at, because it is all assuming that you have to approach things in some
kind of mysterious state
of suspended judgment. Even leaving aside that you are
bound by findings in liability when you come to penalty, you do not have
approach things in any kind of state of suspended judgment.
You can read
submissions before a hearing and hold some very strong views. You just have to
be open to persuasion, and it is no
problem coming onto a bench and
saying – I have to do it, of course – look, I read it and
I do not get it, it does not
make any sense to me, it just seems totally
unpersuasive. Nobody would then stand up and say, boom, apprehended bias, you
because the whole point is: okay, I am open to persuasion, persuade
me. So, this whole idea of the frame of mind, the suspended
judgment – it only means open to persuasion, to me; not I do not have
views – even strong views.
Your Honour, we do not seek to contend that
there is any difference between suspended state of judgment and open to
persuasion.
What we do contend, though, with respect, your Honour, is that
the observer is not likely to form – it is a judicial view,
respect, which approaches that analysis by contending that it is the judge who
made the findings who may indeed be more easily
submission is that the observer’s perspective is not of that kind, and
that the fair‑minded lay observer would apprehend
that the judge who had
made the earlier findings would not be able to return to that same open state of
persuasion – be willing
to approach the receipt of
Mr Powe’s penalty evidence with the same state of openness of
mind – as another judge would,
who, yes, would read the earlier
findings but who, for example, may assess Mr Powe’s credibility
differently from how they
were described in the earlier judgment.
Your Honours, if there is nothing
further ‑ ‑ ‑
Just before you – there is something, sorry. In
your submissions, in this context, you referred to, I think, the observations
Justice Lee in
and Justice Besanko in
in this context.
Yes, your Honour.
How do they help you?
MS O’GORMAN:
Your Honour, in respect of Justice Lee, Justice Lee’s
judgment refers to the:
element of prejudgment –
Justice Lee’s judgment, we contend, is helpful because it
supports the proposition that where a judge has made credibility findings
against a witness, there may in fact be an apprehended element of prejudgment in
respect of the future assessment of credibility
And with respect, your Honour, could I note
that we contend that Justice Lee’s judgment in
consistent with orthodox judicial practice which, whilst it might be the case
that it may be hard in this Court to make out that
the mere finding that a
witness has lied gives rise to
an apprehension of bias, the orthodox
judicial practice would support Justice Lee’s observation, which is
that the more cautious
approach is that where findings of credibility of that
kind are made, then in that case there could in fact be an element of
prejudgment
so as to justify recusal.
think Justice Beech‑Jones put to Mr Wyles that that would cut
across that kind of submission – that breadth of that
would cut across the majority of practice both in the Magistrates Court and
MS O’GORMAN:
Your Honour, we do
not need to seek to defend that orthodox judicial practice as the boundary of
the apprehension of bias. But
we do seek to rely upon Justice Lee’s
judgment in order to contend that there are real reasons why the apprehension
that that element of judgment does in fact arise in some more extreme
cases that go beyond that but are still of that
BEECH‑JONES J:
The orthodox practice you speak
of is – at least in my experience, just speaking for me –
in the case where there is
an interlocutory hearing and findings of credibility.
The other orthodox practice that I was adverting to is in respect of final
hearings, the very distinction that Justice Bromwich drew, and it brings
into the test – as I understand it – because
the ordinary
reasonable observer has to understand what function is being performed, by who,
at what stage. So, where we –
I must say, what I want to go back to
is – your case, does it not just rest or fall on this idea that there
is something in
the language that goes above and beyond what was necessary or
appropriate for a final judgment to decide the liability questions.
In the end,
is that what it comes down to?
MS O’GORMAN:
Your Honour, almost yes, would be our response. We contend, in respect of
the second apprehended deviation, it comes down to that
the findings were, yes,
of character, but they were of the more extreme language, and it is that
combination together which means
that the judge would be apprehended not to be
in the sufficient open state of persuasion in respect of the second lot of
Thank you, your Honours.
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you. Mr Begbie.
Your Honours, we
will structure our submissions by starting with a little more attention on the
fair‑minded lay observer
and what they understand than has been given to
date. We will then move to the
test and deal with that in the
conventional three‑step manner, and then we will conclude with about three
minutes on the corollary
test, which the judge’s duty
Can I say, before I start the first topic, your Honours
will have detected that we have dealt with these matters in written submissions
and we will be dealing with them today in a way that has an almost de novo feel,
in terms of saying whether or not there was apprehended
bias here. The reason
for that – although this is an appeal – is that the
grounds of appeal do not really anchor into
particular error, they do not really
anchor into any particular part of the Full Court’s reasons.
has been run is a combination of, at some levels, a rerunning of what happened
before the primary judge with much more vigour
than was done before the Full
Court; at other levels, arguments that were not put before the Full Court, and
so on. It is not going
to be constructive for us to try to unpack that, so what
we are going to do is just step through the basics, as it were, to answer
complaint – the global complaint – of
GAGELER CJ:
Well, it is put on two quite distinct bases.
You will address both of those bases?
I will address
both of those, yes. They just do not map onto the appeal grounds, and they do
not map onto the way in which the
case was run
below ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
But you will ‑ ‑ ‑
‑ ‑ ‑ but I will deal with them
on those distinct bases, your Honour, yes. The other thing –
time and efficiency reasons, I will not spend a lot of time
doing – is going through the majority judgments, because we have
included all of the relevant sections of those judgments in our oral outline.
So, your Honours can see the references to where the
majority was right
If I start, then,
with the fair‑minded lay observer, central to the majority’s reasons
and central to what this Court
will decide is that the fair‑minded lay
observer will understand these two matters of legal context – I
emphasise “legal”;
I will come back to the factual context as I go
along, but the matters of legal context are the judicial practice of running a
hearing and the statutory context by which the primary judge was
required to impose penalties under the Credit Act.
The ordinary judicial
practice of running a bifurcated hearing is, of course, uncontroversial, common
to all of your Honours, and
common as between, relevantly, here, civil
penalty proceedings that are contested and criminal proceedings. The reasons
practice are obvious and well understood, they are reasons of
fairness – you allow parties to put their cases fully, and then
give the parties an understanding of what conclusions have been reached, and
that permits the parties to respond to those at
the penalty stage.
respondent in particular, there are very important matters of fairness here,
because, firstly, the respondent does not have
to engage in a contest about
contraventions in circumstances where they have been required to, as it were,
embarrass themselves in
some respect by laying their cards on the table for
penalty mitigation and things like that. It is also fair to them because it
creates the sort of opportunity that exists here, which is when things go badly
for you at the first stage of the hearing, you have,
as a respondent, an
opportunity to do your best to remedy that either by taking steps that you can
then tell the judge you have taken
or by doing the kind of thing
your Honour Justice Gleeson identified, which is to come back and
say, well, we were wrong and we acknowledge
that, and we apologise.
it is a practice of formidable value, from the point of view of fairness, and of
course it is a practice of great value from
the point of view of efficiency.
Most obviously and extremely, if no contraventions are found, then there will
not be a further
hearing, and no‑one is put to the burden of preparing for
that and running that hearing. But even if contraventions are found,
often are, it may not be all of the contraventions, and the parties will then be
targeting their efforts only to the things
that were found. It also gives rise
to this kind of efficiency.
It is sometimes the case that the parties
that were in furious contest about contravention might be able to reach very
significant
agreement once that contest is resolved. So, it allows the parties
to then do an agreed statement of facts and perhaps reach an
agreement on
They are all matters which are utterly commonplace. We could
transplant those same kinds of considerations onto the criminal context,
is a context we see every day, in every jurisdiction in Australia, and they are
matters that would be understood by the fair-minded
lay observer. These are not
complicated legal propositions. This is ordinary judicial practice, and the
fair-minded lay observer
would understand that.
In the context of this
case, there is, of course, a statute that governs what the primary judge had to
do, and the fair-minded lay
observer would understand the essentials of that
statutory context. They boil down to this: when imposing a
penalty – that
is, when answering the question to be
decided – the judge must have regard to all relevant matters,
including the enumerated
statutory factors and the so-called “French
factors”, and the judge, of course, must have regard to them in setting a
penalty of appropriate value for specific and general deterrence.
much is trite, it emerges from section 167 of the
Credit Act just in
the same way it emerges from the equivalent provisions littered across the civil
regulatory regimes on the Commonwealth
statute book. I risk taking
your Honours to something very familiar, but would your Honours go to
, at tab 6, volume 4, paragraph 18. This
includes both the – this list at paragraph 18, of course, comes
from Justice French’s,
as his Honour then was, seminal judgment
The first three of the factors in his Honour’s
list map onto the first three of the statutory factors that exist in
167. It is obvious, beyond the shadow of a doubt, that whenever a
judge conducts a bifurcated hearing and determines that contraventions
established, they will have made findings about:
The nature . . . of the contravening conduct.
extent of the contravening conduct.
Usually, to some degree:
The amount of loss or damage –
arising. I say to some
degree because typically, as in a case like this, the findings will go to the
way in which the conduct affected
particular consumers and the number of
consumers and the amounts of money involved, and so forth. Necessarily, the
findings will
The circumstances in which the conduct took place.
Your Honours
will see, and probably have already seen, that the primary judge’s
liability judgment is, indeed, a highly detailed
treatment of the circumstances
in which the conduct took place. So, his Honour is bound by those express
statutory factors to have
regard to all of those matters from his first
When he comes to the second stage, of course, that does not
mean he cannot receive further evidence or submissions about how those
bear upon penalty, but it does mean that he has already decided a large amount
of – perhaps the largest amount of –
factual findings
relevant to the assessment of penalty. When you then move further down that
list – I pick up at item 6 –
The deliberateness of the contravention and the period over which it
Now, that question of deliberateness, your Honours might
appreciate, is liable to become quite a significance one in this case, and
findings that the director of the contravening company and its senior officers
have come to court and together given a particular
story that is fundamentally
and irreconcilably at odds with all of the objective evidence might go some way
to informing a finding
Whether the contravention arose out of the conduct of senior management or at
a lower level.
Will be informed by seeing how all of that senior management conducted
themselves in the witness box and attempted to explain the
Factor 8, of course, would be very powerfully informed by all of the
findings about these witnesses because –
self‑evidently
– a company that comes and gives evidence about
things that were not so is a company that is not exhibiting a culture of
compliance.
Then, finally:
Whether the company has shown a disposition to co‑operate with the
authorities –
and your Honours of course know from the
Agreed Penalties
and ordinary practice that there is a range of ways in which parties
can participate in these sorts of proceedings, which run from
agreeing on
everything, at one end of the spectrum, through to taking every conceivable
point, making every possible appeal and making
every possible application, at
the other end of the spectrum.
So, how a party has conducted itself at
the liability hearing will be a powerful factor in assessing what level of
deterrence is
required. We have given your Honours references to
paragraphs 58 and 60 in this decision as well. I will not go to them
they serve to illustrate and explicate some of those things that I have
just addressed.
So, the fair‑minded lay observer, in our
submission, will understand all of these things as basic integers of judicial
and basis integers of the statutory scheme that his Honour was
bound to apply at the second stage of the penalty hearing. We do
not understand
our friends to really resist any of that. It has been perhaps a
bit – well, they did resist it at some levels
before the Full Court,
and it has been a bit unclear in some respects, but as I heard the submissions
today, that feels to us to
be common ground and it should be, because it is
absolutely basic.
Of course, this is not just a statement about judicial
practice and a statement about the statutory scheme, it is a statement about
fair‑minded lay observer, and the majority judges were very careful to
identify that these things that I have been covering
were things that would be
understood by the fair‑minded observer at least a general level. We have
included the references
in the majority judgments at paragraph 5 of our
oral outline on that.
All of that accords very comfortably with the way
this Court has regularly approached ascertaining the understanding of the
fair‑minded
lay observer. I have put there four authorities, which I
rather expect I do not need to take your Honours to in detail. Can I tell
your Honours what we get from the first three, and then briefly go to
Johnson v Johnson
at 13 and 55
emphasise the need to have regard to all of the circumstances and, in
particular, that the ordinary observer will understand
“ordinary judicial
practice”. In
, of course, that was the practice of the
Bench exposing its thinking to the Bar table in the kinds of ways that
Justice Jagot was
describing earlier.
Isbester v Knox
makes the point that has been reiterated in many cases since, that the
fair‑minded lay observer understands all of the relevant
circumstances, the necessary features of the statutory scheme, the legal
context – in other words, to pick up the
language that
your Honour Justice Gageler used in the joint judgment with the
then‑Chief Justice in
, “the totality of the
circumstances”.
develops that in the paragraphs we
have referred to and shows how, as it were, wide is the gaze of the
fair‑minded lay observer,
and at some levels how sophisticated is their
understanding of a statutory scheme. That emerges quite clearly, particularly
at paragraph
94 of that decision, where the fair‑minded
observer’s understanding of the statutory scheme was set out, I think, by
your Honour Justice Gordon with Justice Nettle, and
Justice Edelman reached similar conclusions at
paragraph 140.
GAGELER CJ:
Part of the fair‑minded
observer’s understanding of the penalty hearing is that it will be
conducted in light of and against
the background of the findings of fact made in
the judgment on liability, including collateral findings going to credit and,
relevant, character of witnesses. Is that right? That is
all – you attribute all of that to the fair‑minded
I emphatically do, and that is why I
emphasise, in the statutory language, the obligation of the judge to impose a
penalty having
regard to “all relevant matters”. That is the
statutory obligation on the judge, and, self-evidently, anyone who understands
bifurcated hearing process understands that findings will be made about a wide
array of relevant matters.
GAGELER CJ:
The character of a
witness may not, itself, be a relevant matter in terms of the French factors,
but it will be something that
is brought to bear at the second
That is so,
your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
Or may be something brought to
Yes, yes. The short answer to
your Honour’s first question was yes. So, all of that is understood.
Moreover, what is understood
is that SunshineLoans consented to this process.
That is, it was a party that consented to a process that afforded all of the
and efficiency that I have described, knowing that this was the task of
the judge under section 167 of the Credit Act when deciding
the question to
be decided – or, to use the expression in the three‑stage
test: when deciding the case.
Now, that brings us to the
three stages of the
test. I am using three. Of course, in
they said two steps followed by an assessment of reasonableness,
but for convenience we are doing what was done in
and calling them
three steps. The first step is where we – let us be
clear – where our fair‑minded lay observer
confronts the
factors which SunshineLoans says might cause the judge to decide the case other
than on its legal and factual merits.
It is “factors”,
plural, because there are two cases being run here, or two arguments being run
here. We have called
one of them the broad argument – that was the
argument that Mr Wyles made – and the other one the narrow
argument; that
is the second credibility finding argument that
Ms O’Gorman made.
On the broad argument – I
confess, it has gotten broader again today than we had quite appreciated from
the written submissions
and the way it was put before the Full Court, because it
is not just the findings of witnesses, plural – including witnesses
that will not be coming back – it is all of the – I will
not get too bogged down on adjectives, but let us say harsh
findings or
statements that the judge made about the way in which SunshineLoans had run its
In other words, it picks up not only evidence but also
submissions. That gets back very closely to how the case was first sought
run by SunshineLoans before the primary judge, when – as you will
recall – it was expressing, initially, no concerns
credibility assessment, it was all located in this first broad argument; it was
his Honour that came up with the
concern about the second credibility
assessment.
On this broad argument, the relevant factor, then, is simply
the nature of the findings made about those submissions and witnesses.
understand the way the case is now put in response to questions from the Bench,
that is located solely in the manner of expression
and whether it reveals a kind
of non‑judicial – or might be seen by the fair‑minded
observer to reveal a kind of
non‑judicial animus. There is no question of
any prejudgment involved in that question. So, that is the factor on the broad
The factor on the narrow case is a bit different, because we are
concerned now solely with findings made about Mr Powe, but importantly,
what we are concerned about is the change in context. That is, when this
judgment was handed down and the parties were preparing
for the penalty hearing
and ASIC made its penalty submissions and so on, Mr Powe then put on a
further affidavit which, in effect
– as Justice Bromwich’s
judgment helpfully summarised – deals with things like financial
circumstances but also
seeks to traverse findings made by the primary judge in
the first decision and traverse directly the things said by ASIC in its written
submissions about those findings.
Here, the factor that has to be
identified is Sunshine’s choice to put on this affidavit and to confront,
as it were, the reality
that Mr Powe’s evidence would come to be
assessed for a second time in light of what had been found below. So, it is
– and we are not trying to be cute – it is true that
the findings made about Mr Powe are, in a sense, central to this
But it would be wrong to isolate the fair‑minded lay observer’s
perspective down simply to six paragraphs as
though they stood alone. They
stand in a critical context, which I have explained.
Your Honours,
I just recalled that I did not take you to
DPP v Smith
. Would you
mind me back‑tracking very slightly? I will not be
GAGELER CJ:
It is at tab 19 of volume 5.
We are back to paragraph 5 of your outline?
Yes, thank you. What we should take your Honours
to is, starting at paragraph [91], and just to give the context,
your Honours
will recall this was a case in which it was said that a
judge’s pre‑hearing meeting with a child complainant in a sexual
abuse case gave rise to a fundamental irregularity in the proceedings. When it
came eventually to be decided by this Court, it was
said that that was not
really a very useful or proper way to frame the concern.
The concern
ultimately was whether that meeting between the judge and the child, that had
been facilitated by a court officer, gave
rise to an apprehension of bias.
Paragraph [91] explains that it did not because, in all of the
circumstances, a fair‑minded
observer would not have the necessary
apprehension. What we draw attention to is a process of reasoning at [92]
through to [95],
which is to step through the
step (1), “the factor”, paragraph [93]; step (2), the
possible “logical connection”; and then step
paragraph [95], commences with:
Even if that asserted connection is a logical connection (which is
doubtful) –
the reasonableness answers the case. I draw attention to that because
that is, in effect, the reasoning process, certainly the reasoning
process that
Justice Bromwich adopted, that is, that the case failed at step (2).
It is less clear in the case of Justice Colvin,
but we read his judgment as
probably meaning the case fails at step (2) but, if it does not, it
certainly failed at step (3).
We will be making that same argument
today, that ultimately this falters at step (2) because there is no logical
connection. We
will address step 3 because it is the
let‑us‑assume scenario, and a testing of reasonableness on that
assumption, but
ultimately this case, as seen to be likely to be the case in
, falls at step (2).
The other thing we draw
your Honours’ attention to is just one of the many examples of the
ways in which this Court has summarised
what the fair‑minded lay observer
would understand at the second part of paragraph [95]. It includes the
scheme of the
Criminal Procedure Act
in relation to intermediaries; it
includes what actually happened; it includes, at (d):
that the accused’s counsel did not object to the
and so, that is a thing for the fair‑minded
lay observer to take into account; and then summarises how all of those
circumstances
bear upon the understanding of the fair‑minded lay observer.
Thank you for that diversion back, your Honours.
Can I then return
to paragraph 6.2 of our outline. I have told your Honours what that
factor is on the narrow argument. What both
of those arguments do, as developed
before your Honours today, is to go through a 360‑paragraph decision
on the contraventions,
selectively zoom in on this sentence or that sentence, or
this paragraph, really towards the end of that judgment, and put them all
together and say you can draw a conclusion from that.
We do not make a
criticism of that. I mean, in a sense, that is what is being done, for reasons
of efficiency and so forth. But
what it unfortunately does, that approach, is
completely obscure actually what the judge was finding in the context of the
was deciding and it completely obscures why he was deciding those
The short answer to that second proposition is he was deciding
them because SunshineLoans had made, obviously, a considered forensic
to take every possible point and to run an evidentiary case by putting its three
senior officers in evidence to contradict
what were the obvious effects of the
contracts themselves, the explanatory material that went with it, the direct
dealings between
SunshineLoans and its customers and many other things
besides – in short, to contradict all of the objective evidence in a
way, as I will take your Honours to, that was both stark and
remarkable.
Having chosen to run its case in that way, they, as it were,
drove his Honour to rule upon the case that they had run and, moreover,
deal with defences which expressly, under the terms of the statute, required
his Honour to consider whether they had a reasonable
belief and to consider
whether they were honest. So, that is the overview.
I do not want
anything I have said to be, I hope, taken as an unfair capturing and, of course,
what your Honours will do is very
carefully read that judgment so that the
findings are understood in their context, because that is precisely what the
fair‑minded
lay observer will be taken to understand: these findings in
the context of resolving issues that SunshineLoans itself required the
Would your Honours go to that liability decision.
Your Honours might be working from the book of further materials, I am
from the version that is in the joint bundle of authorities. The page
numbers do not align, but I will use the paragraph numbering,
convenient. If your Honours look very briefly at the background in 5
to 9, you will see that what is in issue was:
small amount credit contracts –
and whether they charged or included fees that could not be included
because they were proscribed by the Credit Code. That was what
penalty proceedings were brought for.
Immediately upon having identified
that, his Honour deals – starting at
paragraph 11 – with a full‑blooded attach
on standing and
standing to bring proceedings as the
regulator under the Credit Code and
challenged whether, indeed, any of the of the civil penalty provisions in the
Credit Code could
be enforced by a civil penalty proceeding, and things like
That takes about 90 paragraphs of his Honour’s
judgment. To be clear, I am going to be identifying a number of things
SunshineLoans
did. That was its perfect right. We are not suggesting anything
to the contrary. It is just that, in exercising that right, it
understand that there would be consequences for how his Honour made this
decision and, as it were, risks that if they did
not persuade his Honour,
he would make findings that made clear that he had not been
Before moving through those 90 paragraphs, it is perhaps
just convenient to see the terms of the statutory provisions that
was dealing with. First, at paragraph 16, you will see
section 31A. Paragraph (1)(c) relevantly prohibits a contract
imposing or
providing for fees or charges unless they are of one of the
following kinds, the only relevant one in this case was paragraph (c),
fee or charge payable on default.
This became absolutely central to
SunshineLoans’ argument. It contended that it had only ever been charging
or receiving a
default fee, permissible under 31A. If your Honours
then move to paragraph 17: section 23A. That prohibits:
A small amount credit contract –
from imposing:
a monetary liability on the debtor:
(b) in respect of a fee or charge prohibited by this Code –
The fees or charges that ASIC were alleging were called –
alternatively, but the same thing – a rescheduled payment fee
amendment fee. And then section 24, which is itself a penalty provision,
as you can see by the words at the bottom, there
are two limbs to that:
A credit provider must not:
(a) enter into a credit contract –
in prohibited terms, and then:
(b) require or accept payment –
ASIC’s case was under both of those: firstly, the entering into
contracts, and then secondly, requiring or accepting payments.
Ultimately, the
case under paragraph (1)(a) came down to the construction of
All of the arguments that were made about the construction of
the contract by SunshineLoans were rejected, and it was found that
contracts by their terms imposed an amendment or rescheduling fee which was
prohibited. It was where paragraph (b) was
concerned that SunshineLoans
really rolled up its sleeves to run an argument about whether what in fact had
happened with the consumers
was a monetary liability relating to default rather
than to amendment. So, that is just to locate the case in the statutory
provisions.
If your Honours then go down to where liability starts,
which commences at 102 and goes through to the rest of the
I will move quickly through this, I regret I may not quite
finish this decision before the luncheon adjournment, but it is
– in fact, we say critical – for
your Honours to understand these findings in their context.
Paragraph 103 explains
that while the contracts took different forms, the
versions were “substantially the same”.
And then you see,
directly, the analysis of the contracts themselves. In 107, the table is set
out, and starkly and importantly,
the table includes both a default fee, which
was permissible, and a rescheduled payment fee, also known as an amendment fee
versions, which was not permissible.
So, the contract did not
provide a very promising starting point for SunshineLoans to say it had never
charged or received amendment
fees, they had always been default fees.
Paragraph 108 identifies the importance of that. And then
your Honours go over to paragraphs
111 and 112 – you can
read them at your Honours’ leisure, but they are other provisions of
the contract that reiterate
this point.
GAGELER CJ:
might not be the right word.
GAGELER CJ:
indeed, quite so. I will just say those paragraphs will be important. If
your Honours then go down to 123, to 125, that summarises
issues raised – I have already largely done that and taken
your Honours through the statutory provisions – and then
to 151, which asks whether the amendment fee was a prohibited monetary
From there, right through to 169, what his Honour
did was to analyse the contracts and all the associated documents, all the
evidence, to conclude that it was a prohibited monetary liability
because it was, indeed, an amendment fee, not a default fee. In
contract and all of the related documents meant what they said.
paragraph 170, the question is asked: did entering into the contracts with
those terms amount to a breach of paragraph (a)
of the civil penalty
provision? Answer, yes – although, of course, again, his Honour
had to work through a number of technical
arguments and defences that had been
raised, which are dealt with carefully and thoroughly and fairly down
That dealt with limb (a) of the civil penalty
provision. It is at this point, from paragraph 184, that SunshineLoans
made the effort
to persuade his Honour that the amendment fee was not what
it seemed, but was really a default fee, and that might be a convenient
GAGELER CJ:
Yes. We will take the luncheon
adjournment.
AT 12.45 PM LUNCHEON
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 2.14
GAGELER CJ:
Your Honours, we were at 184 of the first judgment. as
I said before lunch, from here, really, the second half of the judgment
with the paragraph (b) limb. There are some 160‑odd careful
paragraphs dealing with that, and I will obviously be as
brief as I can on this.
But just to locate where these criticisms made of submissions and criticisms
made of witnesses sit in that
discourse, let me step through it this
At 186 and following, his Honour identifies that a large
part of the evidence for this aspect of the case comes from 66 representative
files. These are SunshineLoans’ own objective records relating to 66
different customers. They were obtained, as it were,
in a random way by ASIC so
they would be representative of all of the consumers. You see there is quite a
bit of information in
each one of those. If your Honours then go down, you
will see a heading above 190:
Two approaches to assessing the alleged contraventions of
s 24(1A)(b)
Those two approaches are explained at 195 and 196. This is
important because there is a simple first approach, which is to deal with
as a matter of contract and construction, and then there is a highly granular
and complicated second approach, which is the
approach that Sunshine wished to
press and, therefore, have his Honour adjudicate.
your Honours move down from there to paragraph 205, there is a neat
summary of what was central to Sunshine’s defence.
I have already noted
that, but it is essentially – and it is a pretty bold
contention:
there was no evidence that any amendments had been made to
contracts, that:
there was no evidence that the agreements were changed or altered (orally or
in writing) by identified words, or at all.
on no occasion did it “reach any consensus
So, it had pitched its case extraordinarily high, relying upon the idea
that there had only ever been a default fee, not an amendment
fee, when you
looked at each of the customers.
From paragraph 207 there are more
sort of technical arguments about the impact of different provisions of the
Credit Code. We can
move past them, but noting that his Honour dealt with
them carefully and fairly, as with all of the arguments put to him.
Sorry, did you go straight from 205 to 227?
Yes, I did, your Honour. At this point, his Honour
commenced to deal with what actually happened: what is it that you find when
you look at the objective records? He summarises that in 227:
In general terms, the end result of the communications was that there was
agreement that the original repayment obligations need not
be complied
In other words, there was an amendment.
His Honour looks, from 228 onwards, closely at the documents in
question. His Honour looks,
from 234 onwards, closely at some example
calls with customers – what was actually said to each of these
people, bearing in
mind this is Sunshine’s own call records. At 245,
we get to what I think might be the first of the passages that is said to
been unfairly or extravagantly made by his Honour:
Contrary to an array of unfounded submissions advanced on behalf of Sunshine
Loans, the circumstances found in the 66 files show beyond
any doubt that,
in each case ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
We have been taken to that paragraph.
indeed, and I will not step through all of those again, it is just to locate.
That is where the first of these criticisms
that is made of his Honour
comes in. His Honour, from 247 deals with more evidence, that is,
that Sunshine imposed a requirement
to provide documentation in relation to
amendments. From 249, there was a requirement to agree the fee in relation
to the amendments.
From 251, another attempt by Sunshine to avoid the
conclusion that might have seemed inevitable from the objective records is dealt
with carefully and at length.
another – is that another complaint paragraph?
Yes, it is:
In a further attempt to avoid the above conclusion –
think it was another complaint. Certainly, 252 is. That is the one about
the “evidence was disingenuous”.
step back from this kind of analysis, is this to say any more – and I
do not mean to diminish what you are putting
to us – that there is a
structured judgment and that each of these occasions which are relied upon as
being beyond what is
acceptable – putting that neutrally –
are made in the context of the allegations which are put both factually and
Yes, with this additional point that this is
all directly responsive to Sunshine’s running of the
That is what I said, it is in response to the
factual and legal case put by Sunshine.
I see, put by
Sunshine – yes, we agree. The reason I am doing this a bit
carefully, your Honours – and I am happy
to speed up, but my
learned friend said, in a variety of ways, things that implied that this was
his Honour on something of an unexplained
frolic or choosing to go about
things ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
Mr Begbie, I thought it was the choice of language. So,
the effect was that in 252, his Honour could have said: this was
to Mr Simmons’ oral evidence.
BEECH‑JONES J:
the language went beyond that to “disingenuous”. So, earlier, I
think it said “contrary to . . . unfounded
submissions”, I
think the effect of it is all his Honour needed to say was: contrary to
the submissions. But I do not think
it was ever disputed that the point being
made was open to be found as a matter of substance. I thought it was that the
was, to use the vernacular, over the top.
It was certainly that, although it was coupled
with – and we do not need to dwell on it – but it was
coupled with things
like, for reasons which only his Honour can know, he
did this or ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
‑ ‑ ‑ was deciding
to indulge in various things.
I do not know
that is right, Mr Begbie. I had understood – a number of
questions that were put to Mr Wyles: you do not
challenge the findings
that were made, you do not challenge that there was no denial of procedural
fairness, you do not deny that
the findings were open on the evidence. And
Mr Wyles says: I took the appeals, we have lost, we are stuck with
I really do think it is directed at the
Thank you, your Honour.
Then, can I just ‑ ‑ ‑
I speak only for myself,
I understand, your Honour, and I certainly do not wish to labour things
that are not controversial. Can I just wrap this judgment
up, then, by taking
your Honours to 310, which deals with the claim of mistake of fact.
That required his Honour to determine Sunshine’s
contention that it
had acted under a “mistaken but reasonable belief”, and what
his Honour did was say that was not a
belief about a matter of fact, but in
any case, it was not reasonable.
So, he had to do, in terms of things
going beyond what his Honour had to do in the decision, he actually was
asked to rule upon that
question of reasonableness, and he did that. The fact
that he did it in the alternative is just to do exactly what your Honour
Edelman was saying, which is to rule upon all the things that are
put to a court, and that is properly done, and that is done for
reasons that are
obvious: it permits these points to be dealt with on appeal, it might avoid a
need to remit a matter, and so forth.
The same thing with the defence
under section 183 of the Credit Act – not strictly a defence,
but being excused from liability
– you will see, at 314, one of
the things that must be shown to avail yourself of that is that you “acted
What his Honour said was, you would not get the benefit
of that anyway, given the way you have run the case and the circumstances,
if necessary to decide, I would have said you did not act honestly.
he was responding and making findings about honesty in circumstances where that
is what his very task was to do and in circumstances
where it was obvious, at
the end of this, whatever he said about all of that would be relevant to the
second stage. You are left,
in our submission, then, with the relevant factor
being no more than a judge has made exactly the sorts of findings that judges
make all the time when faced with evidence that was – perhaps
to put it in the vernacular that a fair‑minded lay observer
might – at a trial.
GAGELER CJ:
So, what you are
saying in relation to what you have called the broad argument is that when you
look at the strong language in
context, there is no basis for drawing an
inference of what you call non‑judicial animus.
That is so.
GAGELER CJ:
That is really the answer to that part
of the case.
That is so. Another way of looking at
it is to say he said nothing at all about the penalty, about the question to be
he said nothing at all
GAGELER CJ:
it is not put as prejudgment.
It is put as animus.
Yes, indeed. If it is
limited to animus ‑ ‑ ‑
And you say you do not get that from this language in this context,
dealing with these issues.
That is it.
That is it. If it is limited
to animus, that is the end of that factor, yes.
GAGELER CJ:
right. And the other factor?
factor – step (2) – we can deal
step (2) falls away once you accept that the case is not just a case about
error, about a finding of untruthfulness. Once
you accept the case is one that
is about whether there is a possibility that the judge will not be capable of
accepting a submission
that would otherwise have been open at the penalty stage,
the real question is at stage (3): would a reasonable observer have that
apprehension?
We would perhaps put it slightly
differently, your Honour. Step (2) is: is there a logical connection
between the factor? Namely,
here, these findings and the feared deviation from
deciding the case on its merits. Answer: no, because to decide the case on its
merits, you have to take into account all relevant matters. That is the end of
No, but the feared deviation, as the appellant
puts the argument, is not a feared deviation from taking matters into account,
a feared deviation in the respect that the judge, because motivated by
animus, will fail to perform the judicial duty. So, the only
question is, at
stage (3): would a reasonable observer have that
apprehension?
Can I test this with your Honour?
I accept what your Honour says in relation to the broad argument. In
relation to the narrow
argument, I think it is still suggested that
his Honour will not have the suspended state of mind or might be perceived
to not have
the suspended state of mind that he is required to have. So, that
is not quite ‑ ‑ ‑
Ms O’Gorman accepted that the suspended state of mind does not
require the judge to start with a blank slate.
that is so, but it is a slightly different thing from animus, it seems to us. I
understand what your Honour says, but it
seems to us that that straddles
animus and the suggestion that what the judge had to do was judge penalty in a
way that did not involve
having some notional state of mind when assessing the
penalty evidence. So, that is why I was hoping to address step (2) in that
GAGELER CJ:
In what regard?
To say that this suspended state of mind, insofar as that involves some sort of
prejudgment dimension to it, that there is no logical
connection on
as I understand it, prejudgment has been abandoned,
heard that said, your Honour, and then I also heard said that, stepping
through the
test, there was a logical connection because the
fair‑minded observer would perceive that when this judge came to assess
penalty evidence of Mr Powe he would do so without what has been
described as the suspended state of mind. Just to be clear, I am
very happy to
be moved on to step (3) and leave it that, I am just telling
your Honour what I have understood to
GAGELER CJ:
where we are, you have dealt with the broad argument, you are on the narrow
argument, and I think you have said what you
want to say about step (2).
Is that right?
Save perhaps this. The illogicality
of the connection that depends on that suspended state of mind can be
illustrated in a couple
of ways that I will just give your Honours quickly.
The first is that it cannot hold for positive credit findings. In other words,
if Mr Powe had been found to be a witness of impeccable credibility and
honesty and truth, it could not sensibly be said that ASIC
wanting to have a
second go at his credit ‑ ‑ ‑
The argument is not put at that level of generality, though. You are
responding to ‑ ‑ ‑
An earlier argument.
GAGELER CJ:
‑ ‑ ‑ a much more specific argument in this
Okay. Thank you, your Honour. I think,
having heard from your Honour, I might move on to – would
your Honour excuse me
just for a moment. Can I just tell your Honours
what we get from the cases that are at paragraph 10 of our outline, in case
assists your Honours.
GAGELER CJ:
It might that your Honours do not feel that you need that for
We Buy Houses
is a civil penalty case that
your Honour Justice Gleeson will recall, and it
illustrates – and we have given your Honours the
paragraphs – precisely the kind of two‑step civil penalty
fact‑finding that is happening here, in a situation where
strong adverse
credit findings were made at the first hearing and were used – and
properly used – in assessing the further
evidence of the same
director at the second penalty hearing.
So, that case illustrates what
we say would be a completely commonplace approach in these kinds of matters in
the civil penalty context.
The other three decisions are all from the criminal
law context, and they deny an apprehension of bias could arise from a second
credibility finding made in the course of the same proceedings with respect to a
defendant whose credibility has been rejected as
part of either a voir
BEECH‑JONES J:
was a bail decision.
Yes, it was,
your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Then there was a
follow‑up judgment that might look a bit inconsistent with
there was a no‑case submission with some denial, and then
a bail revocation during the trial, and then a judge‑alone
judgment, and
there was an apprehension, so – but you say – that may be
in the category that Justice Bromwich talked
interlocutory, whereas this is different because it is final.
We certainly accept this is different, there is no question that
this is part of a final hearing and no issue with your Honour
there. I do
think – and nothing will turn on this – but I do think
is a little different because what was involved in
was a judge that was saying: I simply will not hear that
no‑case submission, I determine it without hearing it, and nothing
that happened in
. But I accept what your Honour says, the
context is similar, and you could say the same thing, your Honour, about
I was going to ask
that – is not
in the same position?
Yes, these are all in the same position. They are all situations
where adverse credibility assessment has been made.
That was in the context of a voir dire.
is right, and the same with
, your Honour.
Your Honours, we have better copies of
Hutchinson –
almost unreadable, the copy in the joint
bundle ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
We are not going to look at it now, are we?
GAGELER CJ:
You can provide it to the Court
Thank you, Your Honour. Turning
then to reasonableness, we start by going back to what this reasonableness
inquiry involves.
, at 21, it is made clear that “the
totality of the circumstances” informs the judgment of reasonableness.
cases we have given your Honours references to highlight that
what we are concerned with here is what you might call the impression
fair‑minded lay observer would get from the totality of the
circumstances – what would be their reaction to
all of those
circumstances.
We have included references in
to respond to something that was put in the
reply submissions to suggest that public confidence in the administration of
must be seen in this context as limited solely to the question of
impartiality. Actually, this is a test of what is reasonable in
a context where
you are trying to secure public confidence in the administration of justice,
including for reasons of impartiality,
but not limited to reasons of
impartiality. So, I will not detain your Honours by going to each of those
passages, but that is to
tell you what that goes to.
just want to make it clear – from paragraph 11, as I understand
the way you have put it, do you accept that there may be
cases where reasonable
apprehension may arise, it is just not this case?
That is quite so. Justice Jagot gave examples of where an apprehension
could arise because someone truly had expressed a fixity
of mind on the question
to be decided, that is, the penalty, or perhaps had expressed views about
witnesses that were so utterly
extravagant and unjudicial and so
forth – but we are nowhere near that.
GAGELER CJ:
your answer to the second part of the case, really, just a variation of your
answer to the first part of the case? That is,
you look at this language, you
read it in context, and you cannot draw from that a reasonable apprehension that
this judge would
do other than treat the new evidence of this witness fairly on
its merits?
Yes, and we add to that –
standing back a little bit and just looking at everything that happened
here – in the real
world, look at what happened here, which is that
Sunshine agreed to this process, they ran their case the way they did, it went
for them. They made a bias application on the basis that this judge is,
in a sense, against us, and they therefore signalled very
clearly they did not
want this judge to determine penalty.
And they have said, in fact,
almost in terms today, that what they want to be able to do before a new judge
is to cavil with findings
like the evidence was preposterous, or to be able to
say, if cross‑examined about his Honour’s earlier findings
a new judge, no, we want to have another go at that. All of that would
create the impression for the reasonable observer not that
this is protective of
the independence of the judiciary, it would create what is said in
to be the opposite impression.
It would be destructive of public
confidence in the judiciary – that is at 65 of Ebner. When you
add to that the unfairness
to ASIC, the cost and delay and all the other things
that we have pointed to in our written submissions, in no world is that a
connection between what the judge is said to have made by way of
findings ‑ ‑ ‑
I am not sure this submission really goes very far, because, yes, there may
be factors – cost, efficiency, and so on –
that relate to
this notion of public confidence other than impartially, but if you have a judge
who is not impartial, then I am not
sure that those factors are going to
outweigh it.
We accept that,
your Honour.
Really, this case comes down to:
would a reasonable observer, with all of the knowledge and in all of the
circumstances considered
that partiality at the penalties hearing was not
possible or might not be possible.
resist it being decided on that basis, your Honour. I said I would take
two or three minutes on the very final part
of our argument. I will not take
that. Your Honours have our written submissions, and given the way things
have developed, it is
probably not going to take anything further to deal with
Thank you, your Honours.
GAGELER CJ:
you, Mr Begbie. Mr Wyles.
your Honours. In this Court,
makes clear, in our
submission, that where there has been a finding of credit about a particular
witness who is going to be giving
witness on another issue at a later stage,
even in a different trial, that the judge who has made the findings about credit
be disqualified.
BEECH-JONES J:
That is a different case.
That says that for one case, witness, then another case.
It was, but it is not qualitatively different, your Honour. There is no
qualitative difference. We are trying to tell the people
Australia ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
Sorry, I thought you started today accepting that if all the primary judge had
said was Mr Powe and the other witnesses were lying
in their evidence, that
would not be a problem. That would be a problem in a
case, but I
thought you conceded it was not a problem in this case.
I am sorry, your Honour, with respect to – I am just addressing
now the basis upon which his Honour recused himself, which
effectively, the
basis, and if I have misled your Honour, I
apologise, but there is no resiling from the position if Mr Powe’s
credit has been
impugned, as his Honour recognised, and, consistent with
, it would be the same judge having to determine
Mr Powe’s credit on issues that are relevant to the determination of
the appropriate
So, this submission now is
that any finding on section 183(1)(b)(i) will disqualify a judge from
hearing a penalty hearing, is that
your Honour, because the finding about Mr Powe was not
on 183(1)(b)(i).
Put aside Mr Powe for the
moment. A judge that makes a finding on 183(1)(b)(i) in relation to a
person who wants to give evidence
on a penalty hearing, that judge is
disqualified in any like case.
No, not in any like
case. Not in this case. But what his Honour has found here is that
Mr Powe’s evidence was evidence
that he did not seek to give
honestly – 183(1)(b)(i) went to the defence of the company as to
whether or not, in its charging
of the fee, it had acted honestly. They are two
different things, two entirely different things.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Wyles, can I just ask where we are in relation to these two ways in
which you put the case?
your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
As I understand it, you are now
addressing the narrow
basis ‑ ‑ ‑
response to what was said by our learned friend, your Honour,
GAGELER CJ:
This is not responsive, Mr Wyles. You are
putting the case on a different basis from the way it was put by
Ms O’Gorman.
Well, I am sorry, I did not
think I was.
GAGELER CJ:
You are not attempting to do that, as I
I am only seeking to answer the point that
GAGELER CJ:
made the note about
because of the point that my learned friend
was making, about the judge having to assess the credibility again of the same
GAGELER CJ:
apologise, your Honour, if I have gone down a different
GAGELER CJ:
All right. Those submissions were based on
the particular language used by the judge to express the conclusions as to
You do not resile from that way of putting the
GAGELER CJ:
That is the basis upon which
both grounds are put.
Yes, but the language which
the judge used on the subground – the credit of Mr Powe, if I
can call it that – was that
he found that he was not a credible
witness, as the judge said himself, in his own reasons.
And having made that finding, then
this Court has been clear about that same person having to be judged by the same
judge on different
issues of credit. That is the only point in
GAGELER CJ:
And as to the other matters that arose, your Honour, it is with respect to
your Honour the Chief Justice’s observation that
the observer
will understand that the penalty will be determined against the background of
the findings, including the findings of
character. We have not come to Court to
say that that is not correct.
What the submission is – with
respect, Justice Edelman, as you identified just previously – is
that in the circumstances
of this case, because of the language which the judge
used and the manner in which he went about expressing his findings, then it
more than reasonable for a fair‑minded person – understanding
the whole process, understanding that this was just
the first stage,
understanding that those matters have to be taken into account in assessing the
penalty – to form a view that
the judge has reached a position with
respect to this particular company, as is reflected at paragraph 315 in his
reasons, where
he says that you cannot find – he could not find any
reason for leniency.
That when he is determining penalty, try as he
might, as was recognised in
and as this Court has recognised,
the judge may not be able to set to one side that subconscious impact. That is
the reasonable
apprehension. And nothing that our learned friends have said in
their submissions explains to your Honours why that would not be
and nothing that was said by Justice Bromwich or Justice Colvin in
their reasons explain why that would not be the case.
your Honours just bear with me for a moment. If I could just clarify,
your Honour Justice Edelman, on the question of prejudgment,
in respect of the credibility findings on Mr Powe, we do rely upon what
Justice Lee had to say in
to the extent that that invites a
prejudgment aspect. If I have overstepped the mark previously, I withdraw it,
if I might.
Otherwise, thank you, your Honours.
Thank you, Mr Wyles. The Court will consider its decision in
this matter and will adjourn until 10.00 am
AT 2.48 PM THE MATTER WAS ADJOURNED
RTF format (1.55 MB)
Signed PDF/A format