1417187 [2015] MRTA 822 (19 June 2015)
[2015] MRTA 822
(19 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
REVIEW APPLICANT:
Mrs Priscella Mabitad
VISA APPLICANTS:
Mrs Christine Mabitad Saw
Mr Richard Saw
MRT CASE NUMBER:
DIBP REFERENCE(S):
CLF2007/182018
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Filip Gelev
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decisions not to grant the visa
applicants Skilled — Designated Area-sponsored (Provisional) (Class
Statement made on 19 June 2015 at 5:17pm
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of decisions made by a delegate of the Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection to refuse
to grant the visa applicants Skilled
— Designated Area-sponsored (Provisional) (Class UZ) visas under
Migration Act 1958
visa applicants applied to the Department of Immigration and Border Protection
for Skilled — Designated Area-sponsored (Provisional)
(Class UZ) visas on
30 July 2007. The delegate decided to refuse to grant the visas on 15 August
delegate refused the visa applications on the basis that the first named visa
applicant (the applicant) did not satisfy cl.496.215
of Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations) because the visa applicant was not
employed in a skilled occupation prior to lodging the visa application; she
employed as a Sales Representative which is not a ‘skilled
occupation’.
review applicant applied to the Tribunal on 17 October 2014 for review of the
delegate’s decisions.
RELEVANT LAW
Skilled - Designated Area-sponsored (Provisional) (Class UZ) contains only one
subclass: 496 (Skilled — Designated Area-sponsored
(Provisional)) found in
item 1226(4) of Schedule 1 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
Regulations’).
criteria for a Subclass 496 (Skilled - Designated Area-sponsored (Provisional))
visa are set out in
of Schedule 2 to the Regulations. The primary
criteria must be satisfied by at least one member of the family unit who is
for the visa. Other members of the family unit, if any, who are
applicants for the visa need satisfy only the secondary criteria.
to this matter, a primary criterion to be met at the time of application is
cl.496.215. This clause requires that the visa
applicant be
‘employed’ in a ‘skilled occupation’ for a specified
period, subject to an exemption for visa
applicants who, in certain
circumstances have completed a degree, diploma or trade qualification as defined
by cl.496.111 (see cl.496.215(2)).
496.215 relevantly states:
(1) Subject to
subclause (2), the applicant has been employed in a skilled
occupation:
(b) if 40 or 50 points are specified by an instrument in writing for this
paragraph as available for the skilled occupation nominated
in the application
— for a period of, or for periods totalling, at least 12 months in the
period of 18 months immediately before
the day on which the application was
(2) Subclause (1) does not apply to an applicant if:
(a) each of the following subparagraphs applies:
(i) the applicant has, in the 6 months immediately before the day on which
the application is made, completed a degree, diploma or
trade qualification
(other than a degree, diploma or trade qualification in English language
proficiency) for award by an Australian
educational institution as a result of a
course of study of at least 2 years at that institution while the applicant was
in Australia;
(ii) the degree, diploma or trade qualification is relevant to the skilled
occupation nominated by the applicant in his or her application;
(iii) all instruction for that degree, diploma or trade qualification was
conducted in English;...
occupation’ is defined in r.1.15I of the Regulations and, relevantly to
this matter, means an occupation that
is specified by the Minister in an
instrument in writing for this paragraph as a skilled occupation for which a
number of points
specified in that instrument are available and is applicable to
the person in accordance with the specification.
relevant instrument for this purpose is Legislative Instrument IMMI 12/068,
which revoked and replaced IMMI 11/068, which revoked
and replaced IMMI 11/034,
which revoked and replaced IMMI 10/079, which revoked and replaced IMMI 10/026,
which revoked and replaced
IMMI 09/031, which revoked and replaced IMMI 08/004,
which revoked and replaced IMMI 07/058, which revoked and replaced IMMI 06/090,
the legislative instrument at time of application.
term ‘employed’ in this context is defined by r.2.26A(7) of the
Regulations to mean ‘engaged in an occupation
for remuneration for at
least 20 hours weekly’: cl.496.111. The meaning of ‘engaged in an
occupation’ was considered
by Reithmuller FM in
De Ronde v MIMA
[2004] FMCA 519
as ‘actively participating in or undertaking duties
directly connected with the carrying out of the occupation
concerned’.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
review applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 24 March 2015 to give
evidence and present arguments. The Tribunal also received
oral evidence from
the applicant by telephone from the Philippines. The review applicant was
represented in relation to the review
by her registered migration agent.
skilled occupation nominated in the visa application is Financial Investment
Adviser (ASCO
3213-11). Under the relevant legislative instrument IMMI 12/068 the applicant is
entitled to 40 points in relation to the ‘qualifying
score’. The
visa applicant provided a successful skills assessment by VETASSESS, dated 16
November 2006.
already set out above, pursuant to cl. 496.215(1)(a), if 40 or 50 points are
specified by the relevant legislative instrument as
available for the skilled
occupation nominated in the application, the applicant must demonstrate work in
a skilled occupation for
a period or periods totalling, at least 12 months in
the period of 18 months immediately before the day on which the application
made. The relevant period is therefore 30 January 2006 to 30 July 2007.
applicant claimed to have worked as Financial Investment Adviser at the Export
and Industry Bank from 16 November 2003 to 15 September
2006; and as Marketing
Manager or Sales and Marketing Manager at Polygon Marketing from 2 October 2006
up until the time of application,
30 July 2007. Both Financial Investment
Adviser as well as Sales and Marketing Manager are skilled occupations.
question is whether the applicant was indeed employed in these or other
‘skilled occupations’ during the relevant
period, or whether she was
employed in lower skill level occupations, not specified in the relevant
legislative instrument as skilled.
Export and Industry Bank:
Financial Investment Adviser or Financial Institution Branch Manager
evidence before the Tribunal does not support the claim that the applicant
worked as Financial Investment Adviser.
Export and Industry Bank provided the applicant with a certificate, dated 13
November 2008, which describes her occupation as
Office Manager/Administrative
Officer. According to the certificate she was the manager of the Cebu Gorordo
Branch. Her main tasks
Manages the
branch overall cash operations, its cash-in-vault and other cash items
Handles the
daily activities of the Customer Service Associates
Handles the
processing of inward and outward checks
Handles the
review of all posting media at the end of the day
Ensures proper
housekeeping of the branch premises
the hearing, the applicant told the Tribunal that she worked as bank cashier.
After a pause she added that she was also assistant
manager to a branch manager.
Finally, she changed her evidence and said that she was a Financial Investment
Adviser. When asked to
elaborate on her role, she was hesitant and only provided
evidence after lengthy pauses. She gave brief answers such as ‘I
personal plans’. When asked to give more details, she simply added
‘for the investment’. When pressed for more
information she used
‘percentages’, ‘shares of stocks’ and ‘Social
Security System’ (SSS) as
full sentences. When asked how to invest in SSS,
she did not explain. When asked what people could invest in other than shares
the SSS, she said ‘bank deposits’. When invited to clarify what
kind of bank deposits, she replied ‘long term investment’.
Tribunal found her evidence about her tasks to be extremely vague and
unpersuasive. The Tribunal considers that if she had in
fact been employed in
such a position, she would have been able to articulate her tasks and the
products offered by her employer.
the hearing the Tribunal pointed out that the reference letter from the bank
mentioned nothing about the applicant providing investment
advice. When asked to
comment, the applicant replied: ‘we tried to sell products to customers
and that was the basic aim.’
Tribunal is mindful that the applicant cannot provide a further letter in
support of her case, because the Export and Industry
Bank has been defunct since
carefully assessed the available evidence, the Tribunal finds that the applicant
did not work as a Financial Investment Adviser,
nor as a Branch Manager. The
Tribunal considers that the applicant’s spontaneous first answer at the
hearing was correct: she
worked as a cashier/assistant branch manager. That is
consistent with the letter from her then employer.
Cashier, nor Assistant Branch Manager is listed as a skilled occupation in the
relevant legislative instrument.
the Tribunal finds that the applicant did not work in a skilled occupation while
employed by the Export and Industry Bank
in the period 30 January to 15
September 2006.
Polygon Marketing: Sales and Marketing Manager
or Sales Representative
support of her claims, the applicant provided to the Department of Immigration a
copy of a certificate of business name registration
of Polygon Marketing, a
business located at 840 A.S. Fortuna St, Banilad, Mandaue City, Cebu. The
certificate was issued to Peter
C. Saw on 13 May 2008 and it was valid until 13
document entitled ‘Certification’ was issued by Peter Saw on 3
November 2008 as owner of Polygon Marketing. It certified
that Polygon Marketing
is a ‘single proprietorship owned by [Peter Saw] and operates as a General
Merchandise’. It is
a wholesaler and distributor of construction materials
such as UPVC pipes and fittings, UPVC electrical conduit piping system [sic],
UPVC pressure main potable water piping system, imperial vinyl tiles and tile
cement, greenfield garden hoses and accessories.
Saw was the applicant’s brother-in-law.
Department of Immigration conducted a site visit to the offices of Polygon
Marketing on 30 April 2009. According to notes made
by the person who conducted
the site visit, Mr Saw ‘holds office inside a small, air-conditioned
room’. Mr Saw advised
that the business had been operating for some 30
years. He claimed that he asked the primary applicant, who is his sister-in-law,
to resign from her job at a banking institution in order to join the business.
He told the Department of Immigration that the highest
position held by the
applicant at the bank had been bank cashier. He stated that the business
employed nine people: one person in
the warehouse, three delivery drivers, five
is to represent the company in selling constructions supplies’.
based on the conclusions drawn after the site visit, the delegate concluded that
the applicant worked as a Sales Representative.
That occupation is not listed in
the relevant legislative instrument as a skilled occupation.
Tribunal can place only limited weight on the findings of the Department of
Immigration during the site visit conducted in April
2009, because this site
visit happened more than six years ago. In addition, since then Mr Saw has
passed away and the business has
closed down.
said that, the evidence in support of the applicant’s claim that she was
in fact a Sales and Marketing Manager was rather
Tribunal finds that it is not necessary to reach a conclusion in relation to
that issue. Even if the Tribunal were to find that
the applicant did work as a
Sales and Marketing Manager from 2 October 2006 to 30 July 2007, the period is
less than 12 months.
applicant did not make a claim that she was employed in another skilled
occupation during the relevant period of 18 months.
Tribunal finds that the visa applicant has not been employed in a skilled
occupation for the requisite period of a total of 12
months in the 18 months
immediately before making the application, and accordingly, does not satisfy
cl.496.215(1).
CONCLUSIONS
the reasons given above, the Tribunal finds that the visa applicant does not
satisfy cl.496.215 which is a prescribed criteria
for the grant of a Subclass
Tribunal affirms the decision
not to grant the visa applicants Skilled
— Designated Area-sponsored (Provisional) (Class UZ) visas.
Filip Gelev
Standard Classification of Occupations.
The finding is
based on the applicant’s post hearing correspondence and a print out from
a Wikipedia article provider by her.
RTF format (168 KB)
Signed PDF/A format