Granger & Granger [2013] FMCAfam 312 (5 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[2013] FMCAfam 312
FAMILY LAW – Parenting – discrete
issue as to changeovers to facilitate the father’s time –
consideration
of best interests of young child – significant travel times
– father seeks mid point changeover – child in primary
mother – disparity in finances – mother’s application acceded
Family Law Act 1975
Goode and Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346
[2010] HCA 4
Collu & Rinaldo
[2010] FamCAFC
Mazorski v Albright
[2007] FamCA 520
McCall & Clark
[2009] FamCAFC 92
Respondent:
File Number:
PAC 4554 of 2011
Judgment of:
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Mr Alexander
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Verekers Lawyers
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Rebecca Bailey & Associates
(1) That for the purposes of the child’s time with
the father as provided for in orders made on the 21 March 2013 that changeovers
be affected at the McDonald’s Family Restaurant at [B] or as otherwise
agreed between the parties in writing with such writing
to include SMS or e-mail
communication.
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment under the
Granger & Granger
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
PAC 4554 of
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Proceedings
present application is a discrete parenting application as to the issue of
changeovers facilitating the time that the subject
[X] born [in]
shall spend with the father.
mother and father resolved all issues as to parenting save for the present
discrete issue by reason of final parenting orders
made on 21 March 2013.
final orders in summary provided:
the mother and father have equal shared parental responsibility for the
the child to live with the mother,
the child spend time with the father as follows:
4 April 2013 in alternate weeks from 9 AM Saturday to 4 PM Sunday in the
presence of one or both of the paternal grandparents
or other paternal family
member, with the father not to be present during changeover, other than when
changeover is at the contact
Centre and at other times as agreed;
4 April 2014 in alternate weeks from 4 PM Friday to
4 PM Sunday upon the
same conditions and otherwise as agreed;
4 April 2015 if changeovers are at or north of [K] from 5 PM Friday until 5 PM
Sunday and give changeovers are south of [K] from
4 PM Friday until 4 PM
as agreed between the parties.
the orders provided comprehensively for special and significant occasions for
the child to spend with each of the parents,
for school holiday time, electronic
to matters touching
upon the child’s welfare, restraints on the parents
from physically disciplining the child, a mutual non-denigration order,
provision for international travel, the mother be restrained from relocating the
child’s residence more than 25 km from the
current address in [U] and
various other orders not significant for the present purpose.
the final orders provided for the facilitation of changeovers from 4 April 2013
at the Catholic Care Contact Centre in [omitted]
and, if that centre is
unavailable, then the McDonald’s Family Restaurant at [B].
the parties were unable to agree as to arrangements for changeovers after 4
April 2014 and that issue is the issue for determination
The Mother’s Proposal
mother’s proposal is that changeovers from 4 April 2014 take place at the
McDonald’s Family Restaurant at [B] in effect
continuing the arrangements
to be implemented for the next 12 months.
The Father’s Proposal
father proposes that changeovers take place at the McDonald’s Family
Restaurant at [A] upon condition that:
mother deliver the child to the father or the father’s agent at that
location at the commencement of the child’s time
with the father as
provided for or as otherwise agreed;
father or the father’s agent return the child to the mother at that
location at the conclusion of the child’s time
with the father or as
otherwise agreed.
support of the orders sought by him, the father relied upon his affidavits filed
on 12 March 2013 and 28 March 2013 together with
his financial statement filed
on 12 March 2013.
mother, in support of her contention, relied upon her affidavit filed on 8 March
2013 and her financial statement filed on 8 March
mother is presently aged 34 years of age and the father is presently aged 34
years of age.
father has a history of depression which, at present, is controlled by
medication and annual visits to his medical specialist.
The mother asserts that
the father has some obsessional personality traits and lack of emotional
control. These aspects are referred
to in the Family Report.
parties commenced cohabitation in June 2003 and were married [in] 2009. The
parties separated on 4 March 2011.
subject child, [X], is the only child of the marriage.
to the parties separation in March 2011, the mother relocated with the child to
the far south coast of New South Wales
to [U], being an area where she has
support of family, particularly her mother.
to separation, the father remained residing in the matrimonial home at [omitted]
until it was sold in late 2012. The father
now resides with his parents at [C]
appears common ground that the distance between the mother’s home at [U]
and the father’s residence at [C] is just
in excess of 250 km one way and,
subject to traffic, is about a 3 ½ hour drive.
mother says that to facilitate changeovers at [B], as sought by her, she would
be required to travel with the child about 70 km,
which would take about one
hour. Should she be required to effect changeovers at [A], she says this would
require her to travel about
122 km or for about one hour and 40 minutes.
Importantly
the mother asserts that for her to travel either to [B] or [A] would require her
to mostly travel up on country roads,
whereas a substantial portion of the
travel that would be required to be undertaken by the father would be on a
freeway or multilane
highway. This circumstance was not in dispute during
submissions.
to her financial circumstances, the mother receives the child support payments
from the father in the sum of $262 a week and government
benefits that total
earning about $60 per week.
The mother presently owns a 13-year-old motor
vehicle of insignificant value and says that she is unable to afford to upgrade
motor vehicle.
mother says that she spends about $50 per week in petrol and would find it
difficult to meet any additional petrol expenses to
meet the father’s
requirement as to changeovers.
to sale of the former matrimonial home the mother purchased her present home in
[U] for the sum of $270,000 with a mortgage
of $200,000 in respect of which are
repayments are $1175 per month.
mother asserts that the father is in full-time employment earning about $115,000
per annum as part of which he receives the benefit
of a motor vehicle and motor
vehicle expenses as part of his salary package.
father seeks a changeover arrangement that is approximately midway between his
residence and that of the mother, suggesting that
each of them take a break
during their respective drives to provide the child with an opportunity to
stretch his legs and thus make
the journey less onerous.
father complains that should he be required to undertake a more significant
portion of the travel, this will impact upon his time
with the child and impact
on his work arrangements, in that he would need to leave work early when he was
to collect the child on
father says that he is required to reimburse his employer $211 per month for the
private use of his employer’s motor vehicle.
He suggests that he pay to
the mother an amount of $20 for each changeover weekend until January 2016 to
defray the additional costs
of her petrol.
father says that after separation changeover was affected at [K], but that that
arrangement ended in June 2011.
father presently earns an annual salary of about $83,000 per annum. In addition,
as referred to above, he has provided to him
a motor vehicle by his employer, in
respect of which he pays to the employer the modest sum of $211 per month. The
child support is assessed on the basis of his annual salary and a
sum equivalent to his grossed up fringe benefit relating to his
motor vehicle
and any other benefits he may receive from his employer.
the reality is that the mother is the primary carer for the child and her
ability to return to the workforce in any significant
capacity is hindered by
her ongoing obligation to care for the child who is just three years of
relevant principles in relation to parenting and interim proceedings are well
Goode and Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346.
The Full Court in
provided a “framework” as to how applications for
parenting orders are to be determined. The High Court, in
[2010] HCA 4
, affirmed the legislative pathway.
of the Act outlines the objects and principles underlying
objects of this Part are to ensure that the best
are met by:
ensuring that
have the benefit of both of
having a meaningful involvement in
their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best
from physical or psychological
harm from being subjected to, or
, neglect or
family violence
ensuring that
receive adequate and proper
to help them achieve their full
potential; and
ensuring that
fulfil their duties, and meet
their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their
principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be
contrary to a
have the right to know and be cared for by
, regardless of whether their
are married, separated, have never married or
have never lived together; and
have a right to spend time on a regular basis
with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their
and other people significant to their care,
welfare and development (such as grandparents and other
jointly share duties and responsibilities
concerning the care, welfare and development of their
should agree about the future
have a right to enjoy their culture (including
the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
provides that in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order, the
Court is to regard the best interests of the child as
the paramount
consideration.
then outlines the primary (sub-s.(2)) and additional
(sub-s.(3))
considerations that the Court is to take into account in determining what is in
the best interests of the child.
of the Act provides that when making a parenting order, the Court must
apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the
child for the
child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility. If the
presumption in
is to apply, and the Court makes an order for equal shared
parental responsibility, this “triggers” the operation of
which requires the Court to consider whether equal time or substantial and
significant time with each parent is in the child’s
best interests and
reasonably practicable.
these proceedings, the parties have, by consent, provided for equal shared
parental responsibility and for orders as to the child’s
time with each of
that circumstance, the orders to be made by the Court falls to be determined by
reason of a consideration of the best interest
considerations set out in
Best Interests
the Full Court preferred in
Collu & Rinaldo
[2010] FamCAFC 53
Court turns to look at the best interests considerations set out in
should firstly consider the additional
considerations.
The Additional Considerations
expressed by the
factors (such as the
's maturity or
level of understanding) that the
thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the
is of tender years and this is not a relevant consideration.
nature of the relationship of the
(i) each of the
(ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other
The child has a primary attachment to the mother, who is the child’s
primary carer. However the child has a significant and
substantial relationship
with the father that the parties have been able to maintain over the period
since separation. The family
reporter observes that “
the child presents
as a much loved and will cared for child. He appears able to confidently and
securely explore his environment and
seek comfort from his parents which is
indicative that he has been able to form secure and trusting attachment
relationships with
extent to which each of the
has taken, or failed to take, the
opportunity:
(i) to participate in making decisions about
major long-term issues
relation to the
(ii) to spend time with the
(i) to communicate with the
Both parents have been
appropriately engaged in relation to the considerations provided for in this
factor. It is of no assistance
to the Court in the present determination.
ca) the extent to which each of the
has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the
's obligations to maintain the
The mother is the primary provider in terms of the obligation to maintain the
child. She provides the child’s long-term accommodation
overwhelming proportion of the child’s day to day needs from what is, in
comparison to the father’s income, a
modest and government supplemented
income. The father pays child support as assessed but makes no other provision
to assist the mother
in the provision of accommodation or long-term costs for
This disparity in the parent’s obligations favours the mother’s
(d) the likely effect of any changes in the
's circumstances, including the likely effect
of any separation from:
(i) either of his or her
(ii) any other
, or other person
(including any grandparent or other
), with whom he or she has been living;
This is not a factor of great significance. The parties are simply at odds in
relation to changeovers such that would facilitate the
child’s time with
the father. Either party’s proposal has no impact as contemplated by this
consideration.
(e) the practical difficulty and expense of a
spending time with and communicating with a
and whether that difficulty or
expense will substantially affect the
right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both
on a regular basis;
This factor is of little significance. The parties themselves have resolved
the substantial issues in relation to residents and the
father’s time with
the child. The discrete issue has an impact in terms of the expense to either
party of additional travel
but in implementing same there is no issue as to
practical difficulty.
(f) the capacity of:
(i) each of the
(ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other
to provide for the needs of the
including emotional and intellectual needs;
This issue is partially relevant having regard to the mother’s
reservations referred to in the family report, as to the father’s
depression and other aspects of his behaviour. However, the parties have
resolved the question of the father’s time with the
child and, inherent in
that resolution, is an acknowledgement by the mother that she is satisfied that
the father has an appropriate
capacity in this regard.
(g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle,
culture and traditions) of the
either of the
, and any other characteristics of the
thinks are relevant;
As referred to above, the child is of tender years and the child’s
relationships in circumstances of the parent separation are
still developing.
The parents have agreed to appropriate and child focused orders having regard to
the age of the child. This consideration
has no relevance to the discrete issue
for determination.
child or a Torres Strait
Islander child:
's right to enjoy his or
Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander culture
(including the right to enjoy that culture with
other people who share that culture); and
(ii) the likely impact any proposed
parenting order
under this Part will have
on that right;
This is not a relevant consideration.
(i) the attitude to the
the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's
In the context of this discrete issue, the Court has concerns that the father
is focusing more on his and, indirectly, his family’s
needs rather than
the question of appropriate arrangements for his child.
His affidavit evidence reveals, to some extent, an obsession with ensuring
equality in terms of travel time and distance. He does
not acknowledge that his
travel for a significant distance will be on much easier roads and in much
better circumstances than the
travel required of the mother. To some extent this
demonstrates a lack of reflective capacity in the father as to the needs of the
child and his responsibilities as a parent not only to the child but to the
family violence
involving the
of the child's family;
This is not a relevant consideration in the context of this application.
(k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the
's family--any relevant inferences that can be
drawn from the order, taking into account the following:
(i) the nature of the order;
(ii) the circumstances in which the order was
(iii) any evidence admitted in
proceedings
for the order;
(iv) any findings
proceedings
for, the order;
(v) any other relevant matter;
This is not a relevant consideration in the context of this application.
(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least
likely to lead to the institution of further
proceedings
in relation to the
The present application is as to the resolution of one discrete issue, the
parties having resolved all other parenting issues and
its determination is most
likely to avoid further proceedings.
(m) any other fact or circumstance that the
thinks is relevant.
There is no other fact or circumstance that the Court thinks is relevant
The Primary Considerations:
primary considerations are:
benefit to the
of having a meaningful
relationship with both of the
's parents; and
need to protect the
from physical or
psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to,
, neglect or
family violence
applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the Court is to give
greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph
S.60CC(2)(a)
– “meaningful” relationship
Mazorski v Albright
[2007] FamCA 520
; Brown J considered ordinary definitions of the term
“meaningful” and observed:
these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the
context of “meaningful relationship”,
is synonymous with
“significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for
“important” or “of
consequence”. I proceed on the basis
that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the
principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is
one which is important, significant and valuable to the child.
qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. Quantitive concepts may be
addressed as part of the process of considering
the consequences of the
application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the
requirement for time with
children to be, where possible and in their best
interests, substantial and significant.
McCall & Clark
[2009] FamCAFC 92
, the Full Court at 83,476 accepted
as appropriate this interpretation by Brown J of “meaningful
relationship”.
consideration is not of significant relevance having regard to the matters
referred to above, however, the Court is of the view
that notwithstanding that a
portion of the fathers time with the child will be involved in travel, such
travel will facilitate the
father and his extended family interacting with the
child in the much more intimate circumstances of a motor vehicle. To some extent
this has the possibility of enhancing the father’s relationship with the
S.60CC(2)(b)
– need to protect
is not a relevant consideration in the context of the discrete issue for
determination.
Court has had regard to the matters set out above and in particular the best
interest considerations provided for in
section 60CC
of the Act.
Court is conscious of the age of the child, the financial disparity in terms of
disposable income available to each of the parties,
the nature of the travel and
the roads on which that travel is to be undertaken and the distances and time
between each of the parties’
respective contentions.
Court is comfortably satisfied that it is in the best interests of the child
that that there be an order that changeovers be affected
at the McDonald’s
Family Restaurant at [B] or as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing
with such writing to include
SMS or e-mail communication.
Court will make orders accordingly.
I certify that the preceding
forty-seven (47) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of
Date: 4 April 2013
RTF format (232 KB)
Signed PDF/A format