iGas Operations Pty Ltd v Pipe Ex Pty Ltd Pipe Ex Pty Ltd v Intelligas Technology Developments Pty Ltd [2025] APO 27 (11 August 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
PATENT OFFICE
iGas Operations Pty Ltd v Pipe Ex Pty Ltd
Pipe Ex Pty Ltd v Intelligas Technology Developments Pty
[2025] APO 27
Patent Application: 2023201549 (s59) & 2021377198 (s36)
Title: Devices to prevent loss of liquid on high point vents & High-point
vent system
Section 59 Opposition
Patent Applicant: Pipe Ex
Opponent: iGas Operations Pty Ltd
Patent Applicant Intelligas Technology Developments Pty
Requestor Pipe Ex Pty Ltd
Delegate: Andrew
Decision Date: 11 August 2025
Hearing Date: 9 April 2025
Catchwords:
– opposition to the grant of the patent
under s 59(a)(i) and 59(a)(ii) – entitlement – identification of
concept – date of conception – employment agreement and
duty to invent – effect of resignation and notice period
opposition successful – opportunity to amend – operation of s 33
– costs awarded
Request under s 36 – seeking declaration that nominated person not an
eligible person – identification of inventive concept
conception – employment agreement and duty to invent – request
unsuccessful – costs awarded
Representation: Counsel for Pipe Ex Pty Ltd: Mr Joseph Elks
Patent attorney for Pipe Ex Pty Ltd: Dr Andy Mukherji and Dr Vanessa Yeung
Patent attorney for the iGas & Intelligas: Katrina Crooks and Nadine
Martino of Spruson & Ferguson
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Application: 2023201549 & 2021377198
Title: Devices to prevent loss of liquid on high point vents & High-point
vent system
Patent Applicants: Pipe Ex Pty Ltd & Intelligas
Technology Developments Pty Ltd
Date of Decision: 11 August 2025
I am not satisfied that
Pipe Ex Pty Ltd is an eligible person in respect of AU2021377198, and therefore,
the S36 request is unsuccessful.
I am satisfied that Pipe Ex Pty Ltd is
not an eligible person in respect of AU2023201549. Therefore, the S59
opposition is successful.
two (2) months
from the date
of this decision for Pipe Ex Pty Ltd to amend the AU2023201549 application to
attempt to overcome the grounds of opposition.
In the matter of the
request under section 36 of the
in respect of application 2021377198,
I award costs according to schedule 8 against the requestor, Pipe Ex Pty
In the matter of the opposition under section 59 of the Act to the grant
of a patent on application 2023201549, I award costs according
to schedule 8
against the applicant, Pipe Ex Pty Ltd.
REASONS FOR DECISION
application AU2021377198 (
AU198 application
) was filed by Intelligas
Technology Developments Pty on 11 November 2021 under the provisions of the
Patent Cooperation Treaty
as PCT/AU2021/051337, first published as WO2022/099368
A1. The AU198 application claims priority from provisional application
AU2020904128
filed on 11 November 2020.
28 June 2024, Pipe Ex Pty Ltd filed an application under Section 36 requesting
the Commissioner to declare that Pipe Ex Pty Ltd
is an eligible person alone or,
in the alternative, in conjunction with Intelligas Technology Developments Pty
in respect of AU198.
application 2023201549 (
AU549 application
) was filed by Pipe Ex Pty Ltd
on 14 March 2023, claiming priority from provisional application 2022901025
filed on 18 April 2022.
Acceptance of the AU549 application was advertised on
15 June 2023. On 15 August 2023, iGas Operations Pty Ltd filed a Notice of
Opposition under Section 59 against the grant of a patent for AU549. On the
same day, Phoenix Energy Services also filed a Notice
of Opposition, however
Phoenix Energy Services withdrew their opposition before proceeding any further.
15 December 2023, iGas Operations Pty Ltd filed their Statement of Grounds and
Particulars (
). On 19 September 2024 iGas Operations Pty Ltd filed a
first amendment to the SGP, which was allowed on 8 October 2024.
amended SGP sets out the following grounds of opposition:
59(a)(i) – Nominated person not entitled to grant of a patent for the
invention, and
59(a)(ii) – Nominated person only entitled to grant of a patent for the
invention in conjunction with some other person.
will be discussed more below, Intelligas Technology Developments Pty and iGas
Operations Pty Ltd are related corporate entities,
and it will generally be
convenient to refer to them collectively as
, except where necessary
to distinguish between them. For reasons which will become clear, it will be
necessary later in this decision
to be more careful with the nomenclature for
Pipe Ex Pty Ltd. I will refer to the entity which is the requestor for AU198
and applicant
for AU549 as
Pipe Ex Pty Ltd
Applicable Law and the Standard of Proof
applications were made after 15 April 2013, and so are governed by the
Patents Act 1990
) as amended by the
Intellectual Property Laws Amendment (Raising the Bar) Act 2012
standard of proof that applies to both matters is therefore the balance of
probabilities.
AU198, the onus of proof for the purposes of s36 typically initially falls on
the requestor (Pipe Ex Pty Ltd), see
Woodside Energy Limited v Richard John
at [37]. However, the
evidentiary burden may shift under some circumstances, especially when knowledge
of relevant facts lies
primarily with one party or the other; see
Holdings Limited's Application
at 542 to 544.
AU549, if I am satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that a ground of
opposition to the grant of the standard patent
exists, I may refuse the
application. However, under section 60(3B), I must not refuse the application
without, where appropriate,
allowing the applicant (Pipe Ex Pty Ltd) a
reasonable opportunity to amend the application to overcome the ground(s). The
(iGas) bears the onus.
AU549, on 15 March 2024, iGas filed their Evidence in Support, which comprised a
declaration from Derek Fekete (
) with annexures DF-1 to DF-19,
and a declaration from Andrew Clarkson (
) with annexures AC-1
to AC-5. On 17 June 2024, Pipe Ex Pty Ltd filed their Evidence in Answer, which
comprised a declaration from
Steven Larsen (
), and a declaration
from David Nichols (
) with annexures DN-1 to DN-14. On 19
August 2024, iGas filed their Evidence in Reply, which comprised a second
declaration from
Mr Clarkson (
), a declaration from Bryan
), and a second declaration from Derek Fekete
) with annexures DF-20 to DF-23.
AU198, on 21 October 2024, Pipe Ex Pty Ltd filed their Evidence in Support,
which comprised a declaration from Mr Nichols
) and annexures
DN-1 to DN-16. On 20 December2024, iGas filed their Evidence in Answer, which
comprised a declaration from Mr Fekete
) with annexures DF-1 to
DF-18 (noting that DF-1 of this declaration comprises DF-1 to DF-23 from
Fekete#1 and Fekete#2, and DF-2
comprises AC-1 to AC-5 of Clarkson#1). On 20
January 2025, Pipe Ex Pty Ltd filed their Evidence in Reply, which comprised a
declaration
from Mr Nichols (
7 April 2025, Pipe Ex Pty Ltd requested for the Commissioner to invoke Reg. 5.23
to admit two new documents (collectively,
the 5.23 material
). While Reg.
5.23 does not formally apply to S36 matters, it is the Commissioners practice to
apply similar principles. The first
of these documents was an assignment of IP
rights from David Nichols to Pipe Ex Pty Ltd dated 1 April 2019 (the
), and the second is an assignment of IP from David Nichols to
Pipe Ex Pty Ltd dated 20 April 2022 (the
2022 assignment
). On 7 May 2025
I partially allowed the request by admitting the 2019 assignment into evidence
in respect of the AU198 matter, and
I allowed Intelligas Technology Developments
Pty to submit responding material, which they did on 7 July 2025 (
Nichols is the named inventor for both applications. He is the founder and
Executive Director of Pipe Ex Pty
, and was Chief Operating
Officer of iGas Operations Pty Ltd from October 2019 until March 2022. He is a
mechanical and civil engineer
who has been working in the oil and gas sectors
since 1989, and in Australia specifically since
, and as will be discussed more
below, he has expertise in the fields of high point vents and related
technologies. In 2013, he founded
“Independent Pipeline Services”,
which would later become “iPipe”, where he developed new machines,
devices, and tools for use in the coal seam gas
Fekete is the chief executive officer (CEO) of IntelliGas Group Limited, of
which relevantly includes Intelligas Technology Developments
Pty Ltd and iGas
Operations Pty Ltd
. He obtained a
Bachelor’s degree of Engineering from the University of Queensland in
1991, then worked with Energy Developments
Group for 15 years working on
projects related to landfill gas, coal seam methane, CNG/LNG virtual pipelines,
remote area combined
cycle power, and waste to energy fields, contributing to
design, commissioning, operations, and business development. He obtained
Masters of Business Administration from Griffith University in 2009, and went on
to found IntelliGas Group Limited in
Clarkson is currently a Non-Executive Director of Phoenix Energy Services Pty
. He obtained a
Bachelor’s degree of Engineering from Northumbria University in 1996, and
has worked in a range of engineering
roles in the gas production and pipeline
. Mr Clarkson was
previously employed by iGas Operations Pty Ltd as Engineering Manager from July
2020 until March 2022
. Mr Clarkson
describes that, after leaving iGas, he joined forces with Mr Nichols and two
other colleagues to form Phoenix Energy
. However, it appears
Mr Nichols and Mr Clarkson would later fall into dispute over Mr Nichols
becoming a shareholder and a putative
licensing agreement with respect to
Larsen has been working on pipeline, mining, construction, and infrastructure
projects since 2000, in roles including estimator,
procurement manager, and 3D
. He was employed as a
3D designer at iPipe (Mr Nichols’ previous company) from 2013 until 2019,
when he then joined iGas as
a workshop assistant working on compressor
Fulwood has been the Manufacturing Manager at iGas since approximately
Larsen and Mr Fulwood have largely only provided declarations about
conversations and general context about the work conducted
at iGas, while Mr
Nichols, Mr Fekete, and Mr Clarkson have provided more detailed submissions
and various business
arrangements.
of the declarants can be said to be truly unbiased, but that is not unusual
where there are disputes over entitlement. Indeed,
the individuals in dispute
may often be the only people privy to the relevant facts. By my estimate, none
of the declarants have
behaved in such a way that I would discount their
declarations as a whole, but I will need to bear in mind their respective
when weighing up their declarations.
Summary of the AU198 application
relates to the field of high-point vent systems (
) for gas and liquid
pipe networks, particularly in the context of coal seam gas gathering
. HPVs (as the name
suggests) are located at local high points along the length of a water pipeline,
and involve a valve configured
to release air or gas that accumulates at the
high point. If this accumulated gas is not released, it forms a pocket which
or even fully stops the flow of water through the
. In coal seam gas
applications, the water in question is often considered an environmental
pollutant, so it is important for the
HPV to release gas but not
specification identifies several problems associated with existing HPV systems,
with Fig. 1 provided as an example of typical
prior art HPVs (reproduced below).
These existing HPVs comprise a housing 105, an inlet “Y” strainer
125, a vent outlet
120, and a vent valve 115 actuated by a float mechanism 110.
While the specification does not describe the operation of the existing
depth, from the figures and the general description provided it is clear to me
that the inlet side of the Y strainer 125 is
connected by a suitable pipe riser
to the high point of the water line. Accumulated gas and/or water rises through
the strainer
125 and into the housing 105. Gas is free to pass through the vent
valve 115 and vent 120 up until the water level rises high enough
to cause the
float to close the valve 115. The vent will re-open whenever accumulated gasses
displace sufficient water to allow
the float to drop.
problems identified include, firstly, that coal fines, clay deposits, and
construction debris can block fine passages of the vent,
or cause undesired
release of water
. Secondly, the
existing vents are typically made from steel which can be significantly corroded
by the highly saline water. Additionally,
it is stated that the existing vents
experience a “loss of function at angles significantly away from the
as well as difficult and expensive maintenance, and difficulty
cleaning the Y strainer
specification then includes a number of consistory
substantially matching
the claims.
general operation of the preferred embodiment can be described by reference to
Figure 3, reproduced below. The HPV system 200
comprises a cylindrical housing
205 defining a central cavity 300. The housing 205 is made up of an upper
section 327 and lower
section 328, with an inlet at the lower end of the lower
section 328 and an outlet at the upper end of the upper section 327. A
cylindrical, longitudinal basket filter 305 is fixed in the cavity 300 extending
into the lower section 328. A float element 310
is located above and inside the
filter 305, with an upper end of the float connected to a float rod 315. Above
the upper section
327, there is a manifold 330 and check valve subsystem 335.
The upper section 327 is removably bolted to the lower section 328 via
and bolts 325 to allow for easy separation, giving access to the float 310 and
filter 305 for cleaning and
maintenance
use, the operation of this portion of the HPV is similar to the prior art HPV:
gas rises freely from the high point of the pipeline
into the HPV, until liquid
rises to lift the float and close a
(within the manifold 330,
I will describe more below). One notable difference is that instead of
utilising a Y strainer below the
inlet to the chamber, there is a basket filter
305 inside the chamber and surrounding the float. This basket filter 305
comprises a thin layer of “polymer or non-corrosive metallic
mesh material”
context, this is presumably supposed to mean polymer or
corrosion resistant
metal). After liquid passes through the filter 305, it rises into the upper
section 327, which forms a settling
the upper section 327, there is a manifold 330 and check valve subsystem 335,
shown in more detail in Fig. 4 (reproduced below).
The manifold is coupled to
the outlet of the upper section 327 by threaded connection 425. The float rod
315 extends through the
threaded connection 425, leaving an annular gap 400.
The top of the float rod 315 is connected to an extension 410, and the top
the extension 410 includes a rubber-like seal 415. The manifold chamber
includes a small central orifice 420.
check valve subsystem 335 is located above the manifold 330. It comprises a
lower check ball valve and an upper check ball valve.
Lower check ball valve
440 initially seals against lower seat 445 to prevent external gas from flowing
into the system and can rise
under gas pressure within orifice 420 to allow
accumulated gasses to rise towards the upper ball valve
. Upper ball valve 450 is
initially in the open position allowing gas to pass from the lower ball valve
out vent 455, but in the
event rubber-like seal 415 fails and water reaches the
upper check ball valve, the ball 450 floats upward to seal on seat 460, thereby
closing the vent 455
two ball valves are separated from one another by “element” 465,
with upper and lower surfaces for receiving the respective
specification notes that the element 465 “integrates flow passages that
direct flow annularly around the check
ball 450 such that the check ball 450 is
not lifted by the gas flow. The ball 450 is thus only lifted by floating in a
liquid, should
the chamber in which it resides fill with
operation, gas passes through the annular space 400 and then through orifice
420, until the float rises, lifting the float rod,
extension, and rubber-like
seal, pressing the seal against the orifice to form the primary vent
specification describes that by making the central orifice small, such as below
3mm diameter, the effect of any vacuum pressure
in orifice 420 is reduced, which
reduces the chance of the rubber-like seal becoming stuck in the closed
position. This is said
to increase the reliability of the operation when the
2 describes a reverse flush subsystem (reproduced below). This involves three
valves attached to the HPV: valve 225 is tapped
to the side of the inlet end of
the lower section 328, valve 230 is tapped to the side of the lower section 328,
and valve 235 is
tapped to a point above the outlet end of upper segment 327 but
below the valve/seal 415. An external, high pressure water source
connected to valve 230 to wash down the outside of the filter, or to 235 to
flush backwards through the filter, in either
case using valve 225 as a
pressurised exit port or discharging the water and
5-7 relate to a second embodiment of the invention. This second embodiment is
similar to the first, except the upper section
327 and check valve subsystem 335
are not included.
specification identifies that the invention provides a number of advantages,
including robust operation resistant to
, redundant sealing
features to ensure saline solution does not
, capable of operating at
inclined angles
, and efficient
or improved flushing, cleaning, and
maintenance
. However, the
specification notes that not all advantages are associated with all
embodiments
ends with 20 claims, all directly or indirectly appended to claim 1. A full set
of claims is included in the annex, but it
will suffice to set out claim
A high-point vent system, comprising:
a housing defining a central cavity;
a filter that extends across the central cavity;
a float positioned in the central cavity;
a float rod having a lower end and an upper end, the lower end of the
float rod connected to the float and the upper end of the float
rod connected to
a seal; and
a manifold connected to the housing and having an input end and an output
end, wherein the input end defines a seal orifice that is
positioned adjacent to
Summary of the AU549 application
relates to the field of HPV systems, particularly but not exclusively in coal
seam gas (CSG) applications
The specification describes that in CSG gathering systems, high density
polyethylene (HDPE) pipes are used to carry gas and liquid
extracted from
multiple wells, with the gas separated from the liquid either “down
hole” or at the surface, which is
then distributed through a network of
pipes, risers, and manifolds leading to a compression station for the gas and a
liquid pond
or treatment plant for the
. The specification
states these networks have problems associated with “plugging”,
where liquid cannot pass through
the pipeline due to gas locking at high points
in the pipeline. To reduce or avoid plugging, HPVs are used to remove gas
at high points
specification states that CSG often has issues with HPV failures, in particular
failed seals, which cause liquid to be released,
causing environmental
specification describes the prior art HPVs with reference to Fig. 1, reproduced
below. They comprise a housing 105, with a lower
inlet 115 and an upper vent
125, and a side drain port 130. Inside the housing 105 is a float 110, which
actuates a vent valve 120.
The specification states that these existing systems
suffer from corrosion of the metallic parts, fouling or blocking of the vent
valve, and “a loss of function the
. This is said
to lead to “a need for a device to stop the flow of liquid should the High
Point Vent mechanism fail
specification then includes a number of consistory
substantially matching
the claims.
general operation of the first embodiment may be describe by reference to Fig.
6, reproduced below. HPV valve assembly 600 comprises
an upper compartment
housing 200 and a lower compartment housing 300 separated by a diffuser plate
assembly 500. As a note on terminology,
while the specification refers to the
two portions as separate housings, in fact the walls of the lower compartment
and part of the
upper compartment are integrally formed as a single part (Fig.
3), with the remainder of the upper compartment formed of a second
2). The first and second parts are coupled by threaded portions 215, 230. The
lower compartment housing 300 includes
an inlet orifice 310 at the bottom, and
the upper compartment housing 200 includes an outlet orifice 205 at the top.
The diffuser
plate assembly (shown in additional detail in Fig. 5a) comprises a
disc-shaped member 505, which is divided into a radially inner
solid portion
502, and a radially outer/peripheral region which has through holes 510. The
through holes 510 are not equally spaced
around the radially outer portion,
instead the holes 510 are confined to a first arcuate
the upper compartment housing 200, there is a filter assembly 400 (shown in more
detail in Fig. 4) consisting of a cylindrical
structure 402 which extends from
the upper surface of the diffuser plate assembly 500 to the top inner surface of
the upper compartment
housing. The cylindrical structure 402 is sized and
sealed to the diffuser plate such that the radially inner solid portion of the
diffuser disk 502 aligns with the inside of the cylindrical structure 402, while
the radially outer region (and hence all the through
holes 510) align outside of
the cylindrical structure 402. The cylindrical structure 402 includes screening
perforations 405 in
an upper section, with a lower section generally solid
(although see discussion of drain hole 415 below). The lower section of the
cylindrical structure 402 and the radially inner solid portion of the diffuser
plate assembly 500 create a collection chamber, which
collects liquid during
the lower compartment housing 300 is a lower sealing ball 535, which seals
against converging walls around the inlet 310 to
prevent ingress of air during
vacuum conditions
. Inside the
collection chamber, there is an upper sealing ball 420, which floats when liquid
is collected within the collection
chamber. When the liquid reaches high
enough, upper sealing ball 535 engages a seating portion 210 surrounding outlet
orifice 205,
thereby sealing the outlet orifice to prevent release of
all the main components in mind, the general operation of the HPV is this: gas
accumulating in the pipeline at the high point
enters the HPV via inlet orifice
310. This pressurised gas raises the lower sealing ball 535 and passes into the
lower compartment
300. From there, the gas passes through the diffuser plate
assembly 500 via through holes 510, entering an annular space between
housing 200 and the filter assembly 400. The gas passes through screening
perforations 405, which screens any solid particles.
The gas can then flow out
outlet orifice 205. When liquid rises into the HPV, it initially follows the
same path as the gas, until
reaching the screening apertures 405. The liquid
then begins to collect in the collecting chamber and floats the upper sealing
420, until the upper sealing ball seals the outlet orifice 205. At this
point the pressure throughout the HPV equalises, allowing
the lower sealing ball
535 to drop to the closed position. The specification notes that when this
happens, the internal volume of
the housing becomes pressurised, which can be
released by means of a pressure relief valve
. A pressure monitoring
device 610 may be provided to measure pressure levels within the
allow liquid to drain from the collection chamber, the filter assembly includes
a drain hole 415. Confusingly, the drawings show
this drain hole 415 as being
located on a lower portion of the cylindrical structure 402, leading from the
collection chamber to
the annular space, i.e., the upper housing 200. However,
the specification describes that drain hole 415 is provided in the inner
portion of the diffuser plate assembly 500, to drain fluid into the lower
housing cavity
specification goes on to note that it is preferable that the drain hole in the
lower section of the cylindrical section is
positioned adjacent the second
arcuate portion of the diffuser plate assembly
(that is, the portion
without through holes). This alignment prevents air from entering the drain
hole 415, which would cause the
upper sealing ball 420 to spin or prematurely
rise to seal outlet
specification states that the advantages of the invention include: any solid
particles in the liquid gas mixture are screened
by the filter assembly 400 and
may then accumulate within the annular space, and that the threadable engagement
between the upper
section and lower section allow for easy access and removal of
the filter for
ends in 18 claims, all appended (directly or indirectly) to claim 1. A full set
of claims is included in the annex, but it
will suffice to set out claim 1:
A vent valve assembly for use in venting excess gas or gas pressure, the
vent valve assembly comprising:
a housing defining a hollow central cavity with an in-use upper
compartment separated from an in-use lower compartment by a diffuser
the lower compartment having an inlet orifice for receiving influent flow
of fluid and the upper compartment comprising an outlet
orifice for expulsion of
the diffuser plate being provided for allowing upward flow of fluid from
the lower compartment to the upper compartment through the
an upper sealing ball retained in the upper compartment and prevented from
passing through the diffuser plate into the lower compartment,
wherein the upper sealing ball is movably disposed to move towards the
outlet orifice and form a seal at or adjacent the outlet orifice
expulsion of fluid through the outlet orifice;
wherein the in-use upper compartment further comprises a filter having a
hollow structure with upstanding walls extending between
a lower open end and an
upper open end of the hollow structure wherein the upstanding walls comprise
perforations for screening fluid
and preventing solid particles from being
received into an internal volume of the hollow structure;[sic]
Legal principles of entitlement
59 of the Act relevantly states:
The Minister or any other person may, in accordance with the regulations,
oppose the grant of a standard patent on one or more of
the following grounds,
but on no other ground:
(a) that the nominated person is either:
(i) not entitled to a grant of a patent for the invention; or
(ii) entitled to a grant of a patent for the invention but only in
conjunction with some other person;
terms of who is entitled to a grant of a patent, Section 15(1) provides
Subject to this Act, a patent for an invention may only be granted to a
person who:
(a) is the inventor; or
(b) would, on the grant of a patent for the invention, be entitled to have
the patent assigned to the person; or
(c) derives title to the invention from the inventor or a person mentioned
in paragraph (b); or
(d) is the legal representative of a deceased person mentioned in
paragraph (a), (b) or (c).
is understood to mean that a patent may only be granted to the inventor or
somebody claiming through the
36(1) of the Act relevantly states:
(a) a patent application has been made and, in the case of a complete
application, the patent has not been granted; and
(b) an application for a declaration by the Commissioner is made by one or
more persons (the
section 36 applicants
) in accordance with the
regulations; and
(c) the Commissioner is satisfied on the balance of probabilities, in
relation to an invention disclosed in the specification filed
in relation to the
application for the patent:
(i) that the nominated person is not an eligible person, but that the
section 36 applicants are eligible persons; or
(ii) that the nominated person is an eligible person, but that the section
36 applicants are also eligible persons;
the Commissioner may declare in writing that the persons who the
Commissioner is satisfied are eligible persons are eligible persons
in relation
to the invention as so disclosed.
defines that an eligible person “in relation to an
invention, means a person to whom a patent for the invention may be granted
under section 15.” As such, while the two AU198 and AU549 applications
have arrived before me by different mechanisms, the
relevant legal principles
are essentially the same.
general approach to determining who is an eligible person may be summarised
the “inventive concept” of the invention defined in the claims,
inventorship including the person responsible for the inventive concept and the
time of conception as distinct from its
verification and reduction to practice,
whether any contractual or fiduciary relationships give rise to proprietary
rights in the
identifying the inventive concept,
Polwood Pty Ltd v Foxworth Pty
“The invention or inventive concept of a patent or patent application
discerned from the specification, the whole of the specification
including the claims.
The body of the specification describes the invention
and should explain the inventive concepts involved. While the claims may
less than the whole of the invention, they represent the patentee's description
of the invention sought to be protected and
for which the monopoly is claimed.
The claims assist in understanding the invention and the inventive concept or
concepts that gave
rise to it.
There may be only one invention but it may be
the subject of more than one inventive concept or inventive contribution
The invention may consist of a combination of elements. It may be that
different persons contributed to that
combination”
Vehicle Monitoring Systems Pty Ltd v SARB Management Group Pty
“As to how the inventive concept is to be
identified, he said (at [102]):
‘102 It is not possible to be very specific about how this is to be
done. But as a general rule one will start with the specific
disclosure of the
patent and ask whether that involves the use of information which is really that
of the applicant, wholly or in
part or as a joint owner. ...
What one is
normally looking for is “the heart” of the invention
. There may
be more than one “heart” but each claim is not to be considered as a
separate “heart” on its
the second step, it is said that it is conception which is the touchstone of
inventorship
, with the Court
further noting that
“Their Honours referred to the discussion of inventive concept in
Gunter v Stream
573 F 2d 77
(1978), where the ‘conception’ of
the invention was described as the complete performance of the mental part of
the inventive
act. That is to say the invention is the formation in the mind of
the inventor
of a definite and permanent idea of the complete and operative
invention as it is thereafter to be applied in practice
Burroughs Wellcome
(1994) 40 F 3d 1223 cited above. What remains belongs
in the department of construction.
A concept can be complete although
experimentation may continue
. It is complete when a person of ordinary
skill in the art could construct the apparatus without unduly extensive research
of experimentation.
Their Honours referred also to
Mueller Brass Co v
Reading Industries Inc
352 F Supp 1357
(1972) at [16], [17] for the
proposition that inventorship is a role in the final conception of that which is
sought to be patented
It is clear that, in working out the inventive concept in a patent, each
patent will be different and it will be necessary to ascertain
the inventive
concept from the whole of the specification. Contribution after the invention
was fully conceived where that contribution
was under the direction of the
inventor does not give rise to entitlement to the invention.
A person must
be able to say that without his or her contribution to the final conception it
would have been less
Their Honours described that philosophy as “apt”. For joint
inventorship, each inventor had generally to contribute to
the conception of the
discussed the indications of joint inventorship in Australia, summarised at
[52]-[53] as:
“There has been some consideration of the principles of joint
inventorship in Australia. In
Costa v G R and I E Daking Pty Ltd
[1994] APO 23
Row Weeder Pty Ltd v Nielsen
[1997] APO 38
(1997) 39 IPR 400
inventorship was found where one person had a general idea of what was required
in a machine but did not necessarily know how
to put those ideas into effect and
the other person did so. In
the Delegate of the Commissioner of
Patents said that in his view, the question was
whether the invention would
have occurred without the second person’s involvement
(at 246). In
joint inventorship was said to arise where one person has a
general idea for solving a problem but is unable to give effect to the
while another person is able to do so. The Delegate of the Commissioner of
Patents concluded in
(at 405) that a person
has entitlement
to an invention if that person’s contribution, either solely or jointly
with others had a material effect on
the final concept of the invention
Whether or not that contribution involved a key inventive step was said to be
secondary. Entitlement to joint inventorship does
not apply to a person who,
not being the true inventor, bases the claim on knowledge derived from that
inventor (Stack at [18]).
JMVB Enterprises Pty Ltd v Camoflag Pty Ltd
[2005] FCA 1474
(2005) 67 IPR 68
Crennan J said at [132] that rights in an invention are
determined by
objectively assessing contributions to the invention rather than assessing the
inventiveness of respective contributions.
The invention is to be looked at
as a whole, as well as the component parts. The relationship between the
participants, such as
a collaboration (citing
Re Applications by CSIRO
and Gilbert
[1995] APO 16
(1995) 31 IPR 67
at 72–73) is a relevant factor. Her
Honour put it on the basis that,
if the final concept of the invention would
not have come about without a particular person’s involvement, then that
has entitlement to the invention
(at [132])” (emphasis
general principles of the first two steps are probably best summarised by French
“In my opinion, the invention in each case in these proceedings is
generally to be found described in the relevant specification
which will be, for
the most part, the applicable PCT specification. The time at which the
invention was developed and the person
by which it was developed is to be
ascertained by reference to the inventive concept of the invention so described.
The time of invention,
and the identity of the inventor will not be affected by
the subsequent process of reduction to practice some elements of which may
found their way into the claims in the application.”
Ex Pty Ltd also considers a further point from
to be worth
special attention:
“An inventor need not know that the invention will work for conception
to be complete. The inventor need only show that he
or she had the idea. The
discovery that an invention actually works is part of its reduction to
relatedly, from Jagot J in
Vector Corrosion Technologies Limited v E-Chem
Technologies
“Contrary to the submissions for E-Chem, it is not the case that an
inventive concept necessarily involves the ‘formation
in the mind of the
inventor of a definite and permanent idea of the complete and operative
invention as it is hereafter to be applied
in practice’ if, by this,
E-Chem intends to suggest that the inventive concept must in fact work or be
capable of being reduced
to practice. This formulation was cited in [
Gray Full Court
] at [1426] and
at [47]–[50] (citing
Shum v Intel Corporation
499 F.3d 1272
(2007) at [6]). However, it is
apparent that the characterisation of the inventive concept in Australian law
depends on how the
specification as a whole identifies the inventive concept,
which may or may not include the manner in which an idea is carried out
reduction of the idea to practice. [
UWA v Gray Full Court
does not suggest otherwise. Nor does
Sigma Pharmaceuticals (Australia) Pty
Ltd v Wyeth
[2010] FCA 1211
(2010) 88 IPR 459.
contractual or fiduciary arrangements, for reasons which will become apparent,
the most significant aspect will relate to the
nature of the employment of the
inventor. A useful summary is provided by
Victoria University of Technology
“The law is well settled upon the position of an officer or employee
who makes an invention affecting the business of his or
her employer. It
is an implied term of employment that
any invention or discovery made in the
course of the employment of the employee in doing that which he is engaged and
instructed to
during the time of his employment, and during working
hours, and using the materials of his employers, is the property of the employer
and not of the employee.
Having made a discovery or invention in
course of such work, the employee becomes a trustee for the employer of that
invention or
discovery, and he is therefore as a trustee bound to give the
benefit of any such discovery or invention to his employer.
mere existence of the employer/employee relationship will not give the employer
of inventions made by the employee during the term of the
relationship. And that is so even if the invention is germane to and
for the employer’s business, and even though the employee may have
made use of the employer’s time and resources in bringing
the invention to
completion.
Certainly, all the circumstances must be considered in each
case, but unless the contract of employment expressly so provides, or
invention is the product of work which the employee was paid to perform, it is
unlikely that any invention made by the employee
will be held to belong to the
” (emphasis added, citations omitted).
was cited with approval by
UWA V Gray Full
, which added the
following caution:
“We note in passing that it can, on occasion, be factually difficult to
define the subject matter over which a particular employee’s
responsibility to the employer extends. This may be, for example, because (a)
the employee’s engagement gives him
or her considerable discretion in
determining the area of inventive inquiry he or she will pursue for the
employer’s benefit;
or (b) the employee’s
managerial and
inventive responsibilities combined are such that he or she, as a fiduciary, is
obliged to give the employer the benefit
of any invention developed in the
course of his or her employment
that is germane to the employer’s
business (see eg
Fine Industrial Commodities Ltd v Powling
(1954) 71 RPC
British Syphon Co Ltd v Homewood (No 2)
[1956] All ER 897
which is probably better explained as a breach of fiduciary duty case); or (c)
the employee’s inventive responsibilities evolve
over the course of the
employment as a result, for example, of the employment tasks changing: see eg
British Reinforced Concrete
, at 109.” (emphasis
The inventive concept of AU198
Ex Pty Ltd’s submissions summarise the AU198 application much as I have
above, and then summarises what they argue to be
the inventive concept as
“A HPV with an internal filter (e.g., claims 1, 3) with a larger
surface area (i.e., one that “
extends across the central
” in the housing) (claim 1), such filter enabling a longer
service life, less operator intervention (C
[0038] of the 198
Application regarding prior art). The operator has easy access to the working
components of the HPV (see e.g.,
[0044]; [0051]; [0066]). The system has a
reverse flush
”, so it can be “
quickly flushed clean
of debris such as swarf, and without resulting in the spillage of any saline
wastewater onto the ground surrounding
the vent system 200
”: see e.g.,
[0017]; [0030]; [0061]; claims 10-11. Additionally, an air gap is present,
whereby, any debris which passes through
the filter will not impede onto the
actual seals within the mechanism itself leading to the mechanism failing open:
see e.g., [0054];
Figure 4. Finally, the float has a float rod which connects
to a seal: see e.g., [0055]. The float is protected from any debris
filter within the chamber”
(italics in original).
contends that a number of the features identified by Pipe Ex Pty Ltd are merely
preferred or optional features derived from the
dependent claims or part of the
. Instead, iGas says
that the heart of the invention is:
“Having discussed the disadvantages of the prior art, [0006] of the
specification of AU198 notes that there is a need for an
improved HPV system.
The disadvantages of the prior art are described in further detail by Mr Fekete
at [61] of [Fekete#3]. In
response to these challenges of the prior art, Mr
Fekete describes the “heart” of the iGas invention as follows:
‘The iGas HPV addressed these issues by locating the float
, rather than seeking to filter material at the entry point. This
was crucial to the operation of the system as it meant that the
protected from any material finding its way into the housing. Because the float
is protected within the filter, the system
can also be quickly flushed clean of
debris without affecting the
emphasis as per Mr Fekete’s declaration)
then goes on to say:
“In this context, Intelligas Technology submits that the invention as
set out in the Summary of the Invention in the specification
at [0008], is a
combination of a number of features of an HPV system, in particular including a
filter extending across a central
cavity of a housing, with a float positioned
in the central cavity, embodies the inventive concept. These are the features
“At RS[36] Pipe Ex seeks to add further features as part of the
inventive concept derived from dependent claims and/or described
features. It has not explained why these form part of the inventive concept.
These aspects of the alleged inventive concept
which go beyond the features of
claim are either merely optional preferred features (reverse flush) or part of
the prior art (air
gap, float with a float rod connecting to a
a “filter that extends across the central cavity”: As can be seen
above, both parties have made submissions
appear odd. Pipe Ex Pty Ltd equate “extending across the central
cavity” with a
large surface area. However, referring to figure 3, if the
filter had been an essentially flat disc extending horizontally across
cavity at the height of the bottom portion of the actual filter, that would
plainly be “extending across the central cavity”
but would also
involve essentially the
possible surface area for the filter. I
also note that there is nothing in the specification which describes the surface
being a relevant factor.
for iGas’s submissions, these seem to have an internal inconsistency: they
quote Mr Fekete’s declaration that the crucial
feature is locating the
float within a filter, but suggest this somehow leads to the inventive
contribution being the features of
claim 1, which conspicuously locates the
float in the central cavity, not within the filter. Perhaps this inconsistency
resolved if “central cavity” was read as “the centre
of the cavity” (such that both the float and filter
are in some sense
co-located), but that is not how I would have construed such terms. It is also
odd that Mr Fekete was clear that
one of the big advantages of the filter design
was it allowed for quickly flushing the filter without affecting the float, but
regards this as merely an optional extra.
I have summarised above, the specification describes a number of problems in the
art: particulates and debris interfering with
the operation of the valve,
corrosion issues, operation at angles away from the vertical, difficulty in
cleaning or maintaining the
prior art Y strainers, and the failure of valves
leading to environmental contamination. As also summarised above, the
specification
describes a number of advantages of the present invention: robust
operation resistant to corrosion, redundant sealing features to
ensure saline
solution does not escape, capable of operating at inclined angles, and efficient
or improved flushing, cleaning, and
maintenance. The invention does not
necessarily relate to all of these problems/advantages, but it presumably
relates to at least
1 provides an HPV comprising a housing defining a central cavity, a filter
extending across the central cavity, a float positioned
in the central cavity, a
float rod connecting the float to a seal, and a manifold defining a seal orifice
adjacent the seal. As
discussed above, the claim may define less than the whole
of the invention (an observation which, if anything, is more likely in
of an application prior to acceptance like AU198), but may be used to provide
assistance in identifying the inventive concept.
inclusion of a filter, to at least some extent, goes towards solving the problem
of fines and debris interfering with the operation
of the valve. But since the
admitted prior art already include Y strainers (i.e., a type of filter), the
inventive concept cannot
be merely the provision of a filter. As I have alluded
to above, the filter “extending across the central cavity” does
of itself, seem to add anything over merely providing a filter.
inclusion of a float within a housing/cavity is, in essence, acknowledged to be
part of the prior art HPVs. From the specification,
what seems different from
the prior art is that the float is located in the same chamber as the filter,
made possible by configuring
the filter as a basket surrounding the float. This
arrangement contributes towards the ease of maintenance problem in two ways.
Firstly, as described in the
specification
, this arrangement
allows for a backflush system that can “wash down an outer surface of the
filter” in addition to backflushing
through the filter. While it is not
expressly stated in the words of the description, from the drawings it is
apparent that this
is possible because the outer surface of the filter
surrounding the float is the upstream side (i.e., the surface which will be
to unfiltered fluid and in need of washing off). Secondly, the
arrangement of including the filter and float in the one chamber
improves ease
of maintenance by simple reason of only requiring maintenance of a single
chamber (as opposed to having to separately
clean the Y strainer and float
float rod connected at the upper end to a seal, combined with a manifold
defining a seal orifice, serve to constrain the general
form of valve to which
the invention relates (what I mean here is that the inventive concept of AU198
does not relate to ball type
float valves). This arrangement is closely
associated with the problem of reliable operation of the valve when inclined
vertical, with the small orifice minimising the chances of vacuum
causing the seal to stick closed.
it was not included in claim 1, the check valve subsystem also warrants comment
here. It is directed to the problem of preventing
leakage of liquid to the
environment, while also providing the advantage of preventing ingress of air
into the system
. Because this
is, in part, a redundancy subsystem (if the main seal operates correctly, the
check valve subsystem does not need
to act to prevent escape of liquid to the
environment), so it may be said to be an optional feature. Indeed, the second
exemplified in figures 6-7 do not include the check valve subsystem
at all, and nor does the independent claim.
my reading of the specification, including the claims, leads me to believe that
the inventive concept of AU198 involves two
distinct “hearts”: the
first being that the central cavity contains a filter surrounding a float, and
the second being
a float rod, connected at the upper end to a seal, combined
with a manifold defining a seal orifice.
The inventive concept of AU549
the description and
drawings of AU549 similarly to how I have above (albeit iGas is more concise).
iGas then contends that the inventive
concept of AU549 is “the use and
combination of the various elements of the vent valve assembly described in the
the Invention [essentially being the features of claim 1], and
claimed in claim 1 of
They put some
emphasis on the point that [008] of the specification (the consistory clause
according to claim 1) is the only one
described as “an aspect of the
invention” while all other consistory clauses [009]-[0025] (essentially
matching dependent
claims 2-18) are each described as “an
embodiment” or “preferable”.
Ex Pty Ltd state they broadly agree, but would add two additional “key
features” of a lower sealing ball in the lower
chamber to block backflow
or air ingress (which they identify with claim 2), and a drainage feature to
drain accumulated liquid (which
they identify with claims 8, 11, or 15). Pipe
Ex Pty Ltd also provides some additional emphasis on the functions or operations
the features of claim 1,
as that the purpose of the filter element sealing at the lower end is to create
a collection chamber.
parties seem to have fallen into simply equating the inventive concept with the
claimed invention, although at least Pipe Ex
Pty Ltd went a little further by
considering dependent claims. As discussed above, that is not the correct
approach in Australian
law, where the authorities are at pains to emphasise that
the inventive concept must be determined from the specification as a whole.
claims may assist, but the analysis should not stop with the claims. For
obvious reasons, the same caution applies against
excessive reliance on
consistory clauses.
a first point, it is necessary to be clear what type of device the invention
relates to: it is not an HPV
(or at least, not in the sense
consistent with AU198), but rather a backup valve in case the HPV fails in the
open condition (note
the problem identified at [007] of the specification
relates to stopping the flow of liquid when the HPV fails in the open condition,
which would be nonsensical if the AU549 valve was the only valve at the vent).
The minimum requirement for this purpose is, simply
enough, a redundant float
valve comprising the buoyant upper sealing ball and associated outlet orifice.
Also plainly enough, the
inventive concept is more than this.
noted above, the advantages offered by the invention relate to screening solid
particles by the filter assembly, and ease of access
and removal of the filter
by way of the separable upper and lower sections.
this point, I run into a few limitations with the AU549 specification. The
specification and preferred embodiment involve a number
of features which are
not explained. A standout example of this is the “collection
chamber.” This refers to the space
within the cylindrical structure 402.
When liquid rises in the valve assembly, once the liquid gets high enough to
pass through
screening perforations 405, liquid collects in the collecting
chamber, causing the upper sealing ball to float. This explains what
collecting chamber is and how it interacts with the rest of the assembly, but
not what purpose it serves. Equivalently, there
is no direct explanation why
the screening perforations only exists at the upper end of the cylindrical
structure. It is hard to
determine whether something is, or is not, part of the
inventive concept until the functions and purpose are well understood, but
level of detail provided in the specification hints at the significance of these
features, so it is worth analysing further.
claim also indicates that the inventive concept relates to the diffuser plate.
Similar to my comment above, while the specification
provides reasonable
detailed description of what the diffuser plate is and what its preferred design
comprises, there is almost no
explanation of what its purpose is. From its name
alone, I can surmise its purpose is to diffuse the flow of air and/or liquid,
but the specification has not explained why this is desirable. It does not
appear related to the identified problems in the art
(corrosion, fouling, and
backup valve issues do not seem to rely on diffusing the flow). The other thing
that is disclosed about
the diffuser plate is that it divides the housing into
an upper and lower chambers, and retains the upper sealing ball in the upper
chamber. Again, there is no explanation for what the purpose of this is
(especially in the case of claim 1, where there is nothing
in the lower
chamber). The diffuser plate also serves to help define the collection chamber,
but as set out above that does not
assist in determining what the purpose of
these elements are.
indirect, the specification provides a comment at [0035] in the context of the
drain feature which I believe may illuminate
the purpose of all of the diffuser
plate, collection chamber/screening perforations only at the top, and the drain
feature. [0035]
describes that the collection chamber may be provided with a
drain hole (as I noted previously, there is some inconsistency in how
is described), which is preferably positioned, with the assistance of any
appropriate alignment means, adjacent the solid
arcuate portion of the diffuser
(i.e., opposite the through holes 510). This alignment is said to
“[prevent] air from entering
through the drain hole 415 and spinning or
pushing the upper sealing ball 420 towards the vent outlet 205.” While
this problem
was referred to in the context of the drain hole, once the problem
of air pushing the upper seal ball is realised, it is clear that
the diffuser
and collection chamber are actually addressing the same problem. The diffuser
diffuses the gas flow, reducing the chance
of blowing the float around, and the
collection chamber/perforations being located only at the top of the cylindrical
structure serve
to direct air flow above the resting position of the ball.
my opinion, once the specification is read as a whole, the true nature of the
problem being addressed by the invention is providing
a backup valve to prevent
liquid escape that also does not close by air blowing the upper ball upwards.
While this problem is somewhat
buried within the specification, once recognised
it is clearly the inciting motivation for all of the features of the claim, and
most of the features of the detailed embodiment (with the exception of the lower
sealing ball, threaded housing portions, pressure
gauge, and external drain).
This suggests that the inventive concept relates to the solution to this
problem, and includes the combination
housing defining a central cavity, having an inlet orifice at the bottom and an
outlet orifice at the top,
diffuser located in the central cavity, dividing the cavity into upper and lower
compartment, and for the purpose of diffusing the
upward flow of fluid into the
upper compartment,
cylindrical structure extending between the diffuser and the top of the housing,
thereby defining a collection chamber formed inside
the cylindrical structure
and above the diffuser,
buoyant sealing ball retained in the collection chamber, which floats to seal
the outlet orifice when liquid level rises in the
collection chamber,
cylindrical structure provided with screening perforations only at the top end,
which serves to direct air flow into the collection
chamber at a height above
the resting height of the sealing ball, and
collection chamber having a draining arrangement configured to drain liquid from
the collection chamber and aligned to reduce
airflow from the diffuser entering
the drain arrangement.
that this is not the same situation as AU198, where I found there were two
hearts to the invention. Here, there is one heart
of the invention comprising
the combination of these features.
Conception of AU198
The Arrow Energy design
was largely agreed that the key inventor of AU198 was Mr Nichols, so I will
begin with Mr Nichols’ background and description
of the art.
Nichols is a mechanical and civil engineer who has been working in the oil and
gas sectors since 1989, and in Australia specifically
since 2011, when he joined
the Queensland Gas Corporation, working on the production of liquid natural gas
(LNG) extracted from coal
seams (generally, coal seam gas or CSG). In 2013, he
founded “Independent Pipeline Services”, which would later become
“iPipe”, where he developed new machines, isolation devices, and
tools for use in CSG. During this time he also contributed
as a subject matter
expert to the code of practice for “Upstream PE Gathering Systems”
produced by the Australian Pipeline
Association
Nichols says that at that time, the industry was grappling with emerging issues
associated with HPVs and low point drains (LPDs)
containment
. Mr Nichos’
first preliminary designs for an improved HPV are dated 15 June 2015, and were
produced for a client named Arrow
. Most of the information
provided for this design show the exterior of the system and surrounding civil
works, but I have copied
one cross sectional drawing below. It will suffice for
the moment to note that this design approximately matches the “prior
art” design from figure 1 of AU198, except omitting the Y
The Smart Valve design
second HPV design, labelled the “Smart Valve HPV”, is dated 28
November 2015
, but only shows
the exterior of the HPV. Mr Nichols also provides a photograph of what is
clearly the same design, the photograph
“4/11/2015”
Nichols contends that this should be read as 11 April 2025, i.e. that the date
in the screenshot has the date in the American
style of MM/DD/YYYY, but that
seems unlikely, as the other Smart Valve
use the more familiar
DD/MM/YYYY format
because the 11 April 2025 date would imply that the Smart Valve was
than his self-admitted
design for Arrow Energy. Mr
Nichols also provides further drawings which also relate to this Smart Valve
which he states were made
, however these still only
show the exterior of the Smart Valve. The Smart Valve designs are labelled with
the company names “iPipe”
Nichols then explains that, as part of his role as managing director and chief
technological officer (CTO) at iPipe, he produced
a draft technical document
with capability statements for the Smart Valve in
. As confirmation of this
approximate timeframe, Mr Nichols provided a quotation for validation services
from Practical Engineering
Australia Pty Ltd dated 1 June
. I will refer to this as
the Smart Valve design.
general layout of the Smart Valve design is shown in the first image of DN-5.
On the right, it comprises a first cylindrical
chamber with a lower flange at
the base, which is the inlet to the Smart Valve. This is coupled via a short
pipe to a second chamber
on the left, which has an outlet vent at the top. Both
chambers are sealed at their top ends by bolted flanges and plates. This
consistent with the 2015 documents.
internal workings of the Smart Valve are shown in sectional drawings, copied
below. They show that the first chamber (now on
the left) contains a filter,
while the second chamber contains a float. The float is attached to a
“swivel rod” which
prevents bending and twisting of the float being
transferred to the seals of the sealing mechanism. In operation, gas (yellow)
liquid (blue) enter the valve from the lower flange of the first chamber and
passes through the filter, such that any debris (referred
to as “swarf,
sludge, and other impurities”) is retained within the filter. Liquid and
gas then pass to the second chamber,
with the liquid raising the float, causing
the sealing mechanism to close. When the water level drops, the debris returns
the filter with the liquid and the valve opens to allow gas to pass
also describes a secondary float valve which activates if the HPV fails open, to
prevent liquid releasing to the environment.
Mr Nichols refers to this as a
“Secondary Fail Safe Valve”, however this nomenclature seems to be
an anachronism (the
“secondary fail safe valve” terminology does not
appear in any of the Smart Valve documents, but is used extensively
a perhaps minor point: I noted at the hearing that DN-5 described the Smart
Valve as “a patented two chamber system”.
I inquired if there was
any further information about this patent, and was informed by Pipe Ex that
there was no actual patent,
and the reference was merely “marketing
puffery.” Again, like the issue of date formats and anachronistic naming
this is essentially a trivial point, but it is another instance where Mr
Nichols (who produced DN-5) demonstrates a habit of misrepresentations.
Ex Pty Ltd contends that the Smart Valve design demonstrates the features of the
inventive concept, which they described by way
of the following marked up
and the following references to the
features of claim 1 (which, as discussed above, they felt largely reflected the
inventive concept):
“a housing defining a central cavity [A]
consisting of [A1] & [A2]
a filter [B] that extends across the central cavity (being the cavity
comprising portions A1 and A2);
a float [C] positioned in the central cavity;
a float [D] rod having a lower end [D1] and an upper end [D2], the lower end
of the float rod [D1] connected to the float [C] and
the upper end of the float
rod [D2] connected to a seal [S]; and
a manifold [E] connected to the housing [A2] and having an input end [E1] and
an output end [E2], wherein the input end [E1] defines
a seal orifice [E1S] that
is positioned adjacent to the seal [S].”
addition, Pipe Ex Pty Ltd makes special note of the way the “float
rod” of the Smart Valve extends into a cylindrical
space to create a
narrow annular air gap around the float
, similar to
makes a few counter points against this. As a first point, they note that Mr
Nichols himself did not seem to think the Smart
Valve was the same as the AU198
invention, instead Mr Nichols stated that:
“During the time of my involvement with IntelliGas through 2020, I was
involved in developing a HPV device, which was
a progression from the earlier
that has been developed during my tenure at iPipe.
Developments in
the HPV device eventually resulted in
the development of the Patent ... The
development of this device was based and developed upon foundation intellectual
property that
was developed during my time at Pipe
(emphasis added).
the same line, iGas also points to comments made by Mr Nichols in an email dated
10 February 2022 that refer to “IP to
date under 9000” including
“HPV and all associated
, and additional
comments in another email from Mr Nichols dated 17 February 2022 that refers to
“New IP such as: High Point
(the reference
to “under 9000” will be explained later, but for now it suffices to
note it relates to activities well
after 2016). iGas argues that these comments
suggest that Mr Nichols regarded the AU198 invention as distinct from the Smart
and developed much later than the Smart
also submits that the Smart Valve fundamentally differs from the AU198 design.
They say the Smart Valve is conceptually closer
to the prior art figure 1 of
AU198. They say that the first chamber of the Smart Valve and its associated
filter is essentially
a direct replacement of the Y strainer configuration that
AU198 acknowledges as the prior
. They also argue that the
overarching design is also markedly different, in that the Smart Valve is a
“dual chamber”
system quite different to the “single
chamber” system of
the hearing, this point about “dual chamber” vs “single
chamber” was discussed some more. Pipe Ex Pty
Ltd submitted that AU198
a dual chamber design: in figure 4, there is a second chamber
immediately below the manifold 330, this chamber containing the seal
415. Pipe Ex Pty Ltd contends that, in this sense, AU198 is a dual chamber
design, one for the filter and one for the valve,
just like the Smart
the dual chamber design, I must agree with iGas. As I noted above, the first
heart of the invention is that the central
cavity contains a filter surrounding
a float. In the Smart Valve design, perhaps the most defining aspect of the
design is the use
of a separate filter chamber separate from the float chamber.
As such, I do not agree that the Smart Valve demonstrates the first
heart of the
as to the second heart, the Smart Valve does superficially appear to represent a
step along the way. As I noted above, it
describes the use of a swivel rod
between the float and valve seals, which seems to be a marked departure from the
prior art lever
arm arrangements. At least superficially, there is a similarity
between the swivel rod of the Smart Valve and the float rod of AU198.
there are a few points worth noting: Firstly, the swivel rod of the Smart Valve
appears to be for a subtly different purpose.
Its goal is stated to be
“[ensuring] that the seals remain in-shape without threat of disfigurement
or objects interrupting
their service
. While I can see
that the float rod and manifold arrangement of AU198 may achieve the same thing,
as I have described above, I understand
the point of the float rod and manifold
of AU198 is instead related to the issue of operating at inclined angles. There
is no suggestion
that the Smart Valve addressed this issue.
up, the Smart Valve has a rod between the float and seal, but the valve seat of
the Smart Valve (the notional equivalent of
the manifold of AU198) appears
relatively large, and there is no evidence that the Smart Valve was ever
expected to operate at inclined
angles. As such, while there are certain
similarities in design, I do not agree that the Smart Valve demonstrates the
second heart
The iGas HPV design
Nicols states that he stopped working on the Smart Valve design “[i]n or
around 2016” for commercial
. As far as the evidence
in front of me suggests, no further development occurred until Mr Nichols joined
the corporate structures and working relationships will be discussed more below,
for the sake of keeping the timeline clear,
it is worth noting that in 2019,
iPipe was acquired by Monadelphous Group. Mr Nichols (apparently briefly)
joined Monadelphous Group
as a Business Development and Growth Strategy Advisor,
and approximately at the same time Mr Nichols founded Pipe Ex Pty
. Around the same time there
were conversations between Mr Nichols and iGas, which would culminate with Mr
Nichols joining iGas as
the Chief Operating Officer of iGas Operations Pty Ltd
on 28 October
Nichols states that:
“During the time of my involvement with IntelliGas through 2020, I was
involved in developing a HPV device, which was a progression
from the earlier
ideas that has been developed during my tenure at iPipe. Developments in the
HPV device eventually resulted in
the development of the Patent which was
conceived by myself, and then handed to Ernst Graff, Patent Attorney at Spruson
who finalised the Patent and filed a provisional patent
application (AU2020904128) on 11 November 2020 and an associated International
Patent Application (PCT/AU2021/051337) entitled “HIGH-POINT VENT
SYSTEM”. The development of this device was based and
developed upon
foundation intellectual property that was developed during my time at Pipe
The work done on the HPV Patents was an extension or continuation of the work
done on the Smart HPV device which had been carried
out at iPipe and then
provisional and international patent he refers to are the provisional and PCT
phase of AU198 respectively. While Mr Nichols clearly
considers features of an
HPV were developed and conceived by himself during this time, he is not specific
as to what features were
developed at what times. Some of these details are
provided by Mr Fekete.
Fekete describes that before Mr Nichols joined iGas, iGas’s business had
three main lines: commercialising high density compression
gas technologies in
the form of converting diesel trucks to use methane gas; development of an
energy oil box; and acting as the
Australian distributor for Fornovo Gas biogas
compatible compressors
Nichols joining with iGas was seen as an opportunity to develop an HPV product,
along with certain other
Fekete describes that the HPV product development involved iGas’s
engineering team working under direction of Mr Nichols,
and was carried out in
iGas’s workshop. Mr Fekete states that he was also involved in ongoing
conversations about the project
The first iteration of this HPV design was produced “around
October/November 2020”, which Mr Fekete says is shown in
Fekete states that the device on the left (the one on the right is not
mentioned) used a float structure, with rising gas passing
around the float and
into the atmosphere, but the float rising in liquid to block the upper opening
to prevent contaminated water
being released. The structure at the top is
“a secondary sealing valve” acting as a backup in the event the main
fails to seal. This backup valve also acted to prevent air backflowing into
the system. The earliest detailed drawings of the internals
of this design
available in the evidence are allegedly from “during or prior to September
, and a copy of a
relevant portion is copied below. This drawing uses an Intelligas-branded
drawing template, but has left the date,
drafter, approver, and document ID
fields blank. Having said that, Mr Fekete states that Mr Nichols was the lead
developer and the
engineering team worked under his
, so it seems the
drawing may be attributed to either Mr Nichols directly, or otherwise someone
operating under his direction. No
other potential contributors have been
identified.
drawings are clearly an earlier draft of figures 3 and 4 of AU198, only omitting
the reference numerals. This is unsurprising,
given the provisional application
2020904128 was filed on 11 November 2020, only a couple of months after these
drawings were prepared.
These figures demonstrate each element of the inventive
concept, with the left figure showing the features of the first heart, and
right figure showing the features of the second heart.
a whole, the evidence supports that the inventive concept of AU198 was conceived
by Mr Nichols sometime between
28 October 2019 and September
Conception of AU549
The Smart Valve design
party contends that AU549 was conceived before
. However, I will
briefly address a point about the Smart Valve design. As noted above, the 2016
describes a
secondary float valve. However, the level of detail is short, and comprises (in
“secondary float valve which activated if the HPV fails open,
protecting the environment and the operators license to operate...
As a failsafe system, a secondary float valve can be incorporated downstream
of the secondary chamber in the unlikelihood of a primary
float failure...
Sometimes, High Point Vents fail open discharging water to grade. This can be
seen as an environmental issue with landowners. This
unique design has a
secondary isolation valve to stop water should the HPV fail open.”
repetition implies Mr Nichols considered the secondary float valve to be a
significant feature of the design, but the document
provides no detail on what
it actually comprised. As such the Smart Valve only serves to indicate that Mr
Nichols was aware of the
general need for a backup valve, but does not establish
that he was at that time aware of the secondary problem associated with the
flow prematurely closing the valve, let alone the solution which forms the
inventive concept.
The SFSV1 design
Fekete’s declaration states that the first backup valve developed within
iGas was developed contemporaneously with the iGas
HPV design, “around
October/November 2020”, and was referred to as the
” (or the first “secondary fail safe
. His evidence
for this is the same photograph as discussed in respect of the iGas HPV design
above, with the SFSV1 being the small
steel structures above the main chamber
(in black in the photograph). I note that iGas’s second declarant, Mr
Clarkson, indicates
that work on this design was already in progress when he
joined iGas in July 2020, but he agreed the SFSV1 prototype was completed
October or November 2020
Fekete states that the SFSV1 design “utilised a two chamber, two ball
system to prevent contaminated water leaks and also
prevent air ingress in the
pipe in the case of vacuum
conditions.”
was that the first, lower valve was a ball type check valve allowing flow in the
upwards direction but block air flowing
downwards, while the second, upper valve
was a float valve allowing air to flow upwards but would close under the action
. This much seems
consistent with the photograph, which plainly shows two sequential chambers
connected by a short pipe. Mr Fekete
also describes a “baffle” in
the SFSV1 that directs gas flow around the upper sealing ball. Mr Clarkson
describes the
SFSV1 in similar
Mr Fekete’s comments about the internal structure of the SFSV1, on 11
November 2020 the provisional application AU2020904128
was filed, from which
AU198 derives priority. The relevant portion of AU198 is what is referred to as
the “check valve subsystem”
which I have described above.
SFSV1 design evidenced by Mr Fekete and the AU198 application displays a number
of features relevant to the AU549 inventive concept.
It is a backup valve
having a housing defining a central cavity with an inlet orifice at the bottom
and an outlet orifice at the
top, a dividing element (“an element”
in the language of AU198, a “baffle” in Mr Fekete’s
declaration)
dividing the cavity into upper and lower chambers, the upper
chamber containing a buoyant sealing ball which floats to seal the outlet
orifice whin liquid level rises. Importantly, AU198 relevantly states
“Element 465 integrates flow passages that direct flow annularly around
the check ball 450
such that the check ball 450 is not lifted by the gas
. The ball 450 is thus only lifted by floating in a liquid, should the
chamber in which it resides fill with
Fekete described the “baffle” in similar terms. To me, the idea of
directing air around the ball with the aim of avoiding
the ball lifting clearly
suggests that the problem which AU549 seeks to address was clearly known by
November 2020.
agree that Mr
Nichols was the leader in designing the SFSV1. Mr Nichols’ description of
these events is somewhat harder to
follow. He says that Mr Fekete’s
description of the HPV development “is factually incorrect”, with
the apparent
correct characterisation being “the feature of the secondary
fail safe concept had been identified [in the Smart Valve
“the development of the Secondary Fail Safe Valve had been
well before [2019-2020]...
It was my understanding that any
continuation of the work
through 2020 and 2021 that was to remain under the
ownership of PipeEx
think the problem here is Mr Nichols is problematically conflating his opinions
his opinions on what it means
to develop those ideas. Put more simply, what Mr Nichols seems to be suggesting
is that he implicitly
treats identifying the problem to be solved as being the
true inventive concept, and all development work as being merely reduction
practice, and therefore not important. This perspective is very unhelpful, as
it means Mr Nichols does not identify which ideas
were developed at what dates.
It is also quite inconsistent with some of his later comments, which I will come
now, it will suffice to note that despite Mr Nichols’ declaration, neither
Pipe Ex Pty Ltd nor iGas seem to suggest that
the SFSV1 represents the time of
conception of AU549. For completeness, as might be foreshadowed above, while
the SFSV1 is directed
to the same problem and demonstrates some features of the
inventive concept, it is far short of the full combination.
The SFSV2 design
each say that during
testing of the SFSV1 it was discovered that there was a problem of the gasses
entering the second chamber causing
the second ball to prematurely close and
seal the outlet without the presence of liquid. A second design was produced,
called SFSV2.
Clarkson describes that after testing SFSV1, there were two ideas floated to
address the premature closing issue. Firstly, they
considered increasing the
internal volume of the secondary chamber as a means of reducing gas velocity,
and, secondly, they considered
changing the baffle design to protect the sealing
ball. Mr Clarkson says that Mr Nichols, Mr Larson, and himself worked on these
ideas in “late 2020 and 2021” leading to the SFSV2
. Mr Clarkson provided
the following drawing and photograph of the SFSV2 design.
Mr Fekete describes that, for the SFSV2 design, “the SFSV was widened to
limit the effect of gas flow on the ball
and some changes were made to the
design of the baffle to create more turbulence within the gas
. Mr Fekete
states that the SFSV2 work was done by a team of seven people, being Messrs.
Nichols, Clarkson, and
, as well as Mr Doug
Irvine, Mr Gabriel Olszewski, Mr Bogdan Moldoveanu, and Mr Guy Moffat. It was
briefly discussed during the hearing
whether or not this implied all seven of
these people are co-inventors, but it would be difficult for me to arrive at
that finding
without more detailed evidence of who contributed what towards the
development. However, for reasons which will become clear, it
is not necessary
for me to answer that question in this decision.
Fekete describes the operation of the
with reference to the
following marked up copy of the same drawing Mr Clarkson provided. Relevantly,
the yellow portion is a baffle,
where gas and water must pass through the
baffle. Gas is able to pass through and exit the outlet, while accumulated
lift the upper red ball to seal the outlet.
appear to have been a couple of different designs of the baffle, the design
above having a relatively tall pocket for the upper
ball, while other designs
such as the one below
pockets that are shorter than the diameter of the sealing ball.
SFSV2 design is, ultimately, similar to the SFSV1 design, at least in terms of
its relevance to the inventive concept. From the
declarations provided, it is
clear that the baffle serves, in part, to diffuse gas flow, and may be fairly
called a diffuser, and
the relatively deep pocket design of the baffles has wall
portions extending upwards from the bottom of the pocket. However, instead
the cylindrical structure of the inventive concept, the baffle wall portions are
more like isolated teeth, each separated by a
gap. These gaps extend
essentially to the bottom of the pocket, so that there is no collection chamber.
There is consequently nothing
properly equivalent to the draining arrangement,
or cylindrical structure with apertures only at the top to direct gas flow over
the top of the ball.
The AU2012229884 (AU884) discussions
Fekete describes a conversation that allegedly took place at about the same time
as the beginning of the SFSV2 design. Mr Fekete
agrees that the premature
closing problem was identified during testing the SFSV1, and says this prompted
a discussion between himself
and Mr Nichols. Mr Fekete describes this
conversation in this way:
“As part of the design process, Mr Nichols and I discussed the issues
with SFSV1, and in particular the issues with the second
ball unintentionally
sealing the second opening, which appeared to be occurring because the rapid
flow of the gas around the ball
could lift the ball up. I recall that at this
time (during late 2020 or 2021), I discussed with Mr Nichols a design which we
developed in a different context for a compressed natural gas transfer
system including a tank float valve system for use in commercial
vehicles. I
had the idea that this could be used to solve the problems with the SFSV1
because a key feature of this design was that
the gas entered the chamber
through perforations which were placed above the ball so that the gas flow
by-passed the ball and was
unlikely to lift it up. This design had been
previously developed within the iGas business and held by a related entity,
Technology Development Pty Ltd. I also provided Mr Nichols with a copy of
Australian Patent Application No. 2012229884
in relation
to this design, ... and showed Mr Nichols a physical example of the float valve.
The physical float valve was readily
available in the iGas workshop for Mr
Nichols to examine at any time. An image of the same valve is shown below
labelled with various
As can be seen in the image above, the float valve was a hollow cylindrical
structure. As shown in Fig 9 of AU'884 it sat within
a chamber from which gas
and water could enter through perforations in the top section. The float is
encased in the hollow structure
in use and if water enters through the
perforations, will float until it blocks an upper outlet at the top of the
structure. There
is also a drain hole in the hollow structure and in the plug
to allow drainage of
reference, the below is a cross sectional view of the design as disclosed by
Figures 9-10 from AU884. AU884 also relevantly provides:
“As shown, a flow path between the holes 122 at the bottom end 114 and
the outlet hole 128 at the top end 112 is unobstructed
and the valve 78 is
effectively open. The pocket beneath the holes 122 receives the float 80 and
causes the float 80 to remain outside
a flow path of gas between the holes 122
and the outlet hole 128 prior to closure of the valve
Fekete then acknowledges that the ideas from AU884 ultimately did not get
incorporated in the SFSV2
Nichols states that he has no recollection of this conversation, and notes that
there was no contemporaneous supporting
. In evidence in
reply to this comment, Mr Fulwood refers to a
conversation
he believed
occurred “around 6 months before Mr Nichols left iGas” (which would
be approximately September or October
2021), which Mr Fulwood described as being
between himself and Mr Nichols about an “iGas float valve system”
tank, which from context would appear to be either the same as, or
related to, the AU884 design.
Nichols also argues that the AU884 device “simply won’t work”
with the baffle designs developed as part of the
SFSV2 design, and more
generally that the AU884 device is simply incompatible with any
I have no problem accepting that Mr Nichols does not recall a passing
conversation from several years prior, Mr Nichols’
response to the alleged
conversation misunderstands Mr Fekete. I do not believe Mr Fekete was
suggesting that the AU884 device could
simply be plugged into the HPV/SFSV
design. Instead, Mr Fekete’s description of the alleged conversation is
more along the
lines of a brainstorming session, where he suggested an idea from
an admittedly very different art which might be a useful starting
further consideration. Consequently, Mr Nichols’ blunt statement that it
would not work, despite the similarities
to the eventual AU549 solution, and
without explaining why, is, at best, unhelpful.
Fekete’s declaration is dated 15 March 2024, so the alleged AU884
conversation with Mr Nichols was around three years previously.
He provides few
specifics of the conversation itself (e.g. no comment of where the conversation
took place), focussing mostly on
the general context (after the premature
closing issues of SFSV1 were identified) and general topic (the AU884 device and
is relevant). Notably, Mr Fekete does not say what he remembers of Mr
Nichols’ reaction to this conversation. What I mean
by that is since the
SFSV2 design went in a different direction, I can infer that if the alleged
conversation took place, Mr Nichols
was not persuaded. I would have thought
that if Mr Fekete can recall having the conversation, he would have recalled Mr
apparent disagreement. The same concerns apply regarding Mr
Fulwood’s conversation.
said that, I think whether or not the AU884 conversation(s) occurred is a moot
point. Even if they did occur, the AU884 discussion
has more of the character
of a spark of inspiration, rather than formation in the mind of a definite and
permanent idea of the complete
and operative invention. The adaptation of the
AU884 ideas into the context of the SFSV involves more than merely reduction to
and given that the SFSV2 did not meaningfully attempt to incorporate
the AU884 concepts, it seems to me that this conversation does
not represent a
clear formation of the idea at that time. As I will come to below, while Mr
Nichols has neither clearly indicated
when he conceived certain features nor
what inspired them, the sequence of designs seems to indicate that the
inspiration for the
final design came out of a later conversation. As such, it
cannot be definitively said whether the AU884 conversations contributed
the features of the invention. It follows I am not satisfied that the AU884
conversations (whether they happened or not)
support the conclusion that either
Mr Fekete or Mr Fulwood are co-inventors.
The February 2022 sketches
next relevant step in the development of the AU549 invention relates to two
concept drawings dated 12 and 13 February
. The full story of how
these documents came into evidence is slightly circuitous, involving a dispute
between Mr Nichols and Mr
, but for my purposes
it suffices to note there seems to be general agreement that these sketches were
drawn by Mr Nichols on 12 and
13 February
to the inspiration for these drawings, Mr Nichols has stated that sometime in
February 2022, he met with an unnamed representative
of Santos to discuss LPVs
and issues with loss of containment from HPV. No more specifics are provided
but Mr Nichols states that it was this conversation
which led to him drawing the two sketches below.
at a superficial glance, these drawings are much closer to the inventive concept
than any of the preceding designs. However,
Pipe Ex Pty Ltd contends that these
drawings only represent a “very early conceptual
describe the following alleged differences between the February 2022 sketches
and what they consider to be the inventive
“(a) No diffuser plate clearly defined, particularly missing the
specific structural geometry required for energy dissipation
and fluid flow
(b) The diffuser plate is not separable to the upper compartment (in contrast
with claim 1).
(c) There are no perforation holes in the diffuser plate at all, the only
hole is shown as inexplicably being outside the filter compartment,
which would
(d) There is only one ball (an upper ball), and no lower ball.
(e) There is no lower compartment.
(f) There is an absence of the internal cone structure of the 549
Application, which is important in effectively maintaining the float
precise suspension. For example, Figure 5a in the 549 Application clearly shows
the cone 525 being positioned on top of a
sealing portion 520. Claim 10 in the
549 Patent captures this function. The cone has to be raised on the sealing
portion 520 to allow
the separated cylinder to form a seal. The cone itself
merely forms a guiding portion to guide the placement of the cylindrical filter
(g) No integrated strainer element depicted or indicated in the February
Drawings, a vital component in the finalised invention for
effectively screening
particulate matter. Using the item numbers from the 549 Application, the
strainer/filter 400 needs to sit on
top of the solid inner portion 502 of the
diffuser plate 505: [0031]. The pass through holes are located along the
peripheral region
of the diffuser plate 505. Paragraph [0032] of the 549
Application describes the inventive screening feature achieved by the novel
arrangement of the filter assembly 400 and the diffuser plate assembly 500. The
February Drawings do not enable a functioning screening
feature achieved by the
diffuser plate assembly. The February Drawings also fail to show a separable
cylindrical filter or any filter
that can separate debris from a liquid air
mixture in the manner of the 549
Application.”
alleged differences are not persuasive. As a first point, I have gone through
what I consider to be the inventive concept above,
and alleged differences (b),
(d), and (f) are not part of it.
on to differences (a) and (c), it is important to remember that the February
2022 sketches are simply sketch drawings. The
task at hand is not a novelty or
inventive step exercise where I must determine if every feature is clearly and
unmistakably disclosed,
while taking care to avoid hindsight. What I am seeking
is evidence of when the inventive concept was conceived. To that end, I
interpret the sketches in light of all the surrounding circumstances and
evidence. Faults and inaccuracies in the sketches themselves
are not to be
taken literally. So, for example, alleged difference (c) is talking about how
the hole marked on the right side of
the plate-structure appears to be
“inexplicably” outside of the rest of the structure. If that were
the actual design,
such a hole would indeed serve no purpose. But the very fact
that this would be inexplicable suggests that a more common-sense interpretation
is required, i.e., that the hole should have a purpose, and must be inside the
housing. Relatedly, the 13 February sketch clearly
shows a plate-like structure
with a through hole marked on one side. While in isolation that might not mean
much, with the benefit
of hindsight (to interpret what is shown in the sketch,
not to add to it), and the history of developments in SFSV1 and SFSV2 already
discussed above, it is reasonably clear that the plate is a diffuser plate with
at least one through hole. Further, when the 13
February sketch is viewed in
conjunction with the 12 February sketch, it seems clear that the idea is gas
will follow a similar flow
path in both sketches: in from the inlet, through an
aperture into an annular space outside the cylinder, up the annular space, then
inward through the cylinder, before finally up out the outlet. That would mean
that in the 13 February sketch, the hole would lead
from the lower compartment
into the annular space. While I would agree the diffuser is missing certain
“specific structural
geometry” (as noted in (a)) from the final
design, the sketch demonstrates that the concept was solidly in mind. The
geometry aspects (holes in one arcuate region, provision for sealing
means to the cylinder, alignment means, etc.) are all aspects
which I would
consider to be part of the process of reduction to practice.
to alleged difference (e), I do not understand Pipe Ex Pty Ltd’s
confusion: in the 13 February sketch, the lower compartment
is the rectangular
shape below the diffuser plate. It has the inlet at its lower end, and the
diffuser plate above. In the sketch
the lower compartment and upper compartment
seem to be made of separate housing pieces, as distinct from the final design
lower housing portion defines the lower compartment and part of the
upper compartment. However, this might be another point where
shouldn’t be read too literally. Regardless, I do not consider the
composition of the housing to be part of the
inventive concept, instead it is
part of the process of reduction to practice.
to alleged difference (g), the 13 February sketch plainly shows that only the
upper portion of the cylinder (delimited by the
dashed line) is provided with a
plurality of holes. The handwriting is challenging, but it appears to read
“Hole Size [is,
or possibly B] = 2mm.” While that might be a fairly
coarse strainer, it still qualifies as a strainer. To the extent Pipe
Ltd refers to an “integrated” strainer, if that was intended to mean
the strainer being integral with some other
component, I have seen no suggestion
that this was even disclosed by AU549, let alone forming any part of the
inventive concept.
Alternatively, if by “integrated” they simply
mean “included”, this is shown in the February
the 13 February sketch shows a drain arrangement positioned opposite from the
hole through the diffuser. While the sketch
does not state why this is the
case, and it could possibly be mere coincidence, I consider it is tolerably
clear that the 13 February
sketch demonstrates that the drain was intentionally
placed opposite the through hole.
the 12 and February 2022 sketches taken together, it can be seen that there were
small but significant adjustments between the
two, with the 13 February sketch
being the one that demonstrates all of the features of the inventive concept as
I have identified
it above. As such, I am reasonably satisfied that the
inventive concept of AU549 was conceived
by Mr Nichols on 13 February
Later designs
is one last set of drawings which I will briefly discuss for completeness. Pipe
Ex Pty Ltd submits that the first conception
of the AU549 invention is shown by
a set of drawings that were placed into evidence by Mr Clarkson, which I will
refer to as the
. I am somewhat
hesitant about the exact date of these drawings, because the drawings in
evidence are not dated, and they have arrived
by the same circuitous path as the
February sketches. It will suffice for now to note they are notionally dated 20
March 2022, after
the end of Mr Nichols employment at iGas, and they are
attributed to Mr Nichols. The March drawings are fairly extensive, but it
suffice for now to simply include a couple of representative drawings from the
Ex Pty Ltd submits that the March drawings demonstrate a number of key
which were not shown
in the February sketches. The core of their argument appears to
“To that end, the March Drawings mark the point of true conception. The
February Drawings were incomplete and lacked: the diffuser
place with structural
geometry; the lower sealing ball; the internal strainer as defined in the
claims; the dual chamber separation
and functional drainage system. Put another
the March Drawings unified these elements in a practical and inventive
configuration not seen before
(whether at iGas or in the February sketches
prepared by Mr Nichols post-resignation). The technical distinctions are real
and substantial
– they are not merely a different
embodiment”
I have already addressed above, I am satisfied that the February sketches
already demonstrated conception of the diffuser plate,
internal strainer, dual
chambers, and drainage hole in the collection chamber. As I have already
addressed above, I do not consider
the lower sealing ball to be part of the
inventive concept, nor is the specific “structural geometry” of the
parts beyond
those aspects I have already addressed above.
in spite of Pipe Ex Pty Ltd’s position on the matter, Mr Nichols contends
that even the March drawings do not include
“some key features” of
the device, which he says shows “[t]he proof of concept and its working
was not proven until
. He does not say
what, specifically, was missing, only referring generally to “placing a
strainer in the chamber and a way
of diffusing the gas flow making it less
turbulent”. However, the first of these is clearly shown in the February
and the second is vague to the point of uselessness. Regardless, it
should be noted that if Mr Nichols was correct, it would suggest
invention was conceived
the provisional application was filed.
This, as well as his language about “proof of concept”, strongly
suggests to me
that whatever differences there are between the February sketches
and the final design are all of the character of reduction to practice.
Fiduciary and commercial relationships at the time of
conception of AU198
I have set out above, the relevant period for AU198 is between 28 October 2019
and September 2020. But to properly consider all
the relevant circumstances, it
will be necessary to go back a little further, and provide a little more context
of iGas and origins of Pipe Ex Pty Ltd.
parent entity for iGas is “IntelliGas Group Limited” (
which was founded by Mr Fekete in collaboration with Mr Paul Whiteman and Mr Jim
McDonald in January 2010. In 2017, Intelligas
Technology Developments Pty Ltd
(the listed applicant of AU198) was created as a subsidiary company, apparently
for the purpose of
holding intellectual property. At about the same time, iGas
Operations Pty Ltd was created as another subsidiary, with the intention
being the “primary operating entity”. As a broad overview, IGL is
described as being in the business of designing
and providing “systems,
services, and patented technologies” for oil and gas operations,
especially in Australia
foreshadowed above, Mr Nichols’ first company was Independent Pipeline
Services, which was founded in 2013 and which later
was primarily in the business of developing and inventing new machines,
isolation devices, and tools, for which several patents
were filed (under the
name I Pipe IP Pty Ltd, presumably a related entity to iPipe). Sometime in
2019, iPipe was acquired by Monadelphous
some time around July 2019
Mr Nichols was introduced to Paul Whiteman and others at IGL, via a common
associate, Andrew Gambling. It appears this first meeting
went well, as on 31
July 2019 Mr Nichols was given an offer of employment as Chief Technical Officer
) at iGas Operations Pty Ltd by Richard Duffy, the then CEO of
. This offer was
accompanied by a Confidentiality Deed (
; Mr Nichols refers to it as a
Non-Disclosure Agreement or
on 21 August 2019, Mr Nichols turned down the CTO offer. In his email informing
Mr Whitman and Mr Duffy of his decision,
Mr Nichols referred to his feelings of
“personal accomplishment and satisfaction from developing an idea into a
and explained that his reason for turning down the offer was
because he had some “exciting ideas” which he wanted to
further. Also in August 2019, Mr Nichols founded Pipe Ex Pty
September 2019, there was another meeting between Mr Nichols and Paul Whiteman,
this time also with Mr Craig
. Mr Nichols suggests
that this meeting was “primarily to discuss how I could assist IntelliGas
in commercializing their products,
as they were primarily an R&D
business”. However, he says they also discussed some products that he had
been developing.
This meeting culminated in a new employment offer, this time
as Chief Operating Officer (
Nichols accepted the employment agreement. Although he only signed the
agreement on 12 November 2019, it states his employment
commenced on 28 October
2019. None of the parties have attached any significance to the discrepancy
between commencement and signing,
and it is not of any material significance to
my decision.
Relevantly,
the employment agreement included the following provisions:
“2. Position
(a) You will be employed as Chief Operating Officer in which capacity you
will be required to perform such duties consistent with
your position as may
from time to time be assigned to you.
18. Intellectual Property
Intellectual Property Rights means all intellectual property rights created
or generated by you (whether alone or with any other persons)
as a result of
your work on the Project
(whether before or after this letter is signed)
, copyright, registered designs, trademarks, know-how,
and the right to have Confidential Information kept
confidential; and
(b) Any application or right to apply for registration of any of those
19. Assignment
By signing this letter offering you a position with iGas Operations Pty Ltd
(a) Assign to the Company all right, title and interest in the future
Intellectual Property Rights as and from their creation;
(b) Acknowledge that by virtue of this clause, on their creation, all such
future Intellectual Property Rights will vest in the Company;
You must disclose all Intellectual Property Rights to the Company.
means any work in which copyright subsists which is created as a
result of your work undertaken on
the Project
” (emphasis
Importantly,
the employment agreement does not provide any more specific list of duties, or
any definition of “the Project”.
Ex Pty Ltd contends that the intellectual property rights expressly assigned by
the employment agreement are strictly limited
to those generated as a result of
work on “the Project”, and this term should be understood in the
context of the various
discussions that occurred during Mr Nichols’
recruitment. In particular, Pipe Ex Pty Ltd refer to the CD. As I have set out
above, the CD was sent to Mr Nichols along with the original CTO offer on 31
July 2019, and relevantly includes:
Item 1: Purpose
To fully brief the Recipient in anticipation of undertaking employment with,
consultancy or otherwise providing services to IGAS.
Item 2: Field
The field includes:-
HDCNG® technologies inclusive of IntelliGas proprietary Non-Invasive Dual
Fuel Technology (NIDFT);
CNG processing - including compression, storage and filling of CNG
CNG Transport - in cylinders by road or rail;
CNG utilisation - in applications including but not limited to power
generation, mining equipment, on-road and off-road trucks, locomotives
duty vehicles;
Dual fuel (gaseous/liquid) engine technology;
Gas fired power generation; and
All corporate, administrative, technological and support functions for or
ancillary to the Field.”
Nichols states that he “formed an understanding” that, essentially,
directly equates “the Project” of the
employment agreement with the
“Field” of the
. As such he believed any
intellectual property not related to the fields above would fall outside of the
employment agreement.
argues that the general approach to contract construction involves a commonsense
approach and the need to arrive at a practical
and commercially sensible
interpretation
basis, iGas submits the correct interpretation of “the Project” is
essentially “Mr Nichols’ employment”.
They argue Mr
Nichols’ reference to the Fields of the CD is flawed for several
, including that the
CD does not use or refer to “the Project”, there was no cross
reference between the documents, and
indeed the employment agreement relevantly
stated that:
“This Contract and any documents
expressly incorporated
the entire terms and conditions of your employment
replace and are in substitution for any previous letters of appointment or
contracts of employment
and all other agreements and arrangements
(whether express or implied) relating to your employment by the
the employment agreement and CD are approximately contemporaneous, it is
important that the CD should be read in light of its
purpose: to allow Mr
Nichols to be fully briefed on the operations of iGas, but still protect the
confidential information held by
iGas at the relevant time. In that context, it
would be reasonable to conclude that the Field did not cover HPVs, as it seems
that iGas had not developed any confidential information in that area at
that point in time. However, this, to me, also exposes
a central flaw in Mr
Nichols’ reference to the CD when interpreting the Intellectual Property
clause of the employment agreement:
the CD was for the purpose of protecting
confidential information that already existed at iGas at the time, but the
Intellectual
Property clauses were, by design, protecting information that did
not yet exist. As such, using the terms of the CD to limit the
terms of the IP
clauses would seem inherently problematic. While the CD and employee agreement
were approximately contemporaneous,
they are separate agreements which serve
different purposes, do not explicitly cross reference each other, and do not use
terminology (in relation to “project” or
“field”). As such, I give no weight to the CD in construing the
employment agreement. With that in mind, my interpretation of “the
Project” is more in line with iGas’s submission:
the Project
essentially is whatever work is carried out in the role of COO.
there is some dispute as to what, exactly, a COO actually does. The employee
agreement itself simply refers to “duties
consistent with your
unhelpful. Mr Nichols says that he understood the role as being primarily about
“building their business and making
it compliant with major
“oversee operational management and ensure the smooth functioning of an
organisation.”
Pty Ltd argues that the COO role does not include any responsibilities or duties
relating to product development, that being
the role of a CTO, the role that Mr
Nichols turned down
Fekete seems to partially agree, claiming to have told Mr Nichols that the role
would be to “get the organisation in shape
to transact with Queensland gas
majors”, but Mr Fekete says his instructions were also “to develop
and deliver innovative
refutes the second part
What is clear is that it was a senior role within iGas, reporting directly to
the Executive Chairman (which at the time was Paul
Ex Pty Ltd argues that there are two more agreements between the parties that
are relevant to determining the scope of the COO
role: a net profit share
agreement (
), and a purchase of business agreement (
first draft of the NPSA
proposed on 6 November 2019, contemporaneous with the employment agreement, and
was signed on 28 January
. It relevantly
“B. Dave Nichols has agreed to join the IGL group as Chief Operating
Officer (COO) and intends has formalised his employment
by signing the letter of
offer already provided.
C. IGL and DN have agreed that Pipe Ex will become a wholly owned subsidiary
of IGL and continue under DN's stewardship alongside
his duties as COO of the
broader business.
D. The Pipe Ex business will be transferred to IGL at no cost to IGL as soon
as reasonably practical following commencement of Dave
Nichols employment as
E. DN is to receive a net profit share from the Pipe Ex subsidiary as
described in this agreement.
1.2 Dave Nichols will remain an Executive Director of Pipe Ex and will have
management responsibility for the subsidiary Pipe Ex business unit.
1.3 Employee time costs including DN's time spent on Pipe Ex will be charged
subsidiary on in-house schedule of rates (cost recovery including overheads
2.1 IGL grants DN or his nominee an entitlement to be paid a net profit share
calculated at 25% of the net profits before tax but
after interest, depreciation
and amortisation calculated in accordance with statutory accounts of the Pipe EX
subsidiary (Subsidiary)
in connection with profits derived from business
operations conducted by the Subsidiary (Net Profit Share).
6.1 DN may not assign, transfer, encumber or otherwise deal with its interest
agreement or the Net Profit Share other than to an Associated Entity. In such
must first obtain the prior written consent of IGL which shall not be
unreasonably
withheld or delayed.”
this point in my decision, I need to be more precise in distinguishing between
the various entities referred to as Pipe Ex. For
want of a more concise
terminology. I will refer to:
s36 requestor for AU198 (and applicant of AU549) as “Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the
party to these proceedings)”
corporate entity founded by Mr Nichols as “Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the
wholly owned subsidiary of IGL proposed/referred to by the NPSA as “Pipe
Ex (the proposed subsidiary”), and
business name when considered as an asset as “Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the
business name)”
this terminology in mind, the NPSA indicates it was agreed between the parties
that Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the company) would be purchased
and become a subsidiary
within the IGL group, with Mr Nichols continuing to hold both his COO role at
iGas and his Executive Director
role at Pipe Ex (the proposed subsidiary). Pipe
Ex Pty Ltd (the party to these proceedings) contends that this demonstrates a
delineation between Mr Nichols duties in the two
. However, to my mind,
the terms of the NPSA tend to imply the opposite conclusion. Item 1.3 makes
plain that the time Mr Nichols
spends on Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the proposed
subsidiary) as its Executive Director is paid for originally by iGas and then
into” Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the proposed subsidiary) as a way of
accounting for this salary when calculating the net profit. That
is, item 1.3
takes it as a given that Mr Nichols will be drawing his COO salary while
performing his Executive Director role. As
such, the NPSA as signed would tend
to indicate the intention was that Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the company) would be wholly
subsumed into
iGas, and the role of Executive Director, while still existing as
a role, would be subsumed as simply one of the “operations”
Mr Nichols COO role.
shortly after the NPSA was signed, there was apparently a change in plan by all
parties concerned. The only explanation
provided by any of the parties for this
change is from Mr Fekete, who refers to iGas attempting to avoid any
liabilities”
with Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the company). Instead of executing recital C above, the
parties instead signed a “Purchase
of Business
) on 9 March 2020. The PBA relevantly provides:
“C. A Net Profit Share Agreement has been entered into with David
Nichols to continue to grow the business activities of Pipe
Ex Pty Ltd as part
of IntelliGas Group Limited, refer to Appendix 2.
The ‘Assets’ consist of the following:
i. all equipment used in carrying on the [Pipe Ex Pty Ltd], specifically
including, but not limited to, those in Appendix 1; and
ii. the goodwill of [Pipe Ex Pty Ltd] including the business
Subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement, and in reliance on the
representations, warranties, and conditions set out
in this Agreement, [Pipe Ex
Pty Ltd] agrees to sell the Assets to [iGas Operations Pty Ltd] and [iGas
Operations Pty Ltd] agrees
to purchase the Assets from [Pipe Ex Pty Ltd].
Immediately following the Closing, [Pipe Ex Pty Ltd] will discontinue use of
the name Pipe Ex Pty Ltd except in connection with the
collection of the
accounts receivable of [Pipe Ex Pty Ltd] and the disposing of any inventory that
were not part of the Assets sold
to [iGas Operations Pty Ltd].”
note that the total value of the purchase was identified as $38,312, which is
exactly equal to the value of the goods listed in
Appendix 1, and matches the
amount invoiced on 9 March 2020. So, it would appear that the goodwill and
business name of Pipe Ex
Pty Ltd was considered to be of no value to any of the
parties. At the hearing, this prompted some short discussion about Pipe Ex
Ltd’s (the party to these proceedings) continued use of the business name.
There seemed to be some confusion on the part
of Pipe Ex Pty Ltd regarding the
business name, since they had been using the name continuously up to that point.
iGas briefly commented
that their as-yet non-enforcement of the terms of the PBA
did not constitute any acceptance that Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the party to these
proceedings) was entitled to continue using the name. I note that according to
ASIC’s register, Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the company)
changed their business name
to Vois Energy Pty Ltd on the day after the hearing. This name change has not
yet been reflected by
a change of name on the S36 request for AU198 nor as a
change in Applicant name for AU549, so for the sake of internal consistency
my decision I will continue to refer to them as Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the party to
these proceedings).
parties then amended the NPSA
by an agreement apparently proposed on 9 March 2020 (the same date as the PBA),
but only signed on 29 September 2020. This amendment
“1. The Agreement stated in RECITAL C – ‘The Parties have
agreed that Pipe Ex (Pipe Ex Pty Ltd is a company owned
by DN) will become a
wholly owned subsidiary of IGL and continue under DN's stewardship alongside his
duties as COO of the broader
business.’ It has been
that this transaction and change of ownership of Pipe Ex
take place and DN will remain owner of Pipe Ex Pty Ltd.
2. The Agreement stated in RECITAL E – ‘DN is to receive a net
profit share from the Pipe Ex subsidiary as described in
this agreement.’
It has been
that as Pipe Ex will not become a subsidiary of
IGL then DN is able to nominate an Associated Entity to deal with the interest
the Net Profit Share - as per Clause 6.1 and who will now become eligible for
the ‘Profit Share’ as calculated in the
Agreement by charging IGL
(or its wholly owned subsidiary- iGas Operations Pty Ltd (IGOP)) from the
nominated party as and when agreed
between the IGL and DN.
3. Execution of the Acknowledgement of this Amendment Letter constitutes
written consent required for all and any changes to the Agreement
that all other terms and conditions of the Agreement remain
unchanged.” (emphasis in original)
due respect to the parties, despite an apparent six months of consideration, the
operation of these amendments is, at best, convoluted.
As signed, the amendment
has the effect that Mr Nichols was “able to” nominate an Associated
Entity (which has not been
evidenced as having happened) who would become
eligible for the profit share
in DN’s place
(that is what clause
6.1 allows – clause 6.1 does not allow for nominating an Associated Entity
to deal with the interest of
Pipe Ex the subsidiary). Recital E of the amended
NPSA notionally states that some nominated Associated Entity was to receive a
net profit share from the “Pipe Ex
subsidiary”.
However, by
the terms of the amended NPSA, Pipe Ex (the proposed subsidiary) does not, and
never did, exist. Given that is manifestly
a non-commercial interpretation, if
instead recital E was read as referring to Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the company,
remaining the property
of Mr Nichols), then the term of the amended agreement
allows Mr Nichols to nominate an Associated Entity to receive a net profit
from Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the company), i.e., from the entity he already owned.
Again, this would be a rather pointless interpretation,
but I struggle to see
what other interpretation could be applied without significant redrafting of the
NPSA and the associated amendment
agreement. I will also note that by the time
the amended NPSA was actually signed, Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the company) was
no longer called that (having already sold Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the
business name)).
of the correct legal construction and operation of the amended NPSA (which is
beyond the scope of the role of the Commissioner
anyway), what seems to have
actually occurred was that iGas created an internal business unit which used the
name “Pipe Ex”
(from available evidence, they do
to have used the full Pipe Ex Pty Ltd business name), with all work conducted in
this business unit internally recorded as
being “allocated the cost code
. This business
unit (which I will refer to as “
Pipe Ex 9000
”) was then
treated as though it was “the Pipe Ex subsidiary” for the purposes
of the NPSA. While Mr Nichols has
not commented on the 9000 cost code in his
declarations, he does seem to be aware of the code, as in emails dated 10
February 2022
he referred to “IP to date under 9000” as including
“HPV and all associated entities” and “HPV loss
of containment
above, this also appears to have utilised iGas’s resources and personnel,
further indicating the work was conducted
within Pipe Ex 9000 rather than within
Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the company).
the purposes of this decision, it is not necessary for me to resolve how the
amendment to the NPSA would function (in the end,
there were no profits to be
shared anyway, but, again, that is not of any particular relevance to my
analysis). It is sufficient
to note that the behaviours of both parties seem to
indicate that the Pipe Ex 9000 business unit within iGas would fill the role
the “the Pipe Ex subsidiary” for the purposes of the NPSA, and that
the intention was that all other terms of the
NPSA would remain unaffected.
all of the above together, I consider that the senior position of COO tends to
suggest an expansive role, overseeing all of
the relevant operations of the iGas
Operations business. Mr Nichols acknowledges that, at the relevant time, iGas
Operations was
“primarily an R&D
that had yet
to commercialise its products. Clearly, at least one of the operations ongoing
within iGas which the COO would need
to exercise broad oversight over included
product development. This, to my mind, produces a positive duty to invent in
the products developed
within iGas
. While the profusion of
entities with the Pipe Ex moniker may have caused some general confusion, in the
end it seems that the relevant
products were developed within the Pipe Ex 9000
cost code, being an internal business unit of iGas. Pipe Ex 9000 has (as far as
I can ascertain) no legally distinct identity from the rest of iGas, and its
operations fall squarely within the operations over
which Mr Nichols had
oversight as COO.
these circumstances, I am satisfied that the AU198 invention was developed in
the course of Mr Nichols’ duties as COO,
and therefore, consistent with
, he was obliged, as a fiduciary, to give iGas Operations the
benefit of the invention. It follows Mr Nichols was not free to assign
rights in the invention of AU198 to Pipe Ex Pty Ltd.
completeness, I note Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the party to these proceedings) made
arguments about the significance of the fact that the
PBA did not include any
terms about purchasing or transfer of any intellectual property. This is true,
but is putting the cart before
the horse: Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the company) could
not have owned the relevant IP at the time of the PBA, as it had yet to be
so iGas could not have purchased it through the PBA.
for completeness, there is arguably a final link missing in the chain: the
transfer of entitlement from iGas Operations to Intelligas
Developments Pty Ltd. However, the onus lies with Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the party to
these proceedings) to demonstrate Intelligas
Technology Developments Pty Ltd is
not entitled, not the other way around. In order to resolve the s36 request, it
will suffice
to conclude that Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (the party to these proceedings)
have not demonstrated that Intelligas Technology Developments Pty
Ltd is not an
eligible person in respect of AU198, and nor have they demonstrated that Pipe Ex
Pty Ltd is an eligible person in respect
Fiduciary and commercial relationships at the time of
conception of AU549
I identified above, the relevant date for AU549 was
13 February 2022.
Above, I have set out Mr Nichols’ role as COO at iGas and how that gave
rise to an obligation that any invention developed
within his role at iGas be
conferred to iGas
one major change occurred between the period considered for AU198 and the
relevant date for AU549: on 4 February 2022, Mr
Nichols offered his resignation
from the role of COO
letter, he states that the four-week notice period required by his contract
would comprise Monday 7 February 2022 to Friday
4 March 2022.
Ex Pty Ltd argues that Mr Nichols was effectively on “gardening
leave” after submitting his resignation. They say
that during such a
period, there can be no “duty to invent”, or in the language of
Victoria University,
during the gardening leave period it cannot be said
that Mr Nichols was instructed to do
note at this point that, while there is agreement that Mr Nichols spent at least
some portion of his notice period on leave, there
is dispute as to when exactly
this happened. Mr Fekete says that Mr Nichols continued to attend the office,
and retained access
to his company laptop, until 16 February 2022. Mr Fekete
attempted to demonstrate this with a screen shot of the documents folder
from Mr Nichols’ laptop, which indicates certain documents were modified
on various dates from 3 to 16 February 2022,
and several modified much later in
October 2022, which Mr Fekete acknowledges were modified by himself. At the
hearing, I noted
that since the screenshots do not identify who modified the
documents, it was hard to see how it proved Mr Nichols’ involvement.
is exacerbated by the later modifications (and the screenshot itself) by Mr
Fekete, which clearly demonstrate that Mr Nichols
was not the only person to
have access to the laptop.
to the same point, as discussed under the “February 2022 sketches”
section above, at some time in February Mr
Nichols had a meeting with Santos.
Mr Nichols states that this was to discuss LPD and HPV
, but he does not say
whether or not this was part of iGas business. Pipe Ex Pty Ltd argues that
there would have been no reason
for Mr Nichols to meet with Santos in his
capacity as COO, given he had already
. However, that
ignores that the purpose of a notice period is to provide a period of continued
work before final resignation. Mr
Fekete suggests that this meeting was iGas
business, as Santos was an iGas
. Mr Nichols seems
aware that Santos was an iGas
, although I note
that Mr Nichols does appear to have had long standing interactions with Santos
pre-dating his employment with
. I also note that
during the notice period, iGas appears to have wanted to maintain some
relationship with Mr Nichols. A letter
from Paul Whiteman dated 22 February
2022 mentions iGas’s desire for Mr Nichols to continue “promoting a
positive picture
of the products and the relationship between you, the company,
and its clients”
implies a tacit understanding that Mr Nichols would continue to have some sort
of relationship with certain iGas clients even
after leaving the iGas role.
However, that does not suggest any acceptance or condoning of him engaging in
non-iGas conversations
with iGas customers while drawing iGas salary. While it
is not unambiguous, it is tolerably clear to me that client relations, such
the meeting with Santos, formed part of Mr Nichols’ service to iGas.
to the exact date Mr Nichols went on leave, while I have some reservations about
Mr Fekete’s screenshot evidence, it is noteworthy
that Mr Nichols has not
directly refuted it or even offered an alternative date for when his gardening
leave commenced. As such,
in the absence of any alternative, I consider the
evidence suggests Mr Nichols was continuing to perform at least some duties for
iGas up to around 16 February 2022.
the hearing, there was an interesting discussion around what legal precedent, if
any, exists relating to any duty to invent during
an employee’s notice
period or during gardening leave. While neither party was able to identify any
precedent that squarely
answers the point in respect of inventions, Ms Crooks,
when put on the spot, was nevertheless able to identify
Zomojo Pty Ltd v Hurd
corporation law matter rather than intellectual property, but the critical point
(for my purposes) was that:
“What a careful reader will notice is that Hurd failed to explain what
had changed between the period before his resignation
and the commencement of
his notice period. The answer, of course, was nothing. If Hurd’s conduct
was wrong in the notice
period (and it was), his conduct was wrong prior to the
“Under cl 8.9 of his Service Agreement, Hurd was entitled to terminate
the Service Agreement by giving one month’s notice.
Hurd’s email of
11 January 2011 constituted that notice. Hurd’s notice period under his
employment contract expired
on 11 February 2011. Hurd remained an employee
until 11 February 2011. Zomojo did not remove him as a managing director
to cl 16 of Zomojo’s Constitution). Hurd remained in that
position – as a co-managing director – until 11 February
implication from this being that, at least in regards to the matters under
consideration in
, the date of giving notice does not alter the
obligations owed to the employer, only the actual termination date ends the
obligations.
This seems like a reasonable proposition in the present matter as
I consider that at the relevant date, Mr Nichols obligations to iGas operations
were the same as they were for AU198. It
follows that he was obliged, as a
fiduciary, to give iGas Operations the benefit of the invention, and, as such,
iGas was entitled
to the invention of AU549. For the same reasoning, Mr Nichols
was not free to assign any rights in the invention to Pipe Ex Pty
Ltd, and as
such Pipe Ex Pty Ltd is not entitled to the grant of a patent.
Other Matters
are now a couple of residual matters that were raised during the hearing which
are now essentially otiose, but I will quickly
dispense with them now for
completeness.
Section 59(a)(ii)
Operations Pty Ltd’s SGP also includes S59(a)(ii) as one of the grounds of
opposition, but having succeeded on S59(a)(i)
there is no need to discuss
entitlement in conjunction any further.
the written submissions filed ahead of the hearing, iGas made note that, in the
event I were to find some aspect of either invention
was contributed by Mr
Nichols either before or after his employment with iGas, there was no evidence
of how any rights to such contributions
would flow to Pipe Ex Pty Ltd. This
prompted Pipe Ex Pty Ltd to file documents, each alleging to transfer IP rights
from Mr Nichols
to Pipe Ex Pty Ltd (one dated 2019, and the second dated 2022),
which Pipe Ex Pty Ltd requested to be considered under Reg. 5.23.
considering the matter, I reached the opinion that, if Pipe Ex Pty Ltd was
successful in showing the invention had been conceived
before his employment
with iGas, then the 2019 assignment agreement would likely to be crucial (in the
Reflex Instruments Asia Pacific Pty Ltd v Minnovare
sense, noting
“likely” does not mean “certain”). As such, I admitted
the 2019 assignment agreement under
Reg. 5.23. In their 5.23 response, iGas
identify a number of potential deficiencies with the 2019 agreement. However,
of my findings above this point is largely otiose: the 2019 assignment
agreement pre-dates both of the inventions, and Mr Nichols
was not free to make
such an assignment anyway. As such, the 5.23 material is ultimately not
their written submissions and elaborated on at the hearing, iGas made the
unusual request that, in the event I were to find that
iGas and Pipe Ex Pty Ltd
are jointly entitled to the invention, that I should refuse AU549 under S60(3A).
The crux of the argument
was that the relationship between the parties has now
deteriorated to the point where iGas felt joint ownership was unfeasible, and
such, it would be inappropriate to allow an amendment to make them
co-applicants/co-patentees. This prompted much discussion
over whether or not
this course of action is even available to me. While that may be of academic
interest, in light of my findings
above, this question is also otiose.
light of the discussions around refusal and apparent confusion over how the
current matters are to be resolved, I will make a couple
of short observations.
AU198, the next steps are straightforward: the s36 request has failed, so now it
will continue under the name of Intelligas
Technology Developments Pty Ltd
(pending, of course, any appeal of this decision).
AU549, for the reasons above, I am satisfied that there is a valid ground of
opposition against the grant of the application
in its current form;
specifically, that the nominated person is not entitled to a grant of a patent
for the invention (Section 59(a)(i)).
Being so satisfied, I may refuse the
application (Section 60(3A)), however, I must not do so without, where
appropriate, giving
a reasonable opportunity for the applicant to amend the
relevant specification for the purposes of removing the ground of opposition
(Section 60(3B)). For reference, a similar situation played out in
Time Pty Ltd v Smartpark Technologies
The delegate
found the named applicant was not an entitled person, but concluded that, since
it would appear possible that the named
applicant could file a request to amend
the patent request to remove their own name and insert the eligible person as
it was appropriate to allow an opportunity to amend.
such, I will allow the applicant two (2) months from the date of this decision
to amend the application. If they do not do so,
or if any amendment they make
is not persuasive, I may then refuse the application.
it would appear at least somewhat unlikely that Pipe Ex Pty Ltd would
voluntarily remove themselves as applicant, I will draw
iGas’s attention
to the operation of Section 33 of the Act, which relevantly provides
(a) an application has been made for a standard patent; and
(b) the grant of the standard patent is opposed under section 59 by one or
more persons; and
(c) the Commissioner decides, under section 60, that:
(i) one or more opponents are eligible persons in relation to the
invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the opposed patent
application
(the original claim); and
(ii) the nominated person in respect of the application is not an
eligible person in relation to the invention; and
(iii) there is no other reason that a patent should not be granted; and
a complete application is made under section 29 by one or more of
the eligible persons for a patent in relation to the invention
the Commissioner may grant those eligible persons a patent jointly for the
invention, so far as so claimed.
(5) If the Commissioner grants a patent under subsection
(1), (2), (3) or (4), the claims of that patent granted have the same priority
date as that of the original claim referred to in the respective subsection.
(emphasis added)
relatedly, the operation of Regulation 3.8, which relevantly provides
An application under section 29 of the Act must be
(a) in the case of an application of the kind described in section 33 of the
within 3 months of the decision
of the Commissioner referred to
in paragraph 33(1)(c), (2)(c), (3)(c) or (4)(b) of the Act, as the case
(emphasis added).
is, while the simplest way for the AU549 matter to be finally resolved would be
for Pipe Ex Pty Ltd to amend the patent request
to make iGas Operations Pty Ltd
the nominated person, it will be open to iGas to file their own complete
application for the invention
within three (3) months of the date of this
the reasons given above, I am not satisfied Pipe Ex Pty Ltd is an eligible
person in respect of AU2021377198. Therefore, the
S36 request is unsuccessful.
the reasons given above, I am satisfied that Pipe Ex Pty Ltd is not an eligible
person in respect of AU2023201549. Therefore,
the S59 opposition is successful.
two (2) months
from the date of this decision for Pipe Ex Pty Ltd
to amend the application to attempt to overcome the grounds of
opposition.
is usual for costs to follow the event, and I see no reason to depart from that
here. For the sake of avoiding any ambiguity:
In the matter of the request under section 36 of the
in respect of
application 2021377198, I award costs according to schedule 8 against the
requestor, Pipe Ex Pty Ltd.
In the matter of the opposition under section 59 of the Act to the grant of a
patent on application 2023201549, I award costs according
to schedule 8 against
the applicant, Pipe Ex Pty Ltd.
Andrew Burgess
Delegate of
the Commissioner
Claims of AU198
1. A high-point vent
system, comprising:
a housing defining a central cavity;
a filter that
extends across the central cavity;
a float positioned in the central
a float rod having a lower end and an upper end, the lower end of the
float rod connected to the float and the upper end of the float
rod connected to
a seal; and
a manifold connected to the housing and having an input end and
an output end, wherein the input end defines a seal orifice that is
adjacent to the seal.
2. The high-point vent system of claim 1, further
comprising a check valve subsystem connected to the output end of the manifold.
3. The high-point vent system of claim 1, wherein the filter comprises a
filter basket that receives the float.
4. The high-point vent system of
claim 2, wherein the check valve subsystem comprises two check valves, a gas
valve for preventing
gas from entering the system, and a liquid valve for
preventing liquid from exiting the system.
5. The high-point vent system
of claim 4, wherein the gas valve comprises a first check ball that is moveable
between an upper seat
that enables gas to flow through an annular orifice and
out of the system, and a lower seat against which a surface of the check
6. The high-point vent system of claim 4, wherein the liquid valve
comprises a second check ball that is moveable between a lower
seat that enables
gas to flow through an exit orifice and out of the system, and an upper seat
against which a surface of the check
ball seals, sealing the
7. The high-point vent system of claim 6, wherein the
second check ball is buoyant in water.
8. The high-point vent system of
claim 2, wherein the first check ball and the second check ball are separated
by an element having
an upper curved surface for receiving the second check
ball, and a lower curved surface for receiving the first check ball, whereby,
use, when gas is exiting the system through the manifold, the first check ball
rests against the lower curved surface and the
second check ball rests against
the upper curved surface.
9. The high-point vent system of claim 2,
wherein the first check ball and the second check ball are separated by an
element that
provides an annular passage for flow around the second check ball
to prevent flow from gas lifting the second check ball.
high-point vent system of claim 1, further comprising a reverse flush subsystem
connected to the housing.
11. The high-point vent system of claim 10,
wherein the reverse flush subsystem comprises a first valve connected to a lower
the housing, and a second valve connected to an upper end of the housing.
12. The high-point vent system of claim 11, further comprising a third
valve connected to the housing above the second valve.
13. The high-point
vent system of claim 12, wherein the second valve is connected to a flushing
pipe that extends through the housing
below the filter, and the third valve is
connected to a flushing pipe that extends through the housing above the
14. The high-point vent system of claim 1, wherein the seal
comprises a rubber-like element that is received in a recess on the upper
the float rod.
15. The high-point vent system of claim 14, wherein the
rubber-like element seals the seal orifice of the manifold, and wherein a
diameter of the seal orifice is at least an order of magnitude smaller than a
diameter of the central cavity.
16. The high-point vent system of claim
1, wherein each of the housing, float and filter is cylindrical.
high-point vent system of claim 1 , wherein the housing com prises a plurality
of longitudinal sections that are connectable
to each other, using threaded
joints or other connectors.
18. The high-point vent system of claim 17,
wherein a first threaded joint enables the manifold to be threadably removed,
19. The high-point vent system of claim 17, wherein a
second threaded joint, when disconnected, enables removal of the filter and
20. The high-point vent system of claim 1, wherein the filter,
float, float rod and manifold are all removably connected to a stub
positioned at a top end of the housing.
Claims of AU549
1. A vent valve assembly for use in venting excess
gas or gas pressure, the vent valve assembly comprising:
a housing defining
a hollow central cavity with an in-use upper compartment separated from an
in-use lower compartment by a diffuser
the lower compartment having
an inlet orifice for receiving influent flow of fluid and the upper compartment
comprising an outlet
orifice for expulsion of the fluid;
the diffuser plate
being provided for allowing upward flow of fluid from the lower compartment to
the upper compartment through the
diffuser plate;
an upper sealing ball
retained in the upper compartment and prevented from passing through the
diffuser plate into the lower compartment,
wherein the upper sealing ball is
movably disposed to move towards the outlet orifice and form a seal at or
adjacent the outlet orifice
to prevent expulsion of fluid through the outlet
wherein the in-use upper compartment further comprises a filter
having a hollow structure with upstanding walls extending between
a lower open
end and an upper open end of the hollow structure wherein the upstanding walls
comprise perforations for screening fluid
and preventing solid particles from
being received into an internal volume of the hollow structure;
valve assembly in accordance with claim 1 further comprising a lower sealing
ball dimensioned to be retained within the
lower compartment, the lower sealing
ball being movably disposed within the lower compartment to move towards the
inlet and orifice
and form a seal adjacent the inlet orifice.
valve assembly in accordance with claim 1 or claim 2 further comprising a
convergent cross-section converging towards the
inlet orifice.
valve assembly in accordance with any one of the preceding claims wherein the
hollow structure comprises a cylindrical cross
5. A vent valve
assembly in accordance with any one of the preceding claims wherein an upper
section of the upstanding walls adjacent
the upper end comprises said
perforations and wherein a lower section adjacent the lower end is impervious to
6. A vent valve assembly in accordance with any one of the claims
wherein the diffuser plate comprises an outer peripheral portion
plurality of openings to allow fluid to flow from the lower compartment to the
upper compartment.
7. A vent valve assembly in accordance with claim 6
wherein the diffuser plate comprises a radially inner solid portion that is
to fluids and solids wherein the inner solid portion is adapted to
receive the lower end of the hollow structure such that the lower
section of the
hollow structure and the inner solid portion of the diffuser plate define a
collection chamber to collect fluid screened
by the perforations of the
cylindrical structure.
8. A vent valve assembly in accordance with claim
7 wherein the inner solid portion of the diffuser plate comprises a drain hole
draining liquid out of the collection chamber.
9. A vent valve
assembly in accordance with claim 6 wherein a first section of the peripheral
outer portion of the diffuser plate
comprises said plurality of openings and
wherein a second section of the peripheral outer portion is solid and impervious
10. A vent valve assembly in accordance with any one
of claims 7 to 9 wherein the inner solid portion comprises a guiding structure
to receive and guide the lower end of the hollow structure and seat the lower
end of the cylindrical structure along a sealing portion
of the diffuser plate
thereby forming a seal between the inner solid portion of the diffuser plate and
the lower end of the cylindrical
11. A vent valve assembly in
accordance with claim 10 when dependent on claim 9 wherein the lower end of the
hollow structure comprises
a drain hole that is preferably located adjacent the
second section of the peripheral outer portion of the diffuser plate.
A vent valve assembly in accordance with claim 11 further comprising an
alignment mechanism to align the hollow structure of the
filter for locating the
drain hole adjacent the second arcuate section in a fully engaged configuration.
13. A vent valve assembly in accordance with any one of the preceding
claims wherein the diameter of the hollow structure is less
than the overall
diameter of the upper compartment to define a void volume within the upper
compartment that surrounds the upstanding
walls of the filter for receiving
fluid from the lower compartment through the openings provided in the peripheral
region of the
diffuser plate.
14. A vent valve assembly in accordance
with any one of the preceding claims wherein the upper sealing ball is
substantially buoyant
in liquid, preferably water and substantially non-buoyant
15. A vent valve assembly in accordance with any one of the
preceding claims wherein the upper compartment comprises one or more draining
ports for draining fluid out of the upper compartment.
16. A vent valve
assembly in accordance with any one of the preceding claims further comprising a
pressure monitoring device positioned
within the housing to measure pressure
within the internal volume of the upper and lower compartments.
vent valve assembly in accordance with any one of the preceding claims wherein
the upper compartment further comprises an upper
section that is removably
attached to a lower section.
18. A vent valve assembly in accordance with
claim 17 wherein the upper section comprises the outlet orifice and wherein the
section comprises the draining outlet.
Nichols#1 at 1; Nichols#2
Nichols#1 at 4; Nichols#2
Fekete#1 at 1, 4;
Fekete#3 at 1, 4.
Fekete#1 at
1-7; Fekete#3 at 1-9.
Clarkson#1 at 1.
Clarkson#1 at
Clarkson#1 at
Clarkson at 2 and
Clarkson#1 at
Larsen#1 at
Larsen#1 at 3-7, noting
that Mr Larsen refers to the company as “IntelliGas Pty
Fulwood#1 at
AU198 specification at
[0001]-[0002].
specification at [0003].
AU198 specification at
AU198 specification
at [0004]. Note the specification refers to these as one problem, but to me the
reference to “blockages”
and “loss of containment”
implies two failure modes – the vent being blocked closed, and the vent
being blocked
AU198 specification
specification [0008]-[0027].
AU198 specification at
AU198 specification
specification at [0049].
AU198 specification at
AU198 specification
specification at [0059].
AU198 specification at
AU198 specification
specification at
[0061]-[0062].
specification at [0040].
AU198 specification at
AU198 specification
specification at
[0043]-[0044].
specification at [0045].
AU549 specification at
AU549 specification
specification at [004].
AU549 specification at
AU549 specification
specification at [007].
AU549 specification
[0008]-[0025].
specification at [0031], Fig.
AU549 specification at
AU549 specification
specification at [0033].
AU549 specification at
AU549 specification
specification at [0035].
AU549 specification at
AU549 specification
Commissioner
of Patents v Thaler
[2022] FCAFC 62
v Davies Shephard Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 501
108 FCR 422
University of
Western Australia v Gray
[2009] FCAFC 116;
179 FCR 346
)at [253]-[256].
[2008] FCAFC 9
165 FCR 527
[2021] FCAFC 224
288 FCR 247
at [63], quoting
Markem Corp v Zipher Ltd
[2005] EWCA Civ 267
University of
Western Australia v Gray (No 20)
[2008] FCA 498;
246 ALR 603
) at [1426].
at [1426], quoting from
Burroughs Wellcome Co v Barr
Laboratories Inc
(1994) 40 F 3d
(2022) 166 IPR 61
[2022] FCA 188
[2004] VSC 33
V Gray Full Court
UWA V Gray Full
Ex’s written submissions at
iGas’s submissions
submissions at 53, quoting Fekete#3 at [62], emphasis as per
submissions at 54.
iGas’s submissions at
AU198 specification at
[061]-[0062].
specification at [0052].
iGas’s submissions at
submissions at 57-58.
Ex’s submissions at
Nicols#2 at
Nicols#2 at
Nichols#2 Annex
Nichols#2 Annex
Nichols#2 Annex DN-3,
being a screenshot of the file record of the image with a date
Nichols#2 Annex
See also Nichols#2
Annex DN-5, which includes a similar screenshot of file record as DN-3, dated
“20/05/2016”.
Nichols#2 Annex DN-4.
Nichols#2 Annex DN-5.
Nichols#2 Annex DN-6.
Ex’s submissions at
Nichols#2 at
Nichols#2 Annex
Nichols#2 Annex
submissions at 60.
iGas’s submissions at
iGas’s submissions
Nichols#2 Annex
Nichols#2 at
Nichols#2 at 17-18 and
Nichols#2 at 25,
although note Mr Nichols refers to iGas generally as
“IntelliGas”.
Nichols#2 at 29.
Fekete#3 at
Fekete#3 at
Fekete#3 at
Fekete#3 Annex
Fekete#3 at
Fekete#3 at
submissions at 40, iGas’s submissions at
In the AU549
evidence, this is Nichols#1 Annex
Fekete#1 at
Clarkson#1 at
Fekete#1 at
Fekete#1 at
Clarkson#1 at
specification at [0060].
Fekete#1 at 37.
Clarkson#1 at 18.
Nichols#1 at 31.
Nichols#1 at 31.
Clarkson#1 at
Clarkson#1 at
Fekete#1 at
Mr Fekete refers to
“Mr Stephen Larson”, but I assume he means Mr Steven
Fekete#1 at
Fekete#1 Annex
DF-13, fifth image.
Fekete#1 at 50-51.
page 16 line 22-26.
Fekete#1 at 53.
at 33, on page 12.
Fulwood#1 at 5.
at 33, on page 12.
Clarkson#1 Annexure AC-3
Clarkson#1 at 26-32.
Nichols#1 at page 13.
Pipe Ex’s submissions at
Pipe Ex Pty
Ltd’s submissions at
Clarkson#1 annex
Pipe Ex Pty
Ltd’s submissions at
Pipe Ex Pty
Ltd’s submissions at
Nichols#1 at 33, page
Fekete#3 at
Nichols#2 at
Nichols#2 at 19;
Fekete#3 at 20 places it as September but contemporaneous material suggests it
must have been earlier.
Nichols#2 Annex DN-8.
Nichols#2 at 23.
Nichols#2 at 24, this may also be the meeting Fekete#3 at 20 refers to.
Nichols#2 at 28, page
submissions at 79-80, citing
Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
[110-2240] and [10-2242].
iGas’s submissions at
Fekete#3 Annex DF-6
Fekete#3 annex
Nichols#2 at
Nichols#3 at
submissions at 82, citing Nichols#3 at
Fekete#3 at
Nichols#3 at
Fekete#3 annex DF-6
annexure DN-10; also included as Nichols#2 annexure
Fekete#1 annex DF-5,
also included as Fekete#3 annex
submissions at 75.
Fekete#3 at 35.
annex DF-7, also included with Nichols#2 annex DN-16, also included with
Fekete#3 annex DF-7.
Fekete#1 annex DF-6, also included as Fekete#3 annex
Fekete#3 at 34,
Nichols#2 annexure
DN-12, also included as Nichols#1 annexure
Nichols#2 at 24,
noting that Mr Nichols appears to use “IntelliGas” as the generic
name for all iGas entities.
Note that, while the two
matters have not been formally joined such that evidence in respect of AU198 is
not automatically incorporated
into the evidence for AU549, there is sufficient
duplication of material in the two evidence sets that the AU549 evidence
the same conclusions regarding Mr Nichols role as COO.
Fekete#1 annex DF-15,
also included as Fekete#3 annex
Pipe Ex Pty
Ltd’s submissions at
Nichols#1 at page
Pipe Ex Pty
Ltd’s submissions at
Fekete#2 at
Nichols#1 at page
Nichols#1 at 6 and
Nichols#1 annex
[2012] FCA 1458
Ibid at 140.
[2017] APO 8
[2020] APO 48
161 IPR 164.
RTF format (34.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format