URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/2024/38.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Williams v Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited; Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited v Williams [2024] HCA 38 (6 November 2024)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAGELER CJ,
EDELMAN, STEWARD, GLEESON, JAGOT AND BEECH‑JONES JJ
Matter No S157/2023
KENNETH JOHN WILLIAMS &
ANOR APPELLANTS
TOYOTA MOTOR CORPORATION AUSTRALIA
LIMITED RESPONDENT
Matter No S155/2023
TOYOTA MOTOR
CORPORATION AUSTRALIA
LIMITED APPELLANT
KENNETH JOHN
WILLIAMS & ANOR RESPONDENTS
Williams v Toyota Motor Corporation Australia
Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited v
[2024] HCA 38
Date of Hearing: 10 & 11 April
Date of Judgment: 6 November 2024
S157/2023 &
Matter No S157/2023
aside order 3 of the orders of the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia
made on 27 March 2023.
aside order 2 of the orders of the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia
made on 12 May 2023 but only in respect of the
amended answers to questions 26
to 35 posed in Sch 2 to the orders of the Federal Court of Australia made on 16
lieu of so much of order 2 of the orders of the Full Court of the Federal Court
of Australia made on 12 May 2023 that answers questions
26 to 35 posed in Sch 2
to the orders of the Federal Court of Australia made on 16 May 2022, also order
that the primary judge's
answers to those questions be set
matter be remitted to the primary judge for:
(a) the reassessment of reduction in value damages under ss 271(1)
and 272(1)(a) of the
Australian Consumer Law
and damages for excess GST
under ss 271(1) and 272(1)(b) of the
Australian Consumer Law
accordance with the reasons of the High Court of Australia; and
(b) the provision of answers to questions 26 to 35 posed in Sch 2 to
the orders of the Federal Court of Australia made on 16 May
accordance with the reasons of the High Court of Australia.
respondent pay half of the appellants' costs of the
Matter No S155/2023
appellant pay the respondents' costs of the appeal.
appeal from the Federal Court of
Representation
J T Gleeson SC with P A
Meagher and T M Rogan for the appellants in S157/2023 and the respondents in
S155/2023 (instructed by Quinn
Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan)
B W Walker SC with E Bathurst for the respondent in S157/2023 and the
appellant in S155/2023 (instructed by Clayton
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
Williams v Toyota Motor Corporation Australia
Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited v
Damages – Assessment – Consumer law –
Where Mr Williams and Direct Claim Services Qld Pty Ltd ("Williams
brought representative proceedings against Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Limited ("Toyota") on behalf of persons who acquired
motor vehicles
fitted with defective diesel exhaust after-treatment system – Where
vehicles had propensity to experience defect
consequences – Where
effective fix became available in May 2020 free of charge ("repair") –
Where primary judge concluded
vehicles did not comply with guarantee of
"acceptable quality" in s 54(1) of
Australian Consumer Law
at time of supply – Where s 271(1) of ACL provides that if guarantee
under s 54 is not complied with, "an affected
person in relation to the
goods may ... recover damages from the manufacturer" – Where
s 272(1)(a) of ACL provides that "an
affected person in relation to goods
is entitled to recover damages for ... any reduction in the value of the goods,
resulting from
the failure to comply with the guarantee to which the action
relates" – Where primary judge held assessment of damages under
s 272(1)(a) to be made at time of supply and information acquired
thereafter could only be considered if it bore upon "true value"
supply, which did not include knowledge of availability of repair – Where
Full Court of Federal Court of Australia
held that assessment of damages under
s 272(1)(a) may require departure from time of supply or adjustment to
avoid "over‑compensation"
– Where Full Court held that
availability and timing of repair should be considered – Whether Full
Court erred in permitting
an assessment of damages after time of supply rather
than only using information acquired thereafter to confirm what could be
at time of supply – Whether Full Court erred in failing to
conclude that damages under s 272(1)(a) are recoverable where there
ongoing reduction in value at time of trial due to availability of repair.
Words and phrases – "affected person in relation to goods",
"assessment of damages", "availability of a repair", "compensation",
"consumer",
"damages", "defect", "defect consequences", "full knowledge of the defect",
"guarantee of acceptable quality", "hypothetical
reasonable consumer", "inherent
features of the defect", "loss-based damages", "loss or damage",
"performance-based damages", "reduction
in value", "state and condition of the
goods", "time of supply", "time of
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth), Sch 2 (
Australian Consumer Law
), ss 54(1), 271(1),
272(1)(a), 272(1)(b).
GAGELER CJ,
GORDON, STEWARD, GLEESON AND BEECH-JONES JJ. The motor vehicles the
subject of these two appeals were supplied to "consumers"
within the meaning of
Australian Consumer
("the ACL") during
the period from 1 October 2015 to 23 April 2020 ("the relevant
period"). Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited
("Toyota") was the
manufacturer of the motor
The vehicles did
not conform with the guarantee of acceptable quality provided for in
s 54(1) of the ACL in that each had a (hidden)
defect in its diesel exhaust
system which carried an unacceptable propensity to cause the diesel exhaust
system to malfunction.
272(1)(a) of the ACL affords to an "affected person in relation to goods" a
remedy in damages for any reduction in the value
of the goods resulting from
their failure to comply with the guarantee of acceptable quality. The principal
issue raised by these
two appeals is the relevance to that assessment of the
fact that, some years after the time of supply, Toyota developed a means of
repairing the defect that was made available free of charge.
the reasons that follow, the assessment to be made under s 272(1)(a) is of the
amount by which the value of the goods is reduced
at the time of supply to the
consumer as a result of the failure of the goods to comply with the guarantee of
acceptable quality
at that time. The assessment is to be undertaken having
regard to all that is known at the time of trial about the "state and condition
of the goods"
at the time of
their supply to the consumer. The effectiveness, cost, inconvenience and timing
of any repair of a defect in the goods
as known at the time of trial are all
characteristics of the "state and condition of the goods" at the time of their
supply to the
consumer and are therefore all to be taken into account in the
assessment.
neither the primary judge nor the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia
assessed the damages payable under s 272(1)(a)
in accordance with this
approach, the proceedings will be remitted to the primary judge to undertake
that task in accordance with
these reasons.
John Williams and Direct Claim Services Qld Pty Ltd ("Direct Claim Services"), a
company of which Mr Williams is the sole
director, are the appellants ("the
Williams appellants") in one of the appeals ("the Williams appeal"). They are
the lead applicants
in representative proceedings that were brought against
Toyota on behalf of those who had acquired motor vehicles in the Prado, Fortuner
or HiLux ranges during the relevant period that had been fitted with a "1GD-FTV"
or "2GD-FTV" diesel combustion engine. There were
264,170 such vehicles ("the
relevant vehicles"). Toyota is the appellant in the other appeal ("the Toyota
appeals concern that part of the judgment of the Full Federal Court (Moshinsky,
Colvin and Stewart JJ)
that varied the assessment made by the primary judge (Lee J) of the damages
payable by Toyota under s 272(1)(a) of the ACL in favour
of Direct Claim
Services and the group members (except for certain
categories).
The hearing of
both appeals was immediately followed by the hearing of the appeal in
Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty
which raised
similar issues in relation to the proper construction of s 272(1)(a) of the
ACL. The submissions made by the appellant
(Biljana Capic) and respondent (Ford
Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd ("Ford")) in
concerning the
construction of the ACL are addressed in this judgment.
an endeavour to comply with national emissions standards, each of the affected
Toyota vehicles was supplied with a diesel exhaust
after-treatment system ("DPF
System"), which was designed to capture and convert the pollutant emissions into
carbon dioxide and
water vapour through a combination of filtration, combustion
(ie, oxidation) and chemical
components of the DPF System are the diesel particulate filter ("DPF") and the
diesel oxidation catalyst ("DOC"). The DPF
captures and stores diesel
particulate matter in the exhaust gas prior to its release. The captured
particulate matter must be burnt
off periodically in a process described as
"regeneration".
comprises a honeycomb ceramic flow-through monolith substrate with a catalyst
coating. One of its functions is to increase
the temperature in the DPF during
regeneration to enable the captured particulate matter to be burnt off. This
process is impeded
if the DOC becomes clogged or
DPF System "was not designed to function effectively during all reasonably
expected conditions of normal operation and use in
the Australian market" ("the
core defect")
under certain conditions, the DPF System was ineffective in preventing the
formation of deposits on the DOC surface, which
prevented the DPF from effective
regeneration.
defect was inherent in the design of the DPF System and was comprised of both
mechanical defects and defective control logic
and associated software
calibrations.
effect of the core defect was that, if a relevant vehicle was exposed to regular
continuous driving at approximately 100 km/h
("the High Speed Driving
Pattern"), it might experience one or more of various so-called "defect
consequences". The defect consequences
included: the emission of excessive white
smoke and foul-smelling exhaust from the vehicle's exhaust when the engine was
during and immediately following regeneration; the need to have the
vehicle inspected, serviced or repaired by a service engineer
for the purpose of
cleaning, repairing or replacing the DPF System; the display of DPF
notifications on an excessive number of occasions
or for an excessive period of
time, or both; and an increase in fuel consumption and decrease in fuel
primary judge found that, although not every relevant vehicle suffered the
defect consequences, because the core defect was present
in all the vehicles
they each had a propensity to experience one or more of the defect consequences
and there was a high likelihood
they would do
His Honour found that
those consequences "substantially interfere[d] with the normal use and
operation" of the relevant
Claim Services acquired a Toyota Prado motor vehicle on 8 April 2016. At
that time, Mr Williams was ignorant of the core defect
and the defect
consequences. Throughout the period that the group members acquired the relevant
vehicles, the "market" was not informed
of those matters either. The vehicle
acquired by Direct Claim Services developed problems relating to the DPF System
soon after it
was acquired. Sometime around late 2016, Mr Williams first
experienced the vehicle emitting foul-smelling, white smoke. The problem
reoccurred thereafter despite Toyota attempting to repair it through numerous
services of the vehicle. The primary judge found that
the defect consequences
that manifested had a "substantial impact" on Mr Williams' use and enjoyment of
the vehicle.
February 2016, Toyota became aware that vehicles were being presented to dealers
by customers who reported concerns about the
emission of excessive white smoke
during regeneration and the illumination of DPF notifications. Over the
following four years, the
number of complaints increased dramatically. Toyota
attempted a series of countermeasures to fix the problem, which were
ineffective.
in May 2020 did an effective countermeasure ("the 2020 Field Fix") become
"available" in the sense of being first available
to some group members. It was
common ground that, when applied, the 2020 Field Fix was effective and would
continue to be effective
in remedying the core defect and its consequences in
all the relevant
However, the
logistics of its rollout to hundreds of thousands of group members was not
explored in the evidence.
The primary judgment
primary judge concluded that the relevant vehicles were not of an "acceptable
quality" within the meaning of s 54(2) of the ACL
at the time of supply because
they were not: fit for all the purposes for which goods of that kind are
commonly supplied;
acceptable in appearance and
His Honour found
that a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
relevant vehicles at the time of
supply, including any "hidden defects", would
not have regarded the vehicles as "acceptable", especially having regard to the
and price of the
The primary
judge found that such a consumer was taken to be fully acquainted with the
nature of the core defect, the defect consequences
and the manner in which the
relevant vehicles would malfunction when exposed to the High Speed Driving
However, the
primary judge concluded that the state and condition of the relevant vehicles at
the time of supply was otherwise not
determined by anything occurring after that
time, such as whether the defect consequences materialised or whether there was
any knowledge
that an effective fix would ultimately become
determining the damages payable under s 272(1)(a) of the ACL to Direct
Claim Services and group members (except certain categories
such as those who
had their vehicle fixed or disposed of during the relevant period), the primary
judge considered that an assessment
under s 272(1)(a) was to be made at the
time of acquisition
that information acquired thereafter could only be considered if it bore upon
the "true value" of the relevant vehicle at the
acquisition.
This did not
extend to knowledge of a repair that was only made available four years after
the date of acquisition and implemented
"more than a reasonable time after being
requested".
According to
the primary judge, because such a repair was not expected at the time of
acquisition, it was "an extraneous event, irrelevant
to the true value at that
His Honour found
that the reduction in value resulting from the breach of the guarantee of
acceptable quality was 17.5% of the average
individual amounts of damages to be determined having regard to the lesser of
the average retail price or the price paid
primary judge answered common questions in accordance with these findings. His
Honour assessed the damages payable to Direct
Claim Services under
s 272(1)(a) and (b) to be a total of $18,401.76. His Honour made orders
awarding damages to each group member
except certain categories including: those
who had opted out of the proceedings; those who had received the 2020 Field Fix;
who had disposed of their vehicle during the relevant period.
The Full Court's judgment
basis upon which the Full Court rejected Toyota's appeal against the primary
judge's findings that the relevant vehicles did
not comply with the guarantee of
acceptable quality is not of present
Toyota also
appealed the primary judge's assessment of damages for the reduction in value
payable under s 272(1)(a) of the ACL. The
Full Court upheld that aspect of
Toyota's appeal.
Court identified two errors on the part of the primary judge. First, the Full
Court found that the primary judge erred in
not taking into account the fact
that either a repair had become available or a repair might become
Second, the
Full Court found that, in arriving at the figure of 17.5% as the appropriate
figure for the reduction in value, the primary
judge erred in relying on the
evidence of a valuer called on behalf of Mr Williams, Mr
so finding, the Full Court concluded that the use of the word "damages" in
s 272(1)(a) indicates that "the provision is concerned
with compensation
for loss or damage", that is, "compensation for actual damage
According to
their Honours, this meant that "a departure from [assessing damages by reference
to] the time of supply or an adjustment
to avoid over‑compensation" might
be required.
Honours then considered that "in most instances, the intrinsic value of consumer
goods to a retail buyer will lie in their
utility rather than the price at which
they [are sold]",
that the "general law [that] has developed in assessing loss in cases concerning
the defective supply of valuable assets ...
is not apposite" to consumer
According to the
Full Court, "the value of many consumer goods ... is more accurately understood
to lie in their utilisation value
(or life-of-use value) as reflected in the
purchase price".
Honours concluded that, if a repair was not available at the time of the trial,
then an assessment of damages for the reduction
in value should take into
account "the possibility of the availability of a fix", including the
uncertainty as to whether there would
be a fix and, if so, how long it might
take for such a fix to be "made
available".
However, as a
repair was available at the time of the trial (ie, the 2020 Field Fix), the fact
of that repair and the time of its
availability should be considered in
assessing damages for the reduction in value at the time of supply to the
Full Court ordered that the assessment of damages for the reduction in value be
remitted to the primary judge on the basis that
the reduction in value of the
relevant vehicles prior to taking into account the availability of a repair (the
2020 Field Fix) was
The balance of the assessment was to be conducted "in a way that takes into
account the period of time that the particular consumer
held their vehicle
before the fix became
available".
A formula set
out in a letter sent to the parties, which was extracted in the Full Court's
judgment, suggests that the Full Court
contemplated the primary judge
determining the damages payable under s 272(1)(a) by multiplying the
reduction of 10% by the fraction
that the period of time the relevant group
member held their vehicle before the repair "became available" bears to the
life of the
The Full Court
also ordered that the primary judge's answers to the common questions concerning
damages under s 272(1)(a) be amended
to reflect its
the hearing of the appeals, attention was focussed on the following finding of
the Full Court in relation to the availability
of a repair and its effect on the
value of the relevant
"[B]y the time of the initial trial [before the primary judge], it was known
that the 2020 [F]ield [F]ix was available and the experts
agreed that, in
consequence, there was no ongoing reduction in value. It may be observed that
the prospective reinstatement of value
reflected the fact that the fix would
the utility of the vehicle, noting that for some buyers there
remained a considerable period when the utility of the vehicle had
diminished." (emphasis added)
Williams appellants challenged this finding. They contended that, contrary to
the finding, none of the experts who gave evidence
before the primary judge
agreed that the application of the 2020 Field Fix had the effect of
retrospectively restoring value from
the time of supply. They further contended
that the expert they relied on (Mr Cuthbert) simply stated that a reduction in
account of a defect would not be applied if the repair was available
carried out and that, even on the Full Court's approach, the time
frame over which such repairs to hundreds of thousands of relevant
could take place ("quite a few years") also had to be taken into account. Toyota
contended that Mr Cuthbert conceded in
cross‑examination that the mere
availability of a free repair would eliminate any reduction in value. That
interpretation of
Mr Cuthbert's evidence was not reflected in any finding of the
primary judge, who observed and heard the evidence being given.
is considerable force in the Williams appellants' criticisms of the above
finding. However, ultimately it is not necessary
to resolve their challenge. The
Full Court is not to be understood as having found that the supposed
"restoration" in value was retrospective
to the time of supply, but instead as
only removing any reduction in value that was prevalent at the time the repair
became "available".
aside the difficulty in describing the repair as being "available" when it had
to be rolled out to hundreds of thousands
of relevant vehicles, the utility of
this finding was the support it provided for the Full Court's approach to the
assessment of
damages payable under s 272(1)(a). That approach was
predicated on any ongoing reduction in value ceasing when the repair became
available because the vehicle's "utility" was restored. The effect of the Full
Court's approach was that the 10% loss in value should
be reduced by reference
to the proportion of the vehicle's life for which the repair was "available".
The precise formula to be applied
was to be identified by the primary judge on
this Court, none of the parties sought to uphold this aspect of the Full Court's
approach. They were correct to take that course.
As explained later, the Full
Court's approach was premised on an incorrect interpretation of the meaning of
"damages" in s 272(1)
and a mistaken understanding that a court can depart
from an assessment at the time of supply to avoid "over‑compensation"
considering whether subsequent events transpired to increase or decrease the
value of the goods over time. Otherwise, there is
no basis in the ACL for
adopting the concept of the "utilisation value" of goods referred to by the Full
As submitted by
the Williams appellants, s 272(1)(a) protects the interest of the consumer
in having ownership and control of goods
that met the guarantee of acceptable
quality at the time of supply. The utility of the goods is simply an aspect of
that ownership
and control and is reflected in the price paid at the time of
The appeals
Williams appellants and Toyota were each granted special leave to appeal from
that part of the Full Court's judgment that concerned
the assessment of damages
payable under s 272(1)(a) of the ACL. The Williams appellants sought the
restoration of the primary judge's
orders and answers to common questions,
including his Honour's assessment of a 17.5% reduction in value of all the
relevant vehicles
resulting from the failure to comply with the guarantee of
acceptable quality. They contended that the Full Court erred in failing
assess the reduction in the value of the vehicles by reference to the time of
supply and only using information acquired thereafter
as hindsight confirming
what could have been foreseen at the time of supply. The Williams appellants
also contended that the Full
Court erred in construing s 272(1)(a) so as to
permit an assessment at some later time after the date of supply or an
"adjustment"
of the assessment "to reflect a future event unknown and unknowable
at the date of supply". They further contended that the Full
Court erred in
varying the primary judge's assessment of a 17.5% reduction in value of the
relevant vehicles.
contended that the Full Court erred in failing to conclude that damages under
s 272(1)(a) were not recoverable in circumstances
where there was
(supposedly) "no ongoing reduction in [the] value [of the vehicles] at the time
of trial due to the availability
of a repair free of charge". This contention
seeks to take advantage of the impugned finding noted above, although Toyota
that there was an inherent difficulty in the concept of the repair
being "available" in circumstances where findings about the logistics,
especially the timing, of a repair for all the relevant vehicles had not been
made. Toyota also propounded an alternative case, namely
that damages for the
reduction in value should be assessed at the time of supply taking into account
what is known at the trial about
the capacity to repair the defect, including
the time from supply until such a repair would in fact be "available", that is,
"implemented".
Australian Consumer Law
ACL has no separate statement of objectives. They are subsumed in a short
statement of the object of the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
namely "to enhance the welfare of Australians through the promotion of
competition and fair trading and provision for consumer
protection".
Explanatory Memorandum accompanying the ACL's
introduction
and a report
of the Commonwealth Consumer Affairs Advisory Council referred to in the
Explanatory Memorandum
emphasised the need for clarity in relation to both consumer guarantees and
remedies, including avoiding or minimising the necessity
for businesses and
consumers to resort to the law of contract to understand consumer
Acceptable quality and knowledge acquired after supply
in Ch 3 of the ACL is entitled "[c]onsumer guarantees".
Subdivision A of Div 1 provides for guarantees relating to the supply
goods in trade or commerce to a "consumer". Subject to exceptions that are
presently irrelevant,
person is taken to have acquired particular goods as a "consumer" if, and only
if: the amount paid or payable for the goods did
not exceed $40,000 or a greater
amount if prescribed; the goods were of a kind ordinarily acquired for personal,
domestic or household
use or consumption; or the goods consisted of a vehicle or
trailer acquired for use principally in the transport of goods on public
Subdiv A, s 54(1) provides that if a person supplies, in trade or
commerce, goods to a consumer and the supply does not occur
by way of sale by
auction, "there is a guarantee that the goods are of acceptable quality".
Section 54(2)-(3) define the concept
of "acceptable quality" for the
purpose of the guarantee as follows:
"(2) Goods are of
acceptable quality
if they are as:
(a) fit for all the purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly supplied;
(b) acceptable in appearance and finish; and
(c) free from
(d) safe; and
(e) durable;
as a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
goods (including any
hidden defects
of the goods), would regard as
acceptable having regard to the matters in subsection (3).
(3) The matters for the purposes of subsection (2) are:
(a) the nature of the goods; and
(b) the price of the goods (if relevant); and
(c) any statements made about the goods on any packaging or label on the goods;
(d) any representation made about the goods by the supplier or manufacturer of
the goods; and
(e) any other relevant circumstances relating to the supply of the goods."
(emphasis in bold added, emphasis in italics in original)
54(4) provides that if goods supplied to a consumer are not of acceptable
quality, and the only reason or reasons why they
are not of acceptable quality
were specifically drawn to the consumer's attention before they agreed to the
supply, the goods are
taken to be of acceptable quality. Section 54(7) provides
that goods do not fail to be of acceptable quality if: (a) the consumer
the goods before agreeing to their supply; and (b) the examination ought
reasonably to have revealed that the goods were
not of acceptable quality. The
balance of s 54 describes other circumstances in which goods either are
taken to be of acceptable
quality or do not fail to be of acceptable quality,
which are not relevant to these appeals.
the primary judge found that each of s 54(2)(a), (b), (c) and (e) was not
complied with,
critical conclusion was that the relevant vehicles were affected by a "defect".
Neither "defect" nor "hidden defect" as used
in s 54(2) is defined in the
ACL. The reference in s 54(2) to "hidden defects" and a reasonable consumer
being "fully acquainted"
with the state and condition of the goods appears to
draw on Dixon J's description of the condition that goods be of
merchantable
Australian Knitting Mills
Ltd v Grant
, namely that the goods be in a "state that a buyer fully
acquainted with the facts and, therefore, knowing what hidden defects exist
would buy them without abatement of the price obtainable for such goods if in
reasonably sound order and condition and without
s 54(2) provides a far more extensive guarantee than the various statutory
prescriptions that goods be of merchantable
relevance is Dixon J's description of a hidden defect as a defect not
reasonably discoverable by a buyer on examination
This description
coheres with s 54(7)(b) of the ACL and otherwise suffices in the present
context. On any view, the core defect was
not reasonably discoverable to a
consumer from an examination of the relevant vehicles at the time of
Section 54(2)
posits a hypothetical inquiry as to what a reasonable consumer at the time of
supply would regard as acceptable if
the reasonable consumer was "fully
acquainted with the state and condition of the goods", including any "hidden
defects". At least
in a case involving a hidden defect, an inquiry into whether
the guarantee has been complied with requires attributing to a reasonable
consumer, at the time of supply, later acquired knowledge of the defect that
renders the goods below an acceptable quality. The attributed
knowledge of the
defect must be knowledge that would render a reasonable consumer "fully
acquainted" with the true state and condition
of the goods; it follows that this
must include full knowledge of or acquaintance with the defect, including later
acquired knowledge
of the propensity of the defect to occasion adverse
consequences and the nature of those consequences, even if understandings of
those matters vary over the period of time leading up to the trial.
such knowledge is attributed to a reasonable consumer at the time of supply,
there is no reason why later acquired knowledge of
the capacity to repair the
defect or ameliorate its consequences, including when, how and at what cost
those repairs or ameliorative
steps could be undertaken, should not also be
attributed. Those matters are characteristics of the nature and seriousness of
defect and, in turn, the state and condition of the goods. Knowledge of
those matters cannot be divorced from what constitutes the
relevant "defect",
even though they may not necessarily preclude the defect from rendering the
goods in breach of the guarantee in
position can be illustrated by reference to
Kendall & Sons v William Lillico &
the House of Lords considered, inter alia, the relevance of knowledge acquired
after the time of supply to a claim that
goods were not of merchantable quality
at the time of supply by reason of a latent
The relevant
goods were compounded "feeding stuff" which contained extracted groundnut that
was discovered to be contaminated by
a toxic substance that rendered the goods
unsuitable to be included in food for
It was later
discovered that the goods could be included in food for cattle, provided its
content did not exceed 5% of the
The significance
of such a use is that the test for merchantable quality held to be applicable in
the United Kingdom required an
assessment of whether the goods, in the form in
which they were sold, "were of no use for any purpose for which such goods would
normally be used".
Reid held that, in determining whether the goods were of merchantable quality,
it would be "very artificial to bring in some
part of the later knowledge and
exclude other parts" such that the later acquired knowledge of an acceptable use
of the goods affected
an assessment of whether they were of merchantable quality
at the time of supply.
Lord Guest held that "[t]he defect as ultimately discovered must be taken with
its qualifications" and "[i]t is not possible to stop
halfway and say '[w]e know
there is a defect' without proceeding to say '[a]lthough there is a defect we
know it can be cured by
a limited rate of
inclusion'".
According to
their Lordships, the later acquired knowledge that the goods could be safely fed
to cattle qualified the characterisation
of the nature and seriousness of the
defect in the goods at the time of supply.
Pearce, with whom Lord Wilberforce
took a different
view. Lord Pearce did not accept that all "after-acquired knowledge" at the time
of trial should be brought to
His Lordship
accepted Dixon J's approach in
Australian Knitting Mills
of assuming
knowledge of the hidden defects at the date of delivery but stated as
"But what additional after-acquired knowledge must one assume? Logic might seem
to indicate that the court should bring to the task
all the after-acquired
knowledge which it possesses at the date of trial.
But I do not think that
this is always so
. For one is trying to find what market the goods would
have had if their subsequently ascertained condition had been known. As it
hypothetical exercise, one must create a hypothetical market. Nevertheless the
hypothetical market should be one that could
have existed, not one which could
have existed at the date of delivery.
Suppose goods contained a
hidden deadly poison to which there was discovered by scientists two years after
delivery a simple, easy,
inexpensive antidote which could render the goods
harmless. They would be unmarketable at the date of delivery if the existence of
the poison was brought to light, since no purchaser could then have known the
antidote to the poison
." (emphasis in bold added; emphasis in italics in
Pearce did not exclude all after-acquired knowledge from being attributed to a
purchaser at the time of delivery but confined
it to knowledge that could be
utilised in a hypothetical market that could have existed at the time of
delivery but did not exist,
as opposed to a hypothetical market that could not
have existed. Thus, with the example of poisoned goods, the position would have
been presumably different if the existence of an antidote to the poison was
known at the time of delivery. In that circumstance,
knowledge of the poison and
the existence of the antidote would be imputed to the purchaser at the time of
delivery because a hypothetical
market with knowledge of the poison and antidote
could have existed, even if it did not exist.
distinction between markets that could have existed but did not and markets that
could not have existed does not assist. The
indisputable starting point is the
attribution of a full acquaintance with the state and condition of the goods at
the time of supply
to a reasonable consumer, including full knowledge of any
hidden defect. Such an exercise is completely hypothetical, and the better
inquiry is one that is focussed on bringing to account at the time of supply the
best available information that is known about the
defect at the time of trial.
Lord Pearce's initial suggestion that logic might seem to indicate that a court
should bring to account
all the after‑acquired knowledge it possesses at
the time of trial was correct. In the example of poisoned goods, the relevant
after‑acquired knowledge brought to account as at the time of supply is
not just the existence of the antidote but the knowledge
that the antidote will
not be available for two years such that the relevant hypothetical market is for
goods that were poisonous
and would remain so for two years. Assuming the goods
in the example are consumables such as "feeding stuff", then a conclusion that
they were not of merchantable quality at the time of supply would inevitably
primary judge relied on the decision in
Medtel Pty Ltd v
heart pacemaker was found not to be of merchantable quality. The pacemaker was
manufactured with a yellow spool solder,
which had a tendency to attract
contaminants that caused partial short circuits and accelerated battery
This created a
"superadded risk of premature failure" in the
preferred the view of Lord Pearce in
and observed that former
s 74D of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) "calls for the quality,
or fitness for purpose, of the goods to be measured ... in the light of
information concerning the goods
available at the time of the trial", but said
that the ultimate issue remained "whether the goods were as fit for the relevant
as it was reasonable to expect at the time of their supply to the
approach can be accepted but it extends to include such information as is known
at the time of the trial about the defect
and its capacity to be repaired, as
well as when, how and at what cost that repair would take place.
a case such as
where the consequences of the "superadded risk"
materialising are extreme, it may be that any attribution of later acquired
of a repair, even if it is at no cost, would not affect a conclusion
that the goods were not of merchantable, much less acceptable,
quality. With
other types of goods, it might be that the availability of a free and convenient
repair within a short period of time
after the supply is such that a reasonable
consumer armed with that knowledge and having regard to the matters set out in
would regard them as being of acceptable quality.
of the grounds of appeal in the Full Court or in this Court challenged the
primary judge's finding that the relevant vehicles
failed to comply with the
statutory guarantee in
of the ACL. Even though the primary judge's
analysis of whether the vehicles were of acceptable quality did not involve
attributing
to a reasonable consumer any later acquired knowledge of the
capacity to repair the core defect as well as when, how and at what
repair would be undertaken, given his Honour's findings on those topics there is
no reason to suggest that they would have
affected his Honour's finding that the
guarantee of acceptable quality was not complied with. That finding is not to be
Instead, as explained below, the present relevance of those matters
concerns the analysis of the damages payable under s 272(1)(a)
of the ACL.
Assessment of damages for reduction in value under
s 272(1)(a)
of the ACL provides for remedies relating to consumer guarantees.
Subdivision A of Div 1 of
provides for actions against
suppliers of goods. If a supplier's failure to comply with a guarantee specified
in Subdiv A of Div
(which includes
cannot be remedied or is a so-called "major
consumer may reject the goods or take action against the supplier to "recover
compensation for any reduction in the value
of the goods below the price paid or
payable by the consumer for the
Irrespective of
whether the failure cannot be remedied or is a major failure, the consumer may
also recover "damages for any loss
or damage" they have suffered because of the
failure "if it was reasonably foreseeable that the consumer would suffer such
damage as a result of such a
of the ACL provides for remedies against manufacturers of goods.
Unlike Div 1 of
, these remedies can be invoked by "an affected
person in relation to the goods" even though they relate to breaches of
given to consumers by suppliers. An "affected person ... in relation
to goods" is defined as: "(a) a consumer who acquires the goods;
or (b) a person
who acquires the goods from the consumer (other than for the purpose of
re-supply); or (c)
a person who derives title to the
goods through or under the
This is not
materially different to the analogous provisions of the former
Practices Act
which provided remedies for the consumer or a person
who acquired the goods from, or derived title to the goods through or under,
Section 271(1)
provides that, if the guarantee under
applies to a supply of goods to
a consumer and is not complied with, then "an affected person in relation to the
goods may, by action
against the manufacturer of the goods, recover damages from
the manufacturer". Section 271(2) excludes the application of s 271(1)
in circumstances that are not presently material. Section 271(3)-(5) make a
similar provision to s 271(1) in relation to other guarantees
apply to a supply of goods to a consumer, namely
(supply of goods by
description),
(repairs and spare parts) and
warranties).
271(6) provides:
"If an affected person in relation to goods has, in accordance with an express
warranty given or made by the manufacturer of the
goods, required the
manufacturer to remedy a failure to comply with a guarantee referred to in
subsection (1), (3) or (5):
(a) by repairing the goods; or
(b) by replacing the goods with goods of an identical type;
then, despite that subsection, the affected person is not entitled to commence
an action under that subsection to recover damages
of a kind referred to in
section 272(1)(a) unless the manufacturer has refused or failed to remedy the
failure, or has failed to
remedy the failure within a reasonable time."
272 is central to these appeals. It provides:
Damages that may be recovered by action against manufacturers of
(1) In an action for damages under this Division, an affected person in relation
to goods is entitled to recover damages for:
(a) any reduction in the
value of the goods, resulting from the failure to comply with the guarantee to
which the action relates,
below whichever of the following prices is lower:
(i) the price paid or payable by the consumer for the goods;
(ii) the average retail price of the goods at the time of supply; and
(b) any loss or damage suffered by the affected person because of the failure to
comply with the guarantee to which the action relates
if it was reasonably
foreseeable that the affected person would suffer such loss or damage as a
result of such a failure.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1)(b), the cost of inspecting and returning the
goods to the manufacturer is taken to be a reasonably
foreseeable loss suffered
by the affected person as a result of the failure to comply with the
(3) Subsection (1)(b) does not apply to loss or damage suffered through a
reduction in the value of the goods."
action for damages against manufacturers of goods under Div 2 must be
commenced "within 3 years after the day on which the affected
person first
became aware, or ought reasonably to have become aware, that the guarantee to
which the action relates has not been
"Damages" and the time of assessment
the Williams appellants and Ms Capic invoked Edelman J's discussion in
Moore v Scenic Tours Pty
of the equivalent
provision to s 272(1)(a) for the suppliers of services. In
his Honour treated that analogous provision as conferring a measure of damages
similar to that measure of damages in contract, being
"the difference between
the value of what was promised and the value of what was
The reduction
referred to in s 272(1)(a) does not precisely correspond to that measure in that
it is determined by reference to the
reduction in the value of the goods
resulting from the failure to comply with the guarantee and the lesser of the
two figures specified
in s 272(1)(a)(i) and (ii).
Nevertheless,
reference to that contractual measure of damages is germane in that it
highlights that Toyota's and Ford's submission
that consumers and affected
persons will be overcompensated if they obtain both a repaired vehicle and a
monetary award under s 272(1)(a)
assumes, as the Full Court found, that
s 272(1)(a) is directed to compensating for loss or damage resulting from
the "reduction in
the value of the goods" as a result of the failure to comply
with the guarantee.
submissions and that assumption only beg the question: what are the "damages" in
s 272(1)(a) being awarded "for"?
have been defined as an "award in money for a civil
While this Court
has referred to their "fundamental character" as
"compensatory",
be a "mistake" to consider that "damages and compensation are synonymous" given
that not all damages awards are
compensatory.
There is no
textual or other support for a construction of s 272(1)(a) that imports a
requirement to establish loss or damage in
addition to the "reduction in the
value of the goods" resulting from the failure to comply with the relevant
guarantee. Section 272(1)(a)
refers to "damages for ... any reduction in
the value of the goods". Section 272(1)(b) confers an entitlement to
"damages for ...
any loss or damage", which would not make sense if "damages"
imported a separate concept of "loss". Other provisions of the ACL distinguish
between "damages"
"loss or damage",
the phrase "damages for any loss or
The phrase "loss
or damage" is defined to include "a reference to
To construe
"damages" in s 272(1)(a) as containing an additional element of loss or
damage would be inconsistent with that usage.
The equivalent provision to s
272(1)(a) for suppliers of goods provides for the recovery of "compensation" for
"any reduction in
the value of the
There is no
difference between "compensation" and "damages" in this context. Otherwise,
where the statutory regime specifies what
the damages and compensation are
"for", there is no justification for importing an additional requirement of loss
or damage. The
statutory provisions provide their own measure of "damages".
consideration of the extrinsic materials referable to s 272(1)(a) supports
this construction.
statutory predecessor to Div 2 of
provisions creating separate rights of action against manufacturers and
importers of goods in respect of different non-compliances
with various
conditions, including goods being of "unmerchantable quality" (as relied on in
provisions expressly provided a consumer or a person who acquired the goods
from, or derived title to the goods through or
under, the consumer with a right
of recovery for "loss or damage" for those
non-compliances.
describing the effect of s 272(1)(a), the Explanatory Memorandum to the
introduction of the ACL noted that the "damages that are
recoverable from a
manufacturer of goods include the reduction in value of goods below the lower of
the price paid or the average
retail price of the goods at the time of the
supply" and added that "[t]his approach ensures that manufacturers are not
to provide excessive compensation to consumers if suppliers charge high
prices for goods".
was no suggestion in the Explanatory Memorandum of any additional requirement to
show loss or damage arising from that reduction
in value of the goods. If there
were such a requirement, it would undermine the simplification of the remedies
sought to be achieved
by the ACL. It would also undermine the intention to limit
the manufacturer's exposure under s 272(1)(a), as the loss or damage
from the reduction in value below the lower of the price paid or
average retail price could exceed that price.
it is appreciated that s 272(1)(a) provides its own measure of damages,
then the Full Court's concerns about avoiding "over-compensation"
by departing
from the time of supply in assessing damages under s 272(1)(a) fall
There is no scope
for any alteration of the date at which the reduction in value is to be assessed
to avoid "over‑compensation".
Section 272(1)(a)
is exclusively directed to the time of supply to a "consumer". It would be
incongruous for s 272(1)(a)(i) to refer
to the price paid by the consumer
and s 272(1)(a)(ii) to adopt the average retail price at the time of some
other supply. Similarly,
it would be incongruous for s 272(1)(a)(i) to
award damages for the reduction in value of the goods resulting from a breach of
guarantee that occurred at the time of supply to the consumer below a level
fixed by reference to that time, yet somehow ascertain
that value at some other
time. "[T]he consumer" in s 272(1)(a)(i) must be referring to the consumer who
acquires the goods described
The Full Court erred in construing
s 272(1)(a) by allowing for the assessment of damages at a time other than
the time of supply
to the consumer.
"Reduction in value" and
repairs to defects
contrast to s 272(1)(b), the measure of damages provided for in
s 272(1)(a) of the ACL involves an objective assessment of the
in the value of the goods" as opposed to any particular harm occasioned to the
affected person, which, subject to s 272(3),
is addressed by
s 272(1)(b).
concept of "value" in s 272(1)(a) is not defined. There is a distinction
described as "sometimes difficult to draw, but [nevertheless]
fundamental" between "market value" on the one hand and "real" or "intrinsic"
value on the other.
Market value is assessed by reference to the price that a purchaser would have
paid at the relevant date to a vendor, both of whom
are willing but not anxious
to trade, with all circumstances subsequently arising
With "real" or
"intrinsic" value, assessments are commonly made taking into account all matters
known at the trial that illuminate
the value of the goods as at the relevant
earlier date, which in this context is the time of
was common ground in these appeals and in
that in ascertaining the
reduction in value for the purposes of s 272(1)(a), one attributes
knowledge of the relevant hidden defect
at the time of supply to a hypothetical
reasonable consumer, including the likelihood of its consequences materialising.
from that point, the parties differed strongly. The Williams appellants
contended that the only relevance of the availability of
a repair is to confirm
the existence of the possibility, rather than availability, of a repair at the
time of supply. Ms Capic went
further and submitted that, while it might be
accepted that a hypothetical reasonable consumer would purchase a vehicle with
that some defects might be repaired, there could be no attribution of
any knowledge to the parties of any information known after
the time of supply
other than the nature of the defect and the likelihood of its consequences
materialising.
Toyota contended that all knowledge concerning the defect,
including its capacity to be repaired, should be brought to account as
time of supply. Ford contended that the effectiveness, cost, availability and
timing of a repair is a characteristic of the
defect itself and is associated
with the "intrinsic quality" of the vehicle, knowledge of which is imputed to a
reasonable consumer
considering the state and condition of the goods for the
purposes of
of the ACL.
resolution of this dispute flows from the conclusion that later acquired
knowledge of the capacity to repair a defect (including
a hidden defect) or
ameliorate its consequences as well as when, how and at what cost those repairs
or ameliorative steps would be
undertaken cannot be divorced from any analysis
of what constitutes the relevant "defect". Upon being informed that particular
had a defect that carried a particular propensity to cause the goods to
perform sub‑optimally, a hypothetical reasonable consumer
acquiring such
goods could be expected to inquire whether the defect could be remedied and, if
so, the effectiveness, cost, inconvenience
and timing of a repair. If that
information was known at the time of trial and not brought to account at the
time of supply, then
there would truly be a risk of the consumer receiving more
or less than could be justified on the basis of the facts then known.
would receive less if the court awarded damages on a flawed understanding that,
at the time of supply, repair of such
defects at a moderate cost was possible
when subsequent events revealed the defects were in fact unfixable and would
receive more
if subsequent events demonstrated that the defects could be fixed
quickly at no cost.
result is that, at least so far as a consideration of any defects (including any
hidden defects) is concerned, the analysis of
the damages for the reduction in
value provided for in s 272(1)(a) invokes a concept of "value" that is
similar or analogous to the
concept of "intrinsic" value referred to in
Valuers (Central Qld) Pty Ltd v Astonland Pty
The Williams
appellants were critical of relying on that concept because it is often invoked
in a context where loss or damage is
being compensated
s 272(1)(a) establishes its own measure. So much can be accepted, but the
above approach does not follow from a direct translation
of the concept of
"intrinsic" value referred to in
HTW Valuers
into s 272(1)(a).
Instead, it follows from an analysis of what knowledge is attributed to a
reasonable consumer as part of the assessment
of the extent of non-compliance
with the guarantee of acceptable quality in
, which is compensated
for by the measure of damages provided for in s 272(1)(a).
Full Court correctly observed that it was "appropriate to use the known
information as to the availability of a fix at the time
of trial to reach a
conclusion as to the reduction in
However, the
Full Court was otherwise in error in departing from the time of supply as the
appropriate time to assess damages and
considering the loss in the utility of
the vehicles over their working life until a fix became available. In assessing
the reduction
in value at the time of supply, it was necessary to take into
account the "availability" of the 2020 Field Fix, but that analysis
required taking into account how long after the time of supply that fix would
become practically available as well as the inconvenience
and cost that would be
occasioned to a hypothetical reasonable consumer in the meantime. Any particular
cost and inconvenience occasioned
to an individual consumer above and beyond
that assumed by a reasonable consumer at the time of supply is potentially
recoverable
s 272(1)(b).
Leaving aside the circumstances in which s 271(6) is invoked, a consumer
who refuses to take up an effective repair that is practically
available is in
no different position to a consumer who did.
this case, leaving aside any particular inconvenience or cost occasioned to
Direct Claim Services, it seems inherently unlikely
that a hypothetical
reasonable consumer of its vehicle in 2016 would have paid the same purchase
price as Direct Claim Services had
they been informed of the existence and
nature of the core defect, the likelihood of the defect consequences
materialising, the likely
number of attendances that might be required to obtain
a fix and the fact that no effective fix would be available until at least
and a half years later. Ultimately, however, this will be a matter for the
primary judge to assess. It follows that a remittal
may yield different
assessments for different group members, although the only factor that is likely
to vary is the time between
supply to an individual consumer and the practical
availability of an effective repair.
Materialisation of the
defect consequences
that the proceedings will be remitted to the primary judge for the reassessment
of damages, it is necessary to explain the
relevance, if any, of the
materialisation of the defect consequences to that process.
relevant defect in the present case was not the mere propensity for the defect
consequences to
materialise
Rather, like the yellow spool solder in
, the core defect was the
design of the DPF System itself and other related faults. In both this case and
, the defect and risk of the relevant defect consequences
materialising rendered the goods in breach of the relevant statutory guarantee.
In such cases, it is irrelevant to an assessment of damages under
s 272(1)(a) whether those consequences materialised beyond what
events may demonstrate was the actual propensity at the time of supply. The
materialisation of the risks carried by the
defect does not add anything to a
hypothetical reasonable consumer's knowledge of the defect or the goods at the
time of supply.
example, a vehicle may have a defect in the design of its braking system that
carries a 50% risk of the brakes failing in five
years. All other matters being
equal, there will be no difference between the damages payable for two such
vehicles under s 272(1)(a)
which were purchased for the same amount on the
same day even if the brakes subsequently fail on one vehicle but not the other.
fact that the brakes failed on one vehicle but not the other does not of
itself affect the conclusion that, at the time of supply,
both vehicles were
affected by the same defect that carried the same propensity to yield brake
failure and rendered both vehicles
non‑compliant with the statutory
guarantee. The owner of the vehicle whose brakes subsequently failed may be able
"any loss or damage" suffered from that failure under
s 272(1)(b), although those damages would be reduced under s 272(3) by
amount of damages payable under s 272(1)(a) that are referable to the
50% likelihood of the brakes failing.
Section 271(6) and affected
the Williams appellants and Ms Capic contended that s 271(6) of the ACL
supported their respective contentions concerning the
relevance of a
subsequently available repair for a defect to the assessment of damages under
s 272(1)(a). They contended that s 271(6)
was the exclusive means by
which the capacity of the manufacturer to repair the goods might impact on the
recovery of damages under
s 272(1)(a). That submission should be rejected.
Section 271(6)
is only engaged if the manufacturer gave an "express warranty". The provision
appears to provide manufacturers with
an incentive to comply with that warranty
in that, if it is invoked by the relevant affected person and complied with by
the manufacturer
within a reasonable time, the manufacturer can avoid exposure
to an award of damages under s 272(1)(a) in favour of the affected
who had their goods repaired or replaced (but not under s 272(1)(b)). In a
case where there is no such warranty, or the warranty
cannot be invoked, then
s 271(6) cannot be engaged. There is nothing in the text of the ACL or the
extrinsic materials accompanying
its introduction that would support attributing
to s 271(6) the construction contended for by the Williams appellants and
support of its submission that s 272(1)(a) is only directed to recovery for
loss and damage resulting from the "reduction in the
value of the goods" for
failing to comply with a statutory guarantee such as in
, Ford pointed
to an apparent anomaly arising from the conferral of rights to invoke the
remedies in Div 2 of
of the ACL on "affected person[s] in
relation to goods". As noted, the definition of an "affected person ... in
relation to goods"
has three limbs: (a) a consumer who acquires the goods; (b) a
person who acquires the goods from the consumer (other than for the
purposes of
resupply); or (c) a person who derives title to the goods through or under the
contended that, if damages under s 272(1)(a) are not compensatory in the
sense that some loss or damage had to be demonstrated
in addition to a reduction
in the value of the goods, then successive owners of the same goods would each
be entitled to recover
an award of damages under s 272(1)(a) calculated by
reference to the reduction in value arising from the breach of the relevant
at the time of the original supply to the consumer.
assumption behind Ford's submission is that the entitlement to invoke all of the
remedies in Div 2 of
is maintainable by all persons who satisfy the
definition of "affected person ... in relation to goods" regardless of whether
have disposed of the goods. If that is so, then the spectre of a
manufacturer facing multiple actions for the same reduction in value
goods from successive owners of the same goods arises regardless of the proper
construction of the phrase "damages for ...
any reduction in the value of the
goods, resulting from the failure to comply" in s 272(1)(a).
three limbs of the definition of "affected person ... in relation to goods" are
separated by "or".
that definition is read into each of ss 271 and
provisions are ambiguous as to whether the right to invoke those remedies is
only conferred on the affected person who currently
has title or ownership of
is conferred on all persons who satisfy the definition of
affected persons in relation to the same goods. If the position is the
then all rights of recovery under s 271 for both types of damages referred to in
s 272(1)(a)
(b) would run with the goods and be lost on disposal.
That construction would remove the possibility of indeterminate liability,
although, as will be explained, the removal of the right to recover damages for
consequential loss under s 272(1)(b) in those circumstances
inconsistent with the balance of the statutory scheme.
better view is that, within the confines of the definition of an "affected
person ... in relation to goods", the right to invoke
the remedy for reduction
in value of the goods in s 272(1)(a) against a manufacturer runs with title or
ownership of the goods but
that claims for consequential loss by affected
persons in s 272(1)(b) are not tied to the affected person's title or ownership
the goods. There are various textual and contextual matters that support that
construction.
the context of s 272(1)(a), the reference to "the value of the goods", when read
with the words of the chapeau concerning a recovery
of damages by "an affected
person in relation to goods", is at least capable of implying that the damages
are for the reduction in
the value of the
affected person's
that construction, if the relevant "affected person in relation to goods" does
not currently have title or ownership of
the goods, then they have no remedy
under s 272(1)(a). By contrast, s 272(1)(b) allows claims for "any
loss or damage
suffered by the affected person
" (emphasis added). The
reference to "the affected person" in this context is to the affected person who
invokes ss 271 and 272 and
includes all categories of "affected person[s] in
relation to goods", even those who no longer have title or ownership of them,
the affected person has suffered some consequential loss because of the
failure to comply with the relevant guarantee. The loss of
the right to recover
under s 272(1)(a) that accompanies the loss of title or ownership of the
relevant goods is consistent with s
272(1)(a) vindicating the interest of the
current owner in having goods that conformed with the relevant guarantee at the
supply to the consumer. Where a person no longer has title or ownership
of the goods but is "an affected person in relation to goods",
that person may
be able to recover any relevant loss on resale, but that would be pursuant to s
272(1)(b) and would depend on the
circumstances of the resale.
construction is supported by s 271(6). As noted, when "an affected person in
relation to goods" invokes any express warranty
in the circumstances referred to
in s 271(6), they are precluded from commencing an action to recover damages of
the kind referred
to in s 272(1)(a), but not damages of the kind referred
to in s 272(1)(b).
Section 271(6), in terms, does not preclude an affected person who had their
goods repaired or replaced from recovering any consequential
loss they suffered
under s 272(1)(b). As a practical matter, the only person who could require a
manufacturer to repair or remedy
the failure is the person who has title or
ownership of the particular goods at a particular time. If all rights under ss
272 cease with loss of title or ownership of the relevant goods, then an
affected person who had their goods replaced under s 271(6)
would lose their
right to recover damages of the kind referred to in s 272(1)(a)
as they would have ceased to own the goods. Those consequences could not have
been intended.
is a wider problem with the proposition that the capacity to recover damages
under s 272(1)(b) ceases with the loss of title
or ownership of the relevant
goods. It would mean that, in the common example of an affected person whose
goods were so defective
that they were consumed, destroyed or sold for scrap,
that person would lose their right to claim for any consequential loss they
have suffered. Alternatively, an affected person whose goods were defective
would be required to retain the goods until the finalisation
of the claim
against the manufacturer, including any litigation, so as to avoid losing their
right to claim any consequential loss.
That would not provide a cost-effective
and simple remedy.
statutory regime that denies consumers of goods rights of recovery against
manufacturers for consequential loss suffered because
the goods the manufacturer
produced were consumed, destroyed or sold or because they no longer have title
or ownership of the goods
would be of limited utility.
construction is also supported by the overall scheme of
of the ACL.
As explained earlier in these reasons, s 271 is found in Div 2 of
which is concerned with "[r]emedies relating to guarantees". Division 1 of
is concerned with "[a]ction[s] against suppliers". Section 259(3) relevantly
provides that a consumer may reject goods and, by action
against a supplier,
recover compensation "for any reduction in the value of the goods below the
price paid or payable by the consumer
for the goods". Then, the liability of the
supplier for consequential loss under s 259(4) applies even if the consumer has
the goods so that "property in those goods revests in the
274(1) then provides for a right of indemnification of suppliers by
manufacturers. The indemnity covers claims made by consumers
for consequential
loss against suppliers under s 259(4), but only where "the manufacturer is or
would be liable under section 271
to pay damages to the consumer for the
loss or damage
entitlement to recover consequential loss under s 272(1)(b) were to be lost in
circumstances where a consumer who acquired
goods from a supplier ceases to have
title or ownership of the goods (because, for example, they have been rejected,
replaced, sold
or destroyed), then the consumer may be able to recover
consequential loss from the supplier under s 259(4), but the supplier would
precluded from obtaining indemnity for the consumer's claim from the
manufacturer under s 274(1). In that event, the manufacturer
would not be
"liable under section 271 to pay damages to the consumer for the same loss or
damage" (being that provided for in s
272(1)(b)).
result would be irrational.
little assistance on this question of construction can be gained from
considering the extrinsic materials. The wording "affected
person ... in
relation to goods" was drawn from earlier provisions in the
Trade Practices
. Former s 74D of the
Trade Practices Act
was inserted in
1978 and extended the right to seek redress for any loss or damage from the
consumer to "the consumer or person who
... derives title to the goods [through
or under the
consumer]".
parliamentary debates concerning that amendment, the relevant Minister stated
that its effect was that "a manufacturer's liability,
where his goods are of
unmerchantable quality, will be
to the successors in title to a
consumer" (emphasis
Explanatory Memorandum was in similar
This statement
is ambiguous as to whether the extension of a manufacturer's liability was at
the expense of or in addition to the
rights of the original consumer. The same
ambiguity attaches to the cognate provisions introduced in 1986, which conferred
of redress on "the consumer"
"a person who acquires the goods
from, or derives title to the goods through or under, the
in the extrinsic materials accompanying the introduction of the ACL reveals that
any consideration was given to the interaction
between the new remedies
conferred by Div 2 of
and the definition of "affected person". To
the contrary, the Explanatory Memorandum to the Bill wrongly described Div 2 of
as providing that "consumer[s] may recover damages from
manufacturers in respect of failures that relate to acceptable
Not much can
be gained from this reference to "consumers" rather than "affected persons",
save to observe that there was no statement
that consumers lose all rights
against a manufacturer of faulty goods if the goods are replaced, sold or
otherwise disposed of.
The Williams appeal
light of the above, the first two of the Williams appellants' three grounds of
appeal can be dealt with briefly. The Full Court
did not err in failing to
assess the reduction in the value of the goods by reference to the true value of
the goods at the time
of supply and in only using information acquired
thereafter as hindsight to confirm what could be foreseen at the time of supply.
As discussed above, the correct approach was to assess the reduction in value at
the time of supply by reference to all the information
that was known at the
trial concerning the core defect, including its capacity to be repaired as well
as when, how and at what cost
a repair might take place. However, the Williams
appellants' contention that the Full Court erred in construing s 272(1)(a)
to permit departing from the time of supply as the time of the assessment
should be upheld. As explained, the error in so finding
followed in part from
the Full Court's erroneous approach to the concept of "damages" in
s 272(1)(a). Otherwise, leaving aside the
challenge to the Full Court's
conclusion that a 10% reduction in value was warranted, the errors in the Full
Court's approach, including
its reliance on the "utility" of the relevant
vehicles, have already been described.
result of the Williams appellants' partial success on these issues does not
yield a restoration of the primary judge's orders
and findings as his Honour did
not assess damages under s 272(1)(a) in accordance with the approach outlined
above. Instead, the
matter will need to be remitted to his Honour for
reassessment in accordance with this judgment.
noted, the Williams appellants also challenged the Full Court's conclusion that
the primary judge erred in assessing the reduction
in value of the relevant
vehicles as 17.5%. Given that both the primary judge's assessment and the Full
Court's review of that assessment
were not undertaken in accordance with the
above approach, it is not strictly necessary to address this challenge. However,
scope for further argument about the status of the Full Court's
findings concerning the primary judge's approach, it can be addressed
Williams appellants identified four errors on the part of the Full Court in
overturning this finding of the primary judge. The
first error was said to be
the Full Court's construction of s 272(1), which, as explained above, was
an erroneous construction. The
second error was said to be the Full Court's
conclusion that the primary judge did not take into account, at the time of the
of the relevant vehicles, the possibility that a repair for the core
defect might have become available. The Full Court erred in
attributing that
failure to the primary
The primary
judge correctly described Mr Cuthbert as having had regard to the possibility
that there may have existed purchasers
who would have purchased Direct Claim
Services' vehicle "in the hope that they could find someone to fix the [c]ore
remaining errors contended for by the Williams appellants concern the Full
Court's consideration of the primary judge's treatment
of the balance of
Mr Cuthbert's evidence. The Full Court found that the primary judge erred
in not treating Mr Cuthbert's evidence
with "considerable circumspection"
because Mr Cuthbert supposedly focussed on the "salvage value" of the
relevant vehicles and because
of his "associated (implicit) view that the
vehicle was so defective it needed to be repaired before it had any real utility
motor vehicle".
his report, Mr Cuthbert concluded that a reduction in the value of Direct Claim
Services' vehicle by approximately 23.5% to 27%
was appropriate. The primary
judge characterised Mr Cuthbert's report as involving three steps, namely
having regard to: various
factors affecting the seriousness of the core
possibility that there may have existed purchasers who would have purchased the
vehicle "in the hope that they could find someone
to fix the [c]ore
"salvage value" of the vehicle, which would have been approximately 37% to 40%
less than the new vehicle price "as a floor
price (that is, a price discount
that was the absolute
characterisation accurately reflected Mr Cuthbert's report. In
cross‑examination, it was suggested to Mr Cuthbert that
assumed that the vehicle was so unfit that the "best [the owner] can do is ...
send it off to a salvage auction house". Mr
Cuthbert denied that was so.
primary judge noted and accepted Mr Cuthbert's rejection of that
suggestion.
primary judge observed that Mr Cuthbert's evidence had "some force", but
also accepted that "a number of the criticisms directed
to its accuracy and
reliability also ha[d] merit" before arriving at a range below that suggested by
Mr Cuthbert, namely between
the primary judge's assessment was in part based on an assessment of Mr
Cuthbert's evidence, which his Honour heard as it was
given. No proper basis for
setting aside the primary judge's acceptance of Mr Cuthbert's denials of what
was put to him was attempted
in the Full
Otherwise, the
only basis provided by the Full Court for interfering with the primary judge's
assessment was its incorrect characterisation
of the reliance Mr Cuthbert placed
on the "salvage value" of the relevant vehicles. The primary judge correctly
described the effect
of Mr Cuthbert's evidence. Further, his Honour did not
simply adopt Mr Cuthbert's evidence. Instead, his Honour only gave it some
weight. No error was demonstrated in his Honour's approach.
ground of the Williams appeal should also be upheld.
sole ground of appeal contended that no damages were recoverable under
s 272(1)(a) of the ACL where there was "no ongoing
reduction in value at
the time of trial due to the availability of a repair free of charge" (ie, the
2020 Field Fix). Leaving aside
the difficulty in relying on the finding that the
value of the relevant vehicles was "restore[d]", this ground fails because an
of the reduction in value at the time of the trial does not address
the period of time between the time of supply and when a repair
is available as
well as the likely effect of the defect on the use of the vehicles in the
meantime. As noted, Toyota adopted a proposition
to that effect as its
alternative case and provided orders in an Amended Notice of Appeal reflecting
that alternative. To the extent
that alternative case has been accepted, it will
be reflected in the remittal order made in the Williams appeal. However,
sole ground of appeal fails, and thus its appeal should be
Relief and costs
orders of the Full Court varying the primary judge's assessment of damages and
answering common questions should be set aside.
Those matters should be remitted
to the primary judge to be determined in accordance with these reasons. Although
neither party achieved
complete success in the appeals, most of the arguments of
the Williams appellants were accepted. The Williams appellants should receive
half the costs of their appeal and Toyota should pay the costs of its
unsuccessful appeal. The Full Court ordered that each party
pay their own costs
of the appeal because each party enjoyed "a substantial measure of success" on
various issues.
order should not be disturbed.
following orders should be made:
(1) Appeal dismissed.
(2) The appellant pay the respondents' costs of the appeal.
(1) Appeal allowed.
(2) Set aside order 3 of the orders of the Full Court of the Federal Court
of Australia made on 27 March 2023.
(3) Set aside order 2 of the orders of the Full
Court of the Federal Court of Australia made on 12 May 2023 but only in
the amended answers to questions 26 to 35 posed in Sch 2 to
the orders of the Federal Court of Australia made on 16 May 2022.
(4) In lieu of so much of order 2 of the orders of the Full Court of the
Federal Court of Australia made on 12 May 2023 that answers
questions 26 to 35 posed in Sch 2 to the orders of the Federal Court
of Australia made on 16 May 2022, also order that the primary
judge's answers to
those questions be set aside.
(5) The matter be remitted to the primary judge for:
(a) the reassessment of reduction in value damages under ss 271(1) and
272(1)(a) of the
Australian Consumer Law
and damages for excess GST under
ss 271(1) and 272(1)(b) of the
Australian Consumer Law
in accordance
with the reasons of the High Court of Australia; and
(b) the provision of answers to questions 26 to 35 posed in Sch 2 to
the orders of the Federal Court of Australia made on 16 May
accordance with the reasons of the High Court of Australia.
(6) The respondent pay half of the appellants' costs of the appeal.
Concurrence with the joint reasons
agree generally with the joint reasons of Gageler CJ, Gordon, Steward,
Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ. These additional reasons address
justifications for, and provide examples that illustrate, the difference
recognised by the joint reasons between the two types
of remedy provided for by
Parliament in s 272(1)(a) and s 272(1)(b) of the
Consumer Law
failure to appreciate the difference between these two measures, and to
recognise two of the different relevant senses in which
"damages" can be used,
usually leads to the error of treating damages as concerned only with loss (the
subject matter of only s 272(1)(b)).
A related failure is the failure to
recognise two of the different relevant senses in which "compensation" can be
used (the central
Capic v Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty
). The central
point of the reasoning below, and of the examples, is to illuminate this error
and to provide, in part, "a much needed
emancipation from the curious and
cramping notion that compensation for loss is the only thing a victim may
reasonably expect of
a law of civil
The examples
include those raised in argument, which may have been based upon the many and
varied circumstances of group members
in this class action.
different types of remedy
The context of these appeals
consumer guarantee that was breached in this case, from which the remedial
issues arise, is
Australian Consumer Law
, which is the
guarantee that goods are of acceptable quality. The nature of the damages
remedies against a manufacturer for breach
can be understood in the
broader context in which those remedies appear in the
Australian Consumer
. The remedies against a manufacturer for breach of
contained in
, which is concerned with "Remedies relating to
guarantees".
has three Divisions. Division 1 is concerned
with "Action against suppliers". Division 2 is concerned with "Action for
damages against
manufacturers of goods". Division 3 is entitled
"Miscellaneous" but, importantly, includes a provision for "Indemnification of
by manufacturers".
statutory consumer guarantees, and the remedies for breach of them in
Australian Consumer Law
, replaced the scheme of
so-called "implied" conditions and warranties that were imposed as terms of
consumer contracts by the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) and State
and Territory fair trading legislation. But the scheme of rights arising from
the statutory consumer guarantees in
Australian Consumer Law
intended to be "broadly similar to those that were implied under pre-existing
By setting out
the remedies, rather than leaving the remedies to the law of contract (with any
extensions of privity of contract
such as to provide for liability of
manufacturers), the
Australian Consumer Law
aimed to "reduce costs for
businesses and consumers when they seek to assert, or defend, their
the remedies in
Australian Consumer Law
precisely replicate the common law model of damages for breach of contract, the
basic architecture concerning breach and remedies
is the same, as was intended.
For instance, as the joint reasons explain, the notion of a defect in
Australian Consumer Law
appears to draw upon the
common law approach to hidden defects in the context of breach of contract by
supply of goods that lack merchantable
without the use of the term "merchantable quality", which was said to be
the remedies for breach of contract upon which
is based, the
consumer has broadly two different types of remedy under
Australian Consumer
The first is
a performance-based remedy to rectify the failure to comply with a
second is a loss-based remedy to rectify the consequences of the failure to
comply with the
difference between the two is a difference between attempting to rectify
contravening conduct and attempting to rectify the consequences
of contravening
Damages at common law and in s 272(1) of the
Consumer Law
term "damages" can mislead people into thinking that it is only a remedy for
"damage" or "loss". But "damages", in its legal
usage, has never been so
confined. Relevantly to these appeals, "damages" can be used to describe a money
award for a wrong which
serves as a performance-based remedy separate from
whether any loss has been suffered. It can also be used to describe other money
awards for wrongs which are not concerned with loss, such as "nominal damages",
"restitutionary damages", or "exemplary damages".
too, the term "compensation" can be misleading. Although that term is most
commonly associated with rectifying or providing an
equivalent to
"compensation"
has also been used to describe a money award for wrongdoing which serves as a
performance-based
The genus-like
nature of the concepts of damages and compensation should not distract from the
existence of the two different species
of each that are relevant to these
appeals. Importantly, performance-based damages, unlike loss-based damages, are
not concerned
with any loss suffered by a plaintiff.
the area of defective provision of building work, it is well established at
common law that the performance-based remedy of damages
can be "the reasonable
cost of rectifying the departure or defect" even where the work resulted in a
building that is "no less valuable"
than that which had been contracted
observed, the remedy "reflects the importance that the law of contract attaches
to the plaintiff's performance
the area of breach of a contract to supply goods, where replacement has not been
provided by the party in
an alternative
method of rectifying the breach at common law is through the provision of a sum
of money as damages, assessed at the
time of breach, representing the lost
economic value of performance due to the breach. As the Williams appellants
correctly submitted,
the orthodox approach to the common law award of damages as
a performance-based remedy was summarised by Keane J in
"The value to be paid ... is assessed at the date of breach of contract ... to
give the purchaser the economic value of the performance
of the contract at the
time that performance was promised. In this way, the measure of damages captures
for the purchaser the benefit
of the bargain and so compensates the purchaser
for the loss of that benefit".
Consistently
with this orthodox approach, the
Australian Consumer Law
performance-based remedies, including replacement of goods and performance-based
damages. Where the performance-based
remedy takes the form of performance-based
damages, the award is one of compensation for the monetary difference between
of the performance that should have been received and the performance
that was received. These performance-based damages can therefore
described, in the language of the primary judge, as "reduction in value
remedy of performance-based damages or reduction in value damages is assessed by
reference to the construct of a "reasonable
consumer" who is "fully acquainted
with the state and condition of the goods (including any hidden defects of the
similar to an approach that has elsewhere been described as concerned with
"intrinsic"
albeit without clearly distinguishing between an assessment of damages that are
a performance-based remedy and those that
are a loss-based remedy.
common law, where replacement has not been provided by the party in breach,
damages amounting to the economic value of the performance
of the contract, as a
performance-based remedy, are usually assessed at the time of
even if later
independent events mean that no financial loss is
The time of
breach is usually the time at which the price was paid and title
same broad approach is followed by the
Australian Consumer Law
Under the relevant provisions of the
Australian Consumer Law
the time for assessment of performance-based damages is the time of supply
of the goods for a price that is paid or
At the time
of supply of defective goods, the state of science might not have permitted
anyone to identify the defect. But the full
acquaintance of the reasonable
consumer is based upon any and all conditions that are "inherent in the thing
limited to what is known or even knowable at the time of supply. At the time of
supply, the state of science might have permitted
the defect to be identified
but might not have permitted anyone to identify the manner in which the defect
could be repaired or the
time that it would take to make a repair. Nevertheless,
the assessment of performance-based damages is based on the best scientific
knowledge at the time of trial, as applied at the date of supply.
follows that where a latent defect exists at the date of supply, and the defect
would not have had a known repair if the defect
had been patent, the length of
time required to develop a repair is attributable to the nature and significance
of the defect and
is a necessary consideration in the assessment of
performance-based damages. But where a later delay in repair arises only from
not inherent in the defect itself, such as supply chain issues or labour
shortages, that delay will not be relevant to the assessment
performance-based damages.
contrast with performance-based remedies, loss-based remedies to rectify the
consequences of the breach ("consequential
) are necessarily
assessed by reference to facts that are proved to exist at any time from the
failure to comply with the guarantee
until the time of judgment. It has been
held in this Court that the damages award in such cases follows the "universal"
a plaintiff cannot recover more than he or she has
A loss involves
any "adverse effect experienced by the plaintiff either on their mind, on the
way they conduct their business or
live their life, or on their financial
the award of a loss-based damages remedy under the relevant
Consumer Law
provisions, the facts proved must establish that any loss or
damage suffered is "because of the failure to comply with the guarantee"
that it "was reasonably foreseeable" that such loss or damage would be suffered
"as a result of such a
The relevant
provisions in the
Australian Consumer Law
for this loss-based remedy thus
contain at least two important limits: a causal limit (the failure to comply
with the guarantee must
cause the loss) and a remoteness limit (the loss or
damage must be reasonably foreseeable).
is an obvious potential for overlap between performance-based damages and
loss-based damages. For instance, where defective
goods are supplied in breach
Australian Consumer Law
, the difference in value of
the goods reflected in an award of performance-based damages will take into
account matters such as the
cost and inconvenience of repair expected at the
time of supply by a reasonable consumer with full knowledge of the inherent
of the defect. But the measure of performance-based damages is not
concerned with the actual consequences experienced by the particular
after supply, other than as evidence of what might reasonably have been expected
at the time of supply by a reasonable consumer
with full knowledge of the
defect. If cost and inconvenience are experienced by the actual consumer then
that is loss that is suffered—albeit
loss that is not recoverable unless
it exceeds the amount of the award of performance-based damages, since an award
of performance-based
damages would have the effect of rectifying the actual loss
to that extent.
the performance-based remedies for breach of a consumer guarantee are available
Australian Consumer Law
against a supplier of goods, they apply
to a consumer
person to whom a consumer has made a gift of the
performance-based remedies available for a breach of
by a supplier
include: (i) in various circumstances, the consumer (or the donee)
rejecting the goods;
or (ii) payment by the supplier of "compensation for any reduction in the
value of the goods below the price paid or payable by the
consumer [or the
donee] for the
assumption underlying each performance-based remedy is that the consumer or
donee retains title to the goods. That retention
of title provides a connection
with the supplier in the absence of any contract. In relation to the remedy of
rejection (with an
entitlement to a refund or
replacement
consumer or donee is not entitled to reject the goods and obtain a replacement
if the consumer or donee loses, destroys or
disposes of the
assumption applies to the compensation remedy for the reduction in value of the
goods below the price paid. That performance-based
remedy of damages for
reduction in value is an
alternative
remedies such as rejection and replacement of the
and naturally
includes the same constraints.
further reason that underlies the requirement that a consumer retain title to
the goods in order to obtain a performance-based
remedy is that s 259(6)
provides that a consumer (and, by s 266, a donee) is entitled to accumulate
recovery of both (i) the performance-based
remedy of reduction in value
compensation; and (ii) compensation for loss. In many circumstances, the
consequential loss incurred
by a consumer or donee will be independent of the
reduction in value of the goods. But not always. If the performance-based remedy
were not confined to circumstances in which the consumer or donee retained title
to the goods, then double recovery might be possible
by a consumer or donee
recovering compensation for the reduction in value of the goods below the price
paid on supply, as well as
consequential loss on a resale. Hence,
s 259(3)(b) is concerned with "any reduction in the value of the
consumer's or donee's
contrast with performance-based remedies, the loss-based remedy permits recovery
of damages for any reasonably foreseeable "loss
or damage suffered" by the
consumer or donee "because of the failure to comply with the
guarantee".
performance-based remedies, there is no basis for any implication that would
confine recovery to circumstances where the
consumer or donee retains title to
the goods. Indeed, apart from instances of physical inconvenience or loss of
other most likely scenarios where it would be reasonably foreseeable that loss
or damage would be suffered by the consumer
or donee is where the consumer or
donee sells or disposes of the defective goods at a loss due to the defect.
Manufacturers
remedies against manufacturers under Div 2 of
Australian Consumer Law
, for breach of the guarantee in
the same broad pattern as the remedies against suppliers in Div 1. One
apparent difference, however, concerns the person
who can claim the remedy. As
explained above, under Div 1 an action can be brought against a supplier of
goods by a consumer or by
a donee of a consumer. In broad terms, a supply of
goods to a consumer is, with some exceptions, the supply to a person who pays
less than a particular sum to acquire the goods, or who acquires goods of a kind
ordinarily acquired for personal, domestic or household
consumption.
contrast, s 271(1) permits an action to be brought against a manufacturer
by any "affected person". An affected person, in relation
to goods, includes a
consumer who acquires the goods but, rather than extending also to a donee who
receives a gift from a consumer,
it extends to a person who
goods from a consumer. An affected person is defined
consumer who acquires the goods"; (ii) "a person who acquires the goods
from the consumer (other than for the purpose of re-supply)"
(described in the
extrinsic materials as a "successor[] in title to a
(iii) "a person who derives title to the goods through or under the
consumer" (which extends to a person such as a liquidator
whose rights in
relation to goods are derived through or under a company's
proposal recommended by the 1984 Green Paper on reforms to the
Practices Act
(the statutory predecessor to the
Australian Consumer
), that "acquire" should be expanded "to include acquisition by way of
gift", was never
performance-based remedies against manufacturers include repair and replacement
of the goods where an express warranty has been
alternative
damages for any reduction in the value of the goods (although calculated by
reference to a slightly different formula to
ensure that the manufacturer is not
prejudiced by any sale above the average retail price of the
). For the same
reasons as relate to the provisions in relation to the performance-based remedy
of damages against a supplier, the
assumption underlying the performance-based
remedy of damages against a manufacturer is that the claim for a reduction in
only be brought when the affected person has title to the goods. The
text of s 272(1)(a) is concerned with "any reduction in the
value of the
affected person's
to loss-based damages claims against a manufacturer, like such claims against a
supplier, s 272(1)(b) permits recovery of "reasonably
foreseeable ... loss
or damage" suffered by the affected person "because of the failure to comply
with the guarantee". Again, like
the loss-based remedies against suppliers, a
claim under s 272(1)(b) could not have been intended to be premised upon an
person (such as a consumer) retaining title to the goods. For instance,
upon sale or destruction of the goods, an affected person
does not lose their
right to recover reasonably foreseeable consequential losses that have been
suffered as a consequence of the
manufacturer's breach.
the condition of holding title to goods that applies to the award of
performance-based remedies against
of goods, the need for an
affected person to have title to the goods to bring a performance-based claim
manufacturer
under s 272(1)(a) ensures that the affected
person cannot obtain double recovery by an award of performance-based damages
reduction in value of the goods under s 272(1)(a) combined with
recovery of consequential loss on resale under s 272(1)(b). But there
remains potential for overlap between performance-based damages under
s 272(1)(a) and loss-based damages under s 272(1)(b). For instance,
defect in goods might cause their value to fall because of a loss of amenity
which would be expected by a reasonable consumer with
full knowledge of all
aspects and effects of the defect at the time of supply. When that loss of
amenity actually occurs for an affected
person with title to the goods, the
affected person cannot recover damages for the loss of amenity as consequential
loss because
the recovery of performance-based damages will already have had the
incidental effect of compensating the affected person for that
expected loss of
amenity. Section 272(3) excludes from s 272(1)(b) any loss or damage
arising through a reduction in the value of
the goods in order "[t]o avoid
doubt" and ensure that the effect of recovering reduction in value damages
cannot be duplicated in
the recovery of consequential
potential for parallel liability of suppliers and manufacturers for breach of
the guarantee in
means that issues of contribution and indemnity can
arise between suppliers and manufacturers at least in relation to their
overlapping
liability to consumers, rather than the particular liability of
suppliers to a donee from a consumer or the particular liability
manufacturers to a person who acquires or derives title from a consumer. The
Australian Consumer Law
takes the approach of generally excluding
liability of a manufacturer for a breach of the
guarantee of
acceptable quality that is not caused, or contributed to, by the manufacturer or
an employee or agent of the
manufacturer.
instance, where the breach of the
guarantee occurs "only" because of
an act of a supplier then the manufacturer is not liable for an action for
the other hand, where the breach is caused, or contributed to, by an act of the
manufacturer or its employees or agents, the
Australian Consumer Law
recognises an unfairness in what is described in the Explanatory Memorandum
to the legislation that introduced the indemnity as the
"primary responsibility"
that often lies upon a supplier to provide remedies to a consumer "in
circumstances whereby fault more properly
lies with a manufacturer or
the joint reasons
manufacturer
to indemnify a supplier for loss-based damages where the manufacturer and
supplier are both liable to the consumer for the
same consequential loss.
Further, where such concurrent liability does, or could, arise,
ss 274(2)(a) and 274(2)(b)(i) require a
manufacturer to indemnify a
supplier for costs which arise because the supplier is liable for a failure to
comply with
Consistently with the purpose of the indemnity as
described in the Explanatory Memorandum, those costs can include
performance-based
Examples of application of this
these appeals and the related
appeal, a number of examples were
given by counsel to illustrate the alleged advantages of their interpretation of
the provisions
, Div 2, concerning damages against
manufacturers. Six examples can be given to illustrate the application of the
approach taken in
the joint reasons, upon which these reasons have further
elaborated. Each of these examples also illustrates differences in result
that proposed by Toyota in its appeal. The two largest differences are as
Toyota's interpretation of the provisions for both performance-based
and loss-based
manufacturers for a breach of
was based upon the proposition that in
"an action for damages, it is a universal rule that an affected person may
recover only that
which is lost". As explained above, that submission is
generally correct so far as loss-based remedies are concerned. But it is not
correct in relation to performance-based remedies. Performance-based remedies
operate in a functionally different way from remedies
for consequential loss.
And the availability of performance-based remedies is confined by the
requirement that the affected person
have title to the goods which were supplied
in breach of the
Toyota submitted that the measure of performance-based damages against a
manufacturer for a breach of
could be eliminated by "taking into
account the subsequent fact that the reduction in value attributable to the
defect at the time
of supply has been entirely restored" because "the
availability of the 2020 field fix restored the value in the vehicle" so that
performance-based damages should be "nil". That submission should not be
accepted. A reasonable consumer with full knowledge of all
aspects of the defect
(including its future repairability) in, say, 2016 would have paid considerably
less for a car for which a
(free) repair would become available only in 2020
than the consumer would have paid for a car which did not possess the defect.
conclusion does, however, have some curious consequences in marginal cases.
But the curious consequences are explicable and cannot
change the conclusion
that performance-based damages for an affected person are based upon the
economic value of the performance
not received by the affected person rather
than what the affected person has lost.
Consumer purchases a car from Supplier for $30,000, which is the average retail
price. The car is a model that has a major failure
to comply with the guarantee
of acceptable quality due to omissions by Manufacturer. Although no adverse
consequences are experienced
by Consumer in relation to that particular car, the
result of the defect is that at the time of purchase the value of the new car
a reasonable consumer would have been $20,000. One year after purchase, Consumer
discovers the defect and asks Manufacturer to
repair the car. Manufacturer
refuses to repair the car due to difficulties flowing from global supply chain
shortages. Consumer brings
an action against Manufacturer for damages under
s 272(1)(a). The same supply chain shortages mean that by the time of trial
market value of the defective car has increased to far above the average
retail price and the car could be sold almost immediately
for a large profit.
point of Example 1 is to illustrate what is plain from the structure and
terms of s 272(1), that the liability of Manufacturer
s 272(1)(a) is not based upon loss to Consumer arising from the purchase of
the defective car. In Example 1, Consumer is in
position than they were before they purchased the car. But Consumer is entitled
to performance-based damages of $10,000.
Consumer 1 purchases a car from Supplier 1 which has a major failure
to comply with the guarantee of acceptable quality arising solely
from a fault
caused by Manufacturer. Consumer 1 pays the average retail price for the
car. A patent consequence of the (latent) defect
is later discovered by which
the car emits excessive smoke from the exhaust pipe. After discovering this
patent consequence, Consumer
1 sells the car to a second-hand dealer,
Supplier 2, for a reduced price due to this consequence. Supplier 2
sells the car to Consumer
2 for a price that reflects the extent of smoke
emitted from the exhaust pipe. The emission of smoke from the exhaust pipe
Consumer 2 sells the car to another second-hand dealer,
Supplier 3, for a further reduced price reflecting the worsening
consequences
of the defect. Supplier 3 sells the car to Consumer 3 for
a reduced price reflecting the further emission of smoke. The consequences
the defect worsen further. Consumer 3 sells the car to another second-hand
dealer, Supplier 4, for a substantially reduced sale
price. The emission of
smoke from the exhaust pipe continues to worsen. Later, the latent defect is
discovered and it is realised
that the defect renders the car liable to explode.
point of Example 2 is to illustrate the functional importance of an
interpretation of s 272(1)(a) that confines recovery of performance-based
damages to affected persons with title to the relevant goods. Each of
Consumer 1, 2 and 3 has suffered loss due to worsening patent
consequences
of the defect. As explained by the next example, each Consumer can recover for
that loss under s 272(1)(b); each suffers
a separate loss. But Manufacturer
has only failed once in performance. The chain of title could continue, and the
number of affected
persons could increase, indefinitely in respect of a single
car. But this does not increase liability indefinitely. For a single
Manufacturer, the liability of Manufacturer for performance-based damages under
s 272(1)(a) does not extend to multiple
awards of damages for the single
"reduction in the value of the [car]" below the average retail price paid by
Consumer 1.
Consumer purchases a car from Supplier which has a major failure to comply with
the guarantee of acceptable quality arising solely
from a fault caused by
Manufacturer. The fault causes the car to explode upon impact with another car,
destroying Consumer's valuable
belongings in the car, a reasonably foreseeable
consequence of the major failure. The insurer of the car sells the car for
Example 3, Consumer has no claim to a performance-based remedy, as Consumer
no longer has title to the car. But Consumer, or the
insurer of the car by a
subrogated claim, has a claim against Manufacturer for the consequential loss
arising from the sale of the
car for scrap, and Consumer has a further claim
against Manufacturer for the consequential loss arising from the destruction of
belongings. The important point in Example 3 is that Consumer's
claim for consequential loss does not require Consumer to retain
title to the
car. The sale of the car by the insurer for scrap does not destroy Consumer's
claims. Likewise, an affected person with
a car that was damaged or destroyed
due to a defect involving a breach of the guarantee of acceptable quality would
not be required
to take the bizarre expedient of warehousing the destroyed car
for the period of litigation and perhaps any appeals. The same reasoning
to each of Consumer 1, 2 and 3 in Example 2. Each has suffered loss due to
worsening patent consequences of the defect. Manufacturer
is directly liable to
those Consumers for the loss caused by those consequences to each Consumer.
In 2015, Consumer purchases a car from Supplier at the average retail price. The
car has a major failure to comply with the guarantee
of acceptable quality due
to omissions by Manufacturer. The braking system of the car is liable to fail.
At the time of purchase,
the defect was not known. When it was discovered there
was no effective repair or "fix" for the defect, so it could not be repaired
within a reasonable time. Following technological innovations engineered by
Manufacturer and after several failed attempts at a "fix",
in May 2020
Manufacturer developed a repair for the defect. The size and significance of the
defect for which the repair will need
to be applied mean that it is likely that
Consumer will have to wait for six months, until November 2020, for the repair
to be freely
implemented by Manufacturer. At the time of supply of the car, a
reasonable consumer who had knowledge of all the matters above would
$15,000 less than the average retail price for the car. Consumer has to wait a
further three months due to a backlog of
similar and other repairs to be
undertaken by Manufacturer before the repair to Consumer's car. The
inconvenience of an additional
three months' delay is valued at $500. Consumer
retains title to the car.
Example 4, Consumer is entitled to performance-based damages from Supplier
or Manufacturer measured at the time of supply of the
goods by Supplier. The
"value of the goods" at the time of supply, from which the $15,000 reduction in
value below the average retail
price at the time of supply was determined, is
based upon the price that a reasonable consumer would pay for the car with
of the defect, knowledge that the defect cannot be repaired until May
2020, and knowledge that the nature and significance of the
defect is such that
repair will not be likely to be implemented until November 2020. Further
loss-based damages of $500 could be
recovered for the additional three months'
could seek performance-based damages and loss-based damages from either Supplier
or Manufacturer but recovery from either
Supplier or Manufacturer would,
respectively, restore the economic value of performance or the loss. Since there
would be concurrent
liability of Supplier and Manufacturer for the consequential
loss caused by the inconvenience to Consumer, Supplier has a statutory
against Manufacturer for any performance-based damages and loss-based damages
paid to Consumer.
In December 2021, Consumer purchases a new car from Supplier for $50,000 (which
is the average retail price). The car has a braking
defect, which is a major
failure to comply with the guarantee of acceptable quality due to omissions by
Manufacturer. In January
2022, Consumer sells the car to Acquirer 1 at
the second-hand market value of $40,000. In February 2022, Acquirer 1
sells the car
to a second-hand dealer for $35,000. In March 2022, the
second-hand dealer sells the car to Acquirer 2 at the second-hand market
value of $40,000. The major defect in the brakes is discovered in May 2022.
A repair for the major defect is developed by Manufacturer
in May 2023,
only after scientific and technological advances made in 2023 which make the
repair possible. If the defect (including
the time of its future repairability)
had been known in December 2021, the value of the new car to a reasonable
consumer would have
been $10,000. The value of the second-hand car in
March 2022, with knowledge of the defect (including the time of its future
repairability),
Example 5, the only person who would have a claim for a performance-based
remedy is Acquirer 2 (an "affected person" in relation
to Manufacturer, as
a consumer who acquired the car in trade or commerce), because they retain title
to the car at the time of judgment.
The point of Example 5 is to illustrate
a curiosity in the operation of the performance-based remedy of damages in
s 272(1)(a), to
which Mr Finch SC pointed in the related
appeal. The curiosity is that the measure of the performance-based remedy
for Acquirer 2 is calculated by reference to the purchase
price paid by
Consumer (being damages of $40,000) rather than the purchase price paid by
Acquirer 2 (which might suggest damages
of $35,000).
consequence is less curious or anomalous than might first appear in light of a
central purpose for the introduction of provisions
including the
performance-based damages remedy in s 272(1)(a). That purpose was to reduce
the costs of asserting or defending rights
by providing certainty about the
legal position of businesses and
of the quantum of damages available to persons such as Acquirer 2 by
reference to the defective performance concerning
Consumer creates greater
certainty because Manufacturer will know that the quantum of a performance-based
remedy against it will
not vary according to the identity of the party who
brings the claim. After all, from the perspective of Manufacturer, the breach
the guarantee of acceptable quality produces the same effect on the car,
regardless of who brings the claim. Further, once a defect
becomes known, the
likelihood of a performance-based remedy being sought for breach of
an affected person beyond the first consumer is reduced by
which provides that there is no breach of
where the only reason or
reasons that the goods are not of acceptable quality "were specifically drawn to
the consumer's attention
before the consumer agreed to the supply".
In January 2015, Consumer purchases a new car from Supplier at the average
retail price of $30,000. The car had a major failure to
comply with the
guarantee of acceptable quality due to omissions by both Manufacturer and
Supplier. Although unknown and unknowable
at the time of supply, it is later
discovered that a hidden defect caused the car to overconsume and leak large
quantities of fuel.
In the meantime, Consumer suffers the effects of increased
cost, frustration and inconvenience which are common to all users of a
this defect, as well as reasonably foreseeable consequential damage to other
property of Consumer, which is damaged by a
fuel leak. A pecuniary sum of
damages for the increased cost, frustration and inconvenience is $12,000. The
pecuniary sum of damages
for the consequential property damage is $25,000. A
repair for the defect is developed, and made freely available, in January 2017.
A reasonable consumer in January 2015 would only have paid $20,000 for the car
if they had knowledge of the defect in the car causing
the overconsumption and
leakage of fuel.
the failure to comply with the guarantee under
is not "only" because
of an act, default or omission of Supplier, Consumer has a performance-based
remedy of damages against either
Supplier or Manufacturer for the reduction in
the value of the car, below the average retail price that was paid, calculated
by reference
to the price that a reasonable consumer, with knowledge that the
car being purchased has a defect causing the overconsumption and
leakage of fuel
which will not be able to be repaired for two years, would pay. The award of
performance-based damages of $10,000,
reflecting the difference in value between
the price paid by Consumer and the price a reasonable consumer would have paid,
incidental effect of compensating Consumer for part of their losses from
the effects of increased cost, frustration and inconvenience
which are common to
all users of a car with the defect. Consumer can recover additional compensation
of $2,000 for the additional
expected effects arising from the defect which are
not replicated in the performance-based damages award, as well as $25,000 for
the consequential property
appeal in matter
of 2023 should be dismissed and the appeal in matter
of 2023 should be allowed and orders made as set out in the joint reasons.
Although the Williams parties sought orders that would
have the effect of
upholding entirely the reasons of the primary judge, the different orders made
by this Court, and the departure
from aspects of the primary judge's otherwise
compelling reasons (for instance, by recognising that the time necessary to
develop and implement a repair for a defect in goods is inherent in
the defect itself
may ultimately be to the advantage of the Williams parties.
These appeals
the statutory entitlement of an "affected
in relation to
goods to recover damages from a manufacturer in relation to vehicles which
failed to comply with the statutory guarantee
of acceptable quality in
Australian Consumer Law
("the ACL").
principal difference between my conclusions and those of Gageler CJ,
Gordon, Steward, Gleeson and Beech‑Jones JJ ("the
joint reasons")
concerns the proper construction of the key statutory provision,
s 272(1)(a) of the ACL. Section 272(1), as relevant,
provides that
"[i]n an action for damages under this Division, an affected person in relation
to goods is entitled to recover damages
for: (a) any reduction in the value
of the goods, resulting from the failure to comply with the guarantee to which
the action relates,
below whichever of the following prices is lower", being
"(i) the price paid or payable by the consumer for the goods" or
average retail price of the goods at the time of supply".
joint reasons construe s 272(1)(a) to mean "(a) any reduction in the
value of the
affected person's
goods, resulting from the failure to
comply with the guarantee to which the action relates ...". That is, the
affected person must
continue to own the goods to the time of judgment of the
action to have an entitlement to recover damages under that
regard to the text, context, and purpose of the provision, I consider that
s 272(1)(a) is to be construed on the basis that:
(a) the entitlement
being one to "recover" damages only, the object of the provision is
compensatory; (b) to ensure the provision
operates to achieve its
compensatory purpose, it is necessary to recognise that the provision
distinguishes between, on the one hand,
the entitlement to "recover" damages in
the opening part of the provision and, on the other hand, the amounts to which
that entitlement
may relate in paras (a) and (b) thereafter;
(c) the word "recover" confines the
existence and extent
entitlement to the recovery of damages to damage (that is, loss) that continues
to exist at the time of judgment of the action;
(d) paras (a)
and (b) determine the
of damages to which that entitlement of
recovery relates; (e) in accordance with its terms, para (a) requires
the amount for which
that paragraph provides to be determined at the time of
supply of goods to the consumer to whom the relevant guarantee relates; and
(f) that amount, being the relevant reduction in value, is to be understood
as an amount equal to the difference between the value
that the goods would have
had at the time of supply to the consumer to whom the relevant guarantee relates
but for the failure to
comply with the statutory guarantee (the statutory proxy
for which is the price paid or payable or the average retail price of the
at the time of supply) and the true value of the goods at that time given the
failure to comply. On this basis, an affected
person in relation to goods may
have an entitlement to recover damages in accordance with s 272(1)(a)
whether they continue to own
the goods at the time of judgment of the action or
because the word "recover" confines the existence and extent of the entitlement
to the recovery of damages to damage (that
is, loss) that continues to exist at
the time of judgment of the action, the existence and extent of that entitlement
is to be determined
by reference to all circumstances relevant to that fact
(that is, the continued existence of loss) at the time of judgment of the
action. In contrast, because of the terms of para (a) of s 272(1), the
determination of the amount of that potential entitlement
is to be made at the
time of supply having regard to "any reduction in the value of the goods,
resulting from
the failure to comply with the guarantee". The words
"resulting from" necessarily concern facts, matters, and circumstances occurring
after the time of supply, provided that they are facts, matters, and
circumstances resulting from the failure to comply with the
guarantee. The words
"resulting from" in s 272(1)(a) impose a causal requirement. They do not
require the facts, matters, and circumstances
to be known, expected, or
reasonably foreseeable at the time of the supply of the goods.
the complexity of the issues of statutory construction, in my opinion the
primary judge in the Federal Court of Australia
findings of fact and analysed the amount of the reduction in value of the
Relevant Vehicles
yield a substantive outcome unaffected by material error. The primary judge's
findings and analysis amply supported his conclusion
that the amount of the
reduction in value of each Relevant Vehicle resulting from the Core Defect was
17.5 per cent below the purchase
price paid by the consumer for the
Relevant Vehicle. The Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia (Moshinsky,
while properly recognising that s 272(1)(a) has a compensatory
concluding that the primary judge's assessment of the amount of the reduction in
value in accordance with para (a) of s
272(1) was too high.
reasons follow.
The statutory provisions
of the ACL includes this definition:
affected person
, in relation to goods, means:
(a) a consumer who acquires the goods; or
(b) a person who acquires the goods from the consumer (other than for the
purpose of re‑supply); or
(c) a person who derives title to the goods through or under the consumer."
of the ACL provides that a person is taken to have acquired particular
goods as a consumer if, and only if: the amount paid or payable
for the goods
did not exceed $40,000 or a greater amount if prescribed; the goods were of a
kind ordinarily acquired for personal,
domestic or household use or consumption;
or the goods consisted of a vehicle or trailer acquired for use principally in
the transport
of goods on public roads. By
does not apply if the person acquired the goods or held himself or herself out
as acquiring the goods for the purpose of re-supply
or using the goods up or
transforming them, in trade or commerce, in the course of a process of
production or manufacture or in the
course of repairing or treating other goods
or fixtures on land.
of the ACL provides that if a person supplies, in trade or commerce, goods
to a consumer and the supply does not occur by way of
sale by auction, there is
a guarantee that the goods are of acceptable quality. By
are of acceptable quality if, relevantly to the present case, they are as free
from defects as a reasonable consumer fully
acquainted with the state and
condition of the goods (including any hidden defects of the goods) would regard
as acceptable having
regard to the matters in
The matters in
consist of the nature and price of the goods, any statements made
relevant circumstances relating to the supply of
the goods. Limitations to the
guarantee of acceptable quality arising are to be found in
‑(7). These limitations, in substance, involve the consumer
having or being taken to have knowledge of the reason the goods
acceptable quality at the time of supply.
the guarantee of acceptable quality under
is not complied with,
s 271(1) of the ACL gives an affected person in relation to goods a right
of action against the manufacturer
of the goods, to "recover damages from the
manufacturer". By s 271(6), this entitlement to commence an action to
"recover" damages
is excluded for damages of a kind referred to in
s 272(1)(a) in circumstances where the affected person, in accordance with
warranty, has required the manufacturer to remedy a failure to comply
with a guarantee (unless the manufacturer has refused or failed
to remedy the
failure, or has failed to remedy the failure within a reasonable time), with the
concept of "remedy" here meaning repairing
or replacing the goods.
272(1) of the ACL provides:
"In an action for damages under this Division, an affected person in relation to
goods is entitled to recover damages for:
(a) any reduction in the value of the goods, resulting from the failure to
comply with the guarantee to which the action relates,
below whichever of the
following prices is lower:
(i) the price paid or payable by the consumer for the goods;
(ii) the average retail price of the goods at the time of supply; and
(b) any loss or damage suffered by the affected person because of the failure to
comply with the guarantee to which the action relates
if it was reasonably
foreseeable that the affected person would suffer such loss or damage as a
result of such a failure."
272(3) provides that "[s]ubsection (1)(b) does not apply to loss or damage
suffered through a reduction in the value of the
arising under
guarantee of acceptable quality in
of the ACL arises only on the
supply, in trade or commerce, of goods to a consumer. Because a good may be
supplied in trade or commerce
to a consumer more than once (that is, as a
second‑hand good), the same good may be the subject of more than one
of acceptable quality over time. The possibilities in this regard are
best explained by way of example.
a person, person A, was supplied with a new Relevant Vehicle with the Core
Defect by a Toyota dealer and person A, in acquiring
the Relevant Vehicle,
was not doing so for the purpose of re‑supply or for the purpose of using
up or transforming the Relevant
Vehicle (which are excluded from the definition
of "consumer" by
and (b)), then there is a guarantee under
that the Relevant Vehicle is of acceptable quality. Whether the
Relevant Vehicle is of acceptable quality or not is assessed at the
time of that
supply from the Toyota dealer to person A in accordance with
and (3). Further, the exclusions in
, (6) and (7) are applicable to
that supply to person A.
now that person A sells the Relevant Vehicle to a second‑hand car
dealer, person B. As a second‑hand car dealer,
person B is not a
consumer under
as person B acquired the Relevant Vehicle for the
purpose of re‑supply. No guarantee of acceptable quality arises on that
of supply by person A to person B for that reason.
now that person B, the second‑hand car dealer, sells the Relevant
Vehicle to another person, person C. Person C, in
acquiring the
Relevant Vehicle, was not doing so for the purpose of re‑supply or for the
purpose of using up or transforming
the Relevant Vehicle. Accordingly,
person C is a consumer. Further, the supply to person C by the
second‑hand car dealer, person
B, is in trade or commerce. Another
separate guarantee of acceptable quality under
arises on the supply
of the Relevant Vehicle by person B to person C. Whether the Relevant
Vehicle is of acceptable quality or not
is assessed at the time of that supply
from person B to person C in accordance with
Further, the exclusions in
, (6) and (7) are applicable to
that supply to person C.
alternatively, that the original consumer, person A, sells the car
privately to another person, person D, and person D, in
acquiring the
Relevant Vehicle, was not doing so for the purpose of re‑supply or for the
purpose of using up or transforming
the Relevant Vehicle. Person D is a
consumer. But the sale from person A to person D, being a
one‑off private sale, is not
a supply in trade or commerce. Accordingly,
another separate guarantee of acceptable quality under
cannot arise
on the supply of the Relevant Vehicle from person A to person D. There
is no doubt, however, that person D would still
be an "affected person" in
relation to the Relevant Vehicle within para (b) ("a person who acquires
the goods from the consumer (other
than for the purpose of re‑supply)") or
para (c) ("a person who derives title to the goods through or under the
of the definition of that term and, thereby, potentially entitled to
the remedies against the manufacturer in Div 2 of
The actual consumer in
and the hypothetical
reasonable consumer in s 272(1)(a) of the ACL
of the ACL, the guarantee of acceptable quality arises at the time
of the supply of the goods, provided the terms of that provision
are satisfied.
The relevance of the actual consumer's lack of knowledge of the failure to
comply with the statutory guarantee at
the time of supply is reflected in
, (4), (6) and (7). The terms of
, in specifying that
goods are of acceptable quality if they are, relevantly, as free from defects
"as a reasonable consumer fully
acquainted with the state and condition of the
goods (including any hidden defects of the goods), would regard as acceptable
regard to the matters in"
, both: (a) pre-suppose that
the actual consumer does not have that full acquaintance; and (b) convey
that the relevant contrary hypothesis
for the purpose of the application of
other provisions that depend on
(including s 272(1)(a)) is "a
reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of the goods
(including any hidden
defects of the goods)" at the time of supply.
determining the amount of the damages potentially recoverable under
para (a) of s 272(1), the actual consumer is irrelevant other
respect of the price paid for the goods. This may be contrasted with
para (b) of s 272(1), which is concerned with a different
loss. Determining the amount of damages potentially recoverable under
para (a) of s 272(1) requires use of a construct of
a hypothetical
reasonable consumer at the time of supply, attributed with knowledge that the
actual consumer did not have at that
time – namely, full acquaintance with
the state and condition of the goods (including any hidden defects of the
goods). This
enables the hypothetical reasonable consumer to function as the
relevant price comparator (what would have been paid for the goods
at the time
of supply if the consumer had the requisite knowledge at that time) for the
actual consumer (who paid for the goods without
that knowledge). This approach
has a long history in consumer protection law. For example, in
Knitting Mills Ltd v Grant
"The condition that goods are of merchantable quality requires that they should
be in such an actual state that a buyer fully acquainted
with the facts and,
therefore, knowing what hidden defects exist and not being limited to their
apparent condition would buy them
without abatement of the price obtainable for
such goods if in reasonably sound order and condition and without special
Hardwick Game Farm v Suffolk Agricultural Poultry Producers Association
in dealing with an implied statutory condition of goods being of merchantable
quality, Lord Reid said that "[i]t is quite clear
that some later knowledge
must be brought in for otherwise it would never be possible to hold that goods
were unmerchantable by reason
of a latent
Lord Guest went further, saying that "[t]he defect as ultimately discovered
must be taken with its qualifications. It is not possible
to stop halfway and
say 'We know there is a defect' without proceeding to say 'Although there is a
defect we know it can be cured
by a limited rate of
inclusion.'"
Lord Pearce, referring to the reasons of Dixon J in
Knitting Mills
, said that "Sir Owen Dixon was clearly right in
saying ... that in order to judge merchantability one must assume a
knowledge of
hidden defects, although these do not manifest themselves or are
not discovered until some date later than the date of delivery which
is the time
as at which one must estimate
merchantability".
deciding "what additional after‑acquired knowledge must one assume", his
Lordship said that "[l]ogic might seem to indicate
that the court should bring
to the task all the after‑acquired knowledge which it possesses at the
date of trial", but he did
not consider this always to be
Medtel Pty Ltd v Courtney
, Branson J (with whom Jacobson J
considering these cases, observed that a predecessor provision to
the ACL, s 74D of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth), "calls
for the quality, or fitness for purpose, of the goods to be measured against
what it was reasonable to expect in that
regard at the time of the supply of the
goods to the consumer. That measurement must be undertaken, in my view, in the
light of information
concerning the goods available at the time of
of the ACL: key concepts and differences
Suppliers and manufacturers
Subdivision A
of Div 1 of
within Ch 5 of the ACL, concerning
actions against suppliers of goods, contains important differences from
, concerning actions against manufacturers of
The most important difference is that
, concerning
, vests rights in a
"consumer". The rights so vested include, by s 259(4), that "[t]he consumer
may, by action against the supplier,
recover damages for any loss or damage
suffered by the consumer because of the failure to comply with the guarantee if
it was reasonably
foreseeable that the consumer would suffer such loss or damage
as a result of such a failure". In contrast, Div 2 of
manufacturers
, vests rights in an "affected person" in
relation to goods, not in a "consumer" who has acquired the goods. While a
"consumer" is
always an "affected person" in relation to goods, an "affected
person" in relation to goods is not always a "consumer".
must be taken that the different references to "consumer" and "affected person"
in relation to goods in Divs 1 and 2 of
are deliberate,
as they appear consistently throughout the provisions of each Division and have
done so since the ACL commenced.
This is so even though the relevant Explanatory
Memorandum consistently (and incorrectly) refers to "consumers" having rights
a right to damages) against both suppliers and
manufacturers.
is also no exclusion of the right of a consumer to take action against the
supplier to recover damages under s 259(4) comparable
to the exclusion of
the right of an affected person in relation to goods taking action to recover
damages from a manufacturer under
s 271(6) (namely, in circumstances where
the manufacturer has remedied the failure to comply with the statutory
guarantee). A consumer
may take action against the supplier even if the consumer
has rejected the goods. Section 259(6) makes this clear, by providing that
avoid doubt, subsection (4) applies in addition to subsections (2) and (3)".
This may be contrasted with s 272(3), which ensures
that s 272(1)(b)
does not apply to loss or damage suffered through a reduction in the value of
the goods (which is covered by s 272(1)(a)).
distinction in these provisions between, on the one hand, a "consumer" in an
action against a supplier, and, on the other hand,
an "affected person" in
relation to goods in an action against a manufacturer, most likely reflects that
a consumer has a direct
contractual relationship with the supplier, not the
manufacturer, and that the supplier has no legal relationship with "a person
acquires the goods from the consumer (other than for the purpose of
re‑supply)" or "a person who derives title to the goods
through or under
the consumer" (being the extensions beyond the consumer in paras (b) and
(c) of the definition of "affected person"
in relation to goods). In the
ordinary course, moreover, it is the manufacturer, not the supplier, who
controls the quality of the
goods, so that by placing the goods into the market,
it is the manufacturer, not the supplier, who has a potential legal relationship
with not only the consumer, but also "a person who acquires the goods from the
consumer (other than for the purpose of re‑supply)"
or "a person who
derives title to the goods through or under the consumer".
relevant Explanatory Memorandum records the legislative expectation that, in the
ordinary course, the "primary source of remedies"
for a consumer will be from
the supplier for any failure to comply with one of the statutory
guarantees.
s 274(1) is satisfied, the supplier will then have a right of indemnity
against the manufacturer.
Consumer and affected person in
relation to goods
Paragraphs (a),
(b) and (c) of the definition of "affected person" in relation to goods in
of the ACL should not be read as mutually exclusive but, rather, as
creating an ambulatory and cumulative class. That is, in common
definition of "consumer", there may be more than one affected person in relation
to the same goods at the same time.
of paras (a), (b) and (c) of the definition of "affected person" in
relation to goods in
is separated by the word "or", which ordinarily
indicates that they operate disjunctively. But mutual exclusivity is not always
consequence of disjunctive expressions. Sometimes the use of the disjunctive
"or" can operate as creating a non‑mutually exclusive
For example, in
Electricity Trust of South Australia v Krone (Australia) Technique Pty
von Doussa J considered a statute that defined "manufacturer" as a
person described in para (a), (b), (c) or (d). His Honour
"In my view the Act by defining 'manufacturer' to
(a) ... (b) ... (c)
(d) does not intend that
each of the four paragraphs be read as mutually exclusive. The definition
prescribes a class comprising
people falling within the four situations as
described in pars (a) to (d). ...
In my opinion the definition should be construed by reading the four
pars (a) to (d) as constituting a class of persons who are
defined as the
'manufacturer'. The paragraphs should be construed as alternatives, but not as
mutually exclusive alternatives. There
may be more than one person who comes
within the class which is defined."
legislation in issue in that case was an historical source of the
"consumer" was defined by that legislation to mean "any person (including a body
corporate) who purchases the goods when
offered for sale by retail and includes
any person who derives title to the goods through or under any such person".
Importantly,
however, the right to damages for breach of a manufacturer's
warranty was vested only in a consumer who had lawful possession of
at the time the ACL was enacted, there was statutory precedent both for the
extension of the concept of a "consumer" to
successors in title and for
confining rights of action against a manufacturer to a person who has lawful
possession of the goods.
While the ACL expressly adopts the former expedient in
the definition of "affected person" in relation to goods in
not confine that definition (or the definition of "consumer") to a person who
has lawful possession of the goods. For example,
para (a) of the definition
of "affected person" in relation to goods does not say "
consumer who
acquires the goods". The indefinite article "a" and the present
tense "acquires" indicate that para (a) is ambulatory, from which
be taken that paras (b) and (c) must also be ambulatory. Nor, as
discussed below, does s 272(1)(a), in terms, say "any reduction
value of the goods
provided the goods are owned by or in the lawful
possession of the affected person
..." or "any reduction in the value of the
affected person's
goods ...".
Section 271(6)
of the ACL is relevant. Only an "affected person" who controls the goods (that
is, has title to or lawful possession
of them) can require the manufacturer, in
accordance with an express warranty, to remedy the failure to comply with the
by either repairing or replacing the goods. This does not mean,
however, that paras (a), (b) and (c) of the definition of "affected
in relation to goods are mutually exclusive. It means only that, if an affected
person can require, and has required, such
repair or replacement, that affected
person is not entitled to commence an action to recover damages under
s 272(1)(a) for any reduction
in value of the goods. Such an affected
person, however, remains entitled to commence an action to recover damages under
s 272(1)(b)
for loss or damage suffered in accordance with that provision.
Therefore, s 271(6) expressly contemplates that a manufacturer may
action for damages under s 272(1)(a) by, relevantly, replacing the goods,
but cannot avoid an action under s 272(1)(b) by
such replacement. It
follows that an affected person in relation to goods must still be such an
affected person after the goods have
been replaced (and when the person no
longer has title to or lawful possession of those goods). This accords with the
position otherwise
reflected in the statutory provisions that a consumer or an
affected person in relation to goods does not cease to be such merely
they no longer own or lawfully possess the goods.
Consistently
with this, the history of the provisions indicates a legislative intention to
extend the rights arising from the statutory
guarantees against manufacturers
for the benefit of consumers to successors in title to the immediate consumer,
even if those successors
are not themselves consumers supplied with the good in
trade or commerce. This legislative purpose of an extension of rights beyond
immediate consumer is not the same as a legislative purpose of exclusion of a
right of action for a consumer or an affected person
who has ceased to own or be
in lawful possession of the goods.
the predecessor provisions to
were inserted into the
Practices Act
some jurisdictions in Australia had enacted legislation concerning
manufacturers' warranties, including the
Manufacturers Warranties Act
(SA) and the
Law Reform (Manufacturers Warranties) Ordinance
Manufacturers Warranties Act
Reform (Manufacturers Warranties) Ordinance
both defined "consumer" to
include "any person who derives title to the goods through or under" the
Second Reading Speech for the
Manufacturers Warranties Act
refers to a
report of the Ontario Law Reform Commission as one source for the
legislation.
report expressly adverts to the problem presented by successors in
The problem
identified is that a private purchaser from a consumer would not be protected by
the legislation (because of requirements
equivalent to that in s 54(1) that
the supply be in trade or commerce) or by contract (as there would be no privity
of contract between
a person deriving title from the consumer and the
This is why
express provision to extend the warranties to the successors in title to the
consumer was considered appropriate.
the Second Reading Speech in the House of Representatives concerning the
Trade Practices Amendment Bill 1978
which introduced the
predecessor provisions to s 54, the Minister for Business and Consumer
Affairs said that "a manufacturer's liability,
where his goods are of
unmerchantable quality, will be extended to the successors in title to a
the relevant Explanatory Memorandum said that "[t]hese amendments are to
section 74D and extend a manufacturer's liability,
where his goods are of
unmerchantable quality, to the successors in title of a consumer who originally
acquired the
ss 271 and 272(1)(a)
ambiguity of certain provisions of the ACL in respect of damages must be
acknowledged. The potential interactions of the provisions
may not have been
fully resolved. Minds may differ about the interpretative resolution which "is
consistent with the language and
purpose of all the
provisions".
orthodox approach to statutory construction seeks to maintain "the unity of all
the statutory provisions" and to give "each provision
the meaning which best
gives effect to its purpose and language while maintaining the unity of the
statutory scheme".
272(1)(a) is structured so that the opening part of the provision ("[i]n an
action for damages under this Division, an affected
person in relation to goods
is entitled to recover damages for") concerns the existence and extent of the
entitlement in the action,
whereas para (a) concerns the assessment of the
potential amount of that entitlement by reference to the difference between the
value of the goods at the time of supply and the lower of the two fixed
prices at the time of supply (that is, the reduction in value).
structural distinction is supported by the statutory text in that, while
"damages" in s 272(1) means a monetary sum, the statutory
entitlement is
not to "claim", "be paid" or "be awarded" damages of the specified kinds. In
ss 271(1), 271(6) and 272(1), the action
and entitlement are described as
being to "recover" damages. The ordinary meaning of "recover" is "to get again,
or regain (something
lost or taken
The consistent
use of the concept of an entitlement to "recover" damages confines the existence
and extent of the entitlement, relevantly
under s 272(1)(a), to one of
recovery of loss – the potential amount of the loss able to be recovered
being assessed as an
amount equal to the difference between the value that the
goods would have had at the time of supply to the consumer to whom the
guarantee relates but for the failure to comply with the statutory guarantee
(the statutory proxy for which is the price
paid or payable or the average
retail price of the goods at the time of supply) and the true value of the goods
at that time given
the failure to comply.
the two fixed prices in s 272(1)(a) (from which there may be a reduction in
value) focus on the time of supply means that the
statute itself requires the
amount of any reduction in value of the goods to be determined at the time of
supply. The purpose of
the verbal formula in s 272(1)(a) is to require a
determination of the reduction in value of the goods below the lower of these
fixed prices at that time. To put it simply, s 272(1)(a), by using as
one integer the lower of two fixed prices at the time of supply,
necessarily
requires any reduction in value to be calculated at the time of supply. It
requires an apple to be compared with an apple,
not with an orange.
assessing the amount of any reduction in value, s 272(1)(a) requires
consideration of both: the hypothetical reasonable consumer
fully acquainted
with the state and condition of the goods (including any hidden defects of the
goods); and whatever is known to
have resulted from the failure to comply with
the statutory guarantee up to the date of judgment of the action. But this is
be done by shifting the date of the valuation under para (a) of
s 272(1) to the date of judgment. It is to be done by attributing
hypothetical reasonable consumer at the time of supply who is fully acquainted
with the state and condition of the goods knowledge
also of all facts, matters,
and circumstances resulting from the failure to comply with the statutory
guarantee. This knowledge includes
any possibility, probability, certainty or
uncertainty, or fact of the manufacturer remedying the failure to comply with
the statutory
guarantee because that fact, matter, or circumstance results from
the failure to comply with the statutory guarantee.
information arising after the date of supply – that is,
information that either does not expose the nature, quality,
or extent of the
failure to comply with the guarantee or does not involve facts, matters, and
circumstances resulting from that failure
– is not to be
attributed to the hypothetical reasonable consumer at the time of supply for the
purpose of determining the
amount of the reduction in value which an affected
person in relation to the goods may have an entitlement to recover. If, however,
such information is relevant to the question whether the affected person, at the
date of judgment of the action, continues to suffer
damage of a relevant kind to
"recover", then that information is to be considered in determining both the
existence and the extent
of the entitlement to recover damages of the relevant
this latter respect, nothing in the opening text of s 272(1) (or otherwise)
suggests that the time for determining the existence
and extent of the
entitlement to recover damages is at a date other than that of the judgment of
the action. It is only if, at that
time, there is some subsisting damage (that
is, loss) to recover of the relevant kind in para (a) of s 272(1) that
the entitlement
exists, and the entitlement only exists to the extent of that
subsisting loss. The question whether there is some subsisting damage
relevant kind to recover is therefore to be answered at the date of judgment of
the action by reference to any fact, matter,
and circumstance relevant to that
question at that time. In this context, the concept of "supervening" or
"intervening" events, relevant
in other types of
is foreign to
the operation of s 272(1)(a) of the ACL.
it another way, the predicate on which para (a) of s 272(1) operates
is that, at the time of supply, the affected person
never received the full
value of the goods with which they were supplied because of the failure to
comply with the statutory guarantee.
This predicate regulates the amount of any
entitlement to recovery, but not the existence and extent of that entitlement.
The predicate
on which the opening text of s 272(1) operates is that, at
the time of the judgment of the action, that loss of value may subsist
or in part and the affected person, to that extent only, may recover that
amount. That amount, therefore, may be the full
amount of the loss of value
assessed under para (a) of s 272(1) or only a part of that amount,
depending on the relevant facts, matters,
and circumstances at the time of the
judgment of the action.
these reasons, s 272(1)(a) imposes two tasks on the judicial valuer. One
task is to determine the amount of the damages to which
the entitlement relates.
The other task is to determine the existence and extent of the entitlement to
recover damages of the affected
person in relation to the goods. The amount able
to be recovered cannot exceed the extent of the entitlement.
this construction of s 272(1)(a), the provision can never yield more than
an affected person's actual loss subsisting at that
time. As such, this
construction fits with the object of the ACL derived from the object of the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) to "enhance the welfare of
Australians through the promotion of competition and fair trading and provision
for consumer
protection".
limitation imposed in s 272(1) by the entitlement being only to "recover"
damages also performs two other important functions.
First, the limitation
excludes a possibility of double recovery not otherwise excluded by
s 272(3). Assume, for example, that a consumer,
supplied with goods in
trade or commerce, took action to recover loss or damage suffered by them
against the supplier of the goods
in accordance with s 259(4) of the ACL,
including the value of the goods that ought to have been, but was not, received.
further, that the consumer, in that action, recovered all such loss or
damage from the supplier. The supplier may then have a right
to indemnity from
the manufacturer under s 274(1) of the ACL, but the consumer would not also
have any entitlement to "recover" the
same loss or damage from the manufacturer
under s 272(1) of the ACL. Having recovered (in the sense of regained)
damages for the
specified loss or damage in one action (against the supplier
under s 259(4)), to the extent of that recovery there are no damages
recover in another action (against the manufacturer under s 272(1)).
the limitation ensures that an affected person in relation to goods, in an
action against a manufacturer, cannot be better
off by reason of the failure to
comply with a statutory guarantee than they would have been had the goods not
failed to comply with
that guarantee. To explain by example, assume a consumer
paid $50,000 for a motor vehicle which, because of a failure to comply with
guarantee of acceptable quality, was worth only $40,000 at the time of supply.
Where the consumer continues to own the vehicle
and the failure to comply
remains, the consumer's entitlement under s 272(1)(a) is to recover $10,000
from the manufacturer. This
is so even if the value of the vehicle increases
after the supply date – for example, by reason of
supply‑chain difficulties
in obtaining new vehicles.
in contrast, the concept of "recovery" in s 272(1) does not confine the
operation of the provision and the entitlement to recover
under s 272(1)(a)
requires continued ownership of the goods, then apparent anomalies arise.
a failure to comply with the guarantee of acceptable quality which manifests
before the consumer sells the goods. If the consumer
discloses the failure, or
it is otherwise apparent to the purchaser, the reduced value of the goods will
be reflected in the purchase
price. The consumer will receive only the reduced
value while the purchaser will have purchased the goods at their true value. If,
however, the entitlement to recovery under s 272(1)(a) requires ownership
of the goods and s 272(1)(a) is not confined to the recovery
of subsisting
loss, then the entitlement to recover under s 272(1)(a) will be vested in
the purchaser (as the owner of the goods)
not the consumer. The consumer (who
has suffered the loss in value) will have no claim against the manufacturer but
the purchaser
(who has suffered no loss in value) will be entitled to recover
the amount of the loss in value to the consumer (not the purchaser)
at the time
of supply to the consumer (not the purchaser).
prospect that goods may be destroyed is also relevant. Once goods are destroyed,
no‑one has title to them. If s 272(1)(a)
is construed to require an
affected person to continue to own the goods at the time of the judgment of the
action, an affected person
whose goods have been destroyed would be excluded
from an entitlement to recover damages under s 272(1)(a) even if the cause
destruction is the failure to comply with the statutory guarantee.
of the defect is not problematic. If an affected person sells goods affected by
a latent defect, the sale price of the goods
will be the value of the goods
unaffected by the latent defect. The affected person selling the goods would not
have any loss to
recover under s 272(1)(a), as they will have received the
inflated value of the goods on sale. However, the purchaser who paid that
for the goods, on exposure of the defect, will be able to recover for the
reduction in value in accordance with s 272(1)(a)
– that is, by
reference to the time of supply to and price paid by the
Other construction considerations
noted, the context of s 272(1)(a) includes that the object of the
Competition and Consumer Act
, is to "enhance the welfare of
Australians through the promotion of competition and fair trading and provision
for consumer protection".
While it is not to be assumed that the statute pursues
these objects at any cost, and the objects of the ACL overall may well
potentially
conflict with each other, the relevant object is "consumer
protection", not protection of manufacturers from potential liability
defective goods.
is also relevant that, to the extent that a manufacturer may be exposed to
recovery of damages by multiple affected persons in
relation to goods that do
not comply with a statutory guarantee if the goods are sold or transferred by
the consumer other than in
trade or commerce (particularly if the defect is
latent), the manufacturer is in the best position to protect itself from that
To the extent that the possibility of liability to multiple successors in
title for any reduction in value of the goods under s 272(1)(a)
manufacturers to ensure their goods meet the guarantee of acceptable quality
and, if they do not, to promptly and effectively
repair or replace defective
goods, that encouragement is consistent with the overall statutory object of
consumer protection. Less
consistent with that overall statutory object would be
the unintentional creation of a new market for the transfer of unrecognised
choses in action (for the entitlement to bring an action under s 272(1)(a)
of the ACL) from a former owner to a new owner, which
s 272(1)(a) as requiring continued ownership of the goods would involve.
context of s 272(1)(a) also includes the definitions of "consumer" in
and "affected person" in relation to goods in
ACL. Both definitions are ambulatory. A person does not cease to be a "consumer"
or an "affected person" in relation to goods
because of destruction or sale of
the goods. Given this, and that the relevant right of action and entitlement are
vested in an "affected
person in relation to
ss 271(1) and 272(1), it is incongruous that, in s 272(1)(a) alone and
in no other provision concerning damages, there
should be a requirement for the
affected person to retain title to the goods.
incongruity is exacerbated by comparison with s 259(3), (4) and (6) of the
ACL. A consumer may reject the goods under s 259(3)(a)
or "by action
against the supplier, recover compensation for any reduction in the value of the
goods below the price paid or payable
by the consumer for the goods" under
s 259(3)(b),
"by action against the supplier, recover damages
for any loss or damage suffered by the consumer because of the failure to comply
with the guarantee if it was reasonably foreseeable that the consumer would
suffer such loss or damage as a result of such a failure"
under s 259(4).
Importantly, s 259(6) provides that "[t]o avoid doubt, subsection (4)
applies in addition to subsections (2) and
(3)" and there is no
equivalent to s 272(3) excluding from s 259(4) damages for reduction
in value. This does not indicate that s
259(3)(b) is to be construed as
meaning "by action against the supplier, recover compensation for any reduction
in the value of the
goods below the price paid or payable by
the consumer for the goods". Under s 259(3), the remedy of rejection of the
goods is an
alternative to the remedy of recovery of compensation for any
reduction in the value of the goods. It is only the remedy of recovery
damages under s 259(4) which is additional to either rejection of the goods
under s 259(3)(a) or recovery of compensation for
any reduction in the
value of the goods under s 259(3)(b). The control on double recovery under
ss 259(3)(b) and 259(4) is the limit
imposed by the fact that the right in
both cases is one of recovery.
s 262(1)(b), which provides that a consumer is not entitled under
s 259 to notify a supplier of goods that the consumer
rejects the goods if
"the goods have been lost, destroyed or disposed of by the consumer", concerns
only the circumstances of, relevantly,
destruction of the goods by the consumer.
It does not deal with goods otherwise destroyed including because of failure to
with the statutory guarantee.
addition, a supplier may seek indemnity from the manufacturer for its liability
to pay damages to the consumer under s 274(1),
but such a right of
indemnity only exists if "the manufacturer is or would be liable under
section 271 to pay damages to the consumer
for the same loss or damage". If
s 272(1)(a) applies only to an affected person who continues to own the
goods, a supplier may be
liable to a consumer under s 259(3)(b) or (4) for
a reduction in the value of the goods yet not have a right of indemnity from the
manufacturer because the consumer did not have title to the goods at the time of
the claim against the supplier. While this apparent
anomaly could be avoided by
construing s 259(3)(b) as meaning "by action against the supplier, recover
compensation for any reduction
in the value of the
goods below
the price paid or payable by the consumer for the goods" (analogously to the
construction of s 272(1)(a) in the joint
reasons), it is less clear how the
apparent anomaly can be avoided for s 259(4), which contains no reference
to the goods.
Section 271(6)
also does not support the imposition of a limitation of ownership on
s 272(1)(a). In particular, and as noted, the
provision contemplates that a
person will continue to be an affected person in relation to the goods, to
enable recovery under s
272(1)(b), even when the manufacturer has replaced
the goods (so the person no longer owns the goods).
it had been intended that an affected person in relation to goods would have the
right in s 272(1)(a) only for so long as they
retained ownership to the
goods, then the structure of s 272(1) is poorly adapted to achieve that
object. The provision contains
a single opening statement giving no hint that
continued ownership of the goods is relevant. Section 272(1)(a) refers to
"the goods"
simpliciter. In s 272(1)(b), moreover, continued ownership of
the goods is manifestly irrelevant.
relevant legislative history (again) does not provide much assistance in
resolving the meaning of this aspect of the statutory
provisions. As noted, the
legislative history exposes that the definition of "affected person" in relation
to goods was included
in predecessor legislation to extend the reach of the
provisions to persons who take title to goods or derive title from a consumer
because, otherwise, such persons would be excluded from the provisions and would
have no recourse against the supplier of the goods
in contract.
debate in the House of Representatives in connection with the Second Reading
Speech concerning the
Trade Practices Amendment Bill 1978
"The second amendment which I have said we will support relates to a
manufacturer's liability where his goods are of unmerchantable
quality. That
liability will be extended to the successors in title to a consumer. So the
liability will not extend only when the
first owner of the goods sells them to a
second owner; it will remain with those goods when they are passed on, such as
in the case
of a gift passing from a father to a daughter."
statement is ambiguous, however, because it refers to "extending" liability with
the title and liability remaining with the
goods, rather than liability being
removed as title passes.
Explanatory Memorandum concerning the
Trade Practices Amendment Bill 1978
(as amended) said that "[t]hese amendments are to section 74D and
extend a manufacturer's liability, where his goods are of unmerchantable
quality, to the successors in title of a consumer who originally acquired the
however, a legislative intention to extend rights beyond the consumer to persons
taking title to goods or deriving title
through or under a consumer is one
thing. A legislative intention to deny rights to a consumer (or a person taking
title to goods
or deriving title through or under a consumer) by reason of the
passing of title is another, as the examples provided above expose.
Accordingly,
there is insufficient textual, contextual, or purposive support in the statutory
provisions to construe s 272(1)(a)
as if it includes a requirement that the
affected person retain ownership of the goods. As observed above, the
significance of the
lack of clear textual support in the provisions is
reinforced by
Electricity Trust of South Australia v Krone (Australia)
Technique Pty Ltd
which discloses that there was express legislative precedent for confining the
right of action to a consumer who continues to have
lawful possession of the
goods. Despite that, no such limitation is expressed in the ACL.
these reasons, to the extent that "the general purpose and policy of a provision
and its consistency and fairness are surer guides
to its meaning than the logic
with which it is
constructed",
discussion above weighs in favour of construing s 272(1)(a) not as
requiring the affected person to continue to own the goods
in order to have an
entitlement to recover damages but, rather, to require effect to be given to the
limitation inherent in the concept
of an entitlement only to "recover" damages
and no more.
Observations about "value" and "valuation"
considering the reasoning of the primary judge and the Full Court, it is
convenient to distinguish between the concepts of:
(a) the time of a
valuation; (b) the date of a valuation; and (c) the information which
may be brought to bear on a valuation –
as each concept performs a
distinct function. The time of a valuation is the time at which the valuer
(judicial or otherwise) conducts
the valuation. In the case of a judicial
valuer, the time of a valuation is generally the date of judgment of the action.
of valuation is the date (usually in the past) to which the valuation
relates. The information that may be brought to bear on the
valuation at the
date of valuation is dictated by the terms of the statute or other instrument or
agreement under which the valuation
classic formulation of the common law's conception of "market value" in
Australia of Isaacs J in
Spencer v The
Commonwealth
continuing relevance. Isaacs J
"All circumstances subsequently arising are to be ignored. Whether the land
becomes more valuable or less valuable afterwards is
immaterial. Its value is
fixed by Statute as on that day. Prosperity unexpected, or depression which no
man would ever have anticipated,
if happening after the date named, must be
alike disregarded. The facts existing on 1st January 1905 are the only
relevant facts,
and the all important fact on that day is the opinion regarding
the fair price of the land, which a hypothetical prudent purchaser
entertain, if he desired to purchase it for the most advantageous purpose for
which it was adapted. The plaintiff is to be
compensated; therefore he is to
receive the money equivalent to the loss he has sustained by deprivation of his
land, and that loss,
apart from special damage not here claimed, cannot exceed
what such a prudent purchaser would be prepared to give him. To arrive
value of the land at that date, we have, as I conceive, to suppose it sold then,
not by means of a forced sale, but by voluntary
bargaining between the plaintiff
and a purchaser, willing to trade, but neither of them so anxious to do so that
he would overlook
any ordinary business consideration. We must further suppose
both to be perfectly acquainted with the land, and cognizant of all
circumstances which might affect its value, either advantageously or
prejudicially, including its situation, character, quality,
proximity to
conveniences or inconveniences, its surrounding features, the then present
demand for land, and the likelihood, as then
appearing to persons best capable
of forming an opinion, of a rise or fall for what reason soever in the amount
which one would otherwise
be willing to fix as the value of the property."
this classic statement of principle, if read literally, is inaccurate, however.
For example, it has never been that "all" circumstances
subsequently arising are
to be ignored in determining market value. Subject to any applicable contrary
prescription, it has always
been open to a valuer (judicial or otherwise) to
have regard to sales after the date of valuation if those sales are
"comparable".
This is a logical necessity. For example, the best comparable sale
may be a sale that occurs the day after the date of valuation.
common law conception of market value is that of the price point at which a
hypothetical, prudent, willing but not anxious, and
fully informed buyer and
seller would meet to transact the notional sale on the date of valuation. In
this context, "fully informed"
means "perfectly acquainted with the land [or
good], and cognizant of all circumstances which might affect its
conception of market value remains relevant in many circumstances, but the
extent to which it may be applied will depend on
the terms of the statute,
instrument, or agreement under which the valuation is made.
primary judge's reasoning
primary judge correctly attributed to the hypothetical reasonable consumer at
the time of supply full acquaintance with the Core
Defect and the relatively
high prospect of the Defect Consequences manifesting in every Relevant Vehicle
in ordinary driving conditions.
judicial valuer, the primary judge: (a) did not accept the entirety of any
of the expert evidence relevant to the reduction in
value; (b) treated
Mr Cuthbert's valuation evidence as no more than a "helpful indication of
the likely reduction in value to be
generally";
(c) treated the economic and related evidence of other experts as no more
than "of some limited utility in coming to a landing
on a figure for any
reduction in value"
and as "of some use"
respectively.
the primary judge: (a) gave weight to "the entirety of the expert evidence
and the submissions advanced by the parties in
respect of that
(b) recognised the "evaluative and imprecise exercise" which he was
performing;
(c) considered that, on the whole of the evidence and as a matter of common
sense, the reduction in value must be "a figure of
significance";
(d) assessed, doing the best he could, the range of any such reduction to
be in the order of 15 per cent to 20 per cent, and
in the middle of that range on
17.5 per cent.
Moreover, the primary judge did so in circumstances where, as he said, Toyota's
experts did not provide his Honour with "any real
analysis of their own as to
the reduction in value that was suffered by group
The Full Court's reasoning
Full Court's reasons record that "by the time of the initial trial, it was known
that the 2020 field fix was available and the
experts agreed that, in
consequence, there was no ongoing reduction in
According to
the Full Court, "the prospective reinstatement of value reflected the fact that
the fix would restore the utility of
Full Court concluded that the primary judge: (a) in applying a "broad brush
approach", "failed to have regard to the extent of
the validity of the main
criticisms raised by Toyota, namely the focus upon the salvage value and the
associated (implicit) view
that the vehicle was so defective it needed to be
repaired before it had any real utility as a motor
(b) should have treated "Mr Cuthbert's percentage reduction in value
with considerable circumspection" and not used it "as a
useful guide to
valuation without making due allowance for the matters to
the Full Court
had referred (that is, Mr Cuthbert overly relying on salvage value and
ignoring "utility value").
Full Court also said that: (a) "assessment of the reduction in value
resulting from a failure to comply with the consumer guarantee
should not be
made on the basis of an unadjusted resale
(b) Mr Cuthbert failed "to grapple with the effect on an aggregate
assessment of reduction in value damages of the possibility
that a free fix may
become available" in circumstances where the representative example,
Mr Williams' Relevant Vehicle, was purchased
in 2016 but other Relevant
Vehicles were purchased later in the Relevant
on appellate review of judicial valuation
identified in
appeal under
Federal Court of Australia Act
(Cth) the Full Court "is to decide the case – the facts as
well as the law – for itself. In so doing it must recognize
the advantages
enjoyed by the judge who conducted the trial. But if the judges of appeal
consider that in the circumstances the trial
judge was in no better position to
decide the particular question than they are themselves, or if, after giving
full weight to [the
trial judge's] decision, they consider that it was wrong,
they must discharge their duty and give effect to their own
this case, the primary judge alone had the advantage of seeing and hearing
Mr Cuthbert give evidence. Mr Cuthbert gave evidence
in a concurrent
session with Mr O'Mara, a valuer specialising not in vehicle valuations (as
Mr Cuthbert did), but in the valuing
of company assets for the purpose of
merger and acquisition transactions and bank financing. Mr Cuthbert not
only gave an opening
statement in the concurrent session, but also was
cross‑examined at some length. In dealing with valuation evidence of the
kind which Mr Cuthbert gave, and which Mr Cuthbert rightly described
as "impressionistic", the views the primary judge formed reflected
his Honour's
distinct advantage in seeing and hearing Mr Cuthbert give evidence. These
views included his Honour's acceptance of:
(a) Mr Cuthbert's denial in
cross‑examination that he did not apply his own
methodology;
(b) Mr Cuthbert's explanation in cross‑examination that he did
not start from the salvage value and work upwards but used
salvage value only to
"bookend the analysis", as a yardstick to which it was "appropriate to have
having seen and heard Mr Cuthbert give extensive evidence, the primary
judge had a distinct advantage over the Full Court
in ascertaining the weight to
be given to the fact that Mr Cuthbert was "a professional car valuer with
50 years' experience".
That advantage meant that the primary judge did not err in concluding that
Mr Cuthbert's evidence could "serve as a helpful indication
of the likely
reduction in value to be applied
generally".
Allsop J said in
Branir Pty Ltd v Owston Nominees (No 2) Pty
, "[t]he advantages of the trial judge may be more subtle and imprecise,
yet real, not giving rise to a protection of the nature accorded
credibility
findings, but, nevertheless, being highly relevant to the assessment of the
weight to be accorded the views of the trial
Full Court's conclusion that the primary judge erred in the use he made of
Mr Cuthbert's evidence is also difficult to reconcile
with the Full Court's
(accurate) recognition that the primary judge considered the parties had placed
"too much emphasis upon expert
evidence when the task that was required to be
undertaken involved a much more practical and common sense
(correct) view that the primary judge did not err in considering that reasonable
buyers of a Relevant Vehicle would treat the
Core Defect as "very significant
when reaching a conclusion as to an appropriate percentage reduction" to the
sale price at the time
Full Court's ultimate view was that the primary judge erred by not treating
"Mr Cuthbert's percentage reduction in value with
considerable
circumspection",
it is clear from the primary judge's reasons that his Honour treated all the
expert evidence, including that of Mr Cuthbert,
with a high degree of
circumspection. As the primary judge put it, "[a]fter trudging manfully through
the expert evidence, it is
necessary to recall the basic
proposition ... 'valuation is an art, not an exact
high degree of circumspection is apparent also from the fact that the primary
judge's reduction in value of 17.5 per cent,
representing the middle
of a range of 15 per cent to 20 per cent, is substantially
lower than Mr Cuthbert's range of reduction in
23.5 per cent to 27 per cent.
primary judge referred
to several well‑known observations about judicial and other valuations
which remain important, including that: (a) "[v]aluation
is an art, not an
exact science. Mathematical certainty is not demanded, nor indeed is it
(b) valuation is "a jury question, in the sense that it was to be decided,
not by a strict adherence to precise arithmetical
calculations, but by a
commonsense endeavour, after consideration of all the material before the court,
to fix a sum satisfactory
to the mind of the court as representing the
observations may be
"[I]n all valuations, judicial or other, there must be room for inferences and
inclinations of opinion which, being more or less
conjectural, are difficult to
reduce to exact reasoning or to explain to others. Everyone who has gone through
the process is aware
of this lack of demonstrative proof in his own mind, and
knows that every expert witness called before him has had his own set of
conjectures, of more or less weight according to his experience and personal
sagacity. In such an inquiry as the present, relating
to subjects abounding with
uncertainties and on which there is little experience, there is more than
ordinary room for such guesswork;
and it would the very unfair to require an
exact exposition of reasons for the conclusions arrived at."
court also "should be slow to reject any method [of valuation] that, in expert
hands, is capable of yielding a result within bounds
that are not unreasonable",
though "[t]he limitations of every method must, of course, always be kept
clearly in mind".
primary judge's approach, of giving some (albeit variable) weight to the
entirety of the expert evidence, accorded with this
orthodoxy of judicial
nature of valuation as "an imprecise, opinionative activity involving the
consideration of many variables, sometimes with equally
why, in assessing damages (based on valuation or otherwise), a court must do the
"best it can",
the state of the evidence leaves the court to engage in estimation and even
"guess work".
given the nature of valuation, judicial or otherwise, and as Gageler J put
it, albeit in a different
"The appellate court needs to be conscious that '[n]o judicial reasons can ever
state all of the pertinent factors; nor can they
express every feature of the
evidence that causes a decision‑maker to prefer one factual conclusion
over another'. The more
prominently limitations of that nature feature in a
particular appeal, the more difficult it will be for the appellate court to be
satisfied that the primary judge was in error."
the context of judicial valuation, provided the valuation is based on the
correct legal principles, any appellate urge to quibble,
cavil, or nitpick with
the value determined must be resisted. The observation of Mason J in
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v St Helens Farm (ACT) Pty Ltd
"[O]n a question of valuation an appellate tribunal is not justified in
substituting its own opinion for that of the court below
unless it is satisfied
that the court below acted on a wrong principle of law or that its valuation was
entirely erroneous."
"entirely erroneous" valuation should be understood as one where the value
determined is outside all bounds of reasonable tolerance.
In such a case, the
value determined is necessarily wrong.
and as noted in
Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd
judicial valuer is not bound merely to choose between competing expert
valuations or to accept valuation evidence, even if that
evidence is based on
correct assumptions as to facts and law, but is entitled to their own view of
matters arising on the reasoning of the Full Court
s 272(1)(a), there is no separate concept of "utility value" (meaning the
value from the use of the
There is only
the price paid or payable for the goods (or the average retail price of the
goods at the time of supply) compared to
the true value of those goods resulting
from the failure to comply with the statutory guarantee at the time of supply (a
representing those goods' reduction in value). The entitlement to
recover damages of an amount under s 272(1)(a) is not to be reduced
applying a separate concept of utility value because Relevant Vehicles could be
used despite the Core Defect. To attempt to separately
overlay the concept of
"utility" onto the statutory provisions would involve a substantial discount of
the mandated entitlement to
recover damages that is not permitted by the
statutory scheme. Accordingly, it is not the case that, having restored the
of the Relevant Vehicle, the 2020 Field Fix thereby reinstated the value
of the Relevant Vehicle in a manner relevant to the operation
s 272(1)(a).
is also not the case that "by the time of the initial trial, it was known that
the 2020 field fix was available and the experts
agreed that, in consequence,
there was no ongoing reduction in
Mr Cuthbert did not agree that the availability of the 2020 Field Fix meant
that, at the date of supply, there was no reduction in
value of a Relevant
Vehicle. The cross‑examination on which Toyota relied to support the Full
Court's characterisation of the
expert evidence concerned a paragraph of
Mr Cuthbert's first report. It should be inferred that when
Mr Cuthbert referred in that
paragraph to not reducing value if a repair
was available at no cost, he had in mind a repair that would be (and was in
fact) applied
to the Relevant Vehicle promptly ("promptly" meaning a matter of
days, possibly weeks, but not months). In cross‑examination,
Mr Cuthbert agreed with the proposition put to him by Toyota's senior
counsel that if he were asked to calculate the reduction
in value in the
Relevant Vehicles referable to the defect "now" he would not reduce the value at
all because of the availability
of the 2020 Field Fix, Mr Cuthbert was not
referring to value at the time of supply. He was referring to value "now", being
of his cross‑examination, by which time the 2020 Field Fix not
only was available but had been applied to some Relevant Vehicles.
He was also
not asked anything about the effect the time it might take for the 2020 Field
Fix to be applied to any Relevant Vehicle
would have on his answer.
is exposed in Mr Cuthbert's subsequent report, answering the further
questions from the primary judge. Critically, Mr Cuthbert's
question two (what is the reduction in value of the Relevant Vehicles
attributable to the defect assessed as at the time
of purchase, using the
information available today?) was that, for Mr Williams' Relevant Vehicle, the
reduction in value would be
the same, 23.5 per cent to
27 per cent less, as his valuation for question one (what is the
reduction in value of the Relevant Vehicles
attributable to the defect assessed
as at the time of purchase, using only information which was available at the
time of purchase?).
Mr Cuthbert said this was so because from the time of
purchase, April 2016, to the time of the 2020 Field Fix becoming available,
2020, was a "long period of time" and Mr Williams "was faced with the
Defect Consequences for an approximate 4‑year period".
Therefore, it is
not the case that Mr Cuthbert "failed to grapple with the effect on an
aggregate assessment of reduction in value
damages of the possibility that a
free fix may become
available".
be said that Mr Cuthbert's evidence "overstated the reduction in value"
because of that alleged
the Full Court's (otherwise correct) proposition that "assessment of the
reduction in value resulting from a failure to
comply with the consumer
guarantee should not be made on the basis of an unadjusted resale
implies that
this is what Mr Cuthbert did. Mr Cuthbert's reduction in value of
23.5 per cent to 27 per cent was not based on re‑sale
value. It was based on the value that the hypothetical reasonable consumer would
have been willing to pay at the time of supply to
Mr Williams (that being
the representative purchase). Re‑sale value was merely one of a
multiplicity of factors that Mr Cuthbert
considered in assessing the true
value of the Relevant Vehicle at the time of supply to Mr Williams.
while the Full Court was also correct to observe that Mr Cuthbert's
evidence was based on the circumstances of Mr Williams
and other Relevant
Vehicles were purchased later in the Relevant Period, the primary judge's
findings supported his conclusion that
a uniform percentage reduction of value
applies to all Relevant Vehicles. The primary judge found that the likelihood or
probability
of every Relevant Vehicle manifesting one or more of the Defect
Consequences was "relatively
and that the
Defect Consequences, if they occurred, were
significant.
circumstances, if an affected person acquired the Relevant Vehicle days or weeks
before the 2020 Field Fix became available
and the 2020 Field Fix was applied to
the vehicle effectively and promptly (within days, possibly weeks, but not
months) and with
little inconvenience to the affected person, then the
entitlement to recover the amount assessed in accordance with para (a) of
272(1) may be displaced. Mr Williams is not within that category of
affected persons. It is not clear if any other group member is
within that
category. If, however, there are group members within that category, the
potential consequences of such a finding are
that: (a) there has been no
failure to comply with the guarantee in
of the ACL, having regard
to the matters in
; (b) s 271(6) applies so that there is
no entitlement to bring an action under s 272(1)(a); (c) the affected
person has no damages
to "recover" within the meaning of s 272(1)(a); or
(d) there has been no reduction in value within the scope of
s 272(1)(a).
Applying s 272(1)(a) in the present
relevant failure to comply with the statutory guarantee of acceptable quality
of the ACL in this case, being the "Core
characterised as a design defect creating a relatively high propensity or risk
for the "Defect
Consequences"
manifest in every "Relevant
272(1)(a) requires attribution to the hypothetical reasonable consumer at the
time of supply of the Relevant Vehicle knowledge
not only of the Core Defect
(being the failure to comply with the guarantee of acceptable quality under
, but also of every fact, matter, and circumstance resulting from
the Core Defect. Those facts, matters, and circumstances include:
"relatively high" propensity or risk of the Defect Consequences manifesting as a
result of the Core
each Relevant Vehicle was not "suitable for use in all driving
conditions";
(c) that the Defect Consequences, if they manifested, were of a kind that
had "a significant impact upon consumers' use and enjoyment
of the Relevant
(d) that the 2020 Field Fix only became available in May 2020; and
(e) that the 2020 Field Fix had not yet been applied to Mr Williams'
Relevant Vehicle (and presumably others), despite Mr Williams (and presumably
others) seeking that to occur.
the primary judge evaluated the propensity or risk of every Relevant Vehicle to
manifest one or more of the Defect Consequences
to be "relatively
(a) is not one in which the risk of manifestation of the Defect
Consequences was sufficiently minor to be disregarded by
a hypothetical
reasonable consumer at the time of supply of a Relevant Vehicle, with the
potential consequence of either there being
no failure to comply with the
guarantee of acceptable quality under
or no reduction in
value within the scope of s 272(1)(a); and (b) supports the conclusion
that no hypothetical reasonable consumer
would have paid the same or
substantially the same price for a Relevant Vehicle with the Core Defect at the
time of supply as they
would have paid for a Relevant Vehicle without the Core
Defect at the time of supply.
given the relatively high prospect of one or more of the Defect Consequences
manifesting and the significance of the Defect
Consequences, this is not a case
in which the manifestation or non-manifestation of any one or more of the Defect
Consequences in
a Relevant Vehicle affects the reduction in value assessed in
accordance with s 272(1)(a). That is, on the facts as found, the
hypothetical
reasonable consumer attributed with the relevant knowledge at the
time of supply would not pay more for a Relevant Vehicle merely
because a part
of that attributed knowledge is that although the Relevant Vehicle suffers from
the Core Defect and has a relatively
high prospect of manifesting one or more of
the Defect Consequences, no Defect Consequence would manifest during that
person's use
of the vehicle.
and given the knowledge of the facts, matters, and circumstances required to be
attributed to the hypothetical reasonable
consumer at the time of supply of each
Relevant Vehicle, the primary judge was right to conclude that: (a) it
could not be said that
Mr Williams' Relevant Vehicle was "as ... free from
defects ... as a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and
of the goods (including any hidden defects of the goods), would regard
as acceptable having regard to the matters in"
(b) as there is "no impediment to determining the issue of acceptable
quality on a common
there is also
no impediment to determining the reduction in value on a common basis; and
(c) "when the Defect Consequences manifested,
which was a certainty
occasioned by the normal use of highway driving, they were serious", so that
"the reduction in value of all
of the Relevant Vehicles, which each had the
propensity to suffer from the Defect Consequences, was far from
insignificant".
Accordingly,
the primary judge: (a) applied an orthodox approach to the statutory
valuation task; and (b) made factual findings (not
successfully challenged)
that amply supported a reduction in value of 17.5 per cent below the
purchase price at the time of supply
as the amount of the reduction in value
yielded by application of para (a) of s 272(1). The only difference
between my conclusions
and those of the primary judge is that I would allow that
there might be some group member who acquired the Relevant Vehicle days
before the 2020 Field Fix became available and the 2020 Field Fix was applied to
the vehicle effectively and promptly (within
days, possibly weeks, but not
months) and with little inconvenience to the affected person, in which event the
entitlement to recover
the amount assessed in accordance with para (a) of
s 272(1) may be displaced for that person (as explained above). It is not
whether the orders the primary judge made on 16 May 2022 allow
for that possibility (although they may do so given the exclusion
Field Fix Relevant Vehicle" from the order for damages in order 2).
these reasons, grounds 1(b), 2(c) and 2(d) of Mr Williams' notice of
appeal should be allowed. Toyota's appeal should be dismissed.
of the orders of the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia made on
27 March 2023 should be set aside, as should
the Full Court's orders of
12 May 2023. In lieu thereof, it should be ordered that the appeal to the
Full Court be dismissed, subject
only to order 2 made by the primary judge
on 16 May 2022 being varied to the extent necessary to exclude from
order 2 any group member
who acquired the Relevant Vehicle days or weeks
before the 2020 Field Fix became available and the 2020 Field Fix was applied to
the vehicle effectively and promptly (within days, possibly weeks, but not
months) and with little inconvenience to the affected
person, whose claim for
compensation may require further consideration. Toyota should pay the costs of
the appeal to the Full Court
and of the appeals to this Court.
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth), Sch 2 ("ACL"),
ACL, s 54(2).
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 ("
") at 520-521
[20]-[21], 580 [317].
See [15]-[16].
[2024] HCA 39.
Williams v Toyota Motor Corporation Australia
[2022] FCA 344
") at [6], [15(1)-(2)].
[2022] FCA 344
[15(3)-(4)]
[2022] FCA 344
[15(5)-(6)]
[2022] FCA 344
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 519
[2022] FCA 344
[2022] FCA 344
[2022] FCA 344
[2022] FCA 344
[2022] FCA 344
[2022] FCA 344
[2022] FCA 344
[2022] FCA 344
ACL, s 54(2)(a);
ACL, s 54(2)(b);
[2022] FCA 344
ACL, s 54(2)(c);
[2022] FCA 344
ACL, s 54(2)(e);
[2022] FCA 344
ACL, s 54(2), (3)(a)-(b);
[2022] FCA 344
, [196]-[197].
[2022] FCA 344
[2022] FCA 344
[2022] FCA 344
[2022] FCA 344
[2022] FCA 344
[2022] FCA 344
[2022] FCA 344
, [513(1)].
s 272(1)(a)(i)-(ii).
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR
, 577 [295].
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 542
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 546
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR
514 at 580-581
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams [No 2]
[2023] FCAFC 70
Toyota No 2
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 544-545
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR
Competition and Consumer Act
Australia, House of Representatives,
Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill (No 2) 2010
Explanatory Memorandum.
Commonwealth Consumer Affairs
Advisory Council,
Consumer Rights: Reforming Statutory Implied Conditions and
, Final Report (2009) ("CCAAC Report"); Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill
(No 2) 2010
, Explanatory Memorandum at 177-178 [7.7].
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill
(No 2) 2010
, Explanatory Memorandum at 18, 617 [25.85]; CCAAC
Report at 31, 47, 65.
ACL, s 3(2).
ACL, s 3(1).
[2022] FCA 344
, [188]-[189].
[1933] HCA 35
; (1933) 50 CLR 387 at 418.
See, for example,
Sale of Goods Act 1923
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) ("TPA"),
Australian Knitting Mills
Ltd v Grant
[1933] HCA 35
; (1933) 50 CLR 387 at 417-418.
[1968] UKHL 3
; [1969] 2 AC 31.
Pursuant to the
Goods Act 1893
(UK), s 14(2).
Sons v William Lillico & Sons Ltd
[1968] UKHL 3
; [1969] 2 AC 31
") at 39, 75.
[1968] UKHL 3
; [1969] 2 AC 31
[1968] UKHL 3
; [1969] 2 AC 31
at 76-77; cf
Sale of Goods Act 1923
[1968] UKHL 3
; [1969] 2 AC 31
[1968] UKHL 3
; [1969] 2 AC 31
[1968] UKHL 3
; [1969] 2 AC 31
[1968] UKHL 3
; [1969] 2 AC 31
at 118-119.
[1968] UKHL 3
; [1969] 2 AC 31
at 118-119.
[2003] FCAFC 151
; (2003) 130 FCR 182.
Medtel Pty Ltd v
[2003] FCAFC 151
; (2003) 130 FCR 182 at 189-190
Pty Ltd v Courtney
[2003] FCAFC 151
; (2003) 130 FCR 182 at
[2003] FCAFC 151
; (2003) 130 FCR 182 at 206
of the ACL.
ACL, s 260.
ACL, s 259(3).
ACL, s 259(4).
ACL, s 2(1).
TPA, ss 74B(1), 74C(1),
74D(1), 74E(1).
ACL, s 273.
[2020] HCA 17
; (2020) 268 CLR 326.
Moore v Scenic Tours Pty
[2020] HCA 17
; (2020) 268 CLR 326 at 348-349
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 539
McGregor on
, 22nd ed (2024) at 1 [1‑001].
Whitfeld v De Lauret &
[1920] HCA 75
; (1920) 29 CLR 71 at 80; cf Edelman,
McGregor on Damages
ed (2024) at 4-5 [1‑008]-[1‑009].
Remedies for Torts,
Breach of Contract, and Equitable Wrongs
, 4th ed (2019) at 35; see, for
Lewis v Australian Capital Territory
[2020] HCA 26
; (2020) 271 CLR 192 at
See, for example, ACL,
ss 99(3), 138(3)(a).
See, for example, ACL,
ss 41(1)(b)
, 106(7), 239.
See, for example, ACL,
ss 259(4), 267(4).
ACL, s 259(3)(b).
Acts Interpretation Act
TPA, s 74D.
TPA, ss 74B(1), 74C(1),
74D(1), 74E(1).
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill
(No 2) 2010
, Explanatory Memorandum at 205 [7.122].
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR
HTW Valuers (Central Qld)
Pty Ltd v Astonland Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 54
; (2004) 217 CLR 640 at 657
omitted), citing
Potts v Miller
[1940] HCA 43
; (1940) 64 CLR 282 at 289, 300.
Spencer v The Commonwealth
(1907) 5 CLR 418 at 440-441.
Kizbeau Pty Ltd v W G &
[1995] HCA 4
; (1995) 184 CLR 281 at 291-296, cited in
HTW Valuers
(Central Qld) Pty Ltd v Astonland Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 54
; (2004) 217 CLR 640 at 658
[2004] HCA 54
; (2004) 217 CLR 640 at 657
See, for example,
Pty Ltd v W G & B Pty Ltd
[1995] HCA 4
; (1995) 184 CLR 281.
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR
ACL, s 272(3).
Protec Pacific Pty
Ltd v Steuler Services GmbH & Co KG
[2014] VSCA 338
Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd
(2023) 381 FLR 32 at 66 [155].
ACL, s 2(1).
ACL, s 2(1).
Kelly v The Queen
[2004] HCA 12
; (2004) 218 CLR 216 at 253
Qantas Airways Ltd v Transport Workers'
Union of Australia
[2023] HCA 27
; (2023) 97 ALJR 711 at 725
[2023] HCA 27
; 412 ALR 134 at 152.
2 Elizabeth Bay Road
Pty Ltd v The Owners – Strata Plan No 73943
[2014] NSWCA 409
; (2014) 88 NSWLR 488 at 508
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill
(No 2) 2010
, Explanatory Memorandum at 609-610 [25.56]-[25.57].
ACL, s 263(6).
ACL, s 274(1)(b).
ACL, s 274(1)(b).
Trade Practices Amendment
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 17 October 1978 at
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment Bill 1978
, Explanatory
Memorandum on Amendments to the Bill, amendments (5)-(7).
Trade Practices Revision
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill
(No 2) 2010
, Explanatory Memorandum at 205 [7.121].
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR
514 at 544-545
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR
[2019] HCA 28
; (2019) 266 CLR 129 at 148-149
Toyota No 2
Competition and Consumer
(Cth), Sch 2.
[2024] HCA 39
Birks, "Civil Wrongs: A New
Butterworth Lectures 1990-91
55 at 56-57.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill
, Explanatory Memorandum at 18.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill (No
, Explanatory Memorandum at 18.
Australian Knitting Mills
Ltd v Grant
[1933] HCA 35
; (1933) 50 CLR 387 at 417-418, not disturbed in this respect on
Grant v Australian Knitting Mills Ltd
[1936] AC 85 at 99-100.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill (No
, Explanatory Memorandum at 18.
Moore v Scenic
Tours Pty Ltd
[2020] HCA 17
; (2020) 268 CLR 326 at 347-349
Australian Consumer
ss 259(3), 267(3) and 272(1)(a).
Australian Consumer
ss 259(4), 267(4) and 272(1)(b).
Lewis v Australian
Capital Territory
[2020] HCA 26
; (2020) 271 CLR 192 at 239-240
Admiralty Commissioners v SS Susquehanna
[1926] AC 655 at 661,
O'Brien v McKean
[1968] HCA 58
; (1968) 118 CLR 540 at 557, and
Johnson v Perez
[1988] HCA 64
; (1988) 166 CLR 351 at 386.
Rabot v Hassam
[2024] UKSC 11
2 WLR 949 at 954
; [2024] 3 All ER 1 at 4. See also Burrows,
Remedies for
Torts, Breach of Contract, and Equitable Wrongs
, 4th ed (2019) at 35.
Agricultural Land
Management Ltd v Jackson [No 2]
[2014] WASC 102
; (2014) 48 WAR 1 at 64-67
Libertarian Investments Ltd v Hall
(2013) 16 HKCFAR 681 at 732 [168];
Interactive Technology Corporation Ltd v Ferster
[2018] EWCA Civ 1594
, quoting Hayton, Matthews and Mitchell,
Underhill and
Hayton—Law Relating to Trusts and Trustees
, 19th ed (2016) at 1149
[87.7], 1151 [87.11] and
Libertarian Investments Ltd v Hall
HKCFAR 681 at 732 [168], 733 [170].
Bellgrove v Eldridge
[1954] HCA 36
; (1954) 90 CLR 613 at 617.
Stone v Chappel
(2017) 128 SASR 165
at 206 [200].
Moon v Raphael
[1835] EngR 995
; (1835) 2 Bing NC 310 [132 ER 122].
[2013] HCA 56
; (2013) 253 CLR 1 at 31-32
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Australian Consumer
Kizbeau Pty Ltd v W G
& B Pty Ltd
[1995] HCA 4
; (1995) 184 CLR 281 at 291;
HTW Valuers (Central Qld) Pty
Ltd v Astonland Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 54
; (2004) 217 CLR 640 at 661-663
Potts v Miller
[1940] HCA 43
64 CLR 282 at 300.
Johnson v Perez
[1988] HCA 64
; (1988) 166 CLR 351 at 357, 386.
Williams Brothers v
Ed T Agius Ltd
[1914] UKLawRpAC 10
; [1914] AC 510 at 520;
Jamal v Moolla Dawood, Sons & Co
[1916] 1 AC 175
Bainton v Hallam Ltd
(1920) 60 SCR 325
Wardley Australia Ltd v
Western Australia
[1992] HCA 55
; (1992) 175 CLR 514 at 537-538.
Australian Consumer
, ss 259(3)(b), 272(1)(a)(i); see also, in relation to supply of
services, s 267(3)(b).
HTW Valuers (Central Qld)
Pty Ltd v Astonland Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 54
; (2004) 217 CLR 640 at 659
[1940] HCA 43
; (1940) 64 CLR 282 at 298.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill
(No 2) 2010
, Explanatory Memorandum at 206 [7.123].
Haines v Bendall
[1991] HCA 15
; (1991) 172 CLR 60 at 63. See also
The Commonwealth v Amann Aviation Pty
[1991] HCA 54
; (1991) 174 CLR 64 at 82.
Lewis v Australian
Capital Territory
[2020] HCA 26
; (2020) 271 CLR 192 at 243
Australian Consumer
, ss 259(4), 272(1)(b).
For a supply in trade or
Australian Consumer Law
, s 259(1).
Australian Consumer
Australian Consumer
, ss 259(2)(b)(ii), 259(3)(a).
Australian Consumer
, s 259(3)(b).
Australian Consumer
, s 263(4).
Australian Consumer
, s 262(1)(b).
Australian Consumer
, s 259(3)(b), an alternative to s 259(3)(a).
Australian Consumer
, s 259(3)(a), read with s 263(4)(b).
Australian Consumer
, s 259(4).
See, for instance,
Arsalan v Rixon
[2021] HCA 40
; (2021) 274 CLR 606 at 621-623
Australian Consumer
, s 2(1) definition of "consumer", read with s 3, especially
ss 3(1), 3(2) and 3(12).
Australian Consumer
, s 2(1) definition of "affected person".
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
17 October 1978 at 1922; see also Australia, House of Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment Bill 1978
, Explanatory Memorandum on Amendments
to the Bill at 2, amendments (5), (6) and (7).
Tanning Research
Laboratories Inc v O'Brien
(1990) 169 CLR 332 at 353;
Rinehart v Hancock
Prospecting Pty Ltd
[2019] HCA 13
; (2019) 267 CLR 514 at 552-554
Evans, Cohen and Willis,
Trade Practices Act
: Proposals for Change
(1984) at 23 [109]; see
also at 59 (cl 34(1) definition of "acquire").
Australian Consumer
, s 271(6).
Australian Consumer
, s 271(6).
Australian Consumer
, s 272(1)(a). See Australia, House of Representatives,
Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill (No 2) 2010
, Explanatory
Memorandum at 205-206 [7.122].
See Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill (No
, Explanatory Memorandum at 206 [7.124].
Australian Consumer
, s 271(2).
Australian Consumer
, s 271(2)(a).
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill (No
, Explanatory Memorandum at 207 [7.130].
Or importer in circumstances
where the importer is deemed to be a manufacturer:
Australian Consumer
, s 7(1)(e).
Australian Consumer
, s 272(1)(a).
Australian Consumer
, s 272(1)(b).
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill
, Explanatory Memorandum at 18.
Australian Consumer
Williams v Toyota
Motor Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
In addition to the appeal
heard immediately thereafter,
Capic v Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd
(S25/2024), dealt with in separate reasons for judgment,
Capic v Ford
Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd
[2024] HCA 39.
Defined in s 2(1) of
Australian Consumer Law
, Sch 2 to the
Competition and
Consumer Act 2010
Joint reasons at
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344.
Terms defined in
v Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
the same meaning in these reasons.
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514.
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 539
Compare s 259(6)
concerning an action by a consumer against a supplier.
[1933] HCA 35
; (1933) 50 CLR 387 at
[1968] UKHL 3
; [1969] 2 AC 31 at 75.
[1968] UKHL 3
; [1969] 2 AC 31 at 109.
[1968] UKHL 3
; [1969] 2 AC 31 at 118.
[1968] UKHL 3
; [1969] 2 AC 31 at
[2003] FCAFC 151
; (2003) 130 FCR 182 at 209
[2003] FCAFC 151
; (2003) 130 FCR 182 at 206
Dwyer v Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd
(2023) 381 FLR
32 at 42-43 [37].
eg, Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill (No
, Explanatory Memorandum at 198‑200 [7.89]‑[7.96], cf
205‑207 [7.120]‑[7.129].
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill
(No 2) 2010
, Explanatory Memorandum at 205 [7.120].
eg, Herzfeld and Prince,
Statutory Interpretation Principles
(2014) at 121 [3.120];
Electricity
Trust of South Australia v Krone (Australia) Technique Pty Ltd
[1994] FCA 1209
; (1994) 51 FCR
540 at 547.
[1994] FCA 1209
; (1994) 51 FCR 540.
Electricity Trust of
South Australia v Krone (Australia) Technique Pty Ltd
[1994] FCA 1209
; (1994) 51 FCR 540 at
547 (emphasis in original).
Manufacturers Warranties
Trade Practices
Amendment Act 1978
Manufacturers Warranties
(SA), s 3(1);
Law Reform (Manufacturers Warranties)
Ordinance 1977
(ACT), s 3(3)(b).
South Australia, House of
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 12 September 1974 at
Ontario Law Reform
Commission,
Report on Consumer Warranties and Guarantees in the Sale of
(1972) at 74.
Ontario Law Reform
Commission,
Report on Consumer Warranties and Guarantees in the Sale of
(1972) at 74-75.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 17 October 1978 at
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment Bill 1978
, Explanatory
Memorandum on Amendments to the Bill at 2.
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
; (1998) 194 CLR 355 at 381
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
; (1998) 194 CLR 355 at 382
Macquarie Dictionary
7th ed (2017), vol 2 at 1254 "recover", sense 1.
Bwllfa and Merthyr
Dare Steam Collieries (1891) v Pontypridd Waterworks Co
[1903] UKLawRpAC 46
; [1903] AC 426 at
Potts v Miller
[1940] HCA 43
; (1940) 64 CLR 282 at 289‑290,
Kizbeau Pty Ltd v W G & B Pty Ltd
[1995] HCA 4
; (1995) 184 CLR 281
at 291‑296;
Marks v GIO Australia Holdings Ltd
[1998] HCA 69
; (1998) 196 CLR 494
, 514 [48];
HTW Valuers (Central Qld) Pty Ltd v Astonland Pty
[2004] HCA 54
; (2004) 217 CLR 640 at 658‑659 [38]‑[40], 666-667 [63].
Competition and Consumer
Australian Consumer
, s 271(1).
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 17 October 1978 at
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Trade Practices Amendment Bill 1978
, Explanatory
Memorandum on Amendments to the Bill at 2.
[1994] FCA 1209
; (1994) 51 FCR 540.
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
; (1998) 194 CLR 355 at 381
Commissioner for Railways (NSW) v Agalianos
[1955] HCA 27
; (1955) 92 CLR 390 at 397.
(1907) 5 CLR 418.
(1907) 5 CLR 418 at
Spencer v The
Commonwealth
(1907) 5 CLR 418 at 440‑441.
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 544
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 544-545
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 560
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 560
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 560
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 560
560‑561 [208].
[1979] HCA 9
; (1979) 142 CLR 531.
[1979] HCA 9
; (1979) 142 CLR 531 at
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
(2001) 117 FCR 424 at 437
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 548
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 575
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 560
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Gold Coast Selection
Trust Ltd v Humphrey (Inspector of Taxes)
[1948] AC 459 at 473.
The Commonwealth v
[1953] HCA 6
; (1953) 90 CLR 157 at 162.
Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs v Charlesworth, Pilling & Co
[1901] UKLawRpAC 4
; [1901] AC 373 at 391.
Bronzel v State Planning
(1979) 21 SASR 513 at 516. See also
Boland v Yates Property
Corporation Pty Ltd
[1999] HCA 64
; (1999) 74 ALJR 209 at 268
[1999] HCA 64
; 167 ALR 575 at 653.
Electricity Commission of
New South Wales (trading as Pacific Power) v Arrow
(1994) 85 LGERA 418 at
The Commonwealth v Amann
Aviation Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 54
; (1991) 174 CLR 64 at 83.
[1971] HCA 52
; (1971) 124 CLR 303 at 308. See also
Placer (Granny Smith) Pty
Ltd v Thiess Contractors Pty Ltd
[2003] HCA 10
; (2003) 77 ALJR 768 at 774
; 196 ALR 257
Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
; (2018) 264 CLR 541 at 557
omitted). See also
Branir Pty Ltd v Owston Nominees (No 2) Pty Ltd
(2001) 117 FCR 424 at 435‑436 [24]-[26];
Costa v Public Trustee of
(2008) 1 ASTLR 56 at 64-69 [14]-[19], 73 [42]-[43], 86 [101]-[102].
[1981] HCA 4
; (1981) 146 CLR 336 at 381
(citations omitted).
[2024] HCA 39
Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 542
544‑545 [122]-[123].
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 544-545
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 544
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 560
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 560
Toyota Motor Corporation
Australia Ltd v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
; (2023) 296 FCR 514 at 560
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
As defined in
Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
As defined in
Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
As defined in
Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
See, for example,
Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd
(2023) 381 FLR 32 at 57 [100], 65 [147],
65-66 [151]‑[156].
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Ltd (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (737 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter