Gutter Grip Australia Pty Ltd v Interit Pty Ltd [2025] APO 19 (30 June 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT
Gutter Grip Australia Pty Ltd v Interit Pty Ltd
[2025] APO 19
Patent: 2016222479
Title: Multi-component gutter bracket
Patentee: Interit Pty Ltd
Opponent: Gutter Grip Australia Pty Ltd
Delegate: Greg Powell
Decision Date: 30 June 2025
Hearing Date: 30 April 2025, by Video Conference
Catchwords:
– section 104 – opposition to
amendment – subsections 102(1), 102(2)(a), 102(2)(b) – amendments do
matter that extends beyond the disclosure of originally filed
specification – claims fall within the scope of the claims before
amendment – no non-compliance with subsections 40(2) or (3) as a result of
the amendment – amendments allowed –
cost awarded against the
Representation: Counsel for the patentee: Laura Thomas
Patent attorney for the patentee: Peer Watterson, Pizzeys Patent and Trade
Mark Attorneys Pty Ltd
Counsel for the opponent: Peter Creighton-Selvay
Patent attorney for the opponent: Griffith Hack Melbourne
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Patent: 2016222479
Title: Multi-component gutter bracket
Patentee: Interit Pty Ltd
Date of Decision: 30 June 2025
The opposition is unsuccessful. The specification would
not, as a result of the proposed amendments, disclose subject matter that
extends beyond the disclosure of the specification as filed. The amendment
results in claims that would fall within the scope of
the claims before
amendment. The amendment does not result in a specification that fails to
clearly and completely disclose the
invention, or lead to the claims lacking
I allow the amendment composed of the proposed amendments
filed on 5 August 2022, 24 January 2023 and 29 May 2023.
costs in accordance with Schedule 8 of the Patents Regulations against Gutter
Grip Australia Pty Ltd.
REASONS FOR DECISION
application for patent 2016222479 (the
) was filed by Interit Pty
) on 2 September 2016 as a divisional of 2011213740.
The patent claims an earliest priority date of 20 October 2010. The patent
was granted on 22 February 2018.
18 August 2021 a re-examination request was filed by Gutter Grip Pty Ltd.
Following reports and amendments, leave to amend was
granted and advertised. At
that point, Gutter Grip Australia Pty Ltd (the
) filed a Notice
of Opposition to allowance of the amendment. Prior to evidence being filed, the
patentee filed a further amendment
on 5 August 2022. The patentee then withdrew
the amendments that were the subject of the opposition, thereby rendering it
Re-examination
then re-commenced. In response to subsequent re-examination reports, the
patentee filed further amendments on 24 January
2023 and 29 May 2023. A clear
re-examination report issued on 3 July 2023 and leave to amend was granted. The
amendments were advertised
for opposition purposes on 27 July
opponent then filed another notice of opposition to the allowance of the
amendments on 27 September 2023 and a statement of grounds
and particulars
) on 27 October 2023. This decision is in relation to the opposition
to the allowability of the amendment composed of the proposed
amendments filed
on 5 August 2022, 24 January 2023 and 29 May 2023.
in support consists of a first declaration by Dr Shaun Manning dated 10 January
) together with annexures SAM–1 to SAM–18 and a
declaration by James Dalrymple dated 16 January 2024 (
with annexures JRD–1 to JRD–6. Evidence in answer consists of a
declaration by Mr William (Bill) Hunter dated
8 April 2024 (
together with annexures A to D. Evidence in reply consists of a second
declaration by Dr Manning (
) dated 7 November 2024.
to the hearing, the opponent and patentee also filed written submissions on,
respectively, 11 April 2025 (
opponent’s written submissions
April 2025 (
patentee’s written submissions
to the declarants, Dr Manning has, since 1987, been an engineering academic and
an engineering consultant conducting research,
publishing papers and presenting
research findings to industry groups, including reports on eaves gutter designs
and performance.
Mr Dalrymple gives evidence as a UK and European qualified
patent attorney working under supervision at Griffith Hack, and places
evidence various archived web pages. Mr Hunter has many years of experience as
a designer for injection-moulded plastic, fabricated
sheet metal, metal casting
and aluminium products.
am satisfied that both Dr Manning and Mr Hunter have backgrounds that enable
them to give evidence as to how a person skilled in
have understood the specification, and, where necessary, I will decide which
evidence should be given greater weight.
Grounds of opposition
SGP identifies as grounds of opposition that the claims extend beyond
specification as filed in non-compliance with subsection
102(1), the claims do
not fall within the scope of the claims as accepted in non-compliance with
paragraph 102(2)(a) and, as a result
of the amendment, the specification does
not satisfy the requirements of paragraphs 40(2)(a), s40(2)(aa), s40(2)(b) and
40(3) in non-compliance with paragraph 102(2)(b).
the hearing the grounds of non-compliance with subsection 102(1) and paragraphs
102(2)(a) and 102(2)(b) were pressed, with the
arguments under paragraph
102(2)(b) being limited to the specification not satisfying the requirements of
sufficiency under paragraph
40(2)(a) and support under subsection
The specification
patent relates to brackets used for the mounting of guttering to fascia.
Specifically, the brackets of the invention are intended
to mount a gutter to
reduce the risk of inflow flooding. This flooding can occur during heavy
downpours when water in the gutter
accumulates and rises above the top edge of
the rearward wall of the gutter. As a result, water can flow over the top of
and into the eaves, possibly entering the building. This can lead to
flooding and damage to ceiling panels and walls. The invention
seeks to address
this by providing a bracket that locates and fixes guttering positions such that
a flow path is created between
a fascia and a rearward wall of the
bracket of the invention comprises a gutter clip and a support brace. Figures 2
and 4 show an example of a clip and brace, respectively:
is composed of a posterior finger
, an anterior finger
with a bridge connecting the fingers. The bridge
supports a tongue
which operates to space the rearward wall of a
gutter from a fascia. The tongue
is formed from a U-shaped web.
Teeth project into the anterior slot
to act as a ratchet for the edge
of a rearward gutter wall inserted into the anterior slot
formed by an upper
and a lower
L-shaped ledge on an anterior face of the anterior finger
receives the brace
by inserting the brace’s
into the slot
of the brace has at
an outer end a curled finger
to be inserted in a rounded upper lip of
a gutter. The base
which locates in a recess in
when the brace
is fitted to the clip
6 and 7 (although with slightly differently shaped individual components) show a
fully assembled bracket with mounted gutter
and this assembly mounted on a
fascia, respectively:
The curved finger
closely into a corresponding curved upper lip
of the gutter
. The tongue
extends down along the anterior surface of
spacing the rearward wall
of the gutter
from it. The posterior finger
is positioned over a top section of
and conforms to that section to thereby embrace and nestle
closely against it to provide a solid anchoring of the bracket. Assembly
this arrangement involves the clip
being positioned over the
and then the rearward wall
of the gutter
being inserted upwards into the anterior slot
. At that point, the
curved finger
is inserted into the upper lip
of the gutter
and the arm
is rotated in a
downward direction until the base
is parallel to the rearward wall
, whereupon the base
can be slid into the slot
until the nib
slides into the recess and stops against a wall of the
completeness, I note that another form of gutter bracket is shown in Figure
In this multi-component gutter bracket
, the gutter
is supported and mounted on fascia
. The gutter bracket is comprised
of support brace
and gutter clip
. The gutter clip
has an anterior finger
and posterior finger
connected by a bridge
forming a slot
to hold the fascia
and the rearward wall of the gutter
. The anterior wall of
, and the support brace
which slides into the slot
to form a rigid joint
. Teeth are formed on the posterior surface of the anterior finger
. No spacer equivalent to the tongue
is shown in this
embodiment.
Claims as accepted
claims that were accepted consisted of 19 claims. Claims 1 and 18 were
independent and were as follows:
“1. A multi-component gutter bracket for a gutter, the multi-component
gutter bracket comprising:
a gutter clip adapted to mount to a fascia and receive a rearward wall of a
a spacer attached to the gutter clip and dimensioned to space the rearward
wall from the fascia to provide a water flow channel between
the rearward wall
and the fascia;
a support brace adapted to support an outer wall of the gutter;
a rigid joint is formable between the support brace and gutter clip to mount
the support brace to the gutter clip.
the spacer is integrally formed with the clip.”
18. A method of mounting a gutter, the method comprising the steps of:
locating a clip onto or over a fascia;
positioning a spacer integrally formed with the clip on or adjacent an
anterior surface of the fascia;
positioning a rearward wall of a gutter adjacent the spacer, preferably in
engaging a finger of a support brace with an outside lip of the gutter;
sliding the support brace into engagement with the clip.”
The proposed amendments
claims under consideration arise out of the amendments filed on 5 August 2022,
24 January 2023 and 29 May 2023. The final form
of claim 1 as proposed to be
amended is reproduced below. Text added to claim 1 as accepted (being the form
of the claim prior to
the amendment) is underlined and deleted text is struck
A multi-component gutter bracket for a gutter
, the multi-component
gutter bracket
comprising:
a gutter clip
having a mounting portion and a spacer, wherein the mounting
adapted to mount to a fascia
and receive a rearward wall
of a gutter
a spacer attached to
the gutter clip
further comprising a
first slot to receive a
and dimensioned to space the
rearward wall
of the gutter
from the fascia to provide a water
flow channel between the rearward wall and the fascia
an anterior finger, a posterior finger, a bridge connecting the posterior
finger and the anterior finger, an intermediate tongue positioned
between the
posterior finger and the anterior finger, the tongue dimensioned to space the
rearward wall from the fascia, wherein
the first slot is defined by the anterior
finger and the tongue, wherein the mounting portion of the gutter clip comprises
slot defined by the tongue and the posterior finger, the second slot
adapted to locate over the top of the fascia, and wherein the
spacer is formed
by the tongue
the multi-component gutter bracket further comprising
a support brace
adapted to support an outer wall of the gutter;
a rigid joint is formable between the support brace and gutter clip to mount
the support brace to the gutter clip,
the spacer is integrally formed with the clip
is between 5 mm and 20 mm wide to space the rearward wall from the fascia to
provide a water flow channel between the rearward
wall and the fascia;
the gutter clip is integrally formed; and
the support brace and the gutter clip are configured so that only a single
support brace may be mounted to the gutter clip
16 is also directed to a multi-component gutter bracket. It is as follows
(noting that it is all underlined as it is a new
A multi-component gutter bracket for a gutter comprising:
a gutter clip having a mounting portion and a spacer, wherein the mounting
portion is adapted to mount to a fascia,
the gutter clip further comprising a first slot to receive a rearward wall
of the gutter;
the multi-component gutter bracket further comprising a support brace
adapted to support an outer wall of the gutter;
a rigid joint is formable between the support brace and the gutter clip to
mount the support brace to the gutter clip;
the spacer partially defines the first slot of the clip;
the spacer is dimensioned to space the rearward wall from the fascia to
provide a water flow channel between the rearward wall and
the fascia;
the gutter clip includes a plurality of teeth situated in the first slot
to enhance grip on the rear wall and to allow adjustment
of a height of a top
edge of the rearward wall of the gutter;
the gutter clip is integrally formed; and
the support brace and the gutter clip are configured so that only a single
support brace may be mounted to the gutter clip
While similar to
claim 1, claim 16 does not define the structure of the clip as claim 1 does.
Claim 16 also includes the feature
of the teeth situated in the first slot.
17 is based on accepted claim 18, although it is no longer independent. It
defines a method of mounting a gutter using the
gutter bracket defined in
earlier claims:
A method of mounting a gutter, the method comprising the steps of:
providing a multi-component gutter bracket according to any one of the
preceding claims;
of the gutter
onto or over a fascia;
positioning
or the tongue of the
gutter clip
integrally formed with the clip
on or adjacent
an anterior surface of the fascia;
positioning a rearward wall of a gutter adjacent the spacer
or the tongue
, preferably
engaging a finger of
support brace with an
lip of the gutter; and
sliding the support brace into engagement with the
Statutory provisions
present matter arises over the question of whether the amendments as proposed to
the claims are allowable pursuant to the provisions
specifically the provisions of s102 of the
application for the patent was filed after 15 April 2013. Therefore,
substantive amendments of the
brought about by the
Intellectual
Property Laws
(Raising the Bar)
) apply to the patent.
requirements for the allowability of amendments are governed by subsections
102(1) and (2) which state that:
(1) An amendment of a complete specification is not allowable if, as a result
of the amendment, the specification would claim or disclose
matter that extends
beyond that disclosed in the following documents taken together:
(a) the complete specification as filed;
(b) other prescribed documents (if any).
(2) An amendment of a complete specification is not allowable after the
relevant time if, as a result of the amendment:
(a) a claim of the specification would not in substance fall within the scope of
the claims of the specification before amendment;
(b) the specification would not comply with subsection 40(2), (3) or (3A).
With respect to “relevant time”, subsection 102(2A)
(2A) For the purposes of subsection (2), relevant time means:
(a) in relation to an amendment proposed to a complete specification relating to
a standard patent—after the specification
has been accepted; or
(b) in relation to an amendment proposed to a complete specification relating to
an innovation patent—after the Commissioner
has made a decision under
paragraph 101E(1)(a) in respect of the patent.
the application for the patent has been accepted, subsection 102(2) is
applicable. Moreover, the legislation requires that the
failure to meet the
requirements of subsections 102(1) and (2) must be
the result of the
The legal principles
s102(1) – claim or disclose
matter that extends beyond that disclosed at filing
102(1) was considered by Beach J in
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation v BASF Plant Science GmbH
, where His Honour noted the
“First, as has been pointed out, the test is a strict one.
Second, subject matter will be impermissibly added unless the matter is
clearly and unambiguously disclosed in the application as
Third, the required disclosure may be express or implied, but on any view
must be clearly and unambiguously so. In this regard, a
patent applicant is not
permitted to add by amendment matter simply because it would have been obvious
to the skilled person.
Fourth, context is important. A patent applicant cannot extract features
disclosed in one context and introduce them into a specification
stripped of
that context. So, the concept of intermediate generalisation as discussed in
the UK authorities applies to s 102(1)
in its construction and
application”
this matter there was also much discussion around the concept of an
“intermediate generalisation”. In the area of
amendments, where
different embodiments of a specification disclose different features and it
would not have been apparent to the
PSA that the features of the different
embodiments could be interchanged, an amendment to interchange these features
would not be
regard to intermediate generalisations, it was stated in
“In summary, an amendment utilising a feature may amount to added
subject matter, such that it is not relevantly disclosed,
even where there is a
literal reference to such a feature in the specification as filed. An example
of where this may occur is where
by reason of the amendment, a feature that was
not suggested to be significant is, for the first time, suggested to have a
significance. Such a suggestion of technical significance might arise
where a feature is taken from a specific embodiment, and introduced
into a claim
in a manner that is stripped from relevant context provided by that embodiment.
To avoid a conclusion of added subject
matter, the skilled person must have
appreciated from the complete specification as filed that the selected feature
was more generally
applicable. This may involve asking whether the skilled
person is being presented with any new information about the invention which
not directly and unambiguously apparent from the original disclosure.
Further, there may be an impermissible intermediate generalisation where a
new combination of features is sought to be created by
the proposed amendment
which was not apparent in the application as filed. As has been pointed out
Smith & Nephew PLC
at [77]), the question is ‘whether the
features combined in the amended claim were disclosed
as a combination
the application [as
(italics in
the correct approach when considering whether an amendment would result in the
specification claiming or disclosing new matter
is to ask whether the person
skilled in the art would, on looking at the specification as proposed to be
amended, learn anything
directly derive from the complete specification as
s102(2)(a) – claim would not in substance fall within
the scope of the claims before amendment
useful test for the allowability of amendments under
“would the amendment make anything an infringement which would not have
been an infringement before the amendment?”
test was suggested in relation to s31(1) of the
Patents Act 1949
Distillers Co. Ld.’s
Application
. Although the
from the wording of the then s31(1) of the British Act, the Commissioner in
W.J. Voit Rubber Corp.’s
Application
considering the corresponding provision of the
Patents Act 1952
“the test as to whether a proposed amendment would have the effect of
causing infringement when none existed before, seems to
me a perfectly
reasonable one”.
The Federal Court accepted the continuing relevance of this approach in
Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH v
Commissioner
s102(2)(b) – specification would not comply with
subsection 40(2), (3) or (3A).
the opponent alleged that the specification did not comply with paragraph
40(2)(a) and subsection 40(3) with respect to a lack
of support, it is necessary
to set out the principles associated with these parts of the
s40(2)(a) – invention must be clearly and completely
Jusand Nominees Pty Ltd v Rattlejack Innovations Pty
Rofe J referred to the
judgement of Burley J in
Cytec Industries Inc. v Nalco
(who in turn had
referred to respective decisions of the Patent Office by then delegate
and Deputy Commissioner
), presenting the
following as guiding the consideration under s40(2)(a):
“At [143] in
J referred to
CSR Building Products
in which Dr Barker considered at
that assessing
whether the disclosure requirement was satisfied involved the following
(1) construe the claims to determine the scope of the invention claimed;
(2) construe the description to determine what it discloses to the person
skilled in the art; and
(3) decide whether the specification provides an enabling disclosure of all
the things that fall within the scope of the claims.
At [144] his Honour also added two further steps from
[2017] APO 57
(1) Is it plausible that the invention can be worked across the full scope of
the invention?
(2) Can the invention be performed across the full scope of the claims
without undue experimentation?
The last step aligns with what Jacob LJ described in
Novartis AG v Johnson & Johnson
Medical Ltd
[2010] EWCA Civ 1039
) as the heart of
the disclosure test:
Can the skilled person readily perform the invention over the whole area
claimed without undue burden and without needing inventive
s40(3) – claim(s) must be supported by matter
disclosed in the specification
requirement of support was discussed by Burley J in
Merck Sharp & Dohme
Corporation v Wyeth LLC (No
CSR Building Products Ltd v United States Gypsum Company
[2015] APO 72
, Dr S D Barker adopted the summary provided by Aldous J in
Schering Biotech
at 252 – 253, which has been often followed in the
United Kingdom (emphasis added):
...to decide whether the claims are supported by the description it is
necessary to ascertain what is the invention which is specified
in the claims
and then compare that with the invention which has been described in the
specification. Thereafter the court’s
task is to decide whether the
invention in the claims is supported by the description. I do not believe that
the mere mention in
the specification of features appearing in the claim will
necessarily be a sufficient support. The word ‘support’ means
than that and requires the description to be the base which can fairly entitle
the patentee to a monopoly of the width claimed.
That approach encapsulates broadly the claim support obligation under s
40(3). To it may be added the requirement that the technical
contribution to
the art must be ascertained. Where it is a product, it is that which must be
supported in the sense that the technical
contribution to the art disclosed by
the specification must justify the breath of the monopoly
is therefore the case that, under s40(3), the matter in a claim of a
specification must be supported by an enabling disclosure
in the description and
any drawings, graphics, photographs and sequence listing (i.e., the body of the
specification).
Grounds of opposition
s102(1) – claim or disclose
matter that extends beyond that disclosed at filing
opponent raised a number of features that they said extended beyond the original
disclosure:
(i) the “mounting portion” in claim 16;
(ii) “a first slot to receive a rearward wall of the gutter” in
(iii) a “plurality of teeth situated in the first slot” in claim
(iv) the limitation that “only a single support brace may be mounted to
the gutter clip” in claims 1 and 16; and
(v) defining the gutter clip as “having” a tongue or spacer in
claims 1 and 16.
the “mounting portion” in claim
Opponent’s submissions
opponent stated that amended claim 16 covered embodiments that were not
disclosed in the original specification. The opponent
submitted that claim 16
contained the first introduction of a “mounting portion” that was
“adapted to mount to
essential submission by the opponent was that there was no disclosure at all in
the original specification of a “mounting
portion” as defined in
amended claim 16. Accepting that there were disclosures of a first slot and a
second slot, and that
the first slot or the second slot might be used to perform
a mounting function, the opponent noted that those slots were described
depicted as slots formed in a particular way, dependent on a particular
configuration defined by particular features. In this
regard the opponent
contrasted claim 16 with claim 1 where the mounting portion was limited to being
the second slot defined by the
intermediate tongue, the bridge and the posterior
finger, and where the second slot was mounted over the fascia. During the
the opponent stated:
“The question is whether there’s disclosure by way of that new
claim, with the new broader term and broader subject matter
prior to the
amendment clear and unambiguous disclosure of the invention now claimed in all
of its breadth and scope.
And so when one’s talking about deleting for present purposes the
requirement of the use of a slot and replacing it by the use
of a unconstrained
mounting portion, which may encompass the use of a slot but encompasses a myriad
of other things ... , then you
do not have a clear and unambiguous disclosure of
what is now claimed, namely, this much broader unconstrained
opponent submitted that there was no disclosure of the use of a mounting portion
in a generalised sense; that is, something which
was not a slot but a mounting
portion that can be used to mount the clip to the fascia. They relied upon the
evidence of Dr Manning
who was asked what integers performed certain functions
for the bracket, or what features formed a certain part of the bracket, and
did not identify anything other than what was shown in the figures. The
opponent stated that claim 16 encompassed mounting configurations
extending well
beyond, and fundamentally different to, this arrangement, using entirely
different modes of attachment.
the opponent’s opinion, s102(1) required asking the question of whether
there was a clear and unambiguous disclosure of the
invention now claimed in
of its breadth and scope. The opponent submitted that it would be
wrong to focus on whether something which was clearly and unambiguously
disclosed in the patent before amendment falls within the scope of the amended
this regard, the opponent referred to what Mr Hunter labelled as “Diagram
9” in his evidence, which was a modified
version of figure 7 of the
Mr Hunter had included this as an example of a gutter clip that did not
have a posterior finger, but which would still accord with
amended claim
opponent noted that nothing like Diagram 9 had been disclosed in the original
filing. They also noted that Diagram 9 required
the deletion of the posterior
finger 112 of figure 7 shown at [13] above. They then turned to Mr
Hunter’s evidence where,
in discussing what “mounting portion”
might mean, he stated:
“In my view, the definition of mounting portion is the portion of the
bracket which enables the bracket to be mounted onto or
over the fascia. One
example is shown in Figure 7, being item 112, all of which would mount over the
opponent noted that it was precisely posterior finger 112 that had been deleted
by Mr Hunter; the conclusion being that Mr Hunter
was advocating for the removal
of the mounting portion to support a position that a mounting portion was
the opponent’s opinion, claim 16 was directed to an impermissible
intermediate generalization, being a general mounting portion
adapted to be
mounted to the fascia in an unspecified way that was not “directly and
unambiguously apparent from the original
disclosure”
mounting embodiment using a spacer (as required by claim 16) contemplated in the
original specification was mounting to
the fascia via a second slot formed by
the posterior finger of the clip and the spacer. The opponent submitted that
the question
in the context of intermediate generalisation was whether the
patent before amendment disclosed that any portion of the clip might,
the invention described, be used to mount the clip onto the fascia irrespective
of whether it was so used when disaggregated
from the other integers of the
preferred embodiments.
opponent submitted that there was no disclosure of the use of a gutter clip that
could be mounted to the fascia by the use of
a “mounting portion”,
whatever that might mean, in the absence of the use of one of two slots, or the
features which
define that slot. Therefore, when the “mounting
portion” was introduced as a separate claim feature, disaggregated from
other aspects of the claim that collectively enabled mounting, it resulted in an
intermediate generalisation of the type not allowed
Patentee’s submissions
patentee submitted that the patent quite clearly and consistently used the
language of “mount to” as a general description
with two options:
mounting onto the fascia and mounting over the fascia. The patentee submitted
that, although the disclosure must
be clear and unambiguous, it could also be
implicit. The patentee noted that Mr Hunter’s evidence indicated that
portion”, as used in the claims, had its plain English
meaning of “a feature which has the purpose of enabling the gutter
be mounted to the fascia”
and, thus, the mounting portion would be “a portion of the clip which
allows the clip to be mounted onto or over the fascia
as described in the
specification at page 4, lines
They noted Dr
Manning had not disagreed with the definition, and submitted it was consistent
with the specification which disclosed
that the gutter bracket had a
“gutter clip that was adapted to mount to a
patentee’s opinion, for this relatively simple mechanical patent, a
disclosure of a clip that was adapted to mount
onto or over the fascia was
clearly an implicit disclosure that the clip had a part that was adapted in some
manner to allow the
mounting to occur, and this was picked up in the language of
a “mounting portion” in the claims, being the portion that
shaped or adapted to allow the mounting to occur. The patentee submitted that,
therefore, including “mounting portion”
in claim 16 did not add
material that the PSA could not directly derive from the specification as
the use of Diagram 9 by Mr Hunter, the patentee submitted that this was not
something that Mr Hunter was saying was disclosed
in the patent. Instead, in
the patentee’s submission, Mr Hunter was setting out what came from
considering the patent. Diagram
9 was a modification of figure 7, not a
modification of the invention of the patent to some other
patentee disagreed with the opponent’s approach of requiring a clear and
unambiguous disclosure of the invention now claimed
of its breadth
and scope. The patentee criticised the opponent’s approach of comparing
amended claim 16 to amended claim 1.
While conceding that the mounting portion
of claim 16 is broader in scope than the mounting portion of amended claim 1,
the patentee
submitted that this did not demonstrate that a broader mounting
portion was not disclosed in the specification as filed. In the
patentee’s view, the question was whether the “mounting
portion” had added matter in some way. The patentee submitted
that it was
incorrect to look just at an embodiment, note that the portion by which the clip
is mounted has multiple features, and
conclude that a mounting portion that does
not have all the features is not disclosed. In the patentee’s submission
that limited
the invention to the preferred embodiments disclosed in the figures
and nothing else. In the patentee’s submission, this was
the vice of the
evidence of Dr Manning for the opponent. It arose from Dr Manning being
asked whether particular features or integers
were disclosed. Such an approach,
in the patentee’s opinion, directed Dr Manning’s attention to the
preferred embodiment
depicted in the figures, rather than reading the patent as
a PSA would.
patentee also submitted that the opponent’s point that the mounting
portion was not defined by the spacer did not demonstrate
that claim 16 extended
to matter not disclosed in the original specification. The patentee submitted
that the specification made
that a spacer was optional
and the second slot (defined by the spacer, the bridge and the posterior finger
of the gutter clip) was
the preferred embodiment depicted. This did not mean
the claim 16 did not satisfy s102(1). The patentee submitted that the
approach limited the invention to the preferred embodiments
disclosed in the figures.
to the opponent’s submissions on intermediate generalisation, the patentee
stated that the question was whether the PSA would
understand the mounting
portion to be generally applicable to different arrangements, or whether it was
limited to the very specific
arrangement that was described. In the
patentee’s opinion this invention was a quite simple mechanical one where
can be combined in different arrangements. In the present matter the
patentee submitted that a “mounting portion” adapted
to mount onto a
fascia was disclosed, and was not something that required a redefinition of the
invention. The mounting portion
was always part of the invention. The patentee
submitted that a clip that was adapted to mount over or onto a fascia was a
applicable feature that could be used with any combination of claimed
Consideration
do not believe that the inclusion of “mounting portion” in claim 16
offends s102(1).
issue I have with the opponent’s position on the amendment is that it
arises from a comparison of amended claim 1 and amended
claim 16. This
amendment is not, as put forward by the opponent during the hearing (as cited at
[34] above), the deletion of a specific
arrangement and the insertion of a
general one. One could view the amendments as this type only if one
concentrates on the differences
between amended claims 1 and 16. Instead the
amendment involves the insertion of a specific reference to a “mounting
which is adapted to mount to the fascia. Contrary to the
opponent’s position, I do not see the question as being whether there
clear and unambiguous disclosure of everything falling within the scope of the
claim. The question is whether there is a clear
and unambiguous disclosure of a
mounting portion. In my opinion, there clearly is. The specification as filed
and prior to amendment
disclosed (inter alia) “a gutter clip adapted to
mount to a fascia”. It seems quite clear to me that the PSA would
that a clip “adapted to mount” would inherently have a
portion that is involved in the mounting. This feature in claim
16 would not
come as a surprise to them.
opponent’s reliance to Diagram 9 of Mr Hunter’s evidence to
establish that claim 16 is not disclosed is, in some sense,
backwards. I do not
take the authorities to say that because a PSA provides a
example of something
not expressly claimed
but still within the scope of
an amended claim, and that “specific something” is not disclosed in
the filed specification,
it must follow that there is no disclosure in the
original specification of the invention of the amended claim. To my mind the
authorities
apply the opposite approach. If a proposed amended claim
expressly claims
example that was not disclosed in the
original specification, the proposed amendment would not be allowable. This is
true even if
the specific example would have been considered to be an obvious
variation by the PSA in light of the common general knowledge upon
reading the
original specification. There still would have been no disclosure of the
specific example. In other words, an amendment
to claim the arrangement of
Diagram 9 would not be allowable. But that is not the case
intermediate generalisations, the question is whether what is taught now by the
specification was not taught before. For similar
reasons as above, I do not
agree that claim 16 could be said to be an intermediate generalisation. As
noted above, the clip, as
described and defined in the original specification,
was adapted to mount to the fascia. It must follow that the clip had a portion
allowing that mounting. Even if I were to accept to opponent’s
submission, regarding the original disclosure that it was
the clip might be used to mount the clip, that portion would still be a
“mounting portion”. It is not correct,
in my opinion, to say that
the mounting portion has, in some way, been disaggregated from other integers of
the embodiments. The
portion was clearly implicit in those
embodiments.
“a first slot to receive a rearward wall of the
gutter” in claim 16
Opponent’s submissions
opponent submitted that amended claim 16 specified that the gutter clip
comprised “a first slot to receive a rearward wall
of the gutter”,
but nothing in the original specification directed itself to a first slot that
was anything other than the
slot defined by the anterior finger and the
tongue/spacer. While accepting that amended claim 16 defined the first slot as
partially defined by the spacer, the opponent submitted that the first
slot in claim 16 did not require the anterior finger to also
define the first
slot, with the result that the slot was not fully defined.
opponent noted that the originally filed specification disclosed that the first
slot was “defined by the anterior finger
and the tongue [which is
equivalent to the
and that Dr
Manning had stated:
“I agree that the initial disclosure defines a ‘first slot’
that is formed by the anterior finger, the bridge and
the tongue. I was asked
whether there is any example in the initial disclosure of a ‘first
slot’ that is formed by different
feature(s). In my view, there is no
example of a first slot defined by other features in the initial
disclosure”,
noted that Mr Hunter had not disagreed with this.
opponent submitted that one could posit all kinds of hypothetical examples where
the slot was defined in ways other than by use
of the anterior finger, and those
examples would fall within the ambit of what is put forward in claim 16. None
of these examples
have been disclosed in the patent at all; let alone clearly
and unambiguously.
intermediate generalisation, the patentee submitted that:
“the use of
sort of separate and distinct, or generalised,
’ was not disclosed. To the contrary, the
’ was taught and disclosed as being dependent upon
other features of the multi-component gutter bracket, namely, the anterior
finger and tongue that functioned to define that
(italics in
Patentee’s submissions
patentee noted that claim 16 stated that the “spacer partially defines the
first slot of the clip” and noted that
the “first slot” was
described as that part of the bracket that accommodated the rearward wall of the
gutter. They submitted
that it was incorrect to say, as the opponent had, that
the gutter clip having a spacer was effectively undefined and may be formed
any means. Claim 16 did not allow for any sort of first slot. The patentee
submitted that it was clear that:
(i) the slot was part of the clip;
(ii) being a clip it must have at least two parts to allow it to receive the
rearward wall; and
(iii) one side of the slot must be defined by the spacer.
patentee drew my attention to the specification which taught that the invention
may be performed by:
“locating a clip onto or over a fascia;
positioning a spacer on or adjacent an anterior surface of the fascia;
positioning a rearward wall of a gutter adjacent the spacer, preferably in
submitted that the specification taught that the space that accommodated the
rearward wall of a gutter in the clip was a “first
slot” and this
slot was adjacent to the spacer. As such, it was not correct to submit that, in
claim 16, the first slot, in
a gutter clip having a spacer, may be formed by any
means. The patentee submitted that the opponent had sought to limit the
to the preferred embodiments.
Consideration
my opinion, it is clear that the originally filed specification disclosed a
first slot that receives a rearward wall of a gutter,
and it is clear, contrary
to the opponent’s position, that this first slot is not any sort of slot,
but is partially defined
by a spacer. It also seems clear to me that the
patentee is specifically disclaiming the embodiment shown in figure 9 above.
question is whether the claims must also include the feature that the slot
is also defined by an anterior finger of the clip.
this regard, I do not take much from either party’s submissions. The part
of the specification referred to by the opponent
is clearly labelled as
describing a preferred embodiment. Furthermore, the passage referred to by the
patentee was, as noted by
the opponent at the hearing, directed at a method of
mounting, and not directed to the multi component gutter bracket as now claimed
in amended claim 16. Furthermore, the method steps do not disclose a first slot
which is partially defined by a spacer, as claimed
in amended claim
I note that the passage of Dr Manning at [52] above relied upon by the opponent
immediately followed on from this passage
in the same
declaration:
“Amended claim 16 states that ‘the spacer partially defines the
first slot of the clip’. I was asked whether amended
claim 16 recites any
other features that define the slot, along with the spacer. I explained that no
other features defining the
slot are found in claim
To my mind, to
follow this question asked of Dr Manning with the one asked of him in the
passage cited at [52] above is the wrong
way to go about the enquiry and borders
on misleading. The question is whether the PSA would, on looking at the
specification as
proposed to be amended, learn anything about the invention
which they could not learn or directly derive from the complete specification
filed. I think the opponent has focussed on the preferred embodiments to such
an extent that they have strayed away from the
appropriate approach that should
be taken when considering the question is disclosure.
I consider the question of whether there is a clear and unmistakeable disclosure
in the original specification of a first slot
which receives the rearward wall
of a gutter where a spacer plays a part in defining that first slot, that
question must be answered
in the affirmative. At the very least it is clearly
shown in figures 2, 6 and 7 of the originally filed specification that I have
included in this decision.
to the point of intermediate generalisation, my observations for “mounting
portion” are apposite here. A first slot
defined in part by the spacer is
part of the claimed embodiment. The disclosure was not that it was
sort of slot, as the opponent submitted, but it was a slot which was defined in
part by the spacer. It is not correct, in my opinion,
to say that the first
slot has, in some way been disaggregated from other integers of the embodiment.
The slot was clearly there
in the embodiment.
do not believe that the “first slot” in claim 16 contravenes
a “plurality of teeth situated in the first
slot” in claim 16
Opponent’s submissions
opponent submitted that the feature of the “plurality of teeth situated in
the first slot” in amended claim 16 did
not reflect what was in the
originally filed application. Specifically, the opponent noted that original
specification stated that:
“The anterior finger preferably has one or more teeth adapted to
enhance grip on the rear wall. The one or more teeth also
function to allow
adjustment of height of a top edge of the rear wall. The teeth are in the first
limited the teeth to being positioned on the anterior finger, and amended claim
16 did not have that limitation. While recognising
that the specification also
stated immediately after this passage:
“The tongue preferably also has one or more teeth on either or both
forward and rearward surfaces, the teeth adapted to enhance
grip on either the
rear wall or
opponent noted that the use of “also has” was a teaching that the
teeth on the tongue were in addition to the teeth
on the anterior finger. In
contrast, amended claim 16 included the use of such teeth in any location in the
first slot, not necessarily
on the anterior finger (which was not defined in
amended claim 16), and this concept was new.
opponent noted that Mr Hunter had stated that:
“page 3 line 17 states that it is preferable (not mandatory) that the
anterior finger has
but that Dr
Manning had, in response, stated:
“Mr Hunter states that the term ‘
that it is not mandatory that the anterior finger has teeth. On page 3, line
21, it is stated that ‘
The tongue preferably has one of
’. Therefore, Mr Hunter’s conclusion is that it is
not mandatory for either the anterior finger or the tongue to have
However, without teeth, what other means of support are indicated for the gutter
clip to support the rear wall of the
(italics in
opponent submitted that this evidence established that the teeth were necessary
and, to achieve the goal of support they had to
be located on the anterior
finger, or tongue.
opponent submitted that the question was whether the specification would claim
or disclose matter that extends beyond that disclosed
in the complete
specification as filed. In their opinion:
“[t]he effect of the Proposed Amendments is to claim a monopoly in an
arrangement in which teeth are used in any part of the
first slot, irrespective
of whether the first slot is defined by an anterior finger and tongue, and
irrespective of whether those
teeth are located on the anterior finger or tongue
else in that
(italics in
intermediate generalisation, the opponent submitted that there was a connection
between the teeth being positioned on the anterior
finger and tongue, and being
suitably oriented to enhance grip on the rear wall and to allow adjustment of a
height of a top edge
of a rearward wall of a gutter. However, amended claim 16
included teeth in any location in the first slot in its scope. The opponent
submitted that one could posit a scenario where the teeth, instead of being
located on either side of the slot (e.g. on the spacer
and/or the anterior
finger), could be attached to the top portion of the slot. While such an
arrangement was encompassed by claim
16, that arrangement was not disclosed.
Patentee’s submissions
patentee relied upon the passage noted by the opponent ([63] above]), but sought
the opposite conclusion. In their submission,
this passage of the specification
taught that teeth may be on either, or both, sides of the first slot.
patentee noted that Mr Hunter had said, while referring to the teeth in figure 7
(presented as diagram 10 in his evidence):
“This protrusion arrangement of teeth could instead be added to the
front surface of the tongue (as contemplated in the specification
lines 21-23)”,
criticised the opponent’s submissions that Dr Manning had said that it was
necessary for the teeth to be on the anterior
finger. In the patentee’s
submission, Dr Manning’s evidence in the paragraph at [64] above was that
teeth are necessary.
It went no further. The patentee submitted Dr
Manning’s evidence that the specification only disclosed specific tooth
impermissibly limited the invention disclosed in the specification to
the preferred embodiments described.
patentee submitted that the opponent’s position on intermediate
generalisation was somewhat contradictory. The patentee
noted that the opponent
claimed there was a connection between the teeth being positioned on the
anterior finger and tongue, and
being suitably oriented to enhance grip on the
rearward wall and allow adjustment of the height of the top edge of the rearward
of a gutter. However, the patentee stated that the opponent, having
established the connection, also effectively submitted that
a PSA would ignore
the connection and read amended claim 16 as claiming an invention where the
teeth were not on either side of the
first slot, but at some other location
(like the clip’s bridge) that would not serve the purpose of enhancing
grip on the rear
wall or allowing adjustments. The patentee submitted that this
was not a reading that a PSA would adopt as it would not be a workable
embodiment of the invention. Hence, given the disclosure would lead to the
expectation that teeth are placed on the sides
of the slot, there was no
impermissible intermediate generalisation.
Consideration
am of the opinion that this feature does not contravene
feature that the teeth are “situated in the first slot” is disclosed
in the original specification. Like my discussion
for the “first
slot”, the question is whether the claims should be so limited that the
teeth are placed on at least the
anterior finger. I take the point that the
opponent’s reading of the passage set out at [63] above can be said to
that the teeth are preferably located on the anterior finger defining
the slot as a minimum requirement. However, I do not take
this as definitive.
In this regard I note that claims 6 and 10 of the original specification define
the teeth as being on the tongue
and/or the finger. To my mind, while I accept
that these claims are more specific about location than what is in amended claim
there is no doubt that teeth being located in the first slot is present in
the original specification.
to the question on intermediate generalisation, I follow my reasoning in
previous sections of this decision. The teeth being located
in the first slot
is part of the claimed embodiment. Contrary to the opponent’s submission,
the disclosure of the specification
was not that the teeth are in
part of the first slot. Rather, they were in a position that enhanced grip on,
and allowed adjustment of a height of a top edge
of the rearward wall of the
gutter. A reading by a PSA would, in my opinion, not assign a location to the
teeth that did not achieve
this. To my mind, Dr Manning was too focused on the
disclosed embodiments when providing his evidence. This might have been an
effect of the nature of the questions he was asked.
the limitation that “only a single support brace may
be mounted to the gutter clip” in claims 1 and 16
submissions
opponent submitted that, in defining that “the support brace and gutter
clip are configured so that only a single support
brace may be mounted to the
gutter clip”, amended claims 1 and 16 extended beyond the original
specification. The opponent
submitted that there was no disclosure of a single
support brace being mounted to the gutter clip in an unspecified manner, but
a specific means had been disclosed, which was the anterior finger of the
clip having a slot which slidingly received a rail that
formed the base of the
support brace. As such, there was no disclosure of the general concept that the
gutter clip was configured
to mount only a single support
opponent submitted that it was an intermediate generalisation to claim a single
support brace to be mounted to the gutter clip,
with the brace being
disaggregated from the other features disclosed in the preferred embodiment,
being the support bracket having
a base that is inserted into a slot on the
gutter clip, which were disclosed as essential to achieving this
limitation.
Patentee’s submissions
patentee submitted that the figures in the original specification showed a
single support brace attached to the gutter clip.
As such, it could not be said
that a claim extended beyond the specification because it includes the integer
of “the support
brace and the gutter clip are configured so that only a
single support brace may be mounted to the gutter clip”. The patentee
criticised the opponent’s submissions for effectively saying that only the
preferred embodiments could be claimed. The patentee
also noted that amended
claims 1 and 16 stated that “a rigid joint is formable between the support
brace and the gutter clip
to mount the support brace to the gutter clip”
and, while there was a specific example of how that could be achieved in the
specification, it was incorrect for the opponent to submit that the claims were
directed to a mounting of the bracket to the clip
unspecified
manner. What was required was a rigid joint.
Consideration
do not believe that the opponent is correct in their position. In line with the
patentee’s submissions, there is a disclosure
of a single support brace
being mounted to the gutter clip, and there is a disclosure of a rigid joint
being formed between them.
This is what is in amended claims 1 and 16. I do
not understand why the specifically embodied mechanism for achieving this rigid
joint must be part of the amended claims to avoid a finding of disclosure of new
matter. To my mind, what is claimed is clearly
not a disaggregation from other
features in the preferred embodiment to the extent that there is an
impermissible intermediate generalisation.
The opponent’s focus on the
preferred embodiment, likely influenced by Dr Manning’s evidence arising
from the types
of questions asked of him, misled them.
do not consider that the limitation that “only a single support brace may
be mounted to the gutter clip” in claims 1
and 16 contravenes
defining the gutter clip as “having” a tongue or
spacer in claims 1 and 16
Opponent’s submissions
opponent submitted that the original specification, given multiple references to
a “clip and spacer
, described a
multi-component gutter bracket comprising three distinct components: a gutter
clip, a spacer, and a support brace.
In the patentee’s opinion, the
original disclosure was that the gutter clip and the spacer were separate
functional and structural
components that were to be brought together in an
“assembly”. That is, the clip was one component, and the spacer was
a separate component.
opponent submitted that the effect of the amendment in removing
“attached” from the claims and replacing it with
was to claim that the spacer was part of the gutter clip,
rather than being a spacer that was attached to the gutter clip. In the
opponent’s opinion, this was matter that extended beyond that disclosed in
the original specification.
Patentee’s submissions
patentee conceded that “attached” could be said to have indicated
that the clip and spacer could be separate components
that were then attached to
each other. However, the patentee submitted that the claims defined the spacer
as being integrally formed
with the clip, which was a form of attachment. As
such, the removal of “attached”, but the retention of the integral
formation requirement changed nothing.
Consideration
agree with the patentee that there is no issue under s102(1). The original
specification did state that the clip and spacer were
“attached”,
but, as noted by the patentee, the specification also included a clear teaching
that “[t]he spacer
is preferably integrally formed with the
I do not see any
significant difference between a “spacer attached to the gutter
clip” where the clip is integrally
formed and “a gutter clip having
a spacer” with the same requirement that the clip be integrally formed.
They are the
same thing in my opinion.
Conclusion on s102(1) ground
follows that the opponent has not been successful under this
s102(2)(a) – claim would not in substance fall within
the scope of the claims before amendment
submissions
opponent’s arguments here overlapped substantially with their last
argument under the s102(1) ground. They submitted that
claim 1 prior to
amendment defined the gutter bracket as comprising (in a broad sense) the three
distinct components of a gutter
clip, a spacer attached to the clip, and a
support brace, with each performing discrete functions:
(1) the gutter clip mounting to a fascia,
(2) the spacer spacing the rearward wall of the gutter from the fascia to
provide a water flow channel,
(3) and the support brace supporting an outer wall of the gutter.
opponent submitted that amended claims 1 and 16, which did not explicitly state
that the spacer was “attached to”
the gutter clip, defined the
gutter bracket as comprising two distinct components of a gutter clip and a
support bracket, since the
spacer had been redefined as being
clip rather than being
to it. This led, in the opponent’s
opinion, to a situation where the gutter clip functioned to space the rearward
the gutter from the fascia, and the spacer was adapted to mount to a
fascia and receive a rearward wall of a gutter. In the opponent’s
this meant that different configurations of multi-component gutter brackets
would infringe amended claims 1 and 16, highlighting
an impermissible change in
Patentee’s submissions
patentee submitted that the opponent’s submission was not consistent with
the teaching of the specification. In the patentee’s
opinion, the
language of the specification indicated that “attached to” included
“integrally formed”. The
patentee noted that claim 1 of the
specification as granted defined “a spacer is attached to the gutter
clip” and “the
spacer is integrally formed with the clip”.
The patentee observed that amended claim 1 defined that the gutter clip defined
an “intermediate tongue”, “the gutter clip is integrally
formed” and “the spacer is formed by the tongue”.
patentee also noted that amended claim 16 states that “the spacer
partially defines the first slot of the clip”
and “the gutter clip
is integrally formed”. The patentee submitted that, in the amended
claims, the spacer was integrally
formed with the clip. This was what was
required, leading to the inevitable conclusion that the amended claims fell
within the scope
of the claims prior to amendment.
Consideration
do not find the opponent’s submissions convincing. Accepting the
opponent’s position that, prior to amendment, the
claims required the
gutter clip to mount to a fascia, the spacer to be dimensioned to space the
rearward wall of the gutter from
the fascia to provide a water flow channel, and
the support brace to support an outer wall of the gutter, those requirements
exist in the claims after amendment. While the order of words and
features is much altered, I cannot see the structural redefinition
opponent apparently sees. There has been no change in scope insofar as those
features are concerned. In line with the
the opponent’s submission, it
could be said to be reasonable to say that the gutter clip in the amended claims
functioned (in
a general sense) to space the rearward wall of the gutter from
the fascia, since the spacer, with this functionality, was part of
clip. However, to be frank, saying that the spacer was adapted to mount to a
fascia and to receive a rearward wall of
a gutter, is incredibly strained. The
fact that the spacer is part of the gutter clip does not mean that the spacer
of the gutter clip) must perform all (or a randomly
selected) functionality of the gutter clip
as I have already discussed, I cannot agree with the opponent that the effect of
the proposed amendments would be to delete
the requirement of
“attachment” between the gutter clip and the spacer and merely
require that the clip “have”
a spacer, whether the spacer is
attached to the clip or not. To my mind, the requirement that the clip (which
the spacer) be integrally formed establishes that such an
effect is not present. While the opponent submitted that different
configurations
of multi-component gutter brackets would infringe the amended
claims, they provided no example of such a configuration. Indeed,
think of an example of something that would infringe the amended claims, but
would not infringe the accepted claims.
follows that this ground of the opposition fails. All claims following
amendment remain within the scope of the claims before
the amendment.
s40(2)(a) – invention must be clearly and completely
Parties’ submissions
opponent submitted that amended claim 16 defined the gutter clip as having
“a mounting portion ... wherein the mounting
portion is adapted to mount
to a fascia”. In the opponent’s opinion, claim 16 encompassed a
range of mounting portions
which could not work absent the application of
inventive ingenuity and undue burden. As such, there was no enabling disclosure
all types of mounting portions that fell within the scope of that term.
There was only a disclosure of the mounting portion being
the second slot which
was defined by the tongue and posterior finger. The opponent also pointed to
the evidence of Mr Hunter, specifically
his Diagram 9, which, in the
opponent’s opinion, clearly fell within the scope of claim 16 (with or
without a fastener), but
which could not be said to be enabled. Consequently,
claim 16 was not enabled across its scope contrary to
patentee disputed the opponent’s submission that claim 16 encompassed a
range of mounting portions which could not work
absent the application of
inventive ingenuity and undue burden. The patentee submitted that the mounting
portion of the clip was
that part that allowed the clip to be mounted onto or
over the fascia, and that could not be said to be a range. The patentee
that I should not accept the opponent’s submission that Mr
Hunter’s Diagram 9, being an example of a mounting potion
within the scope
of claim 16, is not enabled. The patentee submitted that Diagram 9 illustrated
a mounting onto a fascia and that
a PSA would recognise when fasteners were
required to mount the clip to the fascia and when they were not. While claim 16
define the use of fasteners, this did not mean that a PSA could not
perform the “mounting portion” of claim 16.
Consideration
believe that this ground can be dealt with quickly. Even if I were to accept
(which I do not) the opponent’s submissions
that claim 16 extends to new
and entirely different forms of mounting and, therefore, is not fully enabled, I
note that s102(2)(b)
requires that the non-compliance with s40(2)(a) is to arise
“as a result of the amendment”. In this regard, I note that,
it comes to a mounting mechanism, accepted claim 1 has the
“a gutter clip adapted to mount to a fascia”,
and nothing
more. Consequently, if the argument being advanced that “a gutter clip
having a mounting portion ... wherein the
mounting portion is adapted to mount
to a fascia” is said to impermissibly extend to new and entirely different
forms of mounting
owing nothing to the disclosure, the same must be said
(possibly to an even greater extent) of the claims prior to amendment. It
follows that this issue (if there be one) does not arise
as a result of the
, but is a pre-existing one.
ground of the opposition fails.
s40(3) – claim(s) must be supported by matter
disclosed in the specification
Parties’ submissions
to their submissions for s102(2)(a), the opponent stated that, prior to
amendment, claim 1 had defined the spacer as being
attached to
Following amendment, the claims defined the spacer as being
clip. In line with the opponent’s submissions for s102(2)(a), this led,
in the opponent’s opinion, to a situation
where the gutter clip functioned
to space the rearward wall of the gutter from the fascia, and the spacer was
adapted to mount to
a fascia and receive a rearward wall of a gutter. In the
opponent’s opinion the technical contribution of the patent was directed
to a spacer attached to the clip in the form of a tongue extending downwardly
from the bridge. Therefore, if the claim’s scope
was such that the spacer
could include (as part of itself) one or more of the anterior finger, posterior
finger, and bridge (wholly
or in part), the claim was not
respect to claim 16, the opponent submitted that, in defining the clip as simply
having “a mounting portion ... wherein
the mounting portion is adapted to
mount to a fascia” with no further detail, the claim extended beyond the
technical contribution
of the mounting portion being formed as a second slot
defined by the tongue and posterior finger, which fitted over a
opponent also submitted that, for the reasons set out for claim 16, claim 17,
which was a mounting method which could use the
mounting clip of claim 16, was
not supported. Furthermore, as the method of claim 17 stated
(a) the locating step was simply the clip of the gutter bracket being located
onto or over the fascia,
(b) the first positioning step involved the spacer of the gutter clip being
placed on or adjacent an anterior surface of the fascia,
(c) the second positioning step required a rearward wall of the gutter being
positioned adjacent the spacer and in the gutter clip,
this led to the conclusion that claim 17 was not supported. This was
because it did not specify that the rearward wall of the gutter
was received in
the first slot, and that a second slot was used to locate the clip onto or over
the fascia, which was the only disclosure
of the manner in which the gutter was
respect to the opponent’s submissions on the difference between the spacer
being attached to the clip and the spacer being
part of the clip, the patentee
repeated the submissions they made in relation to the s102(1) and (2)(a)
grounds. The specification
as filed taught that the spacer could be integrally
formed with the clip and the PSA would have no difficulty understanding that
the issue around “mounting portion”, the patentee repeated their
earlier submissions. They submitted that a PSA could
readily understand what
was meant by a mounting portion that was adapted to mount the clip onto the
fascia. The patentee again submitted
that there was no principle that
necessarily required limiting the invention to that disclosed in a preferred
embodiment.
respect to claim 17, the patentee submitted, given their position for claim 16,
that claim 17 was also supported. The patentee
also submitted that it was not
correct to say that claim 17 did not specify that the rearward wall of the
gutter was received in
the first slot. In their opinion, claim 17 defined the
rearward wall being received
the gutter clip and claim 16 defined the
rearward wall being received
the first slot. As such, the feature
defined. With respect to the opponent’s position that claim 17
did not specify that a second slot was used to locate the clip
onto or over the
fascia, the patentee followed their submissions for the s102(1) ground around
“mounting portion”. They
maintained that the disclosure of the
patent was not limited to mounting by use of a second slot.
Consideration
opponent has the same problem for this ground as they did for their submissions
under the s40(2)(a) ground. Assuming for the
sake of argument that the
opponent’s position was correct and the claims after amendment were
missing the features of:
(a) a clip formed by an anterior finger, a posterior finger and a bridge
connecting them;
(b) a first slot being formed by the anterior finger and a spacer extending from
the bridge; and
(c) a second slot defined by the tongue and posterior finger, which fitted over
those same features do not appear in the accepted claims. As seemed to
be agreed to by the opponent at the hearing, the reasons why
the amended claims
lack support also apply to the accepted claims. It follows that lack of support
(assuming it to be the case,
which I do not think can be) does not arise
result of the amendment
. It would be a pre-existing one.
Consequently,
this ground of opposition fails.
specification would not, as a result of the amendments, extend beyond the
disclosure of the specification as filed. The amendment
results in claims that
in substance fall within the scope of the claims before amendment. The
amendment does not result in a specification
that fails to clearly enough and
completely enough disclose the invention, or lead to the claims lacking support.
therefore will allow the amendment composed of the proposed amendments filed on
5 August 2022, 24 January 2023 and 29 May 2023.
also note the words of the clear re-examination report of 3 July
“When the amendments are allowed, you will receive a letter informing
you that the re examination is complete.”
Such a letter will
issue in due course.
opposition to the s104 amendments is unsuccessful. On this basis I consider it
appropriate to make an award of costs against
the opponent, Gutter Grip
Australia Pty Ltd.
Greg Powell
Delegate of the Commissioner of Patents
[2020] FCA 328
) at [215]-[218]
CSIRO v BASF
at [211] and
(1953) 70 RPC 221
AOJP 1752 at page
[2022] FCA 540
[2021] FCA 970
Building Products Limited v United States Gypsum Company
[2015] APO 72
CSR Building
[2017] APO 57
[2020] FCA 1477
CSIRO v BASF
Specification at page
2, line 24 and page 5, line
Ibid at page 2, line 26
and page 6, line 21
page 3, line 6 and original claim
Manning1 at
written submissions at [59]
Specification at page 4 lines
Manning1 at
Specification at page
3, lines 17–20
page 3 lines 21–23
Hunter at [95]
Manning2 at
written submissions at [67]
Hunter at [93]
Specification
at page 7, line 26, page 8, lines 8, 13 and 20, for
Ibid at page 3, line
RTF format (5.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format