KTW25 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FCA 1391 (14 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
KTW25 v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FCA 1391
File number(s):
VID 644 of 2025
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
judgment – whether no reasonable prospects of success – how to
assess claims raised in purported “interlocutory
application”
attaching second statement of claim – whole of proceeding dismissed
JUDICIAL REVIEW
– claim that Department of Home
Affairs had wrongly decided in 2019 that a disclosure by the Applicant fell
outside the
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013
(Cth) – not a
grounds for its decision –
complaint related to University of Adelaide, a
State body – no arguable case of legal error by Department –
substantial
unexplained delay
PUBLIC SERVICE
– claim for
compensation for reprisals under the
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013
(Cth) – where Applicant’s ability to telephone government officials
channels of
enquiry” – allegation that reference to “false criminal
information” in some decisions refusing
to grant the Applicant a bridging
visa was motivated by his previous disclosure – no arguable case that
either conduct amounted
to a reprisal
Legislation:
Corporations Act 2001
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Judiciary Act 1903
Migration Act 1958
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) rr 16.21, 26.01
Cases cited:
AB v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCA 1227
Anvil Hill Project Watch Association Inc v Minister for the Environment
and Water Resources
[2008] FCAFC 3
(2008) 166 FCR 54
Australian Communications and Media Authority v V Marketing Pty Ltd
[2020] FCA 1326
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Shell Co of Australia
[1999] FCA 212
(1999) 161 ALR 686
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v George Weston Foods Ltd
[2003] FCA 601
(2003) 129 FCR 298
Azad v Avant Insurance Limited (No 2)
[2025] FCA 853
B&K Holdings (Qld) Pty Ltd v Garmin Australasia Pty Ltd
[2019] FCA 64
(2019) 134 ACSR 404
Bilal v EML NSW Limited
[2025] FCA 1190
Chetcuti v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] FCAFC 112
(2019) 270 FCR 335
Dandaven v Harbeth Holdings Pty Ltd
[2008] FCA 955
DVO16 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2021] HCA 12
(2021) 273 CLR 177
Fair Work Ombudsman v Austrend International Pty Ltd
(2018) 273 IR 439
Fastbet Investments Pty Ltd v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation
[2018] FCA 1418
(2018) 108 ATR 730
Galuak v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCAFC 146
(2024) 306 FCR 271
Gibb v Commissioner of Taxation
[1966] HCA 74
118 CLR 628
Hutchinson v Comcare (No 2)
[2018] FCA 1179
Hutchinson v Comcare (No 4)
[2019] FCA 1133
Hutchinson v Comcare (No 5)
[2019] FCA 1665
Hutchinson v Comcare
[2017] FCA 1145
Jilani v Wilhelm
[2005] FCAFC 269
(2005) 148 FCR
KTC v David
[2022] FCAFC 60
Kumar v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2024] FCAFC 79
Makarov v Minister for Home Affairs
[2021] FCAFC 129
286 FCR 412
Minister for Home Affairs v DUA16
[2020] HCA 46
271 CLR 550
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2013] HCA 18
(2013) 249 CLR 332
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZIAI
[2009] HCA 39
(2009) 83 ALJR 1123
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZIQB
[2008] FCAFC
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs v
[2002] FCAFC 327
Moreton Bay Regional Council v Mekpine Pty Ltd
[2016] HCA 7
(2016) 256 CLR 437
Mount v Dover Castle Metals Pty Ltd
[2025] FCA 101
; (2025) 339
NWQR v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2021] FCAFC 30
Pasini v Vanstone
[1999] FCA 1271
PlayUp Limited v Mintas
[2022] FCA 892
Prior v Mole
[2017] HCA 10
(2017) 261 CLR 265
Reiche v Neometals Ltd (No 2)
[2025] FCA 125
Rivas v Republic of Chile
[2020] FCA 737
Sayed v Salvation Army Housing
[2023] FCA 526
Scordo v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
[2024] FCA 359
SMEC Holdings Pty Ltd v Commissioner of the Australian Federal
[2018] FCA 609
Smith v Minister for Home Affairs
[2018] FCA 1594
Spencer v Commonwealth
[2010] HCA 28
(2010) 241 CLR
SZRUR v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2013] FCAFC 146
(2013) 216 FCR 445
SZVGE v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCA 516
Timbarra Protection Coalition Inc v Ross Mining NL
[1999] NSWCA
(1999) 46 NSWLR 55
Upaid Systems Ltd v Telstra Corporation Limited
[2016] FCAFC
Warburton Environment Inc v Secretary, Department of Energy, Environment
and Climate Action
[2024] FCA 1272
General Division
National Practice Area:
Administrative and Constitutional Law and Human Rights
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
The Applicant appeared in person
Counsel for the Respondents:
Mr D Merriman
Solicitor for the Respondents:
Australian Government Solicitor
VID 644 of 2025
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
OPERATIONS MANAGER - DEPARTMENT OF
Second Respondent
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
name of the First Respondent is amended to “Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship”.
whole proceeding is dismissed pursuant to
Federal Court
of Australia Act 1976
Applicant pay the Respondents’ costs.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
A. INTRODUCTION
Applicant’s claims against the Respondents are contained in a statement of
claim dated 3 April 2025, and in a second statement
of claim which he
sought to file in July 2025. The Applicant’s first statement of claim
contends, in outline:
of Home Affairs erred in July 2019 when it decided that a
disclosure by the Applicant (alleging misconduct by the University of Adelaide)
was not a “public interest disclosure” under the
Public Interest
Disclosure Act 2013
), and would not be allocated
for investigation under that Act.
The Department
erred in May 2021 when it referred to “false criminal histories” in
the course of refusing to grant the
Applicant a bridging visa. It is said that
this caused the Applicant to be unlawfully detained in immigration detention,
an act of reprisal against his disclosure.
Applicant’s second statement contends, in outline, that the Applicant was
placed under “enhanced monitoring”
when in immigration detention
between at least 5 and 28 May 2025, which (it is said) constituted a
reprisal under s 13 of the PID
Act, for which the Applicant seeks monetary
compensation under s 14 of the PID Act and an apology.
Respondents have applied for summary judgment in the proceeding against the
Applicant or, alternatively, to have the Applicant’s
first statement of
claim struck out. These reasons deal with that application.
the reasons that follow, the whole proceeding should be summarily dismissed with
B. PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Originating
application (May 2025):
The Applicant filed an originating application
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) (accepted for filing on
21 May 2025), which sets out the following “Details of
Details of claim
On the grounds stated in the statement of claim, accompanying affidavit or other
document prescribed by the Rules, the Applicant
applies for the following relief
section 39B
Judiciary Act 1903
the Court hear and determine forthwith the originating motion filed in these
proceedings; legal errors to be heard:
a. Incorrect application of law -
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013
2. Injunctions pursuant to
section 39B
Judiciary Act
the first respondent to appoint a new delegate to review the PID submission made
to Home Affairs which resulted in record
PID 2019/011.
the first respondent to treat the applicant as a Public Official within the
meaning of the
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013
for the purposes of
reassessment of the claim.
the respondent to pay the applicant compensation (
to be calculated
evidence of unlawful detention in 2021 by use of false criminal records with
respect to reprisal against Public Interest Disclosure.
3. Injunctions pursuant to
section 39B
Judiciary Act
courts consider issuing anti-reprisal orders with respect to the evidence of
computer malfunction which caused the Department
to deliberately manipulate
migration records and criminal history records.
statement of claim (Apr-May 2025):
The originating application was
accompanied by a statement of claim dated 3 April 2025 (accepted for filing
on 21 May 2025) (
statement of claim
). That statement
of claim provides:
1. Incorrect application of Public Interest Disclosure (PID) Act 2013
Distilled chain of events:
a. The applicant was in an employee relationship with the University of Adelaide
and the services the applicant contributed to the
University were under specific
Commonwealth contracts relevant to the applicant’s services.
b. The applicant was dismissed from the University and the matters were brought
to the fair work commission, not one decision of
all of the members (up to the
president of the commission) made any reference to a definite finding that the
applicant did not have
an employee relationship with the University of
c. On [REDACTED] July 2019 the decision record from the Fair Work
Commission stated: ...in the absence of more complete evidence
research activities undertaken...I do not consider it appropriate to make a
definite finding...
d. On 30 July 2019 Home Affairs’ decided not to allocate the matters
for investigation and incorrectly claimed that even an
employee of the
University of Adelaide would not be covered by the PID Act.
e. On 12 June 2024 the Department of Defence conceded that “Some
activities of the University of Adelaide may fall within the
2. Reasonable claim from distilled chain of events
a. Had the Department provided correct advice there would have been further
consideration to the remedies available under the
Public Interest Disclosure
3. Indisputable proof of unlawful detention
a. Deliberate reference to false criminal histories
On 26 May 2021 Home Affairs’ refused a visa application while the
applicant was being detained; the primary basis to refuse
the visa application
pertained to ‘8564 - Must not engage in criminal conduct’. The
refusal letter stated...”You
were again arrested by South Australia Police
on 20 April 2020 for Impersonating a Police officer...”. This alleged
criminality
appeared in other decision records as well as internal
communications within the Home Affairs’ network.
b. Forming proof that there was no such criminal history
On 19 August 2021 South Australian Police (SAPOL) Freedom of Information Unit
provided a copy of a spreadsheet tabulating interactions
between SAPOL and the
applicant. In this spreadsheet there was no reference to the date 20 April 2020.
This was the basis for forming
reasonable suspicion that the references to
criminal history were false. This reasonable suspicion transitioned to
‘knowledge’
on 24 November 2022 when SAPOL FOI released 23-1093. Any
competent person comparing the visa refusal decisions referencing criminality
and SAPOL FOI 23-1093 would be able to conclude that the reference to
criminality was false. Equality any competent analyst would
be able to conclude
that the reference to false criminal records resulted in a period of unlawful
4. Relief Sought
On the grounds set out above, the Applicant seeks injunctions pursuant to
section 39B
Judiciary Act
a. Directing the first respondent to appoint a new delegate to review the PID
submission made to Home Affairs which resulted in record
PID 2019/011.
b. Directing the first respondent to treat the applicant as a Public Official
within the meaning of the
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013
for the purposes
of reassessment of the claim.
c. Directing the respondent to pay the applicant compensation (to be calculated)
for evidence of unlawful detention in 2021 by use
of false criminal records with
respect to reprisal against Public Interest Disclosure.
d. The courts consider issuing anti-reprisal orders with respect to the evidence
of computer malfunction which caused the Department
to deliberately manipulate
migration records and criminal history records.
Applicant’s
interlocutory application (Jul-Aug 2025):
The Applicant has filed an
interlocutory application dated 28 July 2025 (and accepted for filing on
12 August 2025) which seeks the
following orders:
Interlocutory orders sought
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013
, the Court Orders the
First Respondent to cause the Department of Home Affairs to pay the applicant
$67,808 (~ £33,000) for
the abuse of office during May 2025 which resulted
in the unreasonable utility ‘closer supervision and engagement
against the applicant.
Court recommends that the Second Respondent requests the Commander of Detention
Operations to issue an apology to the applicant
for the unreasonable
authorization of ‘closer supervision and engagement placement’ as a
punitive measure.
statement of claim:
The interlocutory application was accompanied by a
second statement of claim dated 28 July 2025 (
), which provides:
order sought for the interlocutory application dated 28 July 2025: Pursuant to
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013
, the Court Orders the First
Respondent to cause the Department of Home Affairs to pay the applicant $67,808
(~ £33,000) for
the abuse of office during May 2025 which resulted in the
unreasonable utility of ‘closer supervision and engagement
enhanced monitoring
) against the applicant.
at least 05 May 2025 up to 28 May 2025 enhanced monitoring was used against the
applicant as a punitive measure in an act of
deliberate reprisal.
authorization of enhanced monitoring was required to be made by the Commander of
Detention Operations as per 3.11.2 from Doc
ID (PPN) - DM-6320 (FA25/03/01822).
addition to numerous human rights violations, the authorization was a violation
of 1.1.4 which states: “Under no circumstance
can a detainee be placed
under closer supervision and engagement arrangement as a punitive
authorization was also a violation of 3.7.6 which states: “Closer
supervision and engagement is not punitive and should
not be used as an
incentive to change detainee behavior. It is to be used to support high risk
detainees until they no longer pose
a significant risk to themselves, to others
in the IDF or to the good order of the IDF.”
authorization from the Commander is an exploitable example of abuse of office.
Compensation
is being sought for being the subject of this abuse of office.
statement of claim has not yet been accepted for filing, because
there is a dispute about the legal effectiveness of the Applicant’s
interlocutory application: see [
management orders (Aug 2025):
The Respondents in correspondence with
the Court foreshadowed applying for summary judgment. At a case management
hearing on 7 August
2025, a Judicial Registrar made timetabling orders
for the Respondents file any application for summary judgment by a certain date,
and for the parties to exchange written submissions and evidence.
that case management hearing, the Applicant agreed not to file any further
documents (other than those contemplated by the timetabling
orders) until after
the Respondents’ application for summary judgment was resolved.
Respondents’
application for summary dismissal (Sept 2025):
On 4 September
2025, the Respondents filed an interlocutory application, seeking orders
(a) Summary judgment be given in this proceeding against the Applicant in favour
of the Respondents, pursuant to s 31A(2) of the
of Australia
(Cth) and/or
r 26.01(1)(a), (b) and/or (c) of the
Federal Court
(b) Alternatively, that the Applicant’s statement of claim dated
3 April 2025 (i.e. the 1
statement of claim) be struck
out pursuant to r 16.21(b), (c), (d) and/or (e) of the Rules;
(c) The Applicant pay the Respondents’ costs of the proceeding (in the
event summary judgment is given), or costs of the application
(in the event the
statement of claim is struck out).
before the Court:
The evidence before the Court for the purposes of the
Respondents’ interlocutory application consists of the following.
Respondents’
The Respondents have filed an affidavit of Rodger Prince affirmed
4 September 2025 (and accepted for filing on 5 September 2025)
Prince affidavit
affidavit annexes 14 emails or email chains between the Applicant and the
Department between 5 June 2019 and 13 August
Applicant’s
affidavits:
Relevantly, the Applicant has filed an affidavit affirmed by him
on 4 April 2025 (
Applicant’s 1
affidavit affirmed by him on 13 August 2025 (the
Applicant’s
Applicant’s 1
affidavit attaches a number of documents, or
parts of documents, that seek to explain the allegations in the 1
statement of claim.
Applicant’s 2
affidavit attaches documents, or parts of
documents, that seek to explain the allegations in the 2
addition, the Applicant’s written submissions dated 4 September 2025
also attach documents that he seeks to rely on.
order (Sep 2025):
The proceeding, as filed, named the Applicant. On
16 September 2025, the Federal Circuit and Family Court (Div 2) assigned
the Applicant
a pseudonym under s 91X of the
Migration Act
(Cth) in proceedings in that Court, on the basis that those
proceedings relate to the Applicant in his capacity as an applicant for
protection visa.
determined that this proceeding does not “relate to” the Applicant
in that capacity; however, it appeared that there
is a common factual background
in the two proceedings such that, if the Court were to use the Applicant’s
name in this proceeding,
that would readily enable his identity to be determined
in the Federal Circuit and Family Court proceeding and undermine the policy
I therefore made pseudonym orders in this proceeding under
ss 37AF and 37AG(1)(a) of the Federal Court Act: see
SZVGE v Minister
for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCA 516
(Jackson J); see also
AB v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCA 1227
applications deferred:
At various points, the Applicant also sought to file
a subpoena, and sought broad suppression orders (on the stated basis that it
would be necessary to examine the whole of the relationship between the
Department of Defence and the University of Adelaide). I
ordered that those
documents not be accepted for filing at this stage, as it was not necessary to
determine the issues sought to
be raised by those applications in order to deal
with the Respondents’ application for summary judgment.
(Nov 2025):
The Respondents’ application for summary judgment was
heard on 7 November 2025. The Respondents’ counsel appeared in
in Melbourne. The Applicant (who is in immigration detention in Western
Australia) declined the Court’s offer for him
to be brought to the Federal
Court in Perth to present arguments by video-link. The Applicant also declined
to use the meeting room
arranged by the immigration detention centre, which
would have allowed him to participate in the hearing by video-link. Instead,
Applicant chose to attend by telephone (which I permitted under ss 47B and
47C of the Federal Court Act).
the hearing, the Applicant sent the Court two emails, which sought to make
further submissions. Chambers sent an email to the
parties, stating that
judgment was reserved and that further materials would not be accepted without
the leave of the Court (see
Galuak v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,
Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCAFC 146
306 FCR 271
(the Court), and the cases cited). However, I read
those emails, and am satisfied that they do not add to the relevant materials
before the Court.
C APPLICABLE LEGISLATION
applicable legislation in this proceeding is the law governing granting summary
judgment, and striking out pleadings; and the
PID Act. In considering
summary dismissal and strike out, it will be necessary to explain the position
when (as here) an applicant
is legally unrepresented.
C.1 Summary judgment and striking out pleadings
Court Act s 31A (no reasonable prospect of success):
Starting with
summary judgment, the Court may give judgment to a party defending a proceeding
against another party in relation to
the whole or part of the proceeding if
“the Court is satisfied that the other party has no reasonable prospect of
successfully
prosecuting the proceeding or that part of the proceeding”
(Federal Court Act, s 31A(2)(b)).
these purposes, a proceeding or part of a proceeding need not be hopeless, or
bound to fail, for it to have no reasonable prospect
(s 31A(3)).
By r 26.01(1) of the Rules, a party may apply to the
Court for an order that judgment be given against another party because
(relevantly):
(a) the applicant has no reasonable prospect of successfully prosecuting the
proceeding or part of the proceeding; or
(b) the proceeding is frivolous or vexatious; or
(c) no reasonable cause of action is disclosed;
judgment – general principles:
The Respondents rely on the following
observations about s 31A of the Federal Court Act made by French CJ
and Gummow J in
Spencer v Commonwealth
[2010] HCA 28
241 CLR 118
[Section 31A] authorises summary disposition of proceedings on a variety of
bases under its general rubric. It will apply to the
case in which the pleadings
disclose no reasonable cause of action and their deficiency is incurable. It
will include the case in
which there is unanswerable or unanswered evidence of a
fact fatal to the pleaded case and any case which might be propounded by
permissible amendment. It will include the class of case in the longstanding
category of cases which are “frivolous or vexatious
or an abuse of
process”. The application of s 31A is not, in terms, limited to those
categories.
principles governing s 31A were summarised as follows in
v Salvation Army Housing
[2023] FCA 526
(O’Callaghan J) (which was adopted in
Commonwealth Bank of Australia
[2024] FCA 359
(Button J)):
The essential
requirement for an order under s 31A or r 26.01 is that the Court be
satisfied that the applicant has no reasonable
prospect of successfully
prosecuting the claim. This is a lower standard than the previous
“hopeless” or “bound
to fail” standard.
Summary judgment
is available when well-established propositions of law deny the prospect of
On the other
hand, summary dismissal is a serious step taken only with great care and if the
Court is confident that there is no reasonable
prospect of
exercise of power under s 31A(2) should be used with caution, particularly
where complex questions of fact or law are involved:
Upaid Systems Ltd v
Telstra Corporation Limited
[2016] FCAFC 158
(the Court). At
the same time, if the version of the facts asserted by the party resisting the
motion is either so improbable, or
fanciful, or trifling, or implausible, or
tenuous then summary judgment must be granted:
Fair Work Ombudsman v Austrend
International Pty Ltd
[2018] FCA 171
(2018) 273 IR 439
(Gilmour J);
B&K Holdings (Qld) Pty Ltd v Garmin Australasia Pty
[2019] FCA 64
(2019) 134 ACSR 404
(Derrington J);
Australian Communications and Media Authority v
V Marketing Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2020] FCA 1326
(Collier J);
PlayUp Limited v Mintas
[2022] FCA 892
(Markovic J).
establishes the following propositions about the other tests for summary
dismissal in r 26.01(1)(b) and (c) of the Rules:
A proceeding is
“frivolous” if the cause of action lacks substance or is groundless
or fanciful, or where a party is trifling
with the court or wasting its time. A
proceeding is “vexatious” if it is without foundation, cannot
succeed or is brought
for an ulterior and collateral purpose:
[48], and the cases cited.
A proceeding
will disclose “no reasonable cause of action” if it is so obviously
untenable that it cannot succeed:
at [49]; or if the originating
application simply makes “bare demands” without articulating the
legal bases for the claims:
at [46](a).
, Button J made two general points worth emphasising. First,
the Court’s power to give judgment under s 31A does not involve
“mere pleading points” but is concerned with substance:
at [42]. Second, the Court’s resources are finite, and
s 31A confers power on the Court to avoid the waste of those resources.
While granting summary judgment is a serious matter as it brings to an end a
litigant’s ability to pursue claims to trial,
the Court should not shy
away from exercising its powers in an appropriate case:
r 16.21 (strike out):
Rule 16.21 of the Rules provides that a party may
apply to the Court for an order that all or part of the pleading be struck out
on the ground that the pleading:
(b) contains frivolous or vexatious material; or
(c) is evasive or ambiguous; or
(d) is likely to cause prejudice, embarrassment or delay in the proceeding; or
(e) fails to disclose a reasonable cause of action or defence or other case
appropriate to the nature of the pleading;
Respondents rely on the following principles from the judgment of Wigney J
(with whom Jackson J agreed) in
KTC v David
[2022] FCAFC
A pleading is
“likely to cause prejudice or embarrassment” (within
r 16.21(1)(d)) if it is susceptible to various meanings,
inconsistent allegations, includes various alternatives which are confusingly
intermixed, contains irrelevant allegations
or includes defects which result in
it being unintelligible, ambiguous, vague or too general. Such a pleading could
equally be characterised
as “evasive or ambiguous” within
r 16.21(1)(c):
KTC v David
“reasonable cause of action” (within r 16.21(1)(e)) is a cause
of action that has some chance of success having regard
to the allegations
KTC v David
If substantial
parts of a pleading are struck out, the Court may strike out the entire pleading
on the basis that the “residue
would be confusing”:
with self-represented litigants:
A relevant factor in applying the laws set
out above is that the Applicant is self-represented. The Court has an overriding
to ensure a fair trial for all parties, which means the Court will take
appropriate steps to ensure that an unrepresented litigant
has sufficient
information about the practice and procedure of the Court, so far as is
reasonably practicable for the purpose of
ensuring a fair trial: see generally
SZRUR v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2013] FCAFC
(2013) 216 FCR 445
(Robertson J, with Allsop CJ and
Mortimer J agreeing), and
NWQR v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,
Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2021] FCAFC 30
Court). However, although the Court may be lenient in the standard of compliance
which it expects from a litigant in person,
that leniency does not go so far as
to confer an advantage on the person who acts on their own behalf:
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCAFC 79
(the Court); see also
Chetcuti v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] FCAFC 112
(2019) 270 FCR
(Murphy and Rangiah JJ).
Azad v Avant Insurance Limited (No 2)
[2025] FCA 853
Colvin J explained the position with self-represented litigants in the
context of a summary dismissal application as follows:
When parties conduct their own case, they are not expected to be able to plead
their case with the same precision as a skilled lawyer.
Some leeway, consistent
with the fair conduct of the proceedings, will be allowed to a litigant in
person. Nevertheless, the responsibility
of an applicant to plead a case and for
a respondent to state the nature of the defence must still be met before the
case can proceed.
The fair conduct of adversarial proceedings depends upon the
parties discharging their responsibility in that regard. If an applicant
unable or unwilling to do so, the case cannot proceed.
Bilal v EML NSW Limited
[2025] FCA 1190
(Shariff J).
C.2 PID Act
of the allegations made in the Applicant’s 1
statements of claim concern the application of the PID Act.
As will become apparent, two key issues in this proceeding are:
Whether the
referral made by the Applicant in June 2019 to the Department could
reasonably be considered to be a “public interest
disclosure” within
the PID Act (in particular, an “internal disclosure”);
Whether alleged
action taken by the Second Respondent in May 2025 in relation to the Applicant
in immigration detention could in law
amount to a “reprisal” within
the PID Act. (A similar issue arises with the Department’s refusal to
grant the Applicant
a bridging visa in May 2021.)
C.2(a) Provisions relating to public interest disclosures
(at July 2019)
first set of relevant provisions concern the definition of “public
interest disclosures” and the legal requirements
for dealing with
disclosures of information. These provisions will be considered at the time of
the Department’s decision in
interest disclosure” (s 26):
By s 26(1) of the PID Act,
a disclosure of information was a “public interest disclosure”
(a) the disclosure is made by a person (the
) who is, or
has been, a public official; and
(b) the recipient of the information is a person of the kind referred to in
column 2 of an item of the following table; and
(c) all the further requirements set out in column 3 of that item are met: ...
official” (ss 69-70):
The first element in the definition of
“public interest disclosure” is that the disclosure is made by a
public official
(s 26(1)(a)).
“public official” was defined as an individual mentioned in
column 1 of an item in the table in s 69(1). This table
Commonwealth bodies and agencies such as a Secretary of a Department, and an
Australian Public Service (
) employee in a Department or Executive
Agency. Relevantly, the table in s 69(1) included:
16. An individual who:
(a) is an officer or employee of a contracted service provider for a
Commonwealth contract; and
(b) provides services for the purposes (whether direct or indirect) of the
Commonwealth contract.
an individual who is a “public official” under the above definition
did not engage in conduct in connection with
his or her position as such a
public official unless the conduct was in connection with entering into, or
giving effect to, the Commonwealth
contract (s 30(1)). By s 30(3), a
“Commonwealth contract” was a contract to which the Commonwealth or
a prescribed body
is party, and:
(b) under which goods or services are to be, or were to be, provided:
(i) to the Commonwealth or a prescribed authority; or
(ii) for or on behalf of the Commonwealth or a prescribed authority, and in
connection with the performance of its functions or the
exercise of its powers.
addition, there was provision in s 70 for an authorised officer to
determine that a person who is not a public official is to be
treated as a
public official. This required, among other things, that the official believe,
on reasonable grounds, that an individual
who was not a public official had
information that concerned disclosable conduct (s 70(1)(a)).
for “internal disclosure” (s 26(1) item 1):
element in the definition of “public interest disclosure” was that
the recipient is a person of a kind identified
in column 2 of the table in
s 26(1) (s 26(1)(b)). The type of public interest disclosure turned on
the identity of the recipient:
there was an “internal disclosure”
(item 1 of the table), “external disclosure” (item 2),
disclosure” (item 3), and “legal practitioner
disclosure” (item 4).
Relevantly,
the recipient identified in column 2 for “internal disclosure”
(item 1 of the table) was “[a]n authorised
internal recipient, or a
supervisor of the discloser”. Generally, an authorised internal recipient
was an authorised officer
of the agency to which the conduct related (see
s 34, item 1).
requirements for internal disclosure:
The third element in the definition of
“public interest disclosure” was that all the further requirements
column 3 of that item in the s 26(1) table were met. In
July 2019, column 3 for item 1 set out the following further
requirements
for an internal disclosure:
The information tends to show, or the discloser believes on reasonable grounds
that the information tends to show, one or more instances
of disclosable
“Disclosable
conduct” (s 29):
By s 29(1)(c), “disclosable
conduct” was conduct of a kind mentioned in the table in s 29(1) that
is engaged in by (relevantly)
“a contracted service provider for a
Commonwealth contract, in connection with entering into, or giving effect to,
that contract”.
That conduct in the s 29(1) table included:
6. Conduct that is:
(a) fabrication, falsification, plagiarism, or deception, in relation to:
(i) proposing scientific research; or
(ii) carrying out scientific research; or
(iii) reporting the results of scientific research; or
(b) misconduct relating to scientific analysis, scientific evaluation or the
giving of scientific advice.
Investigating
public interest disclosures (Pt 3):
Part 3 of the PID Act
provided for the investigation of public interest disclosures. Relevantly,
Div 1 dealt with the allocation
of the handling of a disclosure, while
Div 2 dealt with the investigation of a disclosure allocated to an
of disclosure (s 43):
By s 43(1), if a person disclosed
information to an authorised officer of an agency (or to the officer’s
supervisor who then
gave it to the officer), the authorised officer “must
allocate the handling of the disclosure to one or more agencies”.
by s 43(2), s 43(1) did not apply if the authorised officer:
satisfied, on reasonable grounds
, that there is no reasonable basis
on which the disclosure could be considered to be an internal disclosure.
(emphasis added)
explained below, the emphasised wording in s 43(2) means that the Court
does not decide for itself whether the Applicant’s
disclosure met the
requirements of a “public interest disclosure”, but determines only
whether there was a reasonable
basis for the Department’s decision that
the disclosure did not meet those requirements: see further [
C.2(b) Provisions relating to reprisals (at May
second relevant set of provisions in the PID Act are those relating to
reprisals. It is convenient to consider these provisions
at the date of the
enhanced monitoring in May 2025.
of disclosers and witnesses (Pt 2):
Part 2 of the PID Act
provides for protection of disclosers and witnesses. Relevantly, the Court may
make orders for civil remedies
if a reprisal is taken against a person because
of a public interest disclosure (including a proposed or suspected public
disclosure) (see s 9).
By s 13(1), a person (the “first
person”) takes a reprisal against another person (the “second
person”) if:
(a) the first person engages in conduct that:
(i) results in detriment to the second person; or
(ii) consists of, or results in, a threat to cause detriment to the second
person; and
(b) when the conduct is engaged in, the first person believes or suspects that
the second person, or any other person:
(i) has made a public interest disclosure; or
(ii) may have made a public interest disclosure; or
(iii) proposes to make a public interest disclosure; or
(iv) could make a public interest disclosure; and
(c) the belief or suspicion is the reason, or part of the reason, for engaging
in the conduct.
a person does not take a reprisal against another person to the extent that the
person takes administrative action that is
reasonable to protect the other
person from detriment (s 13(3)).
“Detriment”
By s 13(2), detriment “includes (without
limitation) any of the following”:
(a) dismissal of an employee;
(b) injury of an employee in his or her employment;
(c) alteration of an employee’s position to his or her disadvantage;
(d) discrimination between an employee and other employees of the same employer;
(e) harassment or intimidation of a person;
(f) harm or injury to a person, including psychological harm;
(g) damage to a person’s property;
(h) damage to a person’s reputation;
(i) damage to a person’s business or financial position;
(j) any other damage to a person.
for reprisals (ss 14-15):
Part 2 of the PID Act sets out
remedies that can be granted if a person takes a “reprisal” against
another person within
s 13. Relevantly, the Court:
may make an
order requiring the respondent to compensate the applicant for loss, damage or
injury as a result of the reprisal (s 14(1)(a));
may make an
order requiring the respondent to apologise to the applicant for taking the
reprisal (s 15(1)(b)).
D. CONSIDERATION OF APPLICANT’S CLAIMS
section analyses the Applicant’s claims, considering in turn the
statements of claim. The analysis of each
identifies the essential claims; then sets out the relevant facts (to the extent
be determined on the materials before the Court); then analyses whether
the Applicant has any reasonable prospect of prosecuting
those essential
D.1 First statement of claim (whether public interest
disclosure; unlawful detention)
statement of claim):
statement of
claim (set out in [
] above) contains
two broad claims.
not to investigate disclosure under PID Act (July 2019):
The first broad
claim is that the Department erred when it decided on 30 July 2019 that the
Applicant’s disclosure (which alleged
misconduct by the University of
Adelaide) was not covered by the PID Act (see 1
of claim, items 1-2).
The Applicant
contends in this Court that he was an “employee” of the University
of Adelaide, and that he contributed
services to the University under specific
Commonwealth contracts (1
statement of claim, item 1(a)).
Therefore, he argues, his disclosure came within the PID Act (see
item 1(d)).
to “false criminal history” in refusing bridging visa
(May 2021):
The second broad claim is that the Department’s
reference to “false criminal histories” when refusing an application
for a bridging visa on 26 May 2021 caused the Applicant to be unlawfully
detained in 2021 (see 1
statement of claim, item 3).
Department’s decision stated that the Applicant had been arrested in April
2020 for impersonating a South Australian (
) police officer
(item 3(a)). The Applicant contends that records obtained from South
Australian Police (
) under freedom of information legislation shows
no record of him being arrested for that or any other offence
(item 3(b)).
At the hearing,
the Applicant clarified that he contends further that these adverse bridging
visa decisions were reprisals for his
disclosure in June 2019 (cf 1
statement of claim item 4(c) and (d)).
statement of claim):
The materials before the Court
establish the following key events.
begins a Masters program (Mar 2017):
The Applicant is an American
citizen. He began a Master of Philosophy at the Medical School at the
of Adelaide in March 2017.
terminates candidature (Jul 2018):
On 30 July 2018, the Pro
Vice-Chancellor (Research Operations) at the University gave notice that it was
terminating the Applicant’s
Master of Philosophy candidature at the
Medical School.
Applicant’s
internal appeal dismissed (Aug-Sep 2018):
On 27 August 2018, the
Applicant requested an internal appeal against this termination decision. That
appeal was dismissed on 25
September 2018.
internal email from the University helpdesk dated 26 September 2018 states
that the Applicant’s role of “Postgraduate
Research Student”
would end on 10 October 2018.
dismisses Applicant’s misconduct complaint (Oct-Nov 2018):
4 October 2018, the Applicant made allegations relating to research
integrity in the institute relevant to his candidature. On
15 November
2018, the Provost and Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Research) of the University
concluded, after conducting an initial review,
that there was no reasonable
belief that a possible breach of the applicable research code of conduct had
occurred, and that the
matter did not warrant a formal preliminary
assessment.
Applicant’s
licence to attend campus revoked (Dec 2018):
On 20 December 2018,
the University’s General Counsel advised the Applicant that the University
was revoking the Applicant’s
right to attend on campus, because of
concerns that his presence on campus posed a risk to the health and wellbeing of
staff, students
and others on campus.
sends disclosure to Department (Jun 2019):
On 5 June 2019, the
Applicant sent an email headed “PID and Whistleblower Protocol –
Request confirmation that material
has been received” to a number of
recipients, including in the Department. This email included the following
“Lay summary
of my situation”:
1) I was assigned to a research project that was engaging in research misconduct
by fabricating results of a medical treatment model.
I was expected to lie about
results and when I questioned the work I was assaulted, bullied, threatened and
There were attempts to bring this model to human trials. As such this matter is
classified as a Public Interest Disclosure.
2) I am the inventor of medical device and several process patents that are of
great value to the medical and materials science community.
3) My knowledge of this information and attempt to claim my invention has led me
to be bullied and threatened. I was even accused
of being a terrorist and
counter terrorism police infiltrated my home with no notification.
I have omitted data from Australian federal police, South Australian Police
Department, Department of Home Affairs, and Department
of Defense.
Applicant sent a further eight emails to the Department between 5 and
7 June 2019, attaching various documents and audio files.
Those emails and
attachments are almost 450 pages in total.
refuses extension of time to bring unfair dismissal application (Jul 2019):
The material before me indicates that the Applicant brought an unfair dismissal
claim in the Fair Work
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth). It appears from the University’s response to that application
(contained in the Prince affidavit) that the University
contended that the
Applicant was a student, not an employee. The 1
statement of claim
refers to a decision of the Commission (item 1(c)). That document is
available on public databases, and I have
redacted the date in [
] above to preserve the
Applicant’s anonymity.
Commission’s decision was to refuse an extension of time to permit the
Applicant to bring an unlawful termination claim.
The Commission stated that, on
the evidence before it, the “overwhelming body of evidence” was
consistent with the relationship
between the Applicant and the University being
that of a student studying with the University under a scholarship arrangement
not that of an employee being employed. However, the Commission did not make
a definitive finding on that aspect.
decides that disclosure not covered by PID Act (Jul 2019):
2019, an officer of the Department was satisfied that there was no reasonable
basis on which the Applicant’s disclosure
could be considered an internal
disclosure. The reasons were as follows:
have assessed that your disclosure is
a disclosure under the
PID Act, as you are not, and have not been, a public official. In order to
make a public interest disclosure,
a person must be or have been a public
official. Under section 69 of the PID Act, a public official is defined to
include employees,
members and appointees of various Commonwealth entities and
bodies. However, the definition does not apply to any State authorities
bodies. As such, neither an employee or student of the University of Adelaide
would be a public official.
s 70 of the PID Act, there is a discretion for an authorised officer
to deem an individual to be a public official when they
fall outside the
definition in section 69 of the PID Act. However, this is only possible
where the authorised officer believes on
reasonable grounds that the individual
has information that concerns disclosable conduct. In this regard, I am not
satisfied your
disclosure is disclosable conduct under the PID Act.
Specifically,
section 29 of the PID Act limits disclosable conduct to conduct engaged in
by an agency, a public official or a contracted
service provider for the
Commonwealth. The PID Act does not apply to state authorities or bodies. Your
allegation relates to conduct
by members and staff of the University of
Adelaide. The University of Adelaide is a body corporate established by State
law. As such,
conduct engaged in by the University of Adelaide does not fall
within the jurisdiction of the PID Act.
Application
for bridging visa refused (May 2021):
statement of claim
contends that the Department refused an application for a bridging visa on
26 May 2021 (item 3(a)). The Applicant’s
first affidavit
contains a single page from what appears to be a delegate’s decision.
heading “8564 – Must not engage in criminal conduct”, there is
a statement that information provided to
the Department by SA police indicated
that the Applicant was arrested on 27 November 2020 due to outstanding
traffic infringements.
That paragraph continues “You were again arrested
by South Australian Police on 20 April 2020 for Impersonating a Police
but the remainder of the sentence has been redacted. The
remainder of the decision is not provided.
This page also
states that the decision-maker was not satisfied that the Applicant would comply
with condition 8401 Must Report As
rejects claim under CDDA scheme (Jun 2024):
statement of claim refers to a decision by the Department of
dated 12 June 2024 (item 1(e)). That decision and an earlier decision
dated 10 April 2024 (which are before the Court) both concern
application by the Applicant to Defence in March 2024 under the Scheme for
Compensation for Detriment caused by Defective Administration
(a) The 10 April 2024 letter states that the
Applicant sought to make a disclosure under the PID Act to Defence on
4 May 2021, and
that a delegate in that Department found on 8 June
2021 that this disclosure was not an “internal disclosure” made by
“public official”. The letter states that the only connection with
Defence appeared to be an incident in which the
Applicant attended the 2018 Land
Forces Symposium, and attempted to pass himself off as a Defence SA official,
and was removed from
the venue. The Applicant had claimed that he had been
working on a project involving the National Health Medical Research Council
the Defence Science and Technology Group. The letter stated that it was not
defective administration for a Defence delegate not
to accept the
Applicant’s disclosure under the PID Act, in circumstances where the
Applicant did not meet the statutory criteria
under the PID Act.
(b) The 12 June 2024 letter was an internal
review of the above decision. The letter concludes that the 10 April 2024
letter was correct
in concluding that the decision by Defence to decline to
investigate the Applicant’s disclosure was reasonable in the
circumstances.
The letter does state:
Some activities of the University of Adelaide may fall within the jurisdiction
of the PID Act, for example, activities that are connected
“Commonwealth contract” as defined for the purposes of the
PID Act, and that otherwise meet the eligibility criteria
However, the letter also concluded that it was more likely than not that the
Applicant was not an employee of the University, but
was a student. As a result,
the letter concluded that the Applicant was not a “public official”
as defined.
of Applicant’s claims under the PID Act:
Turning to prospects of
success, the Applicant’s claims that the Department wrongly refused to
allocate and investigate his
disclosure under the PID Act face insuperable
difficulties.
legal questions:
First, the Applicant misunderstands the legal questions
that are raised. His application assumes that the Court would decide for
whether his disclosure was or was not a “public interest disclosure”
as defined. However, the statutory definitions
in s 26 and related
provisions of the PID Act only operate as an aid to the construction of the
statute, and do not have independent
substantive effect: see, for example,
Moreton Bay Regional Council v Mekpine Pty Ltd
[2016] HCA 7
256 CLR 437
(French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and Nettle JJ),
Gibb v Commissioner of Taxation
[1966] HCA 74
118 CLR 628
at 635 (Barwick CJ, McTiernan and Taylor JJ). It is
therefore necessary to identify an operative provision.
the operative provision is s 43(2) of the PID Act, and the relevant issue is the
lawfulness of the Department’s decision
not to allocate the
Applicant’s disclosure. As noted, under s 43(2) the Department could
refuse to allocate a disclosure for
investigation under the PID Act if the
decision-maker was “satisfied, on reasonable grounds, that there is no
reasonable basis
on which the disclosure could be considered to be an internal
disclosure”.
The fact that
s 43(2) operates by reference to the decision-maker’s satisfaction is
a clear indicator that the issue is the
lawfulness of that satisfaction, and the
Court does not determine for itself whether the disclosure was an
“internal disclosure”:
Timbarra Protection Coalition Inc v
Ross Mining NL
[1999] NSWCA 8
(1999) 46 NSWLR 55
(Spigelman CJ);
Anvil Hill Project Watch Association Inc v Minister for
the Environment and Water Resources
[2008] FCAFC 3
(2008) 166 FCR
(the Court).
Further, the
legal limit in s 43(2) is whether the decision-maker’s satisfaction
was legally reasonable, as there must be “
for being satisfied that there was no reasonable basis for considering the
disclosure to be an internal disclosure.
This requires that the decision-maker
be subjectively satisfied, and that the facts and circumstances known to the
decision-maker
constituted objectively reasonable grounds for that satisfaction:
Prior v Mole
[2017] HCA 10
(2017) 261 CLR 265
and Bell JJ), [94] (Gordon J); see also [24] (Gageler J,
dissenting in the result). This reference to circumstances “known
decision-maker” follows from the general principle that the legal
reasonableness of an administrative decision is assessed
at the time of the
decision, on the circumstances known to the decision-maker: see
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2021] HCA 12
273 CLR 177
(Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Gordon and Steward JJ);
Minister for Home Affairs v DUA16
[2020] HCA 46
(2020) 271 CLR
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane, Gordon and Edelman JJ). Even if
the reference in s 43(2) to “no reasonable basis” might
notions of whether it was
that a disclosure was an
internal disclosure, those matters are still assessed on the materials before
the decision-maker.
In other words,
the Court’s function in assessing the lawfulness of the Department’s
July 2019 decision is limited to
considering whether, on the materials before
the Department at that time, it was reasonably open for the authorised officer
to conclude
that the Applicant’s disclosure did not raise an arguable
internal disclosure. For that reason, there is no scope for the Court
order that the Applicant be treated as a “public official” under
s 70 of the PID Act: cf originating application,
Applicant’s
arguments do not undermine reasonableness of Department’s decision:
Second, and consequent on the difficulty identified above, the Applicant’s
arguments in this Court do not address whether the
Department’s decision
was reasonably open to it, but rather contend that the decision is
, referring to materials and making arguments not before the
decision-maker. Even if those arguments were accepted, it would not establish
any legal error in the Department’s decision not to allocate the
Applicant’s disclosure for investigation.
this Court, the Applicant contends, correctly, that a “public
official” includes (relevantly) an employee of a contracted
provider for a Commonwealth contract, who provides services for the purposes
(whether direct or indirect) of the Commonwealth
contract: see [
] above. The Applicant then argues
that the true position is that (i) he was an “employee” of the
University; (ii) the
University was a “contracted service
provider” for a Commonwealth contract (relevantly, with the Defence
Science and
Technology Group in the Department of Defence); and (iii) he
provided services for the purposes of that contract.
fundamental difficulty with this argument is that points (ii) and (iii) above
were not put to the Department at all in the Applicant’s
nine emails and
multiple attachments sent between 5 and 7 June 2019. That argument
does not appear in the “lay summary”
quoted in [
] above. And, even after examining all
450 pages of materials sent to the Department during that period, I am unable to
find anywhere
the Applicant articulating (or providing documentation to support)
an argument that he was an employee of a “contracted service
provider”, and therefore a “public official” on that basis. It
seems that this argument was later articulated in
the CDDA claim made to Defence
in March 2024: see [
above. But the argument was not made
to the Department in June 2019.
that reason, it was plainly open to the Department to conclude in July 2019, on
the basis of the materials provided to it, that
there was no reasonable basis on
which the Applicant’s disclosure could be considered an internal
disclosure. Indeed, on the
materials before the Department, no other decision
was possible. It was correct as a general statement for the Department to say
that the PID Act does not apply to a body established by state law, such as
the University. It is true (as the Applicant points out)
that there are some
exceptions to that general statement, particularly when a state body is a
contracted service provider under a
Commonwealth contract. However, in the
absence of any argument or information provided by the Applicant that the
University was acting
in a capacity of a “contracted service
provider” in relation to the matters being disclosed, there was no
requirement
for the Department to consider that possibility: see further [
the same reason, there is no error in the Department’s decision not to
treat the Applicant as a “public official”
under s 70 of the
PID Act: see [
] above (paras
8-9). In the absence of any argument or information indicating that disclosure
related to the University in a capacity
as a “contracted service
provider” for a Commonwealth contract, there was no basis for the
Department to consider that
the Applicant’s disclosure related to
“disclosable conduct” (see PID Act s 29(1)(c)).
note for completeness that the Applicant has at times (particularly in August
2019, after receiving the Department’s decision)
made adverse
representations to the Department about advice he had received from persons at
the University in relation to his immigration
status. That is a separate topic
altogether, and does not go any way towards establishing that the disclosure in
June 2019 could
reasonably be seen to be a “public disclosure”.
to Applicant’s arguments:
At the hearing, the Applicant argued that
the Department’s response stated in absolute terms that “neither an
or student of the University of Adelaide would be a public
official” (see [
(para 7)), which prevented the Applicant from providing further information
that could have shown that the University was
a “contracted service
provider” and that the Applicant was providing services for the purposes
of a Commonwealth contract.
The Applicant argued that he had provided
information and arguments that (i) he was an “employee” of the
University;
and (ii) there had been disclosable conduct, in the form of
falsified scientific data. This was sufficient, he argued, that the Department
should have undertaken further inquiries about his disclosure.
Applicant’s argument turns on whether the Department was under a legal
obligation to obtain further information from the
Applicant before making a
decision under s 43 of the PID Act. The PID Act does not
expressly require recipients of disclosures to
enter into a discussion with
those making disclosures, or to gather more information from them. Rather, the
PID Act requires agencies
to assess the disclosure that is made. Nor can this
obligation be implied: as a general matter, the law imposes an obligation on
administrative decision-makers to conduct further enquiries in only very limited
circumstances; most commonly, a failure to make
an obvious inquiry about a
critical fact, the existence of which is easily ascertained:
Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship v SZIAI
[2009] HCA 39
(2009) 83 ALJR
(French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
What is “obvious” would be assessed on the circumstances known
the decision-maker at the time of the decision, and not with the benefit of
hindsight: see
Smith v Minister for Home Affairs
[2018] FCA 1594
(Robertson J). Here, it was not obvious on the material provided in
June 2019 that the Applicant was contending that the University
“contracted service provider”, and that the disclosable conduct
related to a Commonwealth contract.
Significant
unexplained delay:
A separate difficulty for the Applicant in prosecuting
his case is that he is seeking to challenge a decision that was made more
six years ago. Even if his arguments had any merit (contrary to my view above),
this length of unexplained delay would be strong
grounds for refusing to grant
relief in the exercise of discretion: see
Makarov v Minister for Home
[2021] FCAFC 129
(2021) 286 FCR 412
(the Court);
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZIQB
[2008] FCAFC 20
, [24] (the Court). The Applicant has offered no explanation for not
bringing this application more promptly.
I note for completeness that there are other difficulties with the
Applicant’s arguments in the 1
statement of claim.
In particular,
an essential step in his argument is that he was an “employee” of
the University. That argument was rejected
by Defence in 2024, and the
Commission found that the overwhelming body of evidence before it suggested that
the Applicant was not
an employee: see [
Further, it
should not be assumed that any collaborative research relationship between the
University and the Defence Science and
Technology Group would involve a
“Commonwealth contract”, as that term is defined in s 30(3) of
the PID Act.
these matters were not relied on by the Department in July 2019, so it is not
necessary to decide whether these arguments
could have provided
“reasonable grounds” for the Department’s decision under s
43(2) of the PID Act.
of claims relating to adverse bridging visa decision:
The Applicant’s
second broad claim in the 1
statement of claim relates to a
decision to refuse to grant him a bridging visa in May 2021. He contends that
this adverse decision
caused him to be unlawfully detained, and was a reprisal
for his disclosure in June 2019.
unlawful detention:
Any claim that the Applicant was unlawfully detained in
2021 lacks any prospects whatsoever. The authority to detain the Applicant
derives from
Migration Act
, which provides that an officer
must detain any person in the migration zone who the officer reasonably suspects
is an unlawful non-citizen.
An “unlawful non-citizen” is a
non-citizen who does not hold a visa that is in effect (see
Migration Act
if it be assumed in the Applicant’s favour that (i) the May 2021
decision referred to factually incorrect information and
(ii) consequently,
the decision to refuse to grant a bridging visa was invalid and/or
(iii) the adverse decision amounted to a “reprisal”
PID Act, it would not follow that the Applicant was unlawfully detained at
that time. In that situation, the Applicant
would not in fact hold a visa, and
would therefore still be an “unlawful non-citizen” who was liable to
be detained under
s 189(1). The consequence of any invalidity of the
decision to refuse a bridging visa would be, at most, that the duty to make a
decision remained unperformed, and the Department could be required to make
another decision. (Again, it is most unlikely that this
remedy would be granted
in practice, given that the decision was made more than four years ago, and the
Applicant has made multiple
applications for bridging visas since then.)
Similarly, any conduct amounting to a “reprisal” might attract
under the PID Act, but would not render his detention
with reprisals?
At the hearing, the Applicant argued that the
Department’s reliance on the false police information (and false medical
information)
in refusing his bridging visa in May 2021 was actually a
reprisal, within the meaning of the PID Act, for the Applicant’s
in 2019. Although this argument does not appear in the summary of the
claim in item 3 to the 1
statement of claim, there are
references to reprisals in the relief sought in item 4(c) and (d).
requirements of a “reprisal” under s 13 of the PID Act in
its current form are set out in [
] below, in considering the
statement of claim. The elements of a reprisal in s 13(1)
were broadly the same in May 2021 (although s 13 was later amended in
A reprisal consisted of three elements:
A person caused
“detriment” to another person by an act or omission
(s 13(1)(a));
When the act or
omission occurred, the first person suspected or believed that the second person
or any other person (relevantly)
made or may have made a public interest
disclosure (s 13(1)(b));
That suspicion
or belief was the reason, or part of the reason, for the first person’s
act or omission (s 13(1)(c)).
the Applicant alleges that the Department deliberately manipulated migration
records and criminal history records, in response
to the Applicant’s
disclosure in June 2019 (1
statement of claim, item 4(d)). The
evidence said to support this allegation (or to provide a reasonable suspicion)
is the difference
in the reasons for decision for various bridging visa
decisions by the Department and review tribunals from 29 June 2021 onwards,
and the fact that some decisions refer to the alleged criminal conduct by the
Applicant, and some do not.
difficulty with this reprisal claim is that nothing in the evidence relied on by
the Applicant provides any reasonable suspicion
of a link between the conduct
complained of, and the disclosure that the Applicant made in June 2019. To
the contrary, I consider
that the Applicant’s arguments are purely
speculative, and do not give rise to any prima facie case: see
Hutchinson v
[2017] FCA 1145
(Bromberg J).
The fact that
some decision-makers refer to the alleged offending and some do not does not
give rise to any reasonable suspicion of
wrongdoing at all, let alone that the
refusal decision is connected with the Applicant’s earlier disclosure. The
most obvious
explanation is that some decision-makers thought that this matter
was relevant to their decision whether to grant a bridging visa,
and some did
not. The weight to be given to this particular alleged offending (impersonating
a police officer) is a matter on which
there is real “decisional
freedom”: cf
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2013] HCA 18
(2013) 249 CLR 332
(French CJ).
fundamentally, it is inherently improbable that any use of this alleged
offending in decision-making was connected to a belief
or suspicion by
Departmental decision-makers that the Applicant had made a disclosure that
attracted the PID Act. That is because
the Department’s position in 2019
was that this disclosure was
covered by the PID Act; indeed, the
Department considered that there was no reasonable basis on which the disclosure
could be considered
a PID Act disclosure. I consider that the material before
the Court does not give rise to any arguable case of reprisal in 2021,
there is no proper basis on which the Court could order discovery against the
Respondents to obtain further information
on the matter: see [
am conscious that summary judgment is not lightly given when there are contested
issues of fact. However, in this case the version
of events asserted by the
Applicant (that adverse bridging visa decisions in 2021 were motivated by his
disclosure in 2019) is so
improbable, or fanciful, that there is no real
question of fact to be tried, and summary judgment should be granted: see [
statement of claim should be summarily dismissed:
these reasons, that part of the proceeding constituted by the 1
statement of claim lacks any reasonable prospects of success, and should be
summarily dismissed under s 31A(2) of the Federal Court
D.2 Second statement of claim (alleged reprisals under PID
allegations (2
statement of claim):
statement of claim contends that the Applicant, when in immigration detention,
was placed under “closer supervision and engagement
(which he refers to as enhanced monitoring) between at least 5 and 28 May
statement of claim [1]).
The Applicant
contends that this enhanced monitoring was used as a punitive measure in an act
of deliberate reprisal (2
statement of claim [2]).
compensation under s 14 of the PID Act and an apology (presumably under
s 15 of that Act). Compensation is payable under
s 14 of the PID Act
if a person takes a “reprisal” against another person, as defined in
s 13 of the Act.
Applicant also contends that the enhanced monitoring constituted numerous human
rights violations, and was contrary to Commonwealth
policies (2
statement of claim [4]-[5]).
(Applicant’s 2
affidavit):
The Applicant’s
affidavit contains the following evidence and materials in
support of this claim.
mental health policy:
The Applicant has attached an extract from a
procedural instruction titled “Detention Health: Mental Health”
Mental Health PI
). This instruction relevantly
Health PI provides guidance on the use of closer supervision and engagement of
high risk detainees (with “high risk”
referring to a
detainee’s likelihood to challenge or damage the good order of an
immigration detention facility (
), be at risk of harm to themselves,
others or requests to be separated from the general detainee cohort) (para
circumstance can a detainee be placed under closer supervision and engagement
arrangement as a punitive measure (para 1.1.4).
Placement of
detainees in a closer supervision and engagement arrangement, regulating their
movement within the facility and access
to activities or services, should only
be used as a last resort and when other strategies to manage their
vulnerabilities, behaviour
or the risk they pose have not succeeded. The aim is
to safely reintegrate the detainee to the main detention population of the IDF
following the cessation of the closer supervision and engagement arrangements
(para 3.7.2).
supervision and engagement is not punitive and should not be used as an
incentive to change detainee behaviour. It is to be
used to support high risk
detainees until they no longer pose a significant risk to themselves, to others
in the IDF or to the good
order of the IDF (para 3.7.6).
Detainees should
be placed under closer supervision and engagement for the shortest practicable
time. Placement is considered in 24
hour segments. Placements exceeding 72 hours
require an authorization by the Commander, National Immigration Detention
(Operations)
(para 3.7.11). (Paragraph 3.7.11 refers to section 3.11
(authorisation) of the Mental Health PI, but that section is not included
extract provided by the Applicant.)
Response (May 2025):
An email from the Australian Border Force
) Inspector, SA Detention Operations to the Applicant dated
15 May 2025 (the
ABF Response
) acknowledges receipt of a complaint
from the Applicant dated 9 May 2025, and states:
Your complaint stated, in part, that MTC [Management & Training Corporation
Pty Ltd] staff have advised (09 May 2025) that calls
to any Government body
are not allowed and your desired outcome from lodging your complaint is written
clarification regard what
calls can and cannot be made whilst on enhanced
monitoring.
In response, and to provide clarity, the enhanced monitoring provided by Secure
Journeys is intended to provide you with an opportunity
to raise issues or
concerns with your Detainee Service Officers (DSO) in real time, to support and
assist you with referring your
queries through the appropriate channels for
resolution. These officers are there to allow your voice to be heard and provide
with advice and guidance on the most effective process to follow.
You have the right to contact scrutiny bodies such as the Commonwealth Ombudsman
and the Australian Human Rights Commission, or Government
bodies associated with
your ongoing matters; however this should only be done through their official
channels of enquiry. It is not
appropriate for you to contact individual
Government officials directly through unauthorised channels of communication;
not familiar with your case and will not be able to assist you in any
way. If you need to raise issues relating to your detention
or immigration
pathway, please speak to your DSO in the first instance, and they can assist you
to submit a Detainee Request Form
(DRF). Submitting a written DRF which outlines
your request or concern in detail will hold the relevant stakeholders
accountable
to address your query promptly and provide you with a response.
request form (May 2025):
A Detainee Request Form from the Applicant dated
15 May 2025 refers to the ABF Response, and contains the following
handwritten statement:
It is agreed that there are benefits of having enhanced monitoring, however,
none of the explanation provided from ABF addresses
the request to have personal
space while sleeping. This is reasonable because all calls that have and will be
made to Government
officials will be completed with facility phones.
bottom half of the form (dated 16 May 2025) contains a handwritten note
(apparently from an officer): “Approved to have
closed door from bed time
till [the Applicant] wake[s] so long as no contact is made through unofficial
channels.” The note
is signed and dated by the officer.
that emails not received (June 2025):
On 9 June 2025, the Applicant
made a complaint that he was not able to reliably receive emails claimed to be
sent by his Status Resolution
) to him. He states that the
SRO had advised that an email was sent on 5 June 2025, but the Applicant
had not received any email by
close of 7 June 2025.
For completeness, I mention that the Applicant’s
affidavit also attaches the following:
exchange between the Applicant and a humanitarian observer from the Red Cross
from May-June 2025, in which the observer acknowledges
receipt of documents, and
the Applicant states that he has attached a further update (which is not
included in the annexure).
An email from
the Applicant to an officer in the Commonwealth Attorney-General’s
Department dated 2 August 2025, which contends
that enhanced monitoring was
used against the Applicant as a punitive measure in an act of deliberate
A letter from
the Office of the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security dated
17 February 2024 which states that the Applicant
did not have an adverse
security assessment furnished against him by the Australian Security and
Intelligence Organisation.
documents do not advance the Applicant’s claims.
simply matter of procedure:
The Commonwealth’s principal response is
that these allegations are not properly raised by an “interlocutory
application”,
because the matters raised in the
statement of claim go wholly beyond the scope of the matters
alleged in the 1
statement of claim, citing
Competition and Consumer Commission v George Weston Foods Ltd
[2003] FCA 601
(2003) 129 FCR 298
(Conti J). There
is much force in this argument. However, as noted, a summary dismissal
application is concerned with substance,
not pleadings. This procedural defect
is not incurable, and it is appropriate that any decision to dismiss the
proceeding summarily
should be based on the content of the Applicant’s
of Applicant’s claims that there was a s 13 “reprisal” in
The following discussion considers the prospects of success of the
Applicant’s claim that the enhanced monitoring in May 2025
amounted to a
reprisal under s 13 of the PID Act.
of s 13 “reprisal”:
The definition of
“reprisal” in s 13(1) contains three elements. As the
disclosure that is said to attract the PID Act
was made in the past (at the time
of the alleged reprisals), the following concentrates on those parts of
s 13(1) which apply to
past disclosures, as distinct from possible future
disclosures. Adopting the descriptive labels used in
[2019] FCA 1133
(Bromberg J),
the three elements in s 13(1) are:
detrimental conduct
: that conduct by one person (relevantly) resulted in
detriment to another person
(s 13(1)(a));
: that, at the time of that conduct, the first person believed or
suspected (relevantly) that the second person, or any other person
made, or may
have made, a public interest disclosure (s 13(1)(b)); and
prohibited reason
: that the belief or suspicion was the reason, or part
of the reason, for engaging in the conduct (s 13(1)(c)).
the detrimental conduct element, the inclusive definition of
“detriment” in s 13(2) is modelled on the corresponding
definition in s 1317ADA of the
Corporations Act
(Cth): see Explanatory Memorandum to the
Public Interest Disclosure Amendment
(Review) Bill 2022
(Cth) at [3.28]. In that context, this Court has held that
“detriment” in its ordinary meaning is any disadvantage or
that the inclusive list in s 1317ADA is illustrative only:
v Dover Castle Metals Pty Ltd
[2025] FCA 101
(2025) 339 IR 1 at
(Katzmann J);
v Neometals
[2025] FCA 125
(Feutrill J).
PID belief element in s 13(1)(b) does not turn on whether the disclosure
was in fact a “public interest disclosure”
as defined, but rather
whether the person who carried out the alleged reprisal held a
belief or suspicion
that another person (relevantly) had made, or may have
made, a public interest disclosure: see
Hutchinson (No 4)
Whether the first person had that belief or suspicion is quintessentially a
question of fact: see
Reiche (No 2)
at [84]. Notably, a person
alleging a reprisal under the PID Act retains the onus of proving all
elements in s 13(1), including the
PID belief element (whereas
s 1317AD(2B)
Corporations Act
reverses the onus of proof in respect
of the belief or suspicion element, and the prohibited reason element in
Hutchinson (No 4)
at [24]. There is a nice
question whether the first person’s subjective belief or suspicion must
extend to thinking or believing
that the other person has done something that
is, in law, a “public interest disclosure”, or whether it is enough
the first person believes or suspects the underlying matters that comprise
a public interest disclosure (such as disclosure by a
public official, to an
authorised recipient, relating to disclosable conduct): see
[377]-[379].
prohibited reason element in
is a question of fact that must be
answered in the light of all the facts that are established in the proceeding:
Reiche (No 2)
at [96](4). This element is met if the PID belief
is “part of” the reason for engaging in conduct, but this does not
a reason that is incidental or that is a not substantial or operative
factor in the reason for the detrimental conduct:
Reiche (No 4)
conduct is established on the current evidence?
On the materials before the
Court, the conduct constituting “enhanced monitoring” between 5 and
28 May 2025 is that the
detaining officers placed restrictions on which
government officials the Applicant was permitted to contact by telephone: see
ABF Response set out in [
above. In particular:
The ABF states
that the Applicant has the right to contact scrutiny bodies and government
bodies associated with his ongoing matters,
but says this should occur
“through their official channels of enquiry”. The ABF states that it
is not appropriate for
the Applicant to contact individual government officials
“directly through unauthorised channels of communication”, because
(it is said) those officials are not familiar with the Applicant’s case
and will not be able to assist him.
In addition, it
appears at some stage that the ABF required that the door to the
Applicant’s room be kept closed at night, to
prevent him from making
unauthorised calls, although that requirement was later relaxed: see [
Applicant has also provided evidence that he complained in June 2025 about not
receiving emails: see [
reasonable prospect of establishing PID belief or prohibited reason elements:
For the following reasons, I consider that there is no reasonable prospect
of the Applicant establishing either the PID belief or
prohibited reason
elements in the alleged “reprisal”.
, Bromberg J held that, if there is no direct evidence that the
relevant persons held the PID belief or were motivated by the prohibited
and there is no arguable basis to sustain an inference as to those matters, that
would be an appropriate case for summary
dismissal. That reasoning applies to
there is no direct evidence before the Court to suggest that officers in the ABF
held a PID belief (namely, that the Applicant
had made or may have made a public
interest disclosure), or that the enhanced monitoring was motivated in any way
by a PID belief.
The ABF Response summarised above does not disclose any
awareness of the Applicant having made any disclosures, and this response
an entirely unrelated reason for imposing these restrictions: that the Applicant
not assist the resolution of his
issues. The Applicant bears the onus of proof, and the fact that the Respondents
have not called
evidence from the ABF officers about their state of mind (other
than what can be gleaned from the ABF Response) cannot be used to
deficiency in the Applicant’s case:
Hutchinson (No 4)
addition, there is no arguable basis on the material before the Court to make an
inference that the relevant ABF officers held
the PID belief, or were motivated
by a prohibited reason. Again, the ABF have provided a coherent explanation for
the restrictions
imposed that is unrelated to any previous disclosures made by
the Applicant. Nothing in the surrounding circumstances provides any
not accepting this explanation: to the contrary, the Department’s position
(which forms the complaint in the 1
statement of claim) was that
the Applicant had
made a public interest disclosure. Moreover, that
disclosure was made almost six years before the enhanced monitoring, so there is
nothing in this chronology to suggest that these matters were connected.
light of these conclusions, it is not strictly necessary to decide whether the
enhanced monitoring amounts to “detriment”.
Nonetheless, and despite
the breadth of that expression in
, I do not think that the ABF
regulating the persons within government who the Applicant can call directly is
a “detriment”
of a kind covered by the PID Act, noting that a
“reprisal” can (among other things) attract potential criminal
(see PID Act s 19). The stated reason for the ABF’s
action was to support the Applicant in referring his enquiries through
appropriate channels for resolution. And the Applicant himself has acknowledged
that there were benefits of having enhanced monitoring:
] above. The Applicant’s
complaint about not receiving emails falls outside the scope of the
statement of claim, and in any event there is nothing before the
Court to suggest any connection with a PID Act disclosure.
objections to summary dismissal:
Given the Applicant is self-represented, I
have considered two possible arguments that could be raised by him against
summary dismissal.
the Applicant might argue that the simple chronology establishes that the
enhanced monitoring was motivated by this litigation.
However, that matter (even
if it were established) would not amount to a “reprisal” within
s 13(1) of the PID Act. The
Applicant must establish that the enhanced
monitoring was motivated by the making of a PID Act disclosure (or suspected PID
Act disclosure),
not that the enhanced monitoring was motivated by the Applicant
bringing proceedings to challenge a decision that treated his disclosure
falling outside the scope of the PID Act. (To be clear, I am not suggesting
that the enhanced monitoring actually was motivated
by that factor.)
the Applicant might argue that he should be given an opportunity to obtain
information from the Respondents to show their
reasons for taking the enhanced
monitoring measures. I note he sought leave to issue a subpoena to the
Respondents to obtain this
information (which I deferred until the hearing of
this application). However:
method of obtaining documents from a party is through discovery, not a subpoena:
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Shell Co of Australia
[1999] FCA 212
(1999) 161 ALR 686
(Cooper J);
Pasini v Vanstone
[1999] FCA 1271
Investments Pty Ltd v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation (No 2)
[2018] FCA 1418
(2018) 108 ATR 730
(Derrington J);
Warburton Environment Inc v Secretary, Department of Energy, Environment and
Climate Action
[2024] FCA 1272
The Court does
not order discovery to advance a claim that is based on a mere allegation or
bare speculation, in the absence of any
evidence or facts that might ground a
reasonable suspicion:
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs v Wong
[2002] FCAFC 327
(the Court);
[2005] FCAFC 269
(2005) 148 FCR
(the Court);
Rivas v Republic of Chile
[2020] FCA 737
(Abraham J).
Here, there is
nothing in the materials before the Court that provides any support, even
circumstantial, for the Applicant’s
claim that the enhanced monitoring was
a “reprisal”, as defined in s 13 of the PID Act. What evidence
has been provided
(the ABF Response) is directly contrary to that claim, and the
claim is inherently improbable in circumstances where the Department
found (some
six years ago) that his disclosure was
a PID Act disclosure. The
Applicant’s claim in the 2
statement of claim that the
enhanced monitoring was a deliberate reprisal is bare assertion. Discovery would
not be ordered to find
out if the allegation has any foundation:
SMEC Holdings Pty Ltd v Commissioner of the Australian Federal
[2018] FCA 609
(Bromwich J).
summary, there is no real question of fact or law raised by the
Applicant’s 2
statement of claim that should proceed to
Hutchinson (No 2)
at [16]-[17], citing
Harbeth Holdings Pty Ltd
[2008] FCA 955
(Gilmour J).
necessary to consider other claims:
As noted, the Applicant also contends
that the enhanced monitoring constituted numerous human rights violations, and
was contrary
to the Mental Health PI, particularly paras 1.1.4 and 3.7.6. It is
far from clear that there has been any breach of the Mental Health
any human rights instruments. However, these claims, even if established, would
not be a basis for the relief sought, which
is compensation under s 14 of
the PID Act, and an apology under s 15. (As an aside, nor would those
claims undermine the legality
of the Applicant’s current detention.)
statement of claim should be summarily dismissed:
these reasons, the claims that the enhanced monitoring of the Applicant in May
2025 amounts to a “reprisal” under
s 13 of the PID Act
lacks any reasonable prospects of success. Therefore, there is no basis for
ordering compensation under s 14
of that Act, or an apology under
s 15. That part of the proceeding constituted by the 2
statement of claim should also be summarily dismissed under s 31A(2) of the
Federal Court Act.
E. CONCLUSIONS
the reasons set out above, the whole proceeding should be summarily dismissed
under s 31A(2) of the Federal Court Act.
– PID Act, s 18:
By s 18 of the PID Act, an applicant
for an order under ss 14 or 15 may only be ordered to pay costs if
(relevantly) “the court
is satisfied that the applicant instituted the
proceedings vexatiously or without reasonable cause”.
principles:
The discretion to award costs under s 18 of the PID Act in
an otherwise no-costs jurisdiction is one that must be exercised with
and the case for its exercise should be clearly demonstrated:
(Bromberg J), and the cases cited. In assessing whether a
proceeding was instituted “without reasonable cause”, the relevant
question is whether the proceeding had reasonable prospects of success at the
time it was instituted, not whether it ultimately failed:
Hutchinson (No 5)
at [18]-[20], Bromberg J found that at the
time the proceedings were instituted, the applicant had no reasonable prospect
of demonstrating
at trial an essential element of s 13 of the PID Act;
namely, that the impugned persons held the requisite belief which formed the
reason, or part of the reason, for the detrimental conduct.
on costs in s 18(1) does not apply:
That reasoning applies here: the
material filed with the Applicant’s statements of claim (which is the
relevant time for assessing
the prospects of these PID Act claims) had no
reasonable prospect of demonstrating that the ABF officers held the requisite
which formed part of the reason for the conduct complained of. For that
reason, the bar in s 18(1) on the award of costs does not
apply. There is
no other reason why costs should not follow the event.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
thirty-one (131) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment
Honourable Justice
Dated: 14 November 2025
RTF format (755 KB)
Signed PDF/A format