D20-21\089 [2020] SCTA 197 (25 November 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\089
FILE NUMBER
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Complainant
The Trustee
JOINED PARTY
The Insurer
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
The Employer
The Deceased Member
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(the Complaints Act) and held on 8 October 2020
Duffield, Presiding Member
Collopy, Member.
DECISIONS UNDER REVIEW
decisions under review are as follows:
That the Insurer
has correctly calculated and paid the Terminal Illness Benefit (TIB) to the
Deceased Member; and
Trustee’s agreement in respect of same.
Insurer notified the Trustee of its decision by letter dated 24 April 2017.
Trustee notified the Executor of its decision by letter dated 2 June 2017.
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal does not affirm the decisions of the Trustee and the Insurer.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal sets aside the Trustee’s and Insurer’s decisions and
substitutes other decisions that the Executor
is to be paid the additional TIB
in the amount of $25,300.
57 interest per the
Insurance Contracts Act 1984
(ICA) also applies as
outlined in the ‘Conclusion’ section of the
‘Deliberations’.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
to s32 of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal requested submissions from the
submission was received from the Executor.
Trustee and the Insurer relied on material previously provided to the Tribunal.
submissions were exchanged and responses were invited. No responses were
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
electronic files provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Executor made a complaint that the decisions of the Trustee and the Insurer were
unfair or unreasonable for the reasons summarised
in this determination.
Executor was also the Deceased Member’s defacto spouse.
Deceased Member died on 18 March 2016, aged 58. The Deceased Member was employed
on a casual basis with the Employer from 4 March
2008 to 26 April 2013.
28 August 2012 the Fund issued the Deceased Member a letter advising that from 1
October 2012 her TIB cover would be changing to
new standard cover ($19,700
– flat - to $60,000 - age-based). The Employer has confirmed that the
Deceased Member was not
at work on 1 October 2012 as she was not rostered on.
to Dr KV the Deceased Member was diagnosed with metastatic breast cancer on 28
May 2012. The Deceased Member lodged a TIB
claim with the Trustee on 15
September 2015 and indicated she was first diagnosed on 13 September 2013.
21 December 2015 the Insurer paid the Trustee $19,700, being the TIB prevailing
prior to 1 October 2012. The additional aged based
TIB of $25,300 (as against a
total TIB of $45,000) was declined on the grounds the Deceased Member did not
meet the insurance policy’s
‘At Work’ or ‘New
Events’ definitions.
Executor disputes the Trustee’s and Insurer’s contentions in these
resolution sought by the Executor is for the additional aged-based TIB of
$25,300 be paid into the Deceased Member’s Estate.
Benefit in dispute
to the Trustee, the amount of the Benefit in dispute was $25,300 ($45,000 less
the $19,700 paid) as at 28 November 2017.
Events not in
− The Deceased Member’s date of birth.
− The Executor’s date of birth.
− The Deceased Member joined the Fund.
− The date Dr KV asserts the Deceased Member was
first diagnosed with cancer.
− The date the Deceased Member last physically
worked. (Period Ending)
− The Deceased Member’s employment with the
Employer ceased.
− The date the Deceased Member died.
Tribunal does not consider any provisions of the trust deed of the Fund are
relevant to this complaint.
INSURANCE POLICY
Tribunal considers that the insurance policy relevant to the complaint is that
in force on the date when the Deceased Member lodged
her TIB claim being that
executed by the Trustee and the Insurer, commencing on 1 October 2012 (the
Policy relevantly provides:
Eligibility Conditions
Acceptance Cover for Existing Members
Existing Members who are Members of the [Insurer] Previous Policy
as at 30 September 2012 who:
employer sponsored Members of a sub-plan insurance category with one (1) of the
following benefit designs under the [Insurer]
Previous Policy:
(xii) Where the Member's Amount Insured is greater from the Policy
Commencement Date than the amount of cover the Member held immediately
the Policy Commencement Date, the increased portion for Death (including
Terminal Illness) and TPD cover will be subject to
the Member being At Work on
that date. If the Member is not At Work then New Events Cover will apply to the
increased portion until
such time the Member is At Work for thirty (30)
consecutive days, from which time the New Events Cover restriction will no
apply. The Company is not responsible for any reduction in the Amount
Insured for an Existing Member as a result of Standard Cover
being implemented
from the Policy Commencement Date.
21. Terminal Illness Benefit
Where an Insured Member has a Death Amount Insured and has been certified by
two (2) Medical Practitioners (with one of these Medical
Practitioners being a
specialist practicing in an area related to the Insured Member's injury or
illness) as being Terminally Ill
(see below), the Company will pay a Terminal
Illness benefit. The Terminal Illness benefit will be limited to the lower
the Insured Member's Death Amount insured and $3 million. Where an
Insured Member's Death Amount Insured is greater than $3 million,
the Insured
Member's Death Amount Insured will reduce by the Terminal Illness benefit paid
and will remain in the Plan until the
Insured Member satisfies one of the
termination provisions outlined in General Condition 11.
Definitions
(F) "At Work"
Means in the opinion of the Company the Member
engaged in his or her normal duties without limitation or restriction due to
sickness or injury and is working normal hours on
the day cover is to commence;
not restricted by sickness or injury from being capable of performing their full
and normal duties on a full-time basis (for at
least 30 hours per week) even
though their actual employment may be on a full-time, part-time, contract or
casual basis; and
not in receipt of and/or entitled to claim income support benefits from any
source including but not limited to workers' compensation
benefits, statutory
transport accident benefits and disability income benefits.
The Member will be considered to be At Work if on the applicable
date, as the context requires, he or she is on Employer approved
reasons other than injury or sickness, and not taking into account the leave, is
able to meet the At Work definition.
For a Member who is not gainfully employed for reasons other than sickness or
injury At Work means in the opinion of the insurer the
member is not restricted
by sickness or injury from being capable of performing their full and normal
duties on a full-time basis
(for at least 30 hours per week) even though they
are not then working on a full-time basis and not receiving (or entitled to
income support benefits (for sickness or injury) from any source.
MEDICAL REPORTS
Deceased Member’s cancer of the left breast had been diagnosed in 2006 and
treated by surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy.
Complications from the
chemotherapy included a cardiomyopathy and impairment of renal function. Liver
metastases were diagnosed in
2012, followed by skull and spinal metastases,
which were treated with palliative radiotherapy. Continuation of medical
failed to halt her deterioration.
medical reports were available from:
Dr KV, Medical Oncologist
KV, Medical Oncologist,
who provided details of the Deceased
Member’s history in a report in June 2013,
outlining her initial
treatment in 2006 by a wide local excision, chemotherapy and radiotherapy, the
liver metastases diagnosed in
2012, which he had mentioned in an earlier report
in December 2012
and the treatment complications of a cardiomyopathy and
impaired renal function. Following recovery from those complications,
chemotherapy
was continued.
Dr SA, Oncology Registrar,
SA, Oncology Registrar
provided a report in June 2015, informing of
further complications of the chemotherapy, which were neutropenia and peripheral
neuropathy,
and changes in her medication to address progressive disease.
Dr SN, General Practitioner
SN, General Practitioner,
provided a report in December 2016
advising that the Deceased Member had been attending his clinic from
September 2013, chemotherapy having been recommenced in June
of 2013. He stated
that during the time she was attending the clinic ‘she would not have been
able to work 30 hours (sic)
week for 30 consecutive days’.
Tribunal notes that in the week commencing 1 October 2012 the Deceased Member
would most likely have been on a low dose of Capecitabine,
which according to Dr
KV she was tolerating. Further, the Complainant subsequently completed her
rostered shifts for Pharmacy B in
the weeks ending 9 September 2012 and 14
October 2012.
there is no clear medical evidence to indicate that the Deceased Member was
‘restricted by sickness...from being capable
of performing [her] full and
normal duties on a full-time basis (for at least 30 hours per week)...’ in
the week commencing
1 October 2012.
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Executor
main points made by the Executor are as follows:
The Executor, in
his Registration of Complaint form stated:
[The Deceased Member] applied for her terminal death
insurance in September 2015, at the time her life insurance on her super showed
an insured amount of $45,000. [The Trustee] or the Insurer ...accepted the claim
but stated that she did not meet the working requirements
when the insured
amount was increased by [the Trustee] in 2012. They proceeded to payout on
$19700 of the $45,000, while they investigated
whether [the Deceased Member]
qualified for the extra life insurance which she had been making the premium
payments from the increases’
inception. A copy of the increase letter from
2012 does not indicate anywhere that [the Deceased Member] was required to meet
work tests or be working on the day it was implemented. [The Deceased
Member] was working casually at the time and was not rostered
on that day.
Furthermore the increase letter states if you wish to received [sic] the
standard cover you do not need to do anything.
The battle for the $25,300 life
insurance was a constant stress for [the Deceased Member] while she was fighting
for her life, this
was stress she did not need and she died not knowing if the
funds would be paid and the effects on her family due to this. This was
stress that was not needed. This stress has continued with the claim taking 18
months before a rejection letter was sent. I
made a complaint to [the Trustee]
on the 22nd March via my financial planner...who has been dealing with [the
Trustee] on my and
[the Deceased Member’s] behalf, stating it was not
acceptable that the claim was taking this long to process.
The decision is unfair as the initial letter from [the Trustee] does not
state that [the Deceased Member] needed to be working on
the day or for a
certain number of hours in order to be covered by the new increased amount. It
was only after a claim for the terminal
life insurance was made did this come to
light. [The Deceased Member] was paying the increased premiums for the new life
initially for $60,000 which had reduced to the $45000 due to her age,
throughout the entire time. The claim being questioned caused
[the Deceased
Member] a large amount of stress when she was alive. Since her passing it has
been a constant source of worry and concern
as the claim has taken so long.
The Deceased
Member was employed as a casual on 1 October 2012, and although she wasn’t
working on the date in question, she
did work within the next few weeks.
It appears the
Insurer has not been able to ascertain the Deceased Member’s health during
this time and instead has relied upon
a report from another doctor. The Executor
...how can they be certain as to whether she could work or not?
The letter that
was sent to the Deceased Member in response to government changes states
‘you are eligible with no medical and
no forms.’ There is no mention
of minimum hours worked or consecutive days nor that she had to be at work on
the stated day.
The letter does
not state to refer to a website, however the Deceased Member and the Executor
did not use or have a computer so they
had no way of reading up on any
additional information that did not come with the letter. It is noted that there
was no PDS included
with the letter. The Deceased Member and the Executor took
the letter regarding the increase for life insurance at ‘face value
good faith’ and the Deceased Member paid the increased premiums from the
Fund up until the application for her TIB.
The Trustee
main points made by the Trustee are as follows:
The Deceased
Member was provided an increase in standard insurance cover from $19,700 to
$60,000 effective 1 October 2012. The Trustee
understands that the
Executor’s complaint is regarding the Trustee’s decision to uphold
the Insurer’s recommendation
to decline payment of cover at the higher
amount of $45,000 (additional $25,300). The Trustee also understands that the
has raised concerns about the time it took to process the claim.
Decline Death claim for higher amount
The Trustee
confirms that it has given thorough and genuine consideration to all relevant
information provided in reaching its decision
to uphold the Insurer's
recommendation to decline payment of the higher cover amount.
The Insurer
declined the claim for the higher standard insurance cover on the basis that the
Deceased Member was not 'At Work' on
the day the increased cover commenced (1
October 2012), or subsequently for 30 consecutive days. Pursuant to the terms of
the standard
cover offer, if the insured is not 'At Work' on 1 October 2012, New
Events Cover will apply to any increased amount until such time
as the insured
satisfies the 'At Work' definition for 30 days. The 'New Events' provision of
the Policy was considered, however as
the Deceased Member’s cause of death
in March 2016 was breast cancer ('claimed condition') that had spread to her
bones, spine,
liver and head and was present prior to 1 October 2012, it was not
covered under the Policy.
The Trustee
confirms that given that the Deceased Member was not at work on 1 October 2012
or did not work subsequently 30 consecutive
days and the claimed condition was
known prior to 1 October 2012, she was not eligible for New Events cover.
The Trustee
further refers to its letter dated 28 August 2012, the Product Disclosure
Statement (PDS) and the Additional Information
Booklet-Part 3 (AIB) issued to
the Deceased Member regarding the standard cover offer in 2012. The letter
confirmed that it was a
summary of the cover and to obtain further details to
refer to the PDS. The Trustee specifically draws attention to the below
disclosures
stated on the letter dated 28 August 2012:
More information on standard cover, including all terms and
conditions is available at [Website]. This communication provides an overview
summary only and it should not be considered a comprehensive statement on any
matter or relied upon as such.
A PDS is available... and can be obtained by calling [Telephone Number] or
visiting [Website].
Conditions, limits and exclusions on cover apply and are explained in the PDS
and the insurance policy wording.
The Trustee
confirms that the AIB-Part 3 included definitions of 'At Work' & 'New
The Trustee
confirms that all the relevant disclosures regarding the 'New Cover' were
adequately disclosed.
the reasons set out above it is the Trustee's position that its decision to
uphold the Insurer’s recommendation to decline
the payment of the higher
cover amount is correct, fair and reasonable.
The Insurer
main points made by the Insurer are as follows:
In order to be
entitled to Standard Cover under the Policy a Retained Benefit Member is
required to meet the relevant eligibility
With respect to
this, the Deceased Member's insurance cover would have commenced on 1 October
2012 provided that she could satisfy
the eligibility criteria under Automatic
Acceptance Cover for Existing Members, condition 3 (a) to (xi) as defined in the
In this regard
the Deceased Member was subject to New Events Cover. With respect to New Events
Cover, the Deceased Member is only
covered for claims in which the relevant
sickness or injury first becomes apparent on or after the Cover Commencement
Date on 1 October
The evidence on
file indicates that the Deceased Member's claimed cancer condition first
materialised in 2006, with her most recent
episode being diagnosed in mid-2012.
The Medical Attendant's Statement completed by Dr RS on 17 August 2015 indicated
that the Deceased
Member's condition was diagnosed in May 2012. The claimed
condition therefore pre-existed the Cover Commencement Date of Standard
under the Policy.
The claimed
condition was not therefore eligible for payment under New Events Cover. Having
determined that the Deceased Member's
claim was not eligible for payment under
New Events Cover, the Insurer assessed whether the Deceased Member was At Work
(as defined)
on 1 October 2012 or for 30 consecutive days thereafter. The
purpose of the Insurer ascertaining whether the Deceased Member was
At Work was
that if the Deceased Member was noted to have fulfilled the relevant At Work
criteria, then her insurance cover would
no longer be subject to the
restrictions of New Events Cover, and the Member could hypothetically qualify
for Standard Cover.
The At Work
definition consists of three limbs, being limb (a), (b) and (c) and in order for
this definition to be satisfied, all
three limbs have to be fulfilled.
The Insurer made
numerous attempts throughout the assessment process to confirm if the Deceased
Member met the At Work definition.
However, the balance of evidence clearly
indicated that the Deceased Member did not meet the At Work definition.
The Insurer
respectfully submits that the Deceased Member was medically unable to perform
her normal duties without limitation or
restriction due to her medical condition
and the treatment she was undergoing for the said condition. The Insurer relies
the following evidence in support of that decision:
...Hospital Notes indicate that the [Deceased Member] was
undergoing chemotherapy during 2012. This would suggest that the [Deceased
Member's] ability to work in an unrestricted capacity at the Cover Commencement
Date and thereafter would naturally be inhibited
by the side effects of the
chemotherapy.
The [Deceased Member] made a request withdraw her request on 2 December 2012.
The reason for leaving was stated as
'Retired due to ill health, liver
. This is indicative that approximately two months after the 'At
Work' test date of 1 October 2012 the [Deceased Member] would have
been unable
to perform her normal duties without limitation or restriction due to sickness
or injury as is required by the 'At Work'
definition. This is suggestive that
she would not have had capacity on 1 October 2012 or for any period of 30 days
thereafter to
perform her normal duties without restriction as her health was
likely to have been deteriorating at this time.
Emails from [Pharmacy A] dated 17 May 2016 and 18 May 2016 indicate that the
[Deceased Member] was not working for [Pharmacy A] at
the Cover Commencement
Date or thereafter. Therefore the only employment being performed by the
[Deceased Member] was at [Pharmacy
B]. [Pharmacy B] payslips indicate that the
[Deceased Member] was not rostered to work on 1 October 2012 thereby indicating
she was a casual employee. They also indicate that the [Deceased Member]
was only working 10 hours in the week ending 9 September
2012 and that she did
not work again until the week ending 14 October 2012 when she completed 10 hours
of employment. Limb b) of
the 'At Work' definition requires that a Member be
capable of performing their full and normal duties on a full-time basis (for at
least 30 hours per week) even though their actual employment may be on a
full-time, part-time, contract or casual basis.
A treating doctor's report from Dr [SN], GP dated 20 December 2016 indicated
that from 21 September 2013 the Member would not have
been able to work 30 hours
week for 30 consecutive days.
Similarly, a nurse to doctor telecall with Dr [H], GP stated that the
[Deceased Member] would have been unable to perform her full
and normal duties
as a Beauty Consultant for at least 30 hours per week on 1 October 2012 or for
30 consecutive days thereafter as
she was unwell at that time.
On account of
the above, the Insurer submits the various limbs of the At Work definition have
not been satisfied. Therefore, the Insurer
respectfully submits that the
Deceased Member did not meet the eligibility conditions for insurance cover
under the Policy and as
such there is no entitlement to Standard Cover.
The Complainant
has not provided any evidence that contradicts the assessment of the Insurer or
that would demonstrate that the assessment
was unreasonable.
The Insurer
accepted the Deceased Member's TIB claim under the terms of the Policy
prevailing prior to 1 October 2012, in a timely
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
s37(2)(a) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must review the decisions of both
the Trustee and Insurer.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must initially determine whether the
Insurer’s decision it correctly calculated
and paid the TIB benefit to the
Deceased Member and the Trustee’s agreement in respect of same, were fair
and reasonable decisions
in their operation in relation to the Executor in the
circumstances.
issue is not what decisions the Tribunal would have made on the material before
the Trustee and the Insurer but whether the decisions
were fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal has taken into account all the material
provided by the Parties, the provisions of the
Policy and relevant law. The
Tribunal is satisfied that the material it has relied on has been provided to
all Parties.
declining the Executor’s claim of an additional TIB payment of $25,300 the
Insurer, with the Trustee’s concurrence,
asserts the Deceased Member did
not satisfy the At Work definition on the relevant date of 1 October 2012.
is not disputed between the Parties the Deceased Member was not rostered to work
on 1 October 2012. In which case the relevant
provision of the At Work
definition applies as follows:
Deceased Member] is not restricted by sickness...from being capable of
performing [her] full and normal duties on a full-time
basis (for at least 30
hours per week) even though [her] actual employment may be on a full-time,
part-time, contract or casual basis;
Unfortunately,
the Insurer and Trustee have conflated the quoted provision above with the
following bolded words applying to the Eligibility
Conditions:
Eligibility Conditions
Acceptance Cover for Existing Members
Existing Members who are Members of the [Insurer] Previous Policy
as at 30 September 2012 who:
employer sponsored Members of a sub-plan insurance category with one (1) of the
following benefit designs under the [Insurer]
Previous Policy:
(xii) Where the Member's Amount Insured is greater from the Policy
Commencement Date than the amount of cover the Member held immediately
the Policy Commencement Date, the increased portion for Death (including
Terminal Illness) and TPD cover will be subject to
the Member being At Work on
If the Member is not At Work then New Events Cover will apply to
the increased portion until such time the Member is At Work for thirty
consecutive days, from which time the New Events Cover restriction will no
longer apply...
[Tribunal emphasis]
relevantly submitted by the Insurer:
A treating doctor's report from Dr [SN], GP dated 20 December 2016
indicated that from 21 September 2013 the [Deceased] Member would
not have been
able to work 30 hours week for 30 consecutive days.
Similarly, a nurse to doctor telecall with Dr [H], GP stated that the
[Deceased Member] would have been unable to perform her full
and normal duties
as a Beauty Consultant for at least 30 hours per week on 1 October 2012 or for
30 consecutive days thereafter as
she was unwell at that time.
the At Work definition does not require medical proof the Complainant, as at 1
October 2012, would have been able to work
her normal duties for 30 hours per
week for 30 consecutive days; it simply requires medical proof the Complainant,
as at 1 October
2012, would have been able to work her normal duties for 30
hours per week – full stop!
its part the Tribunal, applying the At Work definition correctly, is satisfied
the medical evidence does not demonstrate the Complainant
would not have been
capable of working her normal duties for 30 hours per week as at 1 October
the Conclusion to the Medical Summary above records:
The Tribunal notes that in the week commencing 1 October 2012 the
Deceased Member would most likely have been on a low dose of Capecitabine,
according to Dr KV
she was tolerating. Further, the Complainant
subsequently completed her rostered shifts for Pharmacy B in the weeks ending 9
2012 and 14 October 2012.
Thus, there is no clear medical evidence to indicate that the Deceased Member
was ‘restricted by sickness...from being capable
of performing [her] full
and normal duties on a full-time basis (for at least 30 hours per
week)...’ in the week commencing
1 October 2012.
the sake of completeness the Tribunal notes there are no facts before it
indicating the Deceased Member, per provision c) of the
At Work definition, was
as at 1 October 2012:
...in receipt of and/or entitled to claim income support benefits
from any source including but not limited to workers' compensation
statutory transport accident benefits and disability income benefits.
Tribunal therefore determines the Deceased Member did satisfy the At Work
definition as at 1 October 2012 and accordingly the
Insurer, with the
Trustee’s concurrence, did unfairly and unreasonably calculate and pay the
wrong TIB to the Deceased Member.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decisions under review
if it is satisfied that the decisions, in their
operation in relation to the
Executor, were fair and reasonable in the circumstances. For the reasons stated
above the Tribunal is
not so satisfied.
Therefore, the Tribunal does not affirm the decisions of the
Trustee and the Insurer.
the Tribunal is not satisfied that the decisions of the Trustee and the Insurer
were fair and reasonable s37(3) empowers the Tribunal
to make a determination to
remit the matter to which the decisions relate to the Trustee and Insurer for
reconsideration in accordance
with the directions of the Tribunal, vary the
decisions, or set aside the decisions and substitute other decisions.
making its decisions, s37(5) of the Complaints Act requires that the Tribunal
must not do anything that would be contrary to law
or to the terms of the
s37(4) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal may only exercise its determination
making power for the purpose of placing a complainant
as nearly as practicable,
in the position that they would have been in but for the unfairness,
unreasonableness, or both, that the
Tribunal has determined to exist in relation
to the Trustee’s and Insurer’s decisions.
accordance with these provisions, the Tribunal determines to set aside the
Trustee’s and Insurer’s decisions and substitute
other decisions
that the Insurer, via the Trustee, is to pay the Executor the additional TIB in
the amount of $25,300.
Insurer is to also apply s57 interest per the ICA as from 21 December 2015,
until date of payment to the Trustee. The Trustee
on receipt of the
Insurer’s total payment is to remit same to the Executor in a timely
Stephen Duffield, Presiding
Date of Tribunal signature: 25 November
RTF format (308 KB)
Signed PDF/A format