Gans & Albert [2013] FMCAfam 300 (11 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[2013] FMCAfam 300
FAMILY LAW – Property dispute –
lengthy relationship – husband’s discovery of wife’s
extra-martial affair
and related financial wastage – extensive disputes
Family Law Act 1975
Stanford v Stanford
Ogilvie & Adams
[1981] VicRp 92
[1981] VR 1041
Respondent:
File Number:
MLC 3033 of 2012
Judgment of:
Burchardt FM
Hearing dates:
19 December 2012, 4 & 5 February 2013
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Ms Stoikovska
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Berger Kordos Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Williams
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Pearsons Lawyers Pty Ltd
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment under the pseudonym
Gans & Albert
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
MLC 3033 of
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introductory
is an embittered property dispute in which the husband seeks that the wife
receive up to 57 ½ per cent of the non-superannuation
assets of the parties
and that the superannuation be split evenly. The wife seeks that she receive 80
to 85 per cent of the pool,
inclusive of superannuation, albeit that the husband
would in fact get his superannuation and a relatively small amount of money
the wife’s proposal.
the reasons that follow, I think that the wife should obtain 65 per cent of the
non-superannuation asset pool and that the parties’
superannuation should
be split evenly, this being in my view a just and equitable resolution of the
dispute between them.
Agreed Facts
the parties are divorced it will be convenient, as their counsel indeed did, to
refer to them as husband and wife.
husband was born [in] 1968 and although he is qualified [occupation omitted] he
works, and has worked for many years, in the [omitted]
industry. He was an
employee until relatively recently but has since gone out on his own as an
independent [omitted], selling his
services as a sole practitioner under the
business name [U].
wife was born [in] 1973 and works as a [occupation omitted]. Historically she
has worked (since resuming work following the upbringing
of the children to whom
I shall come shortly) for three days per week but that seems likely to expand to
5 days a week in the near
are three children of the relationship, [X] born [in] 1996, [Y] born [in] 1997
and [Z] born [in] 2000. All three children live
with the wife and spend no time
whatsoever with their father, from whom they are significantly estranged.
parties married [in] 1995 and, although there is a minor controversy as to how
long they knew one another before that, nothing
turns on it. Both parties
worked until the children were born, although it is clear from the materials as
a whole that throughout
the vast majority of their marriage the parties had what
Ms S, the Family Report writer, described as a very traditional arrangement.
husband worked and produced the money and did some of the outside work at the
the commencement of the relationship the husband had bought a block of land for
$56,000 upon which the matrimonial home rapidly
commenced to be built. He had
bought this block it would appear, out of savings of $75,000. At this time he
received what was described
as a loan from his parents in the sum of $100,000
which was applied towards the building of the matrimonial home on the block in
[P]. The wife and children still live there.
husband has deposed that at the time of the commencement of the relationship he
had approximately $7,000 in superannuation and
this figure was not challenged.
the time of the commencement of the relationship the wife owned a property in
[L] which she had purchased for $117,000 in 1992,
with a small mortgage of no
more than $15,000. It was worth $150,000 according to the wife at the start of
the relationship.
some quibbling on the part of the husband, it seems clear that the mortgage on
the [L] property was paid out relatively quickly
by rental received and the
property was unencumbered for some time thereafter.
husband worked as a [omitted] as well as in the [omitted] industry. He had a
company which I will refer to as [E], but it is
clear from the materials that
that company was deregistered in 2011 and has no ongoing income.
earlier indicated, the husband was retrenched from his previous employment in
May 2011 and he continues to work as an independent
[omitted] at a salary of
$1,800 per week.
husband had a major heart attack in January 2011, shortly after final
separation. It is clear that the final separation came
as a great shock to the
husband, even though he may well have been aware that the marriage was fairing
poorly before that.
husband’s natural concern at the end of the relationship was grossly
exacerbated by the fact that shortly after separation
(which occurred when the
wife took the children overseas to Fiji for a holiday) he found the wife’s
diary. From this diary,
it became apparent to him that the wife had for some
years been conducting an extramarital affair with a man named
Worse again, from the husband’s point of view, it was apparent that Mr K
had been given (as it seemed to him) very substantial
amounts of money by the
wife during the currency of the marriage. The husband’s treating medical
advisers suggested that the
heart attack was brought on by, or at the very least
contributed to, by the enormous emotional stress of these discoveries.
the time of the commencement of the relationship, each of the parties had a car
and although values have been ascribed to them
there are no valuations. Indeed,
these matters are so long ago as in my view to be immaterial, even though one
car appears to have
been sold for some thousand of dollars and applied to the
marital relationship generally.
separation the husband paid certain amounts towards the mortgage, although not
sufficient to satisfy all the amounts outstanding.
The husband has also
continued to pay medical insurance for the children, albeit that the wife, as it
transpires, has her own medical
insurance. This was one of a number of
unprofitable areas for squabbling between counsel during the hearing.
husband paid some of the utilities on the property for a while but eventually
ceased to do so. He now pays Child Support as assessed
in the sum of $2,200 per
month. There was some confusion as to whether there were substantial arrears
and, if so, why? But as best
I can understand the matter, these arrears are
either being paid through a garnishee order or have been paid.
husband has paid only some $1,600 or so towards the children’s school fees
since separation. It is quite clear from Ms
S’s report that the
children’s perception of the father’s failure to support them
post-separation has played a
major part in their alienation from him. This
alienation has clearly, from Ms S’s report, been contributed to by the
even if to an extent unwittingly.
earlier indicated, the wife has worked since 2005 in her present employment as a
[omitted] for 3 days per week. She earns $30
per hour. She will be increasing
to 5 days per week shortly to cover an employee who is leaving on maternity
leave. The tenor of
the wife’s evidence, however, suggested that her
increase in work is likely to continue beyond the presumed one-year period
such maternity leave.
husband charges his employment out at $45 per hour and he works from Monday to
Friday. Before his heart attack he worked on Saturdays
also. He says he is no
longer able to sustain such pressure.
far, the matters I have recorded are either expressly agreed or very
straightforward to determine. Indeed, it is appropriate
to say a couple of
general remarks at this stage about the nature of the materials in the trial and
the way it has been conducted.
case has been fought with an intensity that reflects the distaste of the two
parties for each other and which has its origins,
quite clearly, in the
continuing sense of outrage that the father feels about his former wife’s
infidelity. It is regrettable
that the lawyers have not been able to bring the
parties to a more rational assessment of the strength of their cases. Most of
evidence in the case is in fact relatively straightforward and there are
remarkably few matters in significant disagreement, if one
puts to one’s
side the extent of the moneys advanced to Mr K.
while it is understandable that the husband has a vivid and ongoing suspicion as
to exactly how much money have been advanced
to Mr K, the unending squabbles
over discovery and related issues have been remarkably unproductive.
should make it clear that while I have had regard to all the materials filed and
submissions made, I do not intend to chase, as
both counsel did, every rabbit
down every burrow. This judgment deals with the matters raised that I regard as
relevant and of significance.
The Evidence as given before the Court by the husband
husband adopted his affidavits and financial statement. He confirmed he is still
paid $1,800 per week gross. He dealt in some
detail with a time in 2009 when
the wife ran up a total of some $5,400 in car hire. As it emerged in
cross-examination, the wife’s
explanation for this was believable. This
is typical of the sort of over-elaborate bickering that characterised the case
husband was forced, in the ultimate, to concede that the Viridian Line of Credit
taken out by the wife on the [L] property had
been signed by him, albeit that he
had originally said it was forged.
husband conceded under cross-examination that while he was not aware that the
mother had expended funds on her father’s
monument, this was in fact the
case. He also conceded that the $6,000 that the wife had advanced to her own
mother upon the death
of her father should not be taken into further
consideration.
husband complained vividly of the failure of the wife to keep him informed about
the Viridian Line of Credit. He said he thought
it was going to be used to buy
an investment property. He further said that the wife had access to all his
bank accounts and did
Internet banking for his company, [E].
Cross-examination
by counsel for the wife concentrated initially upon the husband’s
qualifications as a [omitted]. He confirmed
that he could still do this work
but said, in effect, that the demand for such work is not present at the moment
and that in any
event, he derives no satisfaction from it. He said that he
would make a lot less income in this form of work than he presently does.
confirmed that his company, [E], was one in which he was the sole director and
shareholder. He said, however, that after time
[E] went in effect into
partnership with [U] Pty Ltd. He gave evidence which I found convincing about
the operations of [U] and
why it was that that body no longer operates.
Contrary to the position adopted by the wife, he was able in my view, entirely
satisfactorily,
to explain the transactions recorded in exhibit R1 about the
sale of the [C] property.
husband confirmed that when he started work as an independent [omitted], he was
working for some months for six days, but that
he found this too much. He said
that projects had slowed down and that following his heart attack and further
heart complications,
he could not take the pressure. He said he used to
supervise 120 people before his heart attack and associated health issues.
husband said he thought that the [L] property was unencumbered following
separation but the [P] property was mortgaged to the
tune of about $200,000,
this being debts arising from the operation of [E].
husband said he had paid $18,000 towards the mortgage of the matrimonial home
following separation and had sought an offset for
these payments through the
Child Support Agency.
husband confirmed that in his view, payments to Mr K amounted in total to
$201,000 and said he was not aware of any moneys paid
back by Mr K.
husband said that the wife’s credit card balance at separation was $15,000
on her own card and a joint card was about $30,000.
He said this was paid out
husband confirmed that he had contributed only $1,660 towards school fees of the
three children since separation and that they
are still all enrolled in private
schools. He said that he pays Child Support at $2,200 per month and cannot
afford to pay anymore.
relation to the children’s bank accounts, he agreed that the moneys be
split evenly for the children and put into trust between
him and the wife. He
had no objection to the funds being used for their present education.
to further cross-examination, he asserted that some $29,500 (or possibly
$23,000) had been received from the sale of a Ford
Explorer motor vehicle which
was given to the wife.
summary, the husband asserted that he had paid $35,000 towards the mortgage and
utilities since separation, together with medical
insurance. He complained
he gave the wife a second
accepted that the wife’s expenses from week to week were reasonable. He
asserted that he had paid for [X]’s orthodontics
in the garnisheed sum of
husband was critical of the wife’s relationship with Mr K but confirmed
that separation took place one year before the final
end of the relationship.
He asserted that while he understood that the wife said separation took place
four years earlier, they
had continued to share a bedroom until final
separation.
husband confirmed that his solicitor’s costs were some $34,000. He said
that he had been loaned the necessary money pursuant
to a verbal agreement with
his father.
husband confirmed that therapeutic counselling for the children was likely to
cost about $300 per hour but asserted that there
was nothing stopping the wife
from working 5 days a week and having sufficient funds to pay for such facility.
husband accepted the sum of $3,750 as the wife’s contribution to her
father’s monument, notwithstanding that she had
earlier asserted a figure
of $50,000 and agreed that this sum should not be added back. As indicated, the
husband made a similar
concession in relation to the $6,000 advanced to the
wife’s mother following her father’s death.
The wife’s evidence
wife confirmed she was employed as an [omitted] and has been working 24 hours
per week until recently. She received $200 per
week rent from the [L] property
until settlement on 2 November 2012.
wife confirmed that she is now working full-time and being paid $30 an hour.
She anticipates working for 40 hours per week, albeit
that she may lose odd
hours here and there to orthodontic attendances for the children and the like.
wife gave evidence about her responses to the specific questions she had been
required to answer, provided by the father, and
maintained that her answers were
adequate. She confirmed that she has spent $70,000 on legal fees, which
included trial costs.
pursuant to a loan verbally agreed and she would discuss this after the
proceedings.
She said that the remaining $20,000 had been taken as to $13,000
to $15,000 from her credit card and the remainder paid to her in
cash by Mr K.
wife confirmed that her total credit card debt is $28,000.
wife was unable to say if the loan she presently had was the maximum available
to her. She confirmed that she had not looked
for other jobs. She said that
this was because she had been with the family business that employs her for some
eight years and would
be entitled to long service after 10 years. She confirmed
that she has a degree but no professional qualifications in [omitted].
wife was cross-examined about medical insurance and confirmed that she was
removed from the family insurance. Quite a bit of
time was spent on this rather
unprofitable area, because it was clear to me from a fairly early stage that the
wife had been able
to access a number of payments through the husband’s
card as a result of details being with the providers that she had consulted,
that she is now using her own card.
wife produced on the second day of trial a loan application to Westpac, together
with settlement statements and CBA MasterCard
cross-examined about exhibit R4, she confirmed that her income was as given on
the application to the bank and that she was unable
to pay more. She asserted
that there was no guarantor for her loans, notwithstanding that ostensibly her
salary would not appear
enough to justify the loan she was able to take out.
wife conceded that the sum spent on her credit card for her lawyers was $16,000.
wife confirmed that Mr K is continuing to make payments on her credit cards and
had been doing so for the last two to three months.
She asserted that up to
$4,000 might have been repaid in this way. She said that Mr K had repaid her
$15,000 since separation.
cross-examined as to the nature of her contact with Mr K, the wife, in my view,
was evasive. She confirmed that she is still
in a relationship with him, but
described him as being peripatetic without any residential address. She said
that she telephones
him (presumably on a mobile phone). She said that she
expects to get further moneys back from Mr K over a period of time.
wife confirmed that the amount she accepted having been advanced to Mr K was
$100,000 net (bearing in mind his repayments). She
denied playing “catch
me as you can” with counsel during cross-examination.
asserted that a number of payments in the schedule prepared by counsel for the
husband were double-counted. I will deal with
these matters in more detail when
I come to them directly.
wife was cross-examined in inordinate length and tedious detail about the
various payments said to have been paid to Mr K. This
aspect of the case, of
course, reflects the underlying dynamic which is the husband’s outrage at
the relationship and the moneys
Some observations about the credit of the witnesses
husband was, in the main, a direct and responsive witness, but he was quite
unable to conceal his ongoing tumult and anger about
the wife’s infidelity
and its financial consequences. This emerged at every step of the way. At one
stage he said with some
emphasis, “We have been screaming for
discovery.” This reflects the ongoing obsession he has, that the wife has
fashion been able to conceal the full extent of her perfidy in giving
obsession (upon which he has expended very substantial amounts of money through
his lawyers), is as understandable as it has
been relatively unproductive, for
reasons which will emerge. Nonetheless, I found the husband generally to be a
believable witness
whose answers were given, albeit angrily, with sincerity.
wife’s evidence was likewise in the main generally persuasive. She
responded reasonably cooperatively with counsel’s
often hectoring
questions. Nonetheless, there were some aspects I found unpersuasive.
found the wife’s evidence about the nature of her relationship with
K to be evasive and incomplete. She is still in a relationship with him and is,
therefore, clearly in an intimate relationship
with him. This being so, her
professed lack of understanding as to Mr K’s whereabouts and circumstances
is not one I am prepared
this exception, however, I do not generally regard the wife as in any way a bad
witness. Her demeanour in the witness box was
restrained and reasonably
dignified, in the circumstances, and I thought her answers were generally
properly responsive to the questions
short, subject to the reservation I have expressed above, I think she was an
honest and believable witness.
The First Step
it just and equitable to make an order adjusting the property interests of the
parties having regard to their legal and equitable
interests pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
High Court has made it clear in the decision of
Stanford v Stanford
[2012] HCA 52
, that the Court does not and should not embark upon an exercise
pursuant to
of the Act to work out what property settlement between the
parties is just and equitable until the antecedent exercise is taken
pursuant to
as to whether there should, indeed, be any adjustment to property orders
High Court did, however, make it plain in
that this would, in
most marriages, be a relatively straightforward task and this case, in my view,
falls squarely within that range.
Here, the basis upon which the parties have
conducted their affairs during the relationship was radically altered by its
termination
and it is plainly just and equitable that there should be an
adjustment.
all the sound and fury that has been expended upon the matter, the assets of the
parties to this relationship are not difficult
to define. They are set out in
the aide-memoire that constitutes document MFI-1:
in real property at [address omitted], [P] $322,000;
Shares $2364;
and chattels $5000.”
was strongly submitted by counsel for the wife that the chattels should be given
a nil value and while I accept that there are
no formal valuations, I also
accept counsel for the husband’s submission that the $5,000 indicated in
the wife’s financial
statement should be taken as an admission against
interest. The fact is that she retained, to all effects and purposes, all the
chattels that the parties had previously owned upon separation.
Liabilities and Add-Backs
“The husband’s legal fees paid from the
Line of Credit $34,428.”
Superannuation
superannuation $40,675;
superannuation $123,159.”
Disputed Liabilities – the $100,000 loan from the husband’s
debate took place about the Victorian case of
Ogilvie & Adams
[1981] VicRp 92
As with most issues in this case, the parties did not agree with what
for the wife submitted that the net effect of
Ogilvie & Adams
that the loan being a loan of money simpliciter meant that the debt ran
forthwith from the time the moneys were advanced. In
this regard, Fullagar J
said at page 1043:
if A lends money to B, then instantly B is detaining A's money. In order to
prevent a cause of action for recovery
arising in A instantaneously on paying
the money, the parties must expressly contract out of that situation by words
clearly inconsistent
with that situation. The courts have long since settled it
that a mere statement or agreement that the money is repayable on demand
request or at call) is not sufficient to contract out of that situation where
all else that is known of the terms of the contract
is that A has paid money to
B by way of loan.”
Honour cited substantial authority for that proposition, to which he returned at
various times during his judgment.
page 1051, Fullagar J continued:
the law says (and has said for a very long time) that the description of loan
(repayable on demand or repayable on request)
is used in contradistinction to
loans where something must be done, or must happen, in order to constitute a
cause of action in the
lender for recovery of the money. In truth, a loan
repayable on request (or on demand, or on call) is "a loan simpliciter". It is
quite different if the parties choose to say "being a loan upon terms that the
money shall be repayable on three days notice" or
(which is the same thing)
"upon terms that the money shall be repayable three days after demand made". The
law is settled that where
a loan is said to be of that kind which is recoverable
on request, or on demand, it means of that species which is continuously
recoverable
at all times from the moment of the creation of the relationship of
debtor and creditor.”
the loan document which is annexure CLA-1 to the affidavit of Mr A filed 24 July
2012, is relevantly in the following terms:
Debtor acknowledges that it is a term of the loan that the said debt be repaid
within thirty (30) days of notification
in writing being given in that regard by
the Creditors.”
the greatest of respect, it is not entirely clear to me that the differentiation
identified by Fullagar J in
Ogilvie & Adams
is as clear as his Honour
suggested. To say that money repayable on demand where there is no time for the
demand to take effect
is utterly different in substance from a situation where
the demand requires a particular period of time seems to me to an extent
distinction without a difference. The proposition analysed by Fullagar J at
page 1051 seems to me to be equally applicable
to both allegedly different sorts
can think of no reason why the parties would require the loan to be capable of
continuing for 20 or 50 or 200 years and
then to be recoverable at once upon
demand made.”
same observation might be said to apply to this sort of loan where the period
for repayment is thirty (30) days from the demand.
note that the husband’s father has deposed that inter alia;
and his wife loaned the husband $100,000 in 1995 to build his family home;
loaned the same amount to their daughter, who has repaid the moneys in full in
did not ask for the funds to be repaid until after the separation of [Mr Gans]
and the wife as I was always confident that
they would repay the
separation I thought my loan may have been in jeopardy and that there was a risk
I would not be repaid. Accordingly,
on 14 February 2012 I instructed my
solicitor, Mr A, to demand payment of the unpaid debt;
am 72 years of age and I am relying on the loan funds to be repaid since my wife
and I are now in retirement.”
witness was not required for cross-examination, and I must, therefore, accept
the truthfulness of the evidence given in the sense
that I must accept that the
deponent was honest when he swore his affidavit.
does not mean, however, that I am required uncritically to accept his
assertions.
loan was taken out in 1995 and it is quite clear that it was not a loan in the
ordinary sense. There was no term as to repayment
and no interest. It was a
complete indefinite alienation of $100,000 in favour of the husband by his
it is that his sister received a similar loan and repaid it. Nonetheless, there
is no evidence of any sort of demand by the
husband’s father until, as is
understandable, he became concerned that the husband and wife were separating.
circumstances where the loan had been permitted to lie dormant for some 17
years, the assertion that, absent separation between
the parties, the
husband’s parents would have sought their money back seems to me utterly
incredible. It flies wholly in the
face of the objective evidence about the
the assertion that the husband’s father was relying upon the money for his
retirement falls to be considered in the
light of commonsense. At the age of
72, it is reasonable to suppose that the husband’s father had been retired
for some time,
and there is no suggestion that he ever contemplated taking the
my opinion, on the facts of this case, the $100,000 should not be added back
into the pool. It is, of course, however, a significant
contribution made to the
father’s benefit which calls to be considered under the question of
contributions.
the circumstances, it is not necessary for me to arrive at a conclusion as to
the effect and force of Fullagar J’s remarks
, and despite the doubts I have expressed, I should make it clear that
I do not do so.
The amounts involving Mr K
of course, is what this case was all really about. Enormous amounts of time
were expended in both compiling and answering questions
and answers and in the
end it boils down to the matters set out in the document I have marked Exhibit
MFI-2, helpfully prepared by
the husband’s legal advisers, which sets out
the various areas of dispute.
Viridian Line of Credit
my opinion, there is no real dispute that the amount paid out at the settlement
of the [L] property was $159,712.52. It seems
reasonably clear that all these
moneys were paid out by the wife to her own benefit one way or the other, albeit
that not all may
have been paid to Mr K. I accept that there should be a
deduction for the Mercedes motor vehicle in the sum of $23,005.40, leaving
total of $136,707.12.
Commonwealth Bank Line of Credit in the name of [E]
I accept that the wife had at least some access on the internet to the accounts
of [E], I have no doubt, having heard the wife’s
evidence, that her
answers about this are to be accepted. The amounts totalling $93,641.89 set out
in exhibit MFI-2 were all clearly
expended from time-to-time on matters to do
with the husband and household expenses. True it is that the husband made
cheques available
to the wife from time-to-time on demand, and true it may also
be that the wife could, in theory, have extracted further funds from
amounts made available to her.
having seen and heard the wife give her evidence, I believe her answers in this
regard. It is clear that she conducted her
frolic with Mr K through the avenue
of the drawdown on the [L] property and that she left the moneys in the [E]
account alone. It
is reasonably clear that the husband would have noted any
untoward behaviour by the wife in this regard. Clearly, moneys advanced
bills, if not applied to that purpose, would have produced problems long ago.
Commonwealth Bank Streamline account in the name of
loan to Mr K of $2,500 must be added back. The moneys spent in [omitted] were
spent by the wife on herself. She is entitled
to spend money on herself to an
extent. The pursuit of this trivial sum is typical of the way in which this
case has been conducted.
Commonwealth Bank Visa account in the name of Ms Albert
hire of prestige motor vehicles in March and April 2009 should be reduced by
$5,000 to take into account the bond of $5,000, producing
a total of $7,230.
do not propose to traverse each item in the schedule seriatim. The wife took
issue with the following payments:
September 2009 in the sum of $237.70;
2009 for the purchase of alcohol (Mr K does not drink) $83.99;
19 November
2009 Office furniture purchased $524;
19 November
2009 advertisement with Carsales $80;
20 February
2010 hotel expenditure $130;
2010 hotel expenditure $159.12;
2010 hotel expenditure $107;
2010 $6,000 given to the wife’s mother;
2010 expenses in Sydney which she said were her own in the total of
September 2010 Kwik Kopy Printing for the children’s homework
measure of detail is disturbing and alarming and merely reflects the vindictive
way in which this case has been conducted by
both sides. I do not propose to
dignify it by detailed reasons. Having heard and seen the wife give what, to
me, were plausible
explanations, I accept her denials of those amounts.
also accept that there is a measure of double-counting insofar as a number of
these expenses are also replicated and repeated in
the Viridian Line of Credit
debt. It is not, however, possible to quantify the double-counting with
absolute precision.
Myer Visa credit card account in the name of Ms Albert
wife continued her opposition to the inclusion of alcohol expenses on 5 February
2010 for $75, but otherwise accepted that all
of the total of $14,945.41 was
payable in respect of Mr K.
CPA Australia Amex account in the name of Ms Albert
wife only challenged the stationery payment on 24 May 2010 in the sum of
again, I uphold the wife’s objections in this regard.
Matters double-counted in the Viridian Line of Credit
have already referred to the $23,005.40 which is for the Mercedes motor vehicle,
which counsel for the husband accepts.
also accept that the wife spent $3,750 for her father’s monument from this
Line of Credit account. (It is not clear where
the $6,000 given to the
wife’s mother – the other figure conceded by the father not to be
added back – came from).
note that although unable to give definite figures, the wife said that about
$85,000 to $90,000 of the $136,707.12 was payable in
respect of Mr K, although
she put a figure of some $20,000 that has been applicable to interest and bank
fees and charges.
Conclusion on the methodology used to assess the add-backs in relation to Mr
should be noted that I do not propose to sit down in the same way as the parties
have and conduct an exhaustive red ink, calculator-in-hand
approach to the
add-backs. This is not through a lack of proper application or a failure to
appreciate that this is all money that
should be added back because the wife has
already inappropriately spent it. Rather, it is because it is clear on my view
evidence is not sufficiently precise to enable this to occur in a
fashion that would be just and equitable to both parties.
is true that the wife has not responded as she should have responded to the
various requests for discovery and information. Nonetheless,
her demeanour in
the witness box did not suggest to me, as counsel so vigorously put it to her,
that she was playing “catch-as-catch-can”.
While the wife obviously
has a degree, she is not a person with any professional qualification. She did
not impress me as being
as dishonest and manipulative as the husband’s
case would put it. I think that she complied as best she felt she was able from
time-to-time with requests for information, and if I am wrong, then so be it.
it is scarcely surprising that events as long ago as 2009 may not be wholly
cross-referenced and
clearly indexed. I do not know for certain how much
of the Viridian Line of Credit debt is duplicated in the other accounts. I will
have to do the best I can.
this approach, I note that the following subamounts of the debt should be
Viridian Line of Credit
(rounding-off after removing $3,750 for the wife’s father’s monument
and the motor vehicle $23,000).
also remove the $13,000 repaid by Mr K, which produces a total of $120,000.
note that this figure, if one excludes the figure of some $20,000 of interest
and bank fees and charges, is not so very far from
the wife’s own
assertions as to the amount owing.
[E] account
should be added back from this account for the reasons already given.
Commonwealth Bank Streamline Access account
should be added back from this account.
Commonwealth Bank Visa account in the name of Ms Albert
one removes the matters disputed by the wife from the total of $43,989.29, which
I accept should be deducted (see paragraphs 93-95
above, the total is
$8,524.29), the resultant total rounded-off is $35,450. I will return to this
Myer Visa credit card account in the name of Ms Albert
one takes off the matters denied by the wife, this produces a figure rounded off
of $14,900.
Amex account
the reasons given, only the materials for Tyres Direct should be added in the
sum of $2,100.
Conclusion on the total moneys advanced to Mr K
total of these figures is $174,965. As I have indicated, one of the things I do
not know is the extent to which the matters itemised
under the Commonwealth Bank
Streamline Access account, Commonwealth Bank Visa account in the name of Ms
Albert, the Myer Visa credit
card account in the name of Ms Albert and the Amex
account were in fact replicated in the Viridian Line of Credit.
doubtless the husband would say that these were matters for the wife to prove
bearing in mind that it was she who dispersed
these moneys and had control for
all relevant purposes over these accounts, I think the matter is more complex
husband is seeking a dollar for dollar adjustment in the wife’s property
settlement in respect of the Mr K add-backs, if
I so may describe them. Both
parties proceeded on that footing. It is, therefore, not just and equitable
that the ultimate amount
as it were subtracted from the wife be greater than in
fact it was.
I have indicated earlier in these reasons, it scarcely surprising that the sort
of amounts and accounts with which we are dealing
cannot be wholly
cross-referenced and indexed.
picture that emerged for me was that the Viridian Line of Credit was the line of
credit that the wife used to conduct her affairs
and acted, so to speak, as her
bank account. Her only other available source of funds were her wages and so
far as I recall there
is no evidence what the wife did with her
none-too-munificent wages. There is certainly no evidence she applied her wages
credit cards.
other accounts are in the main credit card accounts. The moneys to pay these
accounts must in the main have come from elsewhere
and the obvious place to look
for them is the Viridian Line of Credit account.
the same token, however, it is clear that the wife underestimated the amounts
that she had spent on Mr K.
side was able to trace the credit card details into the Viridian Line of Credit
and this is clearly not a matter for criticism
of either party. Payments made
on the various credit cards from time-to-time would have been made in lump sums
which would not be
readily capable of being translated to the individual items
in the actual credit card accounts.
circumstances like this there is a clear factual conclusion, namely that there
is more probably than otherwise a very considerable
measure of double-counting
between the credit card accounts in particular and the Viridian Line of Credit
account (I do not make
the same assumption in relation to the Commonwealth Bank
Streamline Access account because it is not a credit card) but it is impossible
to quantify it. The Court, in my view, in order to do justice and equity must
take a robust approach.
difference is between the $120,000 applicable to the Viridian line of Credit and
the total with the other accounts taken into
consideration of $174,965 (of which
$2,500 relates to the Commonwealth Bank Streamline Access account which I do not
accept involved
any double-counting). In my opinion, the proper conclusion is
that the total applicable to the wife should be rounded out at $122,500.
figure reflects the $120,000 (Viridian) and the $2,500. Although it is possible
that the amounts reflected in the credit card
amounts were not entirely paid
from the Viridian Line of Credit, the evidence is not sufficient to say how
much, if anything, the
amounts were. I can only include amounts I am
sufficiently satisfied are proved on the evidence.
should be noted that although I have not added back the $6,000 advanced to the
wife’s mother, I have not subtracted it either.
There is no evidence
where the funds came from.
Superannuation
think it is agreed that the husband’s superannuation is worth $123,159,
and the wife’s, $40,675.
Contribution
unsurprisingly, having wallowed in such detail through the property pool, the
contribution issues may now be seen to be relatively
straightforward. At the
commencement of the relationship the parties’ assets were, really,
essentially, roughly equal. The
husband was well on his way to building and
owning outright the former matrimonial home and the wife already owned another
The respective values of the two properties at the same time are not
the subject of expert evidence, but would appear to be roughly
the same. The
husband had bought the block for $56,000 and applied the $100,000 from his
parents to the matrimonial home. The wife’s
property was worth $150,000
and had a small mortgage.
Thereafter,
as the Family Report writer, Ms S, records, the parties lived a rather
conventional lifestyle in the sense that the husband
worked and made the money
and the wife looked after the children and the home. She also contributed by
way of earnings, both before
the birth of the first child and indeed thereafter,
when she was eventually able to go back to work.
as I do the husband’s parents’ gift of $100,000, it is really quite
apparent that looked at over such a long
relationship, the contributions of the
parties should be taken as equal. It is not, in my view, necessary to say more
Section 75(2)
factors – future needs
the husband makes about $90,000 a year and the wife will make less than that on
any view. Assuming full-time work for 40 hours
per week at $30 per hour, she
will earn $1,200 a week, or roughly $60,000 per year.
roundly reject the unnecessarily uncharitable insinuations that each party makes
It is entirely reasonable that
the husband should not return to work as a [omitted], this being work he has not
done for a long
time, which he does not want to do because it would be
unsatisfying for him and which, in any event, according to his unchallenged
evidence, is in any event unavailable. Likewise, the assertions that the wife
should leave secure and satisfactory employment in
pursuit of further earnings
in circumstances where she has no professional qualification, even though she
has a degree, is similarly
uncharitable and inappropriate.
health of the husband is severely impacted by his heart attack and the attendant
stress and problems. To suggest that he should
be out earning more, and killing
himself by inference by doing so, is an extremely regrettable innuendo and one I
am not prepared
to give any weight to. Nonetheless, and despite his health
problems, the husband will clearly earn about 50 per cent more than the
any on-going basis. He will of course pay Child Support at least until 2018.
the wife’s health is also poor and she will have the care of the children
to at least an extent for some years to
my view, there should be a 10 per cent adjustment in the wife’s favour in
this regard.
Just and equitable
my opinion, the just and equitable disposition of this matter will well and
truly be reflected by an order that splits the pool
60 per cent in favour of the
wife and the superannuation of the parties in like proportion.
husband’s position was that I should award up to 57 ½ per cent to the
wife and superannuation be split equally whereas
the wife’s position was
that superannuation not be split at all. Each side clearly wants to maximise
their cash position.
my view, the same considerations that apply in relation to the contribution and
future needs matters apply to superannuation as
they do to the pool generally.
The vast bulk, almost the entirety, of the husband’s superannuation and
the wife’s superannuation
were earned during the relationship. I have
already dealt with the parties contributions and do not need to repeat what I
terms of future needs both these parties will need superannuation in all
probability at about the same time. The husband’s
capacity to amass
superannuation will be greater than that of the wife as his earnings will be
greater and, in my view, it is eminently
appropriate that the superannuation be
pooled and divided as between the parties as a discrete issue at this stage.
will give the parties an opportunity to confer and produce orders to give effect
to these Reasons for Judgment. I note that it
has always been the wife’s
position that she should be able to retain the family home. Much will depend
upon whether or not
this is practicable, although it is clearly desirable if
the event that the parties are unable to come to agreement (something that would
not be surprising given the bitterness with which
this litigation has been
conducted), I will list the matter for further hearing.
certify that the preceding one hundred and thirty-nine (139) paragraphs are a
true copy of the reasons for judgment of Burchardt
Date: 11 April 2013
Addendum/Corrigendum
has been drawn to my attention that the Reasons for Judgment as originally
published contained an internal inconsistency.
paragraph 2, I said that:
wife should obtain 65 per cent of the non-superannuation asset pool and that the
parties’ superannuation should
be split evenly.”
paragraph 134, I said:
just and equitable disposition of this matter will well and truly be reflected
by an order that splits the pool 60 per
cent in favour of the wife and the
superannuation of the parties in like proportion.”
was correct to draw my attention to this matter, which as I explained in Court
arose from an editing error in circumstances
where the final editing of the
Court took place under considerable pressure of time.
2 should have read:
the reasons that follow, I think that the property pool should be divided as to
60 per cent in favour of the wife and
the superannuation of the parties in like
proportion.”
I certify that the preceding
five (5) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of Federal
Magistrate Burchardt.
Date: 19 April 2013
RTF format (242 KB)
Signed PDF/A format