URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1974/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Geelong Harbour Trust Commissioners v Gibbs Bright & Co [1974] UKPCHCA 1; (1974) 129 CLR 576 (4 February 1974)
PRIVY COUNCIL
GEELONG HARBOUR TRUST COMMISSIONERS v. GIBBS BRIGHT & CO.
(1974) 129 CLR 576
Shipping - Privy Council
Privy Council
Lord Diplock(1), Lord Hodson(1), Lord Devlin(1), Viscount Dilhorne(1) and Lord
Kilbrandon.(1)
Shipping - Harbour Trust - Damage to beacon by vessel - Absence of
negligence or default on part of vessel - Liability of agent
of vessel -
Geelong Harbour Trust Act 1928-1951 (Vict.), s. 110.*
Privy Council - Stare decisis - Long-standing decision of High Court of
Australia - Determination of High Court not to depart from
earlier decision -
Whether Privy Council ought to interfere on appeal.
*Section 110 of the Geelong Harbour Trust Act 1928 (as amended to 1951)
(Vict.) provided: "(1) The Commissioners may recover damages
in any court of
competent jurisdiction from the owner master and agent of any vessel for any
injury caused by such vessel or by any
boatmen or other persons belonging to
or employed in or about such vessel to the property or effects of the
Commissioners or the
banks or wharves or other works erected maintained or
repaired under the provisions of this Act. (2) The owner master or agent of
any vessel shall not be relieved of any liability to the Commissioners by
reason of the fact that such vessel was under compulsory
pilotage at the time
any injury was caused as aforesaid. (3) Nothing in this section shall
prejudice any other rights which the Commissioners
may have or limit any
liabilities to which the vessel or the master owner or agent thereof may be
subject in respect of any injury
caused by such vessel."
1973, December 19, 20; 1974, February 4. 4:2:1974
APPEAL from the High Court of Australia.
1974, February 4.
LORD DIPLOCK delivered the judgment of their Lordships as follows:-
In their Lordships' view, the real question in this appeal is whether the
decision of the High Court of Australia (McTiernan, Kitto
and Menzies JJ.;
Barwick C.J. and Owen J. dissenting)
[1970] HCA 16
(1970) 122 CLR 504
that they should
follow the ratio decidendi
of an earlier
decision of the High Court, which had
stood unchallenged in Australia since
1914, irrespective of whether or not
considered that decision to be wrong. (at p577)
2. The relevant facts can be stated briefly. (at p577)
3. On 26th October 1958, the M.V. Octavian was moored at a wharf in Geelong
Harbour. As a result of a sudden squall of unusual
violence she was blown
from her moorings against a beacon belonging to the Geelong Harbour Board.
The damage to the beacon amounted
to 2,868 pounds 19s. 5d. The Geelong
Harbour Trust Commissioners brought an action in the Supreme Court of Victoria
under s. 110
of the Geelong Harbor Trust Act 1928 (as amended) against Gibbs
Bright & Co., the agents of the vessel, seeking to recover from
amount of the damage caused. They pleaded merely the fact of the collision
and the resulting damage. They did not allege
upon the part of
anyone. (at p577)
4. Section 110 was in the following terms:
"(1) The Commissioners may recover damages in any court
of competent jurisdiction from the owner master and agent of
any vessel for any injury caused by such vessel or by any boatman
or other persons belonging to or employed in or about such
vessel to the property or effects of the Commissioners or the
banks or wharves or other works erected maintained or repaired
under the provisions of this Act.
(2) The owner master or agent of any vessel shall not be
relieved of any liability to the Commissioners by reason of the
fact that such vessel was under compulsory pilotage at the time
any injury was caused as aforesaid.
(3) Nothing in this section shall prejudice any other rights
which the Commissioners may have or limit any liabilities to
which the vessel or the master owner or agent thereof may be
subject in respect of any injury caused by such vessel."
By their defence, the agents pleaded inter alia that the collision between the
vessel and the beacon was caused:- (i) by act of God;
alternatively (ii) by
inevitable accident; alternatively (iii) without negligence on the part of the
motor vessel "Octavian" or on
the part of any person for whose negligence the
defendant is liable. A question was ordered to be determined as a preliminary
of law. As slightly amended in the course of the hearing in the
Supreme Court, it was: "Whether the provisions of s. 110 of the
Harbor Trust Act 1928 (as amended by s. 10 (1) of the Geelong Harbor Trust
(Amendment) Act 1951) operate to impose liability
on the agent of a vessel for
injury caused by such vessel to the property of the plaintiff where the
collision in which such injury
is done occurs as a result of act of God or
inevitable accident or without negligence or other tortious act or omission on
of any person employed in or about the vessel." (at p578)
5. The issue of law which it raises is whether or not the section imposes
upon the owner, master or agent of any vessel an absolute
liability in all
circumstances to compensate the Commissioners for any damage caused by a
collision between the vessel and the property
of the Commissioners, and, if
not, in what circumstances are the owner, master and agent relieved of such
liability? (at p578)
6. Newton J. rightly considered himself bound by the reasoning of the High
Court in Townsville Harbour Board v. Scottish Shire Line
[1914] HCA 33
(1914) 18 CLR
. He answered the question in the negative, holding in effect that the
liability arose only
when the collision
was the result of
negligence or other
tortious act or omission on the part of someone employed in or about the
(1970) VR 513
. (at p578)
7. On appeal to the High Court, Barwick C.J. and Owen J. considered that the
Townsville Case
[1914] HCA 33
(1914) 18 CLR 306
was plainly wrong.
They would have refused
to follow it. They would have allowed the appeal and answered the question in
the affirmative.
Kitto and Menzies JJ. expressed no view as to the
correctness of the reasoning or the decision in the Townsville Case
[1914] HCA 33
. They were of opinion that it had stood so long unchallenged in
Australia that the High Court
ought to follow it, whether it
wrong. They accordingly dismissed the appeal. (at p579)
8. Section 110 of the Geelong Act deals with liability for damage caused by
vessels colliding with the property of port authorities.
It is in similar
terms to corresponding provisions which appear in many statutes in Australia
and in England, though there are minor
variations of language between one
section and another. Upon these differences, however, no distinction has been
based in the decided
cases. The interpretation of these provisions has given
rise to considerable conflict of judicial opinion. (at p579)
9. The trouble started with a decision of the House of Lords in River Wear
Commissioners v. Adamson
(1877) 2 AC 743
had been driven ashore by
storms and abandoned by its crew while endeavouring to make the port of
Sunderland. While
derelict she
was driven by wind and waves against a pier
belonging to the harbour and damaged it. The relevant section under which
authorities sued the owners of the vessel was s. 74 of the Harbours,
Docks, and Piers Clauses Act 1847 (U.K.). The terms
Act, so far as
relevant to the instant appeal, are in substance similar to those of the
Geelong Act though there are minor
differences
of wording. The English Act of
1847, however, contains an express exemption of the owner from liability when
compulsory pilotage and it imposes no liability on the
agent of the vessel. The House of Lords, by a majority of four to
as the Court of Appeal had done unanimously, that in the circumstances the
owners of the vessel were not liable. Each
of their Lordships
was of opinion
(a) that the section imposed upon owners a greater liability for damage caused
by their vessels
coming in contact
with the property of the harbour
authorities than would have existed at common law, and (b) that,
notwithstanding
the apparently
plain words of the section, Parliament could
not have intended to impose upon the owners of such vessels, an absolute
liability in
every possible circumstance in which a vessel might cause damage
to the property of the port authority. (at p579)
10. Unfortunately, the rationes decidendi vary widely. They are difficult to
reconcile with one another, in particular, as respects
the circumstances in
which the owner is relieved from liability. For present purposes it is,
however, only necessary to notice that
Lord Cairns L.C. construed the relevant
section as imposing liability upon the owner of the vessel only where the
damage to the property
of the port authority resulted from some actionable
wrong upon the part of someone. In his view all it did was to make the owner
of the vessel vicariously liable for that other person's tort even though he
was not a servant or agent of the owner but a stranger
for whose acts or
omissions the owner would not have been liable at common law. The speeches of
the other members of the House of
Lords appeared to place narrower limits upon
the exemption of the owner of the vessel from liability under the section. (at
11. A valiant attempt to identify the highest common factor in the reasoning
of the various speeches in the River Wear Case
was made by
the House of Lords in 1927 in Great Western Railway Company v. Owners of s.s.
(1928) AC 57
case a vessel, while navigating under the
control of its owners, damaged a cable belonging to the harbour authorities
but without
negligence on the part of anyone. The minority (Viscount Dunedin
and Lord Phillimore) adopted Lord Cairn's construction
of the English
Act of 1847 and would have held the owners to be exempt from liability; but
the majority (Viscount Haldane,
of Dunfermline and Lord Blanesburgh)
rejected Lord Cairns's construction as constituting the ratio decidendi of the
House in the River Wear Case
(1877) 2 AC 743
considered the exemption of the owner from liability under the section was
narrower though they were divided as to whether
it was limited to cases
where the vessel was derelict at the time of the collision
or whether it
extended to all cases where the
collision resulted from an act of God. The
Mostyn was not derelict, no act of God
was involved, so on either view the
owners were
liable. The later decision of the House of Lords in Workington
Harbour and Dock
Board v. Towerfield
(1951) AC 112
did not resolve this
difference. (at p580)
12. In the meantime, however, in Australia there had been the decision of the
High Court in the Townsville Case
[1914] HCA 33
(1914) 18 CLR 306
. The relevant statute
was The Harbour Boards Act, 1892, (Q.). Section 196 was in substantially the
as s. 74 of the
English Act of 1847 but contained no express
exemption for compulsory pilotage. In the Townsville Case
(1914) 18 CLR 306
was under compulsory pilotage when owing to the negligence of the
pilot it collided with a wharf
belonging to the harbour
members of the High Court (Griffith C.J., Barton and Isaacs JJ.) considered
Queensland Act was to
be construed
in the same way as the English Act
of 1847. All three adopted Lord Cairns's construction of the
English Act as
the true construction
of the Queensland Act. But there their unanimity
of reasoning ended, though they concurred
in the result.
Since compulsory
was an express ground of exemption from liability of the owner under
the proviso to s.
74 of the English
Act of 1847, Lord Cairns's
speech in the
River Wear Case
(1877) 2 AC 743
threw no direct light on whether on his
construction of the section apart from the
proviso the owner would have been
Griffith C.J. and Barton J. held that the
owner was exempted under
Lord Cairns's construction;
the former by equating compulsory
pilotage with
vis major, the latter for reasons
which are not clearly articulated. Isaacs
the other hand was of opinion that
under Lord Cairns's construction of
the section
the owner would have been liable for a collision
resulting from
the negligence of
the compulsory pilot, but that he was relieved
of liability
under another statute, the Navigation
Acts Amendment Act 1911. (at p581)
13. The case can hardly be regarded as a satisfactory one and relief from
liability when the vessel is under compulsory pilotage
has been expressly
taken away by subsequent legislation. The Townsville Case
[1914] HCA 33
(1914) 18 CLR 306
nevertheless remains
clear authority
in Australia in support of Lord Cairns's
construction of sections of this kind which impose
upon owners and agents
vessels liability
for damage caused by the vessel's coming into contact with
the property of the port authority.
There is no
relevant distinction
the wording of s. 196 of the Queensland Act and s. 110 (1) of the Geelong
Act. If the
Townsville Case
[1914] HCA 33
(1914) 18 CLR 306
is to be followed the
preliminary question of law in the instant case must necessarily be answered:
"No". (at p581)
14. It is true, as Barwick C.J. points out, that after the decision of the
House of Lords in The Mostyn
(1928) AC 57
in 1927 where
the majority rejected
Lord Cairns's construction of s. 74 of the English Act of 1847, there was room
for doubt as
to the status of
the judgments in the Townsville Case
[1914] HCA 33
as binding authority in Australia, since it would have been
Court to follow the decision of the House of Lords
in The Mostyn
(1928) AC 57
in preference to its own earlier
decision in the Townsville
[1914] HCA 33
(1914) 18 CLR 306
. But although there was a majority in The Mostyn
for rejecting Lord Cairns's construction
there was no clear majority for
any one alternative and, in particular, there was no majority
in favour of a
construction which would
make the owner liable for damage caused by act of
God. What would have happened if the authority
of the Townsville Case
[1914] HCA 33
had been challenged in the High Court of Australia shortly after
in their Lordships' view, a matter of speculation.
down a rule of construction of general application to sections
in Harbour Acts
throughout Australia dealing with liability
for collision damage caused to
harbour installations which had the merit
that it was comparatively simple,
would generally be easy
to apply to the facts of particular cases and was not
dependent upon niceties
of minor variations in the precise wording of
Acts. In the result despite the conflict between The Mostyn
and the Townsville Case
[1914] HCA 33
(1914) 18 CLR 306
, the latter
case remained
unchallenged in the Australian Courts for another
thirty years until the
Defence in the instant case was
order to challenge it on 28th
February 1969. So for more than
fifty years its ratio decidendi has formed
part of the
maritime law
of Australia and all of its States. (at p582)
15. The High Court of Australia has always possessed the power, which the
House of Lords itself only assumed as recently as 1966,
to refuse to follow
its own previous decisions if it thinks fit. This power however has been used
but sparingly. The decision whether
or not to exercise it is, in their
Lordships' view, one of legal policy into which wider considerations enter
than mere questions
of substantive law. The fact that the court considers its
previous decision to have been plainly wrong is a prerequisite to discarding
it, but it is by no means a decisive reason for doing so. (at p582)
16. The law laid down by a judicial decision, even though erroneous, may work
in practice to the satisfaction of those who are affected
by it, particularly
where it concerns the allocation of the burden of unavoidable risks between
parties engaged in trade or commerce
and their insurers. If it has given
general satisfaction and caused no difficulties in practice, this is an
important factor to
be weighed against the more theoretical interests of legal
science in determining whether the law so laid down ought now to be changed
judicial decision. The High Court, sitting regularly in the capitals of the
various States which are also the main ports and
commercial centres of
Australia, is much better qualified than their Lordships are to assess the
importance of this factor. (at p582)
17. If all that the minority of the High Court had proposed had been to
follow the decision of the House of Lords in The Mostyn
(1928) AC 57
preference to that of the High Court in the Townsville Case
[1914] HCA 33
(1914) 18 CLR 306
, the effect of this
would not have
been to clarify or simplify the law in
Australia, but to reduce it to the state of uncertainty
in which it still
as respects liability for collision damage to harbour
installations resulting from act of God,
where the vessel which
damage is not derelict. To avoid this, Barwick C.J. and Owen J. would have
been in favour of holding
that the section
imposed upon
the owner, master and
agent an absolute liability, subject to no exceptions. This would have the
of keeping the
law throughout
Australia on this subject simple and even
easier of application in practice than the existing rule
laid down in the
Townsville Case
[1914] HCA 33
(1914) 18 CLR 306
, but it would indubitably change the law to
impose upon owners, masters and agents
of vessels in Australian ports
liability than they or the harbour authorities or their respective
insurers had any
previous ground for thinking might
be incurred
by them. No
doubt, as the Chief Justice pointed out, it would not be difficult to
with the extended liability as
respects future
damage, by appropriate
adjustments in the insurance policies of those concerned;
but any change made
by judicial
decision would be
also retrospective. It would create in harbour
authorities new rights of action
in respect of collisions which
had resulted
act of God at any time within the six year limitation period before the
High Court's
decision altered the law,
though no such right
of action had
existed at the time of the collision. Whether there would be many,
any, cases in this
category, is not known.
The real difference between the
minority and the majority in the High Court was
one of principle, viz. whether
in a matter of this
kind involving liabilities which were created by statute,
the law as previously
understood ought to be altered
by judicial decision
retrospective effect or left to the Parliaments of the States to alter as
thought fit and with prospective
effect only.
The field of law involved in
the instant case is not one in which the Parliament
of Victoria has been
content to leave
the liabilities
of those who maintain and those who make use
of harbours in Victoria for damage
to harbour installations to be adjusted
with those general principles of the unwritten common law which it
is the function
of the courts to expound and to
adapt to changing
circumstances and developing concepts of social justice. By intervening to
the common law Parliament has
relegated the courts
within this field to
the lesser role of interpreting the written law that Parliament
has enacted;
but the power
to state authoritatively
what the words that Parliament has used
mean for the purpose of applying them
to particular circumstances
necessarily
power in the courts to make law even though this be, in the phrase
of O.W. Holmes
J., but interstitially.
When for the first time
final instance interprets a written law as bearing one of two or more
meanings, as the
High Court did in the
Townsville Case
[1914] HCA 33
(1914) 18 CLR 306
effect of the exercise of
its interpretative role is to make law.
involved in the application of the doctrine of
stare decisis to judicial
on statutory construction is: at what
point as a matter of legal
policy should the interpretative
role of the court be treated as
spent? Ought
it to be regarded as exhausted
once the court of final instance has expounded
the meaning
of the statute, as was the
practice of the House of Lords in
England until
it was changed in 1966? Or should it be regarded as continuing
so as to entitle
the court to correct a previous erroneous interpretation
experience shows that this has caused confusion or difficulty
application? (at p584)
18. Under a system of law which admits exceptions to the strict rule of stare
decisis there is no simple answer to these questions.
It depends upon
striking a balance between many factors whose relative importance may vary
considerably from case to case. If it
can be inferred from the terms in which
subsequent legislation has been passed that Parliament itself has approved a
particular judicial
interpretation of words in an earlier statute this would
be decisive in both Australia and England in favour of adhering to it.
J. in the Supreme Court of Victoria
(1970) VR 513
felt able to draw that
inference in the instant case, but the majority
in the High Court did not rely
[1970] HCA 16
(1970) 122 CLR 504
; and in their Lordships' view there is no ground
was for the High Court to form its own conclusion as to
in the particular field of law dealt with by s. 110 of the
the balance of advantage lay between adhering to an interpretation
section which had regulated the rights and
liabilities
of those affected by it
for fifty years, and adopting a new interpretation
which, though it might well
be more consistent
established rules of statutory construction, might
create retrospectively
rights of action against owners, masters and agents
vessels which had used Australian harbours. As their Lordships have
observed, the High Court sitting in Australia
better qualified
than their Lordships are to do this. (at p584)
19. Apart from those factors which are special to the particular field of law
in the instant case, there is however a wider consideration
which would make
their Lordships reluctant to interfere with the decision of the High Court on
a matter of this kind. If the legal
process is to retain the confidence of
the nation, the extent to which the High Court exercises its undoubted power
not to adhere
to a previous decision of its own must be consonant with the
consensus of opinion of the public, of the elected legislature and of
judiciary as to the proper balance between the respective roles of the
legislature and of the judiciary as lawmakers. Even among
those nations whose
legal system derives from the common law of England, this consensus may vary
from country to country and from
time to time. It may be influenced by the
federal or unitary nature of the constitution and whether it is written or
by the legislative procedure in Parliament, by the ease with which
parliamentary time can be found to effect amendments in the law
which concern
only a small minority of citizens, by the extent to which Parliament has been
in the habit of intervening to reverse
judicial decisions by legislation; but
most of all by the underlying political philosophy of the particular nation as
to the appropriate
limits of the lawmaking function of a non-elected
judiciary. (at p585)
20. The High Court of Australia can best assess the national attitude on
matters such as these. Their Lordships would not regard
it as proper for them
in the instant case to interfere with the decision which the High Court
reached to abstain from altering the
law in Australia from what it had
previously been understood to be. They will humbly advise Her Majesty that
this appeal should be
dismissed with costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter