HKW25 v National Disability Insurance Agency [2025] FCA 1379 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
HKW25 v National Disability Insurance
[2025] FCA 1379
File number:
VID 928 of 2025
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
interlocutory application for suppression of applicant’s identity pursuant
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
circumstances in which suppression is necessary to prevent prejudice to proper
administration of justice or to protect
the safety of any person – where
applicant has significant and debilitating mental health conditions and fears
interferences
with his privacy – where applicant attests to the impact
upon him of disclosure of his identity in connection with the proceeding
where risk of chilling effect on persons with similar characteristics
vindicating their claims if orders not made –
orders made
Legislation:
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) r 2.32
Cases cited:
Alpert v Commonwealth
[2023] FCA 784
Country Care Group Pty Ltd v Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) (No
[2020] FCAFC 44
(2020) 275 FCR 377
Hogan v Australian Crime Commission
[2010] HCA 21
(2010) 240 CLR 651
Ogawa v President of the Australian Human Rights Commission
[2022] FCAFC 160
294 FCR 221
Roberts-Smith v Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
[2019] FCA 36
General Division
National Practice Area:
Administrative and Constitutional Law and Human Rights
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submissions:
Date of hearing:
Determined on the papers
Counsel for the Applicant:
Dr M Sharpe
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Draddy Legal
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr A Solomon-Bridge
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Sparke Helmore Lawyers
VID 928 of 2025
NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
the grounds specified in
ss 37AG(1)(a)
and (c) of the
Federal Court of
Australia Act 1976
(Cth), and until further order:
(a) the applicant shall, for the purposes of this proceeding, continue to be
known and referred to by the pseudonym “HKW25”;
(b) the disclosure and publication of information that reveals or tends to
reveal the identity of the applicant as the applicant
is hereby prohibited.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
an originating application dated 4 July 2025 and amended on
6 October 2025, the applicant moves for relief under the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
(Cth). That relief
is directed to a decision and certain conduct of the respondent (the
”), which, the applicant complains, inhibits his
participation in the preparation of a “plan of supports” under
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
is trite to observe that the court’s jurisdiction is usually exercised in
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
However, in this case, prior to filing
his originating application, the applicant sought permission to do so under
cover of a pseudonym.
A registrar of the court confirmed that the applicant
would have a pseudonym applied on an interim basis until the issue could be
ventilated at the first case management hearing.
hearing subsequently proceeded before me on 24 September 2025. There,
the applicant pressed an application under
of the Act, supported by
the affidavit of his solicitor, Ms Jennifer Draddy, sworn on
9 July 2025.
in Ms Draddy’s affidavit are the reports of two mental health
professionals who are or have been involved with the
applicant’s mental
health treatment. The first report, being that of psychiatrist Dr Geoff
Thompson dated 23 May 2012, was
provided to a government entity in the
apparent context of a claim by the applicant for compensation. The second
report, being that
of psychologist Ms Elfin Berwick dated
15 February 2023, was provided for the general purpose of explaining
the applicant’s
impairments and how they might impact upon him. Neither
report was addressed—or directly addressed—to the necessity
suppression in this proceeding, nor to any general requirement that the
applicant remain anonymous in the conduct of his affairs.
the hearing, the basis for making an order under
was put in the
following way by the applicant’s counsel:
So, in respect of the affidavit that has been filed in support of the
application, there are two matters that touch upon the need
to protect his
personal safety. One is my instructing solicitor as she deposes in her
affidavit. She is informed that his service
in the defence services may put him
at risk if his identity were made known in the public domain, of course which
would also involve
some description of his previous service...I’m
instructed that he’s concerned that he may be targeted by others;
as far as I can take that in terms of the affidavit, but perhaps
the most pressing issue here, your Honour, is that what this hearing
involve is very sensitive – a very sensitive mental health history will be
made known in the public domain, and, given
his particular condition or his
particular disability, that could trigger further harm having those details
– those very personal
details – in the public domain could worsen
his mental health.
my raising that the evidence in support of such an order did not, at that time,
appear to rise above the level of assertion,
the applicant sought an opportunity
to provide supplementary affidavit material in support of his application. In
the absence of
any objection to that course from the NDIA—which did not
wish to be heard in relation to the question of suppression—I
was inclined
to and did afford the applicant that opportunity. The interim order of the
registrar persisted; and a note was placed
on the court’s file requiring
that any requests for the public inspection of documents on it be referred to my
is now before the court a further affidavit sworn by Ms Draddy on
3 October 2025, together with an affidavit affirmed by the
himself on 10 October 2025. The applicant also filed helpful written
submissions in support of the application. Since
then, the matter has been the
subject of a mediation before a registrar but it remains unresolved.
CONSIDERATION
court’s power to make an order for the suppression of the
applicant’s identity is not to be doubted. It is conferred
of the Act. In making such an order, the court must take into account that a
primary objective of the administration of justice
is to safeguard the public
interest in open justice: the Act,
The grounds upon which such an
order may be made are closed and are enumerated in
Relevantly for
present purposes, those grounds include that such an order is necessary to
prevent prejudice to the proper administration
(s 37AG(1)(a))
and to protect the safety of any person
(s 37AG(1)(c)).
is to be placed on the inclusion within those grounds of the word
“necessary”: see, for example,
Country Care Group Pty Ltd v
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) (No 2)
[2020] FCAFC 44
(2020) 275 FCR 377
(Allsop CJ, Wigney and Abraham JJ). It must be the case that
prejudice to the proper administration of justice cannot be
avoided any other
Ogawa v President of the Australian Human Rights Commission
[2022] FCAFC 160
294 FCR 221
, 228 [29] (Rares, Perry and Hespe JJ)
”). The occasioning, through matters revealed
in the court process, of embarrassment or inconvenience is insufficient, as is
personal sensitivity:
applicant did not, in filing the supplementary material, provide any further
medical evidence in support of the suppression application.
The most relevant
aspects of the evidence of Dr Thomspon and Ms Berwick—which was
to similar effects—may be summarised
as follows.
applicant is a veteran who suffers from significant and debilitating mental
health symptoms, the onset of which is connected to
his service in the
Australian Defence Force in the 1980s and ’90s. He has been diagnosed
with Major Depression, Complex Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder and Simple
Schizophrenia. He has, over the past two decades, suffered from such serious
symptoms as suicidal ideation
(which has led to multiple attempts to end his
life), “extreme” social withdrawal and acute self-neglect. His
beliefs and fear of intrusion on his privacy have previously left him
financially destitute and without food because he would not
complete forms
necessary to obtain government financial support. He has gone long periods
without leaving his home or without having
anybody enter it. He is described as
being easily triggered into a trauma response, which exacerbates his functional
impairments
to such an extent that he cannot complete basic daily tasks without
extensive support. That comes with its own challenges, given
his difficulties
trusting or tolerating other people.
applicant’s prognosis is described as poor. Two of his conditions are
chronic, and his treaters considered that he would
require a high level of
treatment and close supervision for the rest of his life.
his affidavit, the applicant deposes as follows (errors original):
...I now suffer from Chronic Complex Post Traumatic Stress Disorder
) and Chronic Severe Major Depression (
) and five other
mental health comorbidities that further compound and exacerbate these
conditions, which cause me to be in a perpetual
flight or fight state against
suicidal thoughts and having to suppress those thoughts and to act on them on a
daily basis. I have
permanent plans in place on how I can effectively end my
life and have made numerous attempts and been resuscitated. I am in a perpetual
state of distress, depression and hypervigilance.
I am unable to trust another human being. I perceive everyone as an imminent
threat and expect all humans being to betray me at
some stage. I therefore go
to enormous lengths to protect my anonymity and vet anyone I engage with. Going
outside my house for
appointments is only achieved by engaging the skills I
learned in my service with intelligence, which takes great mental effort that
leaves me mentally and physically exhausted as a consequence. I cannot leave my
house to attend appointments or meet anyone in my
support worker...I only go out for essential appointments that cannot be done in
the home such as seeing
my GP and psychologist...
I hold profound fear that if my name is published because of these proceedings,
it is possible for reporters and members of the public
to investigate my service
record and for me to be contacted in relation to my service. I avoid, at all
costs, putting myself in
a position where I can be publicly identified and the
subject of discussion or contact. I only gave evidence at the Royal Commission
into Defence and Veteran Suicide on the condition I remained anonymous.
Since 1993, I have avoided all contact with former lifelong friends from primary
school. Reconnecting with people who knew me before
that year forces a
confrontation with my former self that is deeply destabilising and life
threatening. The contrast between who
I was then and who I have become after
the abuse is so jarring that it triggers severe psychological distress,
including suicidal
ideation. I see it as a death sentence.
For the last two decades I have gone to great lengths to keep myself isolated
from contact or interaction with previous corporate
colleagues, students and
friends. I have no social media presence. I have only survived because I
wilfully and deliberately avoid
human beings unless absolutely imperative. I have no ability to deal with
reaching out to me or to explain my circumstances. Anyone who has known
me would not recognise the person I am today. Contact from
people from my past
would be like putting a cocked loaded gun to my head.
My relationships with each of my siblings has broken down at various stages in
my life and I am utterly estranged from all of them.
I do not want them
not to end my life. My parents
are deceased, and I have no contact with any
family members and do not want any.
My request for a pseudonym is not about my social status or possible
embarrassment it is so I can safely access the legal system
to enforce my
rights. I cannot cope with the fear of being contacted by people I have known,
or by people inquiring about my military
service, or with having the details of
my mental health made public. I know that such exposure would cause my mental
health to further
deteriorate significantly and compel me to make further
attempts on ending my life.
applicant’s evidence engages directly with the impacts of disclosure of
his identity on him, including the threat that that
would pose to his health (if
not, to his life). The harm which he anticipates will be occasioned if his
identity is disclosed, given
its seriousness, need not be probable:
Roberts-Smith v Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
[2019] FCA 36
[16]-[17] (Besanko J). In any event, I accept that it is probable. His
evidence is consistent with presentations that his treaters
describe as
consequences of his mental health conditions. The making of a suppression order
is necessary to protect the applicant’s
it might be implied (and indeed, the applicant submits that it should be), but
the evidence does not go so far as to say that
if the applicant’s identity
is revealed then he will not continue to pursue his case. Evidence to that
effect would likely
s 37AG(1)(a)
of the Act. At any rate, I incline
towards the view that that ground is engaged insofar as it is necessary to
secure for the applicant
safe access to the courts to vindicate the rights that
he says have been trespassed. The present litigation seeks to review
administrative
actions that relate to the supports that the applicant receives
(or hopes to receive) in respect of his disabilities. If, by prosecuting
review in the open, those very disabilities are aggravated—as the evidence
makes clear is very likely—then the proper
administration of justice would
be prejudiced.
Alpert v Commonwealth
[2023] FCA 784
[12], [21]-[25] (Snaden J), I
accepted (after a survey of relevant authority) that the species of prejudice
s 37AG(1)(a)
of the Act is concerned might extend beyond an
instant case. Here, if suppression is not granted, there may well be a chilling
upon the legitimate pursuit of claims by prospective litigants with
serious mental health challenges. The want of anonymity with
which open justice
is necessarily associated may well deter such litigants from seeking to
vindicate claims that are properly to
be made in relation to the administration
of government services of which they are or might be beneficiaries.
formed the view that two of the grounds in
are engaged, I must make
an order under
Hogan v Australian Crime Commission
[2010] HCA 21
240 CLR 651
, 664 [31]-[33] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon and
Kiefel JJ). The question is on what terms it might be made. Those terms
derogate from open justice only to the extent that is
“necessary”:
228 [30] (Rares, Perry and
applicant did not make any submission as to the appropriate duration of a
suppression order. Noting that the medical evidence
is that certain of his
conditions are lifelong and his current presentation has persisted for many
years, it is appropriate that
it be made until further order. Should any party
(or indeed any member of the media or the public) seek that the order be
I will entertain with appropriate haste an application to that
note the import of
of the Act and the inspection facility that,
notwithstanding the relief that I am inclined to grant, will endure in respect
of information
on the court’s file. It may or may not be that additional
relief is to be sought in due course pursuant to r 2.32(3) of the
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth). That can be considered if or when the
occasion to do so arises.
I certify that the preceding nineteen (19)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 13 November 2025
RTF format (345 KB)
Signed PDF/A format