TCXM v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship & Anor [2025] HCATrans 67 (9 October 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 067
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Sydney No S146 of 2025
B e t w e e n
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Second Respondent
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
CANBERRA AND BY VIDEO CONNECTION
ON THURSDAY, 9 OCTOBER 2025, AT
This is hybrid hearing. In accordance with the protocol for
remote hearings, I will announce the appearances for the
MR E.M. NEKVAPIL, SC
appears with
MR C.J. FITZGERALD
remotely for the appellant.
(instructed by Zarifi Lawyers)
MR B.D. KAPLAN, SC
appears in Court for the respondents. (instructed by Australian Government
HIS HONOUR:
Mr Kaplan, I believe this is your
application.
Your Honour, the Commonwealth moves
on its interlocutory application dated 1 October 2025.
In support of that application are
three affidavits, which I propose to read.
HIS HONOUR:
The first is the affidavit of Shan Strugnell
affirmed on 29 September 2025. For the avoidance of doubt,
your Honour, that is the
open of affidavit of
Ms Strugnell.
HIS HONOUR:
Yes, I have that, and I should
ask: is there any objection to that open affidavit,
Mr Nekvapil?
MR NEKVAPIL:
No objection,
your Honour.
HIS HONOUR:
Thank you. Yes, I have that, and
I have read that affidavit.
your Honour. The second affidavit is that of Michael Thomas, affirmed
on 30 September 2025. I read that affidavit.
HIS HONOUR:
Mr Nekvapil?
MR NEKVAPIL:
No objection,
your Honour.
HIS HONOUR:
Yes, thank you, I have read that
The third affidavit is that of Mark
Tattersall, affirmed on 30 September 2025. I read that
HIS HONOUR:
Mr Nekvapil?
No objection, your Honour.
HIS HONOUR:
Thank you, I have read that affidavit.
your Honour. Your Honour will have seen from the interlocutory
application that we seek a number of orders.
HIS HONOUR:
Could your Honour take up the interlocutory
application.
HIS HONOUR:
Your Honour will see that in paragraph 1, the Commonwealth has sought
a suppression order in respect of information that is described
the Sensitive Commonwealth Information –
which in turn is defined on page 1 of the interlocutory application,
which in turn directs the reader to annexure A in the application.
your Honour goes to annexure A, your Honour will see various
parts of the reasons for judgment of the primary judge, Justice
identified in the table in annexure A.
What is proposed your Honour
is a suppression order in respect of that application prohibiting disclosure of
the information except
for disclosure to and between the parties and to the
Court, and so ‑ ‑ ‑
HIS HONOUR:
When you say “in respect of that application” do you mean in respect
of what is defined as the sensitive information?
your Honour.
HIS HONOUR:
intended to say in respect of that information. Your Honour sees that we
do not seek orders that would prevent the parties from
using the information in
these proceedings.
HIS HONOUR:
Yes, I see that, and your
preference is for order 1 rather than order 2; order 1 being more
restrictive of the extent of disclosure.
Is that correct?
That is so, your Honour, for the reasons given by the three
witnesses in their affidavits made in support of the interlocutory
application.
HIS HONOUR:
Yes, I see.
The Sensitive Commonwealth Information is limited to parts of
his Honour’s reasons for judgment, and we anticipate,
Honour, that this will be the only – that is to say, the
reasons for judgment of Justice Moshinsky – will be the only
document that will be included in the cause removed book that contains
information of a sensitive nature.
HIS HONOUR:
Yes. Am I right
in understanding that the form of the suppression order that you
seek – or at least the scope of the suppression
order that you
seek – mirrors that which was made by Justice Moshinsky
on 2 June 2025?
Yes, your Honour.
Including in respect of the duration of the suppression order. I was proposing
to come to this after taking
your Honour through the interlocutory
application as being one reason why your Honour would be persuaded that it
is appropriate to
make an order.
HIS HONOUR:
That is to ensure
consistency in the orders that are being made within the same matter at
different stages of its determination,
In circumstances where the procedure that was adopted by his Honour has not
been challenged by the appellant in this Court.
Your Honour made
observations on this topic in
, which I was proposing
to take your Honour to if necessary.
HIS HONOUR:
forgotten that I had opined on this topic there.
So, your Honour, that summarises paragraphs 1 and 2. As to
paragraph 3 and paragraph 4 in the interlocutory application,
are ancillary suppression orders that would be made in relation to the
transcript of the hearing of the appeal.
HIS HONOUR:
Orders 5 and 6 deal with the
Commonwealth’s lawyers being notified if the Court considers that access
might granted to a
non‑party to any document containing the Sensitive
Commonwealth Information. Paragraph 6 also refers to that the duration
the suppression orders sought by the Commonwealth and as mentioned to
your Honour a little earlier – that mirrors the order
made by Justice Moshinsky.
HIS HONOUR:
Although I think it
makes more explicit that the time specified in order 6 is subject to
variation by the Court.
Yes, of course.
Your Honour will have seen that the orders are sought on the grounds
identified in section 77RF(1)(a) and (1)(b).
HIS HONOUR:
As to (1)(a), we rely on that ground as that
this is a case where, as just discussed, suppression orders were made by
Justice Moshinsky
in respect of the same information, and that is important
context, adapting what your Honour said in
v The Queen
(2016) 90 ALJR 452
, at paragraph 22.
Court to disclose or permit the disclosure of the sensitive information
identified in the application would, in our submission,
undermine the efficacy
of the existing orders made by Justice Moshinsky. That in turn would have
the potential to prejudice the
proper course of the administration of justice in
accordance with the procedure that his Honour adopted, which –
as I mentioned
earlier, your Honour – has not been challenged by
the appellant in this course.
We otherwise say that the information
engages international relations considerations, in that disclosure of the
information is likely
to harm Australia’s bilateral relationship with
Nauru, and more specifically its ability to pursue its border protection and
foreign policy objectives. Therefore, in our submission, the sensitive
information engages both of the grounds in 77RF(1)(a) and
particular reasons are those set out in the three affidavits, your Honour.
I could take your Honour through each of the
affidavits, should
your Honour require persuasion.
HIS HONOUR:
I have read
those affidavits, and I understand the claim that is made by reference to the
sections that you have identified. I
do not need you to take me through them.
I take it that you do not seek to rely on any further evidence for the purpose
application.
That is so. It is only if
your Honour were not persuaded, having regard to the open affidavits, that
the suppression orders sought
by the Commonwealth should be made that we would
invite your Honour to consider the confidential evidence of
Ms Strugnell. Our preference
is to avoid that course.
your Honour is persuaded, having regard to the three open affidavits, that
there is a proper basis for the making of the orders
sought by the Commonwealth,
then we are content to rely on that evidence and not trouble your Honour
with the confidential evidence
of Ms Strugnell.
HIS HONOUR:
I understand that position. Thank you, Mr Kaplan.
If the Court pleases.
HIS HONOUR:
Mr Nekvapil, what is your
attitude to this application?
MR NEKVAPIL:
Your Honour, our
client neither consents nor opposes, which is consistent with the position that
was taken before Justice Moshinsky
below at the equivalent application
HIS HONOUR:
Yes, thank you. Well, I will deal with this
application and then there will be some timetabling issues to attend
On 14 June 2025, TCXM appealed to the Full Court of the Federal
Court from the judgment of Justice Moshinsky in
TCXM v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] FCA 540.
29 September 2025, on the application of the Attorney‑General of the
Commonwealth and with the consent of the parties, I
ordered that the appeal be
removed into this Court under
section 40(1)
Judiciary Act
(Cth). At the same, I made directions designed to have the appeal
ready for hearing in the December sittings of this Court.
directions included provision for the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
and the Commonwealth of Australia, as respondents
to the removed appeal, to seek
a suppression or non‑publication order and a direction for an open and
closed cause removed
book. The parties, I am told, intend to include a redacted
version of the judgment of Justice Moshinsky in an open cause removed
and to include an unredacted version of the judgment in a closed cause removed
Before me today in open court is the foreshadowed application for
a suppression order, or alternatively for a non‑publication
order, over
the information contained in those parts of the unredacted version of the
judgment as have been excised from the redacted
version of the judgment,
described as the “Sensitive Information”.
The application
for an order under
section 77RE(1)(b)(iv)
Judiciary Act
been made by the Commonwealth under
section 77RG(1)(a)
, on the grounds set
section 77(RF)(1)(a)
and (b) that such an order is necessary either
or both to prevent prejudice to the proper administration of justice or to
prejudice to the interests of the Commonwealth in relation to national
or international security.
The notice of the hearing, as posted on the
Court’s website on 8 October 2025, having stated that the
hearing was to involve
an application for suppression orders consistently with
the practice outlined by me in
Obeid v The Queen (No 2)
[2016] HCA 10
paragraph 10, I am satisfied that persons entitled by
section 77RG(2)
Judiciary Act
to appear and be heard on the application have had
adequate notice of it.
By the application, the Commonwealth does not
seek to prevent disclosure of the unredacted version of the judgment to TCXM,
representatives or the Court. The application is rather limited to
seeking the prevention of broader disclosure. The form of the
suppression order
sought in this Court substantially replicates the effect of an order made by
Justice Moshinsky in respect of the
unredacted version of the judgment
on 2 June 2025 under the equivalent provision of
section 37AF
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) on the equivalent grounds
section 37AG(1)(a)
and (b) of that Act.
The application
is supported by three affidavits. The first is an affidavit of
Ms Shan Strugnell, who is the Assistant Secretary,
Offshore Programs
and Strategy within the Department of Home Affairs. The second is an affidavit
of Mr Michael Thomas, who is the
Deputy Secretary, Immigration
Compliance within the same department. The third is an affidavit of
Mr Mark Tattersall, who is the
First Assistant Secretary of the
Polynesia, Micronesia and Development Division, Office of the Pacific, within
the Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade.
Having read and considered
those affidavits, I am satisfied that the disclosure of the “Sensitive
Information” contained
in paragraph 67 of the unredacted version of
the judgment would be likely to impact Australia’s relationship with the
of Nauru, and that the disclosure of the other “Sensitive
Information” contained in the unredacted version of the judgment
likely to be seen by the government of Nauru as a breach of confidentiality in
the course of the international negotiations
which led to the exchange of
letters between the Minister for Home Affairs and the President of the Republic
of Nauru referred to
in the judgment as the “Interim
Arrangement”.
I am further satisfied that such disclosure would
risk adversely affecting the level of cooperation and assistance Australia
from the Republic of Nauru in respect of Australia’s border
security arrangements and operations. I am therefore satisfied
that the making
of a suppression order in substantially the terms sought is necessary to prevent
prejudice to the interests of the
Commonwealth in relation to national and
international security.
Given that disclosure beyond the terms of the
suppression order sought from this Court would contravene the continuing effect
the order made by Justice Moshinsky under
section 37AF
Federal Court of Australia Act
and consistently with what I said in
Obeid (No 2)
at paragraph 22, I am also satisfied that the adoption
of a consistent approach to the suppression of the “Sensitive
Information”
is required to prevent prejudice to the proper administration
of justice.
I will therefore make the suppression order that is sought
in the form in which it is sought, noting that the duration of the order
specified under
section 77RI
Judiciary Act
is expressed to be
subject to the possibility of variation by further order, which of course will
be capable of being made on application
by any party or any person referred to
section 77RG(2).
The orders that I therefore make and that are
appropriate to be read out onto the transcript are as follows:
Interpretation
In these orders:
Sensitive Information
The highlighted information contained in Confidential Exhibit SS-1 to the
affidavit of Shan Strugnell affirmed 29 September 2025,
information contained in the unredacted version of the judgment
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] FCA 540
located in the following paragraphs:
[44]-[45], [48], [51], [55]-[56], [67], [69]-[73], [115], [135], [138], [140],
[175] and [177].
Permitted persons
of this Court
Court staff (including transcription service providers)
representatives of the parties instructed in these proceedings
or proposed witnesses in these proceedings, and
Commonwealth
officers acting in the course of their duties.
section 77RE(1)(b)(iv)
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth), on the
section 77RF(1)(a)
section 77RF(1)(b)
, there shall be
no disclosure of the Sensitive Information, by publication or otherwise, except
to and between permitted persons.
Commonwealth, via its legal representatives, shall be provided a transcript of
any hearing in these proceedings. Upon receipt
of the transcript by the
Commonwealth, the Commonwealth shall have 48 hours or two business days
(whichever is greater), or such
further period as the Court permits, to apply to
the Court for suppression or non‑publication orders in respect of any
of the transcript. During that period, the transcript shall not be
disseminated to any person other than to a permitted person.
the Commonwealth applies for suppression or non‑publication orders in
respect of a transcript of the proceedings pursuant
to order 3, that
transcript shall not be disseminated to any person other than to a permitted
person until the Court determines that
application.
the Court receives any application by a non‑party for access to any
documents containing Sensitive Information and the Court
considers that access
might be granted subject to hearing from the parties:
Commonwealth is to be given notice that an application has been made,
identifying the material sought, by email to the following
email addresses:
finn.lowe@ags.gov.au, kristy.alexander@ags.gov.au,
madisen.scott@ags.gov.au.
3 business days, or such further period as the Court permits, of being given
notice, the Commonwealth is to notify the Court
whether it objects to access
being granted and, briefly, the reason why.
section 77RI
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth), unless the Court
otherwise orders, orders 1 to 4 continue for a period of 10 years
from the date of these orders.
Mr Kaplan, does that cover
everything in the appropriate form?
your Honour.
HIS HONOUR:
Mr Nekvapil, do you have any
comment on those orders in that form?
MR NEKVAPIL:
No comment,
your Honour, no.
HIS HONOUR:
Thank you. Now, there is a
timetabling question as I understand?
your Honour, we provided this morning to the Registry some proposed consent
HIS HONOUR:
sure whether your Honour has had a chance to consider those.
I have received them. Am I right that they are heading towards a
December hearing?
HIS HONOUR:
Yes. Are there other proceedings in the Court that may be related to these
proceedings which would be appropriately heard together?
I will just check that, your Honour.
We are not aware of any,
your Honour, that it would be appropriate to be heard together with these
proceedings, but may we reflect
on the question posed by
your Honour.
HIS HONOUR:
do not have any instructions
HIS HONOUR:
take that on board. I am not going to be setting the matter down in the
December sittings, but I can see where the parties
are heading. The existence
of any related matter would be something I would need to take into
Yes. I understand, your Honour. We
have proposed that the open and closed joint cause removed book be filed
by 17 October.
HIS HONOUR:
Our friends have indicated that a book of further materials may be filed by the
24th, and so we have agreed that by the
HIS HONOUR:
not need to take me through the detail of this, unless there is something
contentious about it.
Nothing contentious,
your Honour. Only to make the observation that we have proposed in
paragraph 4, that any further application
for suppression or
non‑publication orders be made by 27 October. It is not yet
clear whether the appellant will include in
his book of further materials any
information over which such orders might be sought by the Commonwealth. It may
be that no such
application is made by the Commonwealth, but we will not know
until we receive the appellant’s list of documents on the
HIS HONOUR:
Yes. All right, I understand that. Thank
you. Mr Nekvapil, what do you have to say about these proposed
directions?
MR NEKVAPIL:
They are by agreement,
your Honour. Perhaps if I could just make one observation, which I think
in practical terms will not create
any difficulty, but I just point
out – partly for my learned friend’s benefit – that
if we were, in accordance
with order 3, to file and serve a book of further
materials containing material of the kind that was suppressed by
Justice Moshinsky
and/or in our submissions, which are due to filed the
same day, refer to material of that kind, we would be filing them in the Court
file in circumstances where the application would not be caught by the order
that your Honour just made about access to the Court
file, and the
suppression application would not come until the following Monday.
there would just be a very short period where documents may be filed and on the
Court file but not covered by protective order,
but I just raise that for our
learned friend’s consideration. I would think that, provided the Court
were alert to that and
did not grant access in the intervening short period,
then there could not be any difficulty with it.
HIS HONOUR:
Well, there may be another way of doing it. You are talking about information
that would already be covered by one or other of
the suppression orders that
Justice Moshinsky has made – I think he has made three
altogether – is that right?
MR NEKVAPIL:
HIS HONOUR:
It would be highly inappropriate that the
disclosure of information that would contravene one of his Honour’s
orders would
occur in a filing in this Court. Is there another way of dealing
with it, Mr Nevapil? Can you, if absolutely necessary, file a
version of your proposed submissions, providing a copy to the
respondents?
MR NEKVAPIL:
We can do that in terms of the
submissions. I suppose with the book of materials, which is the matter which
would then be subject
to the suppression application on the following Monday, if
we do decide to rely on – for example – discovered
or affidavit evidence or transcript which was before his Honour,
then that material would be in that further book of materials, which
need to be filed. If what
your Honour ‑ ‑ ‑
There is a much easier way of doing that. Why do you not serve
the book of further materials on 24 October and file it after any
of suppression or non‑publication order being resolved.
Yes. Thank you, your Honour.
HIS HONOUR:
So, let us work out how we incorporate that into your proposed orders. In
order 3, we cross out the words “and serve”.
And “file and”?
HIS HONOUR:
sorry, yes. “File and” with the “serve”, and then what
do we add where?
MR NEKVAPIL:
Perhaps a new
HIS HONOUR:
The appellant file?
After the determination of any application for a suppression
order, the appellant file.
HIS HONOUR:
Yes, thank you. I will
work something out.
Your Honour, perhaps within
a certain number of days of determination of any application for suppression or
non‑publication
HIS HONOUR:
Yes. What day of the
week is 28 October? Does anyone know?
MR NEKVAPIL:
that is a Tuesday, your Honour.
HIS HONOUR:
right, I think I have worked it out. So, the proposed directions are as
respondents file and serve an open and closed joint cause removed book
by 4.00 pm on 17 October 2025.
appellant serve on the respondents a list of documents proposed for inclusion in
any book of further materials by 4.00 pm on 22
appellant serve any book of further materials by 4.00 pm
on 24 October 2025.
respondents file and serve any further application seeking suppression or
non‑publication orders by 4.00 pm on 27 October
two days of the determination of any such application or by 4.00 pm
on 29 October 2025, whichever is the later, the appellant
book of further materials.
respondents file and serve any book of further materials by 4.00 pm
on 21 November 2025.
satisfactory?
It is, your Honour. Could I just
clarify the question that your Honour posed earlier about other
HIS HONOUR:
your Honour have in mind matters presently before the High Court
HIS HONOUR:
I see. We are not aware of any,
your Honour, but we will take on board your Honour’s
HIS HONOUR:
If anything does come to your attention
that might have a bearing on the issues in this case and the appropriate use of
to resolve any potential overlapping issues, please bring that to the
attention of the Registry in a communication to which Mr Nekvapil
Of course, your Honour.
As soon as possible, please.
will be done.
HIS HONOUR:
MR NEKVAPIL:
Your Honour, I am sorry, just in terms of order 5 that
your Honour just proposed, I wonder whether your Honour might add to
any unredacted submissions by our party, because if we do file on the
Friday, 24 October a redacted form, then we would seek to file
unredacted submissions at the
HIS HONOUR:
will add those words:
two days of the determination of any such application or by 4.00 pm
on 29 October 2025, whichever is the later, the appellant
book of further materials and any unredacted submissions.
Thank you, your Honour. Yes.
HIS HONOUR:
Thank you. Have we covered everything, Mr Kaplan?
Yes, your Honour.
HIS HONOUR:
Mr Nekvapil?
MR NEKVAPIL:
One other matter that I just
wanted to mention for the Court’s attention is that it may be that we seek
consent to a minor
amendment to the amended notice of appeal, just to
seek – as an alternative form of remedy – remittal to the
Court. Whereas at the moment the remedy sought in the proposed orders
is an injunction by the High Court, and so that is a matter
we will take up with
our learned friends and do through the Federal Court. I just wanted to raise
that as a minor alteration we
might seek to make.
HIS HONOUR:
am not sure you can do it through the Federal Court. The matter has been
removed. If you want to do it, can you do it now?
It seems a very minor
MR NEKVAPIL:
Yes. I can. I can tell
your Honour the form of the proposed amendment. It would be –
if your Honour can go right to the
end of the orders sought, which starts
on page 7 of the document.
HIS HONOUR:
And then if your Honour goes down to – (g) was
struck out:
A writ of habeas corpus directed to the Respondents.
HIS HONOUR:
I am sorry, did you say it was struck
MR NEKVAPIL:
It is struck out. Your Honour should
have a strike through (g):
A writ of habeas corpus directed to the Respondents.
HIS HONOUR:
I am not sure I am looking at the right version of
the document. Bear with me. I am looking at a version that is
dated 14 June
MR NEKVAPIL:
That is the original
notice of appeal. There is an amended notice of appeal.
Yes, I think I may have that.
MR NEKVAPIL:
you, your Honour.
HIS HONOUR:
Yes, I see, it is struck
through. Yes.
MR NEKVAPIL:
And so, we would insert just above
that a new (g).
HIS HONOUR:
MR NEKVAPIL:
Which would say: alternatively, (2)(d)(ix) and (f), the matter be remitted to
the Federal Court of Australia.
HIS HONOUR:
Do you have a
difficulty with that, Mr Kaplan?
your Honour, I can indicate that a short time ago I received instructions
to consent to the proposed further amended notice
Yes. Well, the appellant has leave to file a further amended
notice of appeal incorporating the amendment just indicated.
HIS HONOUR:
In that document,
Mr Nekvapil, you can delete entirely those parts of the original version of
the notice of appeal that have been
struck through.
MR NEKVAPIL:
HIS HONOUR:
Otherwise, we will not know where we are
trying to read through a multiple‑amended document.
HIS HONOUR:
That covers
everything?
Yes, your Honour.
Thank you, your Honour. Yes.
HIS HONOUR:
Very well. The Court will adjourn.
AT 10.10 AM THE
MATTER WAS ADJOURNED
RTF format (1.34 MB)
Signed PDF/A format