Warren and National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS) [2025] ARTA 2412 (13 November 2025)
Warren and National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS) [2025] ARTA 2412
(13 November 2025)
Applicant/s:
Eric Warren
Respondent:
National Disability Insurance Agency
Tribunal Number:
General Member J Papalia
The Tribunal affirms the decision under review.
Statement made on 13 November 2025 at 3:11pm
NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE SCHEME – access request –
whether access criteria under s 21 met – disability requirements
physical impairments – neurological impairments – chronic low back
pain – whether substantially reduced
functional capacity – mobility
and self-care – whether likely to require support under the NDIS for their
eligible for funded aged care services – early
intervention requirements – decision affirmed
LEGISLATION
Aged Care Act 2024
Aged Care Rules 2025
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Becoming a Participant) Rules
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
Social Security Act 1994
Boucher v Australian Securities Commission
[1996] FCA 1523
(1996) 41 ALD 274
National Disability Insurance Agency v Foster
[2023] FCAFC 11
(2023) 295 FCR 521
National Disability Insurance Agency v Lampard
[2025] FCAFC 139
Burrows and CEO, National Disability Insurance Agency
Re Foster and National Disability Insurance Agency
[2025] ARTA 718
Re Peters and National Disability Insurance Agency
[2025] ARTA
Re Spencer and National Disability Insurance Agency
[2024] AATA
Statement of
Applicant, Mr Warren, is a 65-year-old male who seeks access to the National
Disability Insurance Scheme (
). He commenced that process in April
2023, when he was 62.
accepted that the Applicant has a fractured lower spine, which causes several
impairments, including ‘chronic low back
dispute before the Tribunal is whether:
(a) these impairments are ‘permanent’;
(b) whether the impairments result in ‘substantially reduced functional
capacity’ to undertake ‘mobility’
and ‘self-care’;
(c) whether the Applicant is ‘likely to require support under the NDIS for
[his] lifetime'
the following reasons, the Tribunal has found that the Applicant has permanent
impairments which result in substantially reduced
functional capacity. However,
the Tribunal has concluded that the Applicant’s supports are more
appropriately funded under
the aged care system. Accordingly, the Tribunal has
determined that the correct or preferable decision is to
reviewable decision.
THE HEARING AND THE EVIDENCE
Applicant initially appeared before the Tribunal on 2 and 3 July 2025. He was
represented by Ms Claire Faulkner of Legal Aid WA.
The Respondent was
represented by Ms Jennifer Flinn of counsel, instructed by Moray & Agnew
following documents were marked as exhibits:
(a) Joint and Supplemental Tender Bundles (543 pages combined) (
), including the parties’ respective Statements of Facts, Issues and
Contentions (
Tribunal reserved its decision at the conclusion of the two-day hearing on
3 July 2025 and set a programme for the parties’
submissions to be done in writing.
his closing submissions, the Applicant sought to adduce new evidence without
leave. This new evidence consisted of a journal
and documents taken from
the Department of Health (WA) website regarding physiotherapy services available
at various departmental
business units in metropolitan Perth (and their
geographical areas of coverage).
Respondent objected to that new evidence being received by the
Applicant subsequently sought leave to adduce the new evidence and an extract of
an email chain between Ms Faulkner and the Applicant
dated 12 February 2025
regarding the preparation of his witness
He also sought leave to
adduce fresh evidence,
Affidavit of Mikaela Rose English affirmed 7 August 2025 regarding her
observations of the Tribunal hearing on 2 July 2025
and transport
arrangements made for the Applicant.
Tribunal held an interlocutory hearing on 22 August 2025 regarding the further
evidence. At this hearing, the Applicant abandoned
the application for leave to
adduce the English Affidavit. He subsequently abandoned reliance on the email
the substantive hearing of the review, the Tribunal took oral evidence from:
(a) the Applicant;
(b) Ms Rebecca Ann Thompson, occupational therapist;
(c) Ms Claudia Di Lazzaro, occupational therapist; and
(d) Prof Eric John Visser, specialist medical practitioner.
Tribunal heard evidence from another health professional, Mr Eshan Shona Pal
Thomson, physiotherapist, on 2 July 2025. However,
when questions were raised
to rely on it.
parties accepted that the only relevant part of the evidence given by Mr Pal
Thomson was the fact of the Applicant’s attendance
at physiotherapy
sessions at Enhance Physiotherapy in
Applecross.
LEAVE SHOULD BE GRANTED FOR THE APPLICANT TO RE-OPEN HIS CASE
Tribunal has a discretion to allow a party to re-open their case and to adduce
further evidence after it has reserved its
This is reflected in the
Common Procedures Practice Direction 2024
Practice Direction
which provides that the Tribunal ‘will not normally permit’ the
tender of any evidence which an opposing party has
not been give advance notice
of, and that permission to adduce evidence post-hearing must be sought from the
Tribunal absent which
such material will ‘not usually be taken into
questions for the Tribunal in exercising the discretion to allow a party to
re-open their case are:
(a) whether the proposed further evidentiary material is relevant and probative
of the issues to be decided;
(b) whether the other party has been given an opportunity to respond to that
material; and
(c) ultimately, whether, as a matter of fairness, the request to adduce further
evidence should be granted.
this context, ‘fairness’ includes ‘the public interest in the
finality of litigation’ and whether allowing
such material to be tendered
post-hearing would best achieve the Tribunal’s statutory objectives.
Applicant relied on the decision of Justice Northrop in
Boucher v Australian Securities Commission
[1996] FCA 1523
(1996) 41 ALD 274
, where his Honour held (at 280) that the Australian Securities
Commission, as an administrative decision-maker, was not bound by
governing re-opening of a hearing before a court. It was put by the Applicant
that the documents sought to be adduced are
publicly available documents and
that there was no real opportunity to put them to any of the witnesses,
particularly Prof Visser.
It was conceded that any failure to put these
documents, or to apply for an adjournment, was the fault of counsel.
Respondent relied on the analysis of Senior Member Buxton in
Re Spencer and National Disability Insurance
[2024] AATA 3507
Tribunal is not satisfied that it should grant the Applicant leave to adduce the
journal article or the Department of Health documents.
First, the applicant was
given a reasonable opportunity to present his case. The matter was commenced in
August 2023, and, at all
material times, he was either represented by a
disability advocate or by Legal Aid. Second, the re-opening of the hearing to
a journal article and contested factual evidence to be adduced without
this being put to any witness would not be consistent with
the Tribunal’s
statutory objectives; nor would it be appropriate to re-list the matter for
further hearing for this to occur.
Third, the evidence is ‘new
evidence’ and could have been obtained and adduced with reasonable
diligence. There is no
mistake or misapprehension as to each party’s case,
because this was clearly articulated in their respective
LEGAL FRAMEWORK
question for determination by the Tribunal is whether the Applicant meets the
‘access criteria’ found in
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
statutory framework governing the NDIS was substantially amended from
3 October 2024. However, those legislative amendments only
access requests made on or after that
21(1) of the NDIS Act, as of 20 April 2023 (when the access request was made),
provided that:
person meets the access criteria if:
(a) the CEO is satisfied that the person meets the age requirements (see section
(b) the CEO is satisfied that, at the time of considering the request, the
person meets the residence requirements (see section 23);
(c) the CEO is satisfied that, at the time of considering the request:
(i) the person meets the disability requirements (see section 24); or
(ii) the person meets the early intervention requirements (see section 25).
parties agree, and the Tribunal accepts, that the Applicant meets the age and
residence requirements.
the avoidance of doubt, the Tribunal finds that s 22 of the NDIS Act confines
the Tribunal’s attention to a particular time,
being ‘when the
access request in relation to the person was
This view is
reinforced by r 3.1 of the
National Disability
Insurance Scheme (Becoming a Participant) Rules 2016
access request is ‘made’ to the Respondent (not the
and must meet the
content requirements set out in s 19(1) of the NDIS Act, including being in the
form approved by the Chief Executive
Officer of the Respondent (if any). In this
context, ‘made’ means
‘dispatched’.
Applicant made his access request to the Respondent, on the approved application
form (including with endorsement by his treating
medical practitioner), on or
At that time, he was under 65 years of
There were also no
additional age requirements for the Applicant found in r 3.2 and sch A to the
Access Rules.
delegate found, and the Tribunal accepts, that the Applicant meets the residence
requirements.
dispute between the parties is whether the Applicant meets the ‘disability
requirements’, and, if not, whether he
meets the ‘early intervention
requirements.’
24 of the NDIS Act (in April 2023) provided that:
person meets the disability requirements if:
(a) the person has a disability that is attributable to one or more
intellectual, cognitive, neurological, sensory or physical impairments
person has one or more impairments to which a psychosocial disability is
attributable; and
(b) the impairment or impairments are, or are likely to be, permanent; and
(c) the impairment or impairments result in substantially reduced functional
capacity to undertake one or more of the following activities:
(iv) mobility;
(v) self‑care;
(d) the impairment or impairments affect the person’s capacity for social
or economic participation; and
(e) the person is likely to require support under the National Disability
Insurance Scheme for the person’s lifetime.
the purposes of subsection (1), an impairment or impairments that vary in
intensity may be permanent, and the person is likely
to require support under
the National Disability Insurance Scheme for the person’s lifetime,
despite the variation.
the purposes of subsection (1), an impairment or impairments that are episodic
or fluctuating may be taken to be permanent, and
the person may be taken to be
likely to require support under the National Disability Insurance Scheme for the
person’s lifetime,
despite the episodic or fluctuating nature of the
impairments.
(3) does not limit subsection (2).
the Tribunal’s findings with respect to s 24(1)(e) of the NDIS Act, it is
only necessary to refer to the following exclusion
in the early intervention
requirements found s 25 of the NDIS Act (as in force in April 2023):
subsections (1) and (2), the person does not meet the
early intervention
requirements
if the CEO is satisfied that early intervention support for the
person is not most appropriately funded or provided through the National
Disability Insurance Scheme, and is more appropriately funded or provided
through other general systems of service delivery or support
services offered by
a person, agency or body, or through systems of service delivery or support
services offered:
(a) as part of a universal service obligation; or
(b) in accordance with reasonable adjustments required under a law dealing with
discrimination on the basis of disability.
(original emphasis)
Applicant must satisfy the Tribunal that he meets these legislative
requirements.
These requirements
are ‘cumulative’.
The focus in addressing each criterion is ‘not the person’s
disability, nor the diagnoses given to a person- but rather
what are the
impairments
experienced by a person which may require supports so that
the person can participate in all aspects of personal and community
‘impairment’ involves ‘the loss or damage to a physical,
sensory or mental
phrase ‘permanent’ in s 24(1)(b) of the NDIS Act means
‘enduring’.
impairment may ‘endure’ even if it is not stable, or it fluctuates
in intensity and impact.
5 of the Access Rules informs the Tribunal’s assessment of the statutory
criteria by:
(a) confirming that an impairment that varies in intensity may be permanent, and
may mean that the person is likely to require lifetime
support despite the
variation (rr 5.2, 5.5);
(b) providing that an ‘impairment is, or is likely to be, permanent
if there are no known, available and appropriate evidence-based
clinical, medical or other treatments that would be likely to remedy
impairment’ (r 5.4) (emphasis added);
(c) observing that
an impairment may require medical treatment and review before a determination
can be made about whether the impairment is permanent
or likely to be permanent.
The impairment is, or is likely to be, permanent
if the impairment
does not require further medical treatment or review in order for its permanence
or likely permanency to be demonstrated
(even though the impairment may continue
to be treated and reviewed after this has been demonstrated)’ [(r 5.6);
(d) observing that if ‘an impairment is of a degenerative nature, the
impairment is, or is likely to be, permanent if medical
or other treatment would
not, or would be unlikely to, improve the condition’ (r 5.7).
same part of the Access Rules also provides useful (and binding) guidance on
when an impairment results in substantially reduced
functional capacity, as
5.8 An impairment results in substantially reduced functional capacity of a
person to undertake one or more of the relevant activities—communication,
social interaction, learning, mobility, self-care, self-management (see
paragraph 5.1(c))—if its result is that:
(a) the person is unable to participate effectively or completely in the
activity, or to perform tasks or actions required to undertake
or participate
effectively or completely in the activity, without assistive technology,
equipment (other than commonly used items
such as glasses) or home
modifications; or
(b) the person usually requires assistance (including physical assistance,
guidance, supervision or prompting) from other people
to participate in the
activity or to perform tasks or actions required to undertake or participate in
the activity; or
(c) the person is unable to participate in the activity or to perform tasks or
actions required to undertake or participate in the
activity, even with
assistive technology, equipment, home modifications or assistance from another
the Respondent has published policy guidelines on access
The Tribunal is
authorised, but not bound, to give that policy guidance
THE APPLICANT MEETS THE DISABILITY REQUIREMENTS
Disability attributable to one or more intellectual, cognitive,
neurological, or sensory, physical impairments, or impairments to
psychosocial disability is attributable
23 July 1987, Mr Warren (then 27) fell from a scaffold at
The fall from height
caused ‘a wedge fracture of the L1 vertebral body with sensory disturbance
in the right S1
dermatome.’
‘sensory disturbance’ was reported to have resolved by August 1988,
and the Applicant then considered to be ‘fit
then, the Applicant has suffered CLBP. He has been in receipt of a disability
support pension (
) since February 1997. The Tribunal was told that a
forensic choice was made not to adduce evidence relevant to that DSP,
notwithstanding
the potential relevance of any assessments made against
s 94 of the
Social Security Act 1994
spine magnetic resonance imaging (
) was conducted in May
and January
The Tribunal notes the
findings of those MRI reports, including the ‘stable appearance of
significant L1 anterior wedge compression
fracture’. It was also reported
that the Applicant had ‘mid to lower thoracic spine mild spondylotic
degenerative disc
disease’ in July
Computed Tomography (
) scan was conducted in November 2022, which
confirmed that the Applicant had ‘chronic anterior wedge compression
fracture of
the L1 verterbra’, which was stable, and multilevel minor
degenerative disc disease.
Radiofrequency
) (or ‘spinal nerve blocks’) were performed in
November 2022 and January 2023.
The ‘clinical indication’ recorded by the radiologist for each
procedure was that:
low back pain. No response to physiotherapy and several epidural injections.
Chronic wedge compression fracture of L1 relating
to prior trauma 1987. Absence
of radicular pain. CT lumbar spine 15 November
CT-guided facet joint injection was performed in July
Warren was reviewed by the Respondent’s independent expert, Prof Visser,
in February 2024 at his consultation rooms in
Professor Visser confirms
the diagnosis of CLBP associated with the L1 wedge vertebral
He observed
‘chronic musculoskeletal pain’, ‘chronic post trauma
pain’, ‘nociplastic pain (central
nervous system pain
amplification)’ and that the Applicant’s low back pain was worse
with sitting for ten minutes and
that ‘walking one suburban block is [the]
level of endurance re back pain’.
Professor Visser referred to
the Applicant’s previous medication and treatment, including analgesia,
physiotherapy and spinal
He thought these were
appropriate treatments,
noted that it was ‘not clear’ how physiotherapy affects the
Applicant’s physical functioning but this was reported
to reduce the back
pain for approximately one to two
He confirmed in his report
and in oral evidence to the Tribunal that the Applicant’s CLBP is
When asked whether
there were any other appropriate, evidence-based clinical, medical or other
treatment options that would likely
remedy, alleviate or improve the symptoms of
the Applicant’s CLBP, he said:
this time there are no other treatments I would recommend, except for
to a physiotherapist weekly for pain relief, maintaining spinal muscle core
strength, and also hydrotherapy
. I recommend this be trailed for 9 months,
with the proviso that the patient and physiotherapist keep a diary of pain and
gains (sitting and walking endurance in particular) during this
treatment course. The benefits of physiotherapy should then be re-assessed.
also recommend review by a spinal orthopedic surgeon to ascertain the
biomechanical status of his thoracolumbar spine, particularly
the site of L1
vertebral facture, and to exclude new spinal pathology related to his ongoing
low back pain. A thoracolumbar MRO scan
would be required for such an
assessment.
cannot suggest a prognosis regarding the effects of otherwise of the treatments
above. The report in the T documents by Jordan Podesta
physiotherapist are
thorough, evidence based and some pain-related outcomes are being measured,
including the Orebro Musculoskeletal
Pain Questionnaire.
(original emphasis)
were two functional capacity assessments undertaken in April 2024 and January
2025, respectively.
first was conducted by the Respondent’s independent occupational
therapist, Ms Di Lazzaro.
(a) It was observed by Ms Di Lazzaro in respect of mobility that:
(i) Mr Warren could walk independently (approximately a distance of 20 m) within
his home, with no walking aids and did not require
walking aids or upper limb
support when mobilising;
(ii) Mr Warren could walk ‘unaided’ from his home to the
neighbouring shops (approximately 100 m), at an average pace
and with no
limitations observed;
(iii) Mr Warren could sit for between three to five minutes before needing to
change his posture from sitting due to his reported
lower back pain and
discomfort;
(iv) Mr Warren was able to walk through his door threshold, over grass and sand
with no observed difficulties; and he could unilaterally
balance standing on a
rug in his loungeroom for approximately 10 seconds on each side before losing
his balance;
(v) Mr Warren reported that he has restricted capacity to sit in a car as either
the driver or a passenger; he reports to be independent
with accessing public
transport but frequently uses his elbow crutch as an assistive technology to
balance and support when walking
to/from and standing on public
(vi) The home was observed to be cluttered; dust was on surfaces in the
loungeroom; the vinyl floors had dirt and water marks; but
the bathroom and
toilet were clean;
(vii) Mr Warren reported that he can change his bed linens with minimal
difficulty and is able to load/unload his front-loading washing
holding on to the machine for support when squatting down, and that he can hang
out/pick up cloths with his eye-level
washing line and carry light loads in a
(viii) Based on his reported capacity and her observations:
back pain restricts the distance, duration and frequency of walking more than
350 m at a time;
required support from furniture to transfer to/from floor
able to manage reaching movements from mid-thigh to overhead height with no
difficulty, however, is restricted in his capacity
to sit, stand, forward bend,
lift and carry (above 5 kgs from waist height), squat and kneel, thereby
reducing his capacity for tasks
associated with these movements and postures,
such as driving, gardening and
back pain impacts on his capacity to manage stairs and uneven surfaces, and he
therefore avoids navigating these; he has reduced
unilateral balance, impacting
his ability to stand on slippery or uneven surfaces and to climb stairs without
a handrail;
independently manage cleaning at waist height, sweeping the floor and short
periods of light dusting; he is however restricted
with heavier cleaning because
this requires him to assume postures of repetitive pushing a vacuum or mop with
force, frequent bending
down or prolonged and repetitive
was a pile of dirty linens in the laundry, but this was consistent with a
reported exacerbation of symptoms following a lengthy
(b) It was observed by Ms Di Lazzaro in respect of self-care that:
(i) Although Mr Warren reported to be independent with his showering, grab rails
are recommended to support safe transfers and
(ii) Mr Warren can toilet and feed/eat for
(iii) Mr Warren uses adaptions to manage dressing of his lower body
independently; if he was required to wear shoes, long-handled
elasticated laces and a sock aide would be
recommended.
(c) Overall, Ms Di Lazzaro considered the Applicant to have ‘moderate to
severe impairment across all domains’, with
WHO Disability Assessment
Schedule 2.0 (
) scores of 85% for mobility, 44% for self-care and
69% overall.
It was observed
that Mr Warren’s physical limitations from his back condition and
associated pain impacts on his ability to
manage tasks that require forward
bending, prolonged or repetitive squatting postures and
(d) Relevant to the Respondent’s argument about physical interventions, Ms
Di Lazzaro noted that Mr Warren had reported ceasing
his walking programme,
which has been part of his prescribed physiotherapy programme, due to tennis
elbow associated with his elbow
Similarly, he did not
participate in pain management
counselling.
Ms Di Lazzaro
opined that it ‘is difficult to predict whether this intervention will
improve Mr Warren’s function, however
it is outlined in the WHO guidelines
as recommended treatment for non—surgical management of chronic back pain,
which he has
She observed
would be beneficial to explore whether Mr Warren responds to more
frequent physiotherapy intervention and a suitable exercise program
optimising his physical capacity. It is however noted that his ongoing pain may
limit Mr Warren from improving his physical
capacity, and therefore limit
treatment in these circumstances would be aimed at maintaining his current
second assessment was conducted by the Applicant’s independent
occupational therapist, Ms Thompson.
(a) Ms Thompson described Mr Warren as having ‘physical symptoms –
pain in lower back’ as a result of the L1 wedge
This accorded with the
premise of Ms Di Lazzaro’s assessment.
(b) Notably, unlike Ms Di Lazzaro, Ms Thompson differentiated between the
Applicant having a ‘good day’, an ‘average
reported that his pain always fluctuated between nine and ten out of ten,
regardless of the type of day.
(c) Ms Thompson scored the Applicant on the WHODAS, using the ‘item
response theory’. She gave him scores of 75% for
Around’ and 37.5% for ‘Self-Care’. She described this
assessment as follows:
...moderate levels of disability across day-to-day life because of his
physical impairments. Upon finer analysis of [Mr Warren’s]
domain level
scores [on the WHODAS], the greatest level of difficulty is experienced within
the domains of ‘Getting Around’
which encompasses mobility,
‘Life Activities’ which includes domestic and home maintenance tasks
and ‘Participation
in Society’ which includes participation in paid
or non-paid employment and schooling. Of note, [Mr Warren] demonstrated total
disability within the areas of ‘Life Activites’, indicating the
severe level of difficulty he experiences performing
(d) It was observed that Mr Warren’s capacity for mobility ‘is
severely impacted by the pain experienced in his lower
back, and subsequently
reduced ability to perform movements such as bending, lifting and
Ms Thompson saw
the Applicant walk around his home and courtyard independently; shift postures
every 15 minutes; stand for a maximum
of ten minutes; sit for a maximum of five
to ten minutes; and to have limited tolerance for bending, twisting,
lifting/carrying and
(e) Mr Warren reported accessing physiotherapy through Medicare and his private
health insurance (caped at 12 sessions per year),
and it was recommended that he
be funded to attend weekly physiotherapy sessions to ‘manage his [CLBP]
and maintain his current
levels of mobility which will reduce the risk of future
deconditioning and increased
(f) In terms of self-care, Ms Thompson’s observations were consistent with
those of Ms Di Lazzaro, save the Applicant had reported
to Ms Thompson that he
could not use his washing machine because it was broken and be could not bend to
load/unload it.
occupational therapists gave oral evidence to the Tribunal.
(a) In evidence-in-chief, Ms Thompson remarked that it was obvious when she went
to Mr Warren’s house in January 2025 that
it was not clean and that he had
not been physically able to clean the floors, bathroom and kitchen properly. She
said that for most
of her assessment the Applicant had been reclined and that
his movements had been ‘guarded’ and that there was ‘very
stiff’ movement in the pelvic and back. These movements were consistent
with what she expected to see from someone with severe
back pain. In
cross-examination, Ms Thompson said that the day of her assessment must have
been a ‘good day’ and that
a ‘bad day’ was when he could
not get out of bed. Counsel put to Ms Thompson observations of the Applicant
from the hearing,
however these did not meaningfully change her evidence.
(b) In evidence-in-chief, Ms Di Lazzaro confirmed the basis of her assessment
and expertise. The Tribunal notes that both clinicians
were experienced and that
the only real point of difference between them was that Ms Di Lazzaro held a
master’s degree whereas
Ms Thompson only held a bachelor’s degree.
Ms Di Lazzaro was asked if Mr Warren had the capacity to do his own grocery
and she said that he did but he needed to ‘modify’ this by
making more frequent, smaller trips. She said that ‘because
fluctuation, this has a potential to impact on his capacity.’ In terms of
showering/grooming, Ms Di Lazzaro observed
the Applicant transfer into/out of
his shower and that he could wash his upper body. She said that the issue was
bending forward
and touching his feet, which caused pain. The Applicant was able
to lift his foot to reduce forward bending, but it was identified
that safety
could be improved by the installation of grab rails. She said that the Applicant
had capacity to prepare light meals.
In cross-examination, she admitted that the
Applicant did not present like the typical 65-year-old. She said that
pain does have an impact on his ability to function’ but
that he was observed to mobilise independently for short periods/distances
without difficulty. Ms Di Lazzaro considered that, at baseline, Mr Warren likely
had capacity to do his own laundry, but this could
be affected by fluctuations
in pain. She confirmed Ms Thompson’s observation that chronic pain does
fluctuate and there are
days where he can manage and days where he cannot. She
admitted that Mr Warren would find ‘anything outside bed’ as
activity’. In re-examination, Ms Di Lazzaro clarified that
the WHODAS assessment is based on self-reporting by the patient.
Applicant contends that the evidence before the Tribunal demonstrates:
(a) he has a disability attributable to the physical, sensory and neurological
impairments arising from the spinal fracture he sustained
in 1987 and consequent
(b) his physical, sensory and neurological impairments are, or are likely to be,
(c) his physical, sensory and neurological impairments result in substantially
reduced functional capacity to undertake the activities
of mobility and
(d) his physical, sensory and neurological impairments affect his capacity for
social and economic participation; and
(e) he is likely to require support under the NDIS for his
Respondent:
(a) accepts that the Applicant’s ‘condition’ of CLBP results
in him having a disability that is attributable to
the following physical
impairments:
(i) reduction in range of movement in the lumbar region, including bending and
ability to maintain a sitting position;
(ii) reduction in walking distances;
(iii) reduction in balance; and
(iv) reduction in ability to lift heavy objects.
(b) disputes that there is sufficient evidence demonstrating that the above
‘impairments’
(i) are permanent;
(ii) result in substantially reduced functional capacity to undertake mobility
and self-care; and
(iii) that the Applicant will likely require NDIS Supports under the NDIS for
his lifetime.
the context of s 24(1)(a) of the NDIS Act, the term ‘disability’ has
a specific meaning – being a functional
outcome that is attributable to
specified categories of
impairment.
The Act identifies
‘intellectual, cognitive, neurological, sensory and physical
impairments.’
the reasons explained by Senior Member French in
Burrows and CEO, National Disability
Insurance Agency
[2025] ARTA 607 (
), at [25]-[26], the
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health
) (World Health Organisation,
is extrinsic material
to which the Tribunal may have regard ‘in ascertaining with objective
precision the impairment of body
structure or function which is at issue in each
case’ for the purposes of s 24 of the NDIS Act.
evidence in this case is that the Applicant lives with the following health
conditions:
(a) significant L1 anterior wedge compression fracture;
(b) kyphosis (excessive forward curvature of the spine);
(c) right L5/S1 disc protrusion;
(d) right S1 nerve abutment;
(e) multilevel degenerative disc disease;
(f) pain, including:
(i) chronic musculoskeletal pain;
(ii) chronic post trauma pain; and
(iii) nociplastic pain (central nervous system pain
amplification).
is described in the ICF under ‘sensory functions and pain’ as the
‘sensation of unpleasant feeling indicating
potential or actual damage to
some body structure’ (ICF, b280). The ICF provides qualifiers to the
‘extent or magnitude
of impairment’ ranging from ‘no
impairment’ to ‘complete impairment’.
, Senior Member French found that the applicant in that case,
amongst other impairments, had ‘impaired sensory functions and
pain’, being ‘sensation of pain’, specifically pain in the
head, neck and back.
Member then said:
[38] There is however an issue as to how the
impairments set out in paragraph 36(ii) are to be conceptualised for the
purposes of
s 24(1)(a). The Agency’s operational policy appears to limit
the meaning of “sensory” impairment to “how
hear”. That would not appear to include vestibular function or pain. In
closing oral submissions, if I understood
her correctly, counsel for the CEO
submitted that pain should not be understood as an impairment at all for the
purposes of s 24(1)(a),
but as a condition that is potentially
“secondary” to one or more of the categories of impairment set out
[40] I do not accept the CEO’s submission that pain is not to be
regarded as an impairment for the purposes of s 24(1)(a). Pain
constitutes a
loss or variation to typical body function (typical body function does not
involve persistent experience of pain).
Pain is a sensory experience produced by
the nervous system usually in response to damage to body structure. Within the
of the ICF pain is categorised with other sensory functions, including
sight and hearing. I adopt that categorisation here even though
Agency’s operational policy appears to limit sensory impairment to sight
and hearing impairment. The alternative would
be to find, at least in this case,
that the Applicant’s experience of pain is a neurological impairment
because it is produced
by her nervous system. In either case it is an impairment
for the purposes of s 24(1)(a).
I respectfully agree.
Tribunal finds that the Applicant’s pain is either a sensory and/or
neurological impairment for the purposes of s 24(1)(a)
of the NDIS Act.
the level of body structure, the Tribunal finds that the Applicant lives
(a) impaired structures of the nervous system, being the spinal cord and related
structures (ICF, s120), specifically compression
of the spinal nerves (ICF,
(b) impaired structures related to movement, being the structure of the trunk
(ICF, s760), namely the thoracic and lumbar vertebral
columns (ICF, s76001,
s76002); and
(c) impairment (deconditioning) of the muscles of the trunk (ICF, s7601).
impairments at paragraphs [52] and [53] above are neurological and physical
impairments for the purposes of s 24(1)(a) of the
impairments are, or are likely to be, permanent
Respondent’s position was that the Applicant’s impairments could not
be said to be permanent because he has not undertaken
all known, available and
appropriate treatments, namely physical interventions such as structured
exercise therapies or programmes
physiotherapy).
problem with this submission is that it proceeded on a false premise that the
Applicant’s ‘impairments’ were
those stated at [46(a)] above.
For the above reasons, the Tribunal does not agree with that characterisation.
Visser testified that the Applicant’s pain was permanent. That is
self-evidently the case, particularly because of
its underlying physical cause,
which is long-standing and
inoperable.
The evidence before
the Tribunal demonstrated that there has been multidisciplinary treatment for
over 30 years. These interventions,
which have included physical interventions,
have not meaningfully improved his long-term capacity for mobility or for
It is the case that the Applicant’s pain fluctuates. That is to
be expected.
impaired structures of the nervous system and related to movement are clearly
Tribunal notes that assessments have been made that:
Warren’s] capacity to complete domestic activities, transfers and [to]
ambulate is grossly hampered by de-conditioning,
Due to [Mr Warren’s] high
severity of pain this has led to learned non-use of the lumbo-pelvic region. [Mr
Warren] struggles
to complete strengthening programs and mobility programs due
to his high level of muscular de-conditioning. In my clinical opinion
Warren] would benefit from physiotherapy intervention and exercise physiology in
conjunction to allow hands on therapies
modulate pain
strength/conditioning is improved throughout the lumbo-pelvic region/lower limbs
with gym-based loading programs.
[Mr Warren] would grossly benefit from continued physiotherapy services to
continued regulation/reduction of his current high levels of
. Secondly [Mr Warren] would also benefit from exercise physiology
review for a personalised and supervised gym strengthening program.
allow [Mr Warren] to progressively load and strengthen his lumbar region in a
supported/controlled environment allowing
for greater regulation of his central
nervous system and to avoid flare ups of his chronic
(emphasis added)
that assessment was made by Mr Podesta, it reveals the consistent theme in the
evidential material before the Tribunal –
physical intervention is about
maintenance
of pain not
Tribunal accepts that physical intervention is relevant to the Applicant’s
trunk muscles, and that this physical impairment
could not therefore be said to
be permanent.
fundamental proposition is whether physical interventions will be likely to
remedy the permanent impairments. The word ‘remedy’
in r 5.4 of the
Access Rules is taken to mean ‘something approaching a removal or cure of
the impairment’.
observed above, the better view of the evidence is that physical interventions
are only going to be about
of the Applicant’s pain and
maintenance
of his current levels of mobility. That is, the prevention of
further deconditioning and temporary relief or improvement of some
symptoms. It is not likely to remedy the sensory and neurological impairments in
any meaningful way.
Tribunal finds that the Applicant’s sensory and neurological impairments
are permanent for the purposes of s 24(1)(b) of
the NDIS Act.
The impairments result in substantially reduced functional
capacity to undertake mobility and self-care
Tribunal respectfully adopts Senior Member French’s observations in
at [59]-[96]. Section 24(1)(c) of the NDIS Act requires the
Tribunal assess what, from a practical functional perspective, a prospective
participant can and cannot do. The tasks that make up ‘mobility’ and
‘self-care’ are:
(or “mobility and moving around” as it is
referred to in the policy)
(i) tasks associated with moving around within the home,
(ii) tasks associated with moving around within the community (how you get out
and about),
(iii) tasks associated with getting in and out of bed, and
(iv) tasks associated with getting in and out of a chair.
(i) tasks associated with personal care, including personal hygiene and
(ii) tasks associated with eating and drinking, and
(iii) tasks associated with health care.
depart from the reasoning in
in one respect. I accept that
‘self-care’ includes domestic tasks such as laundry and cleaning.
These tasks are essential
to ‘personal care’. They are also
associated with ‘moving around within the home’. I accept that it is
clear that the NDIS Act contemplates tasks associated with other
‘domestic activities’, such as gardening and yard maintenance.
note that ‘cleaning’ and ‘caring for your belongings’ is
considered under the ‘Life activities’
domain on the WHODAS, and
that this domain is not explicitly listed in s 24(1)(c) of the NDIS Act.
However, ‘hygiene’
is an essential precursor to self-care and, in my
view, this term should not be construed narrowly because that would not accord
with the overall legislative context and purpose.
Re Foster and National Disability Insurance
[2025] ARTA 718, which was cited with approval by the Full Court in
National Disability Insurance Agency v
[2025] FCAFC 139
, Senior Member French remarked that:
I have sought to bring some social
scientific objectivity to the task of ascertaining the meaning of the term, or
more specifically,
the threshold at which it is enlivened, by reference to the
calculus used in the ICF and its designated assessment tool, the World
Organisation Disability Assessment Schedule (WHODAS 2.0) to assess and describe
the degree of difficulty a person may experience
in executing tasks of daily
living due to impairment.
[57] WHODAS 2.0 assesses the “degree of difficulty” a person
experiences in doing specified activities of daily living
in terms of
“increased effort”, experience of “discomfort or pain”,
“slowness” and “changes
in the way the person does the
activity” (the difficulty factors) according to a five-point scale which
“mild”, “moderate”,
“severe”, and “extreme or cannot do” (the difficulty
A “mild” degree of difficulty or reduced functional
capacity to perform a task is a degree of difficulty up to 25% greater
of a person who does not have the assessed person’s impairments,
“moderate” is a degree of difficulty
up to 50% greater, and
“severe” is a degree of difficulty greater than 50% than that of a
person who does not have the
assessed person’s impairments. In my opinion
this analytical framework is helpful in giving meaning to the concept of
substantially
reduced function by providing an objective measure of the
threshold at which it is enlivened. In my view, “substantial”
should be understood as connoting a degree of difficulty, or reduced functional
capacity, in performing a task or action that is
greater than
“moderate”, and “reduced” should be understood as being
in one of the four ways specified by
the difficulty factors.
[58] I should be clear that it is not my intention to suggest that the WHODAS
2.0 difficulty ratings are a proxy for the statutory
concept; merely that they
are an aid that assist in bringing some social-scientific objectivity to
ascertaining when the statutory
threshold is enlivened.
summarised above, Ms Di Lazzaro assessed the Applicant in April 2024 on WHODAS
as having 85% for mobility (severe disability),
44% for self-care (moderate
disability) and 69% overall (severe
disability).
Ms Thompson in
January 2025, using the ‘item-response-theory’ method, scored the
Applicant with 75% for ‘getting
around’ (mobility), 37.50% for
self-care and 60.59% overall.
my view, the evidence establishes a substantial reduction in functional capacity
with respect to mobility. That is, the Applicant
experiences a degree of
difficulty in getting around that is 50% or greater than that experienced by
another (unassisted) person
without his neurological and sensory impairments. It
does not do so with respect to self-care (though they are clearly
inter-related).
The impairments or impairments affect the
person’s capacity for social or economic participation
Respondent did not contest that Mr Warren meets the criteria in s 24(1)(d) of
the NDIS Act.
That concession
was appropriate.
The person is likely to require support under
the NDIS for the person’s lifetime
Respondent argued that because the Applicant is now 65 years of age he is not
likely to require supports under the NDIS because
the supports sought to be
funded under the NDIS (namely assistance with housework and physiotherapy) are
separately available to
Mr Warren through the ‘MyAged Care’
programme, including the Commonwealth Home Support Programme, which provides for
‘clinical supports’ (including physiotherapy),
‘independence’ (help with showering, taking medications, transport
or respite) and ‘everyday living’ (including cleaning, gardening or
meal preparation).
Respondent referred the Tribunal to
Disability Insurance Agency v Foster
[2023] FCAFC 11
(2023) 295 FCR 521
, where the Full
Court identified that:
(a) the ‘focus of [this criterion] is on whether the prospective
participant is likely to require support under the NDIS, or
whether those
supports are most appropriately met by other
(b) the ‘likely’ support referred in s 24(1)(e) of the NDIS Act
‘can only be referable to the result of the impairment
the subject of the
application to gain access to the
(c) whether the support available under other systems is comparable to what
would be available under the NDIS is not the question
Aged Care Act 2024
) commenced on 1 November 2025 and replaced the
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth) (repealed).
The objects of
that Act are to:
(a) in conjunction with other laws, give effect to Australia’s obligations
under the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights and the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities; and
(b) provide a forward‑looking aged care system that is designed to:
(i) uphold the rights of individuals under the Statement of Rights; and
(ii) assist individuals accessing funded aged care services to live active,
self‑determined and meaningful lives; and
(iii) ensure equitable access to, and flexible delivery of, funded aged care
services that put older people first and take into account
the needs of
individuals, regardless of their location, background and life experience;
(iv) support individuals accessing funded aged care services to effectively
participate in society on an equal basis with others,
thereby promoting positive
community attitudes to ageing; and
(v) facilitate access to integrated services in other sectors where required;
(c) enable individuals accessing funded aged care services to exercise choice
and control in the planning and delivery of those services;
(d) ensure individuals accessing funded aged care services are free from
mistreatment, neglect and harm from poor quality or unsafe
(e) provide a robust and risk‑based regulatory framework for the delivery
of funded aged care services, including accessible
complaint mechanisms for
individuals accessing those services, that will promote public confidence and
trust in the Commonwealth
aged care system; and
(f) provide and support education and advocacy arrangements that can assist
individuals accessing funded aged care services to understand
their rights, make
decisions and provide feedback on the delivery of those services without
reprisal; and
(g) provide for sustainable funding arrangements for the delivery of funded aged
care services by a diverse, trained and appropriately
skilled workforce; and
(h) promote innovation in the Commonwealth aged care system based on research
and support continuous improvement in the Commonwealth
aged care system.
is clear from those objects that the Aged Care system operates alongside the
NDIS in giving effect to Australia’s international
obligations with
respect to human rights.
into the aged care system is governed by ch 2 of the
Aged Care Act
(a) A prospective individual who ‘needs care’ may apply under s 56
of the Act if:
(i) they are aged 65 or over; (s 58(a)(i)) and
(ii) ‘information of a kind prescribed by the rules has been provided
relating to the individual’s care needs’
(b) Rule 58-5 of the
Aged Care Rules 2025
Aged Care Rules
) provides that this must be
(i) a declaration by the individual that they have ‘care needs’;
(ii) a written statement from a prescribed third party (as to which see r 56-5)
setting out those care needs; and
(iii) written medical records of the individual’s care needs.
(c) The term ‘care needs’ is defined in s 7 of the
Aged Care Act
...one or both of the following that apply in relation to an individual:
(a) the individual has difficulty (whether physical, mental or social)
undertaking any daily living activities;
(b) the individual requires help from another person, or the assistance of one
or more aids, to maintain their physical, mental or
social capacity to function
independently.
Aged Care Act
requires the ‘System Governor’ (the
Secretary of the Department of Health, Disability and Ageing) to consider an
application and decide whether to make an ‘eligibility
determination for an aged care needs assessment for the individual’.
eligibility determination requires an assessment be undertaken by an approved
needs assessor
using the ‘Integrated Assessment Tool’
prescribed by r 62-5 of the Aged Care Rules (s 62(1)). This assessment must
a discussion with the applicant about what the assessment has identified
in terms of funded aged care services the individual may
require access to and
may assist the individual to maintain their independence (s 62(2)(a)) and a
report about that assessment is
provided to the Secretary (s 63). The Integrated
Assessment Tool includes a functional capacity assessment.
aged care services’ are services prescribed under pt 3 of the Aged Care
Rules, including ‘allied health
and therapy’, ‘domestic
assistance’, ‘hoarding and squalor assistance’, ‘home
maintenance and
repairs’ and ‘therapeutic services for independent
living’, which can each be delivered in a ‘home or community
setting’ (ss 8-10).
follows from the above summary of the legislative framework governing the aged
care system that there is, in fact, another system
available to the Applicant,
as someone aged 65, which, upon application, can provide the same types of
supports potentially available
to him under the NDIS; namely, allied health and
therapy and domestic assistance in a home or community setting.
question then is whether these supports are more appropriately funded under the
NDIS or the aged care system?
Applicant argued that:
[39] The document commonly referred to as
the Applied Principles and Tables of Support (
) provides at
principle 5 that: ‘In determining the approach to the supports funded by
the NDIS and other service systems governments
will have regard to the
efficiency, the existing statutory responsibilities and policy objective of
other service systems and operational
implications.’ The principles
relating to the interaction of Aged Care and the NDIS provide that they have
different areas
of expertise and interact with one another, and that: ‘A
participant can choose to continue to receive supports from the NDIS
65, or can choose to take up an aged care place’. The fact that the Aged
Care system exists and that as of last month
the Applicant is eligible to
receive supports from that system therefore does not answer the question of
which system is most appropriate
to provide that support.
[40] The evidence of Professor Visser is that the Applicant’s pain is
being generated at a centralised nervous system level,
and that whilst he might
also be experiencing degeneration due to age, the Applicant’s L1 fracture
is the direct source of
the Applicant’s most severe degeneration. The
Applicant’s L1 fracture was not caused by his age but by an injury. The
supports he requires are therefore not aged care supports, but rather supports
which flow from a substantially reduced functional
capacity to engaged in
mobility and self-care as a result of a disability attributable to physical,
sensory and/or neurological impairments
flowing from that
Respondent’s retort was that:
[41] During the hearing, Mr
Warren’s representative made a submission to the effect that the NDIS
provides disability supports,
whereas My Aged Care provides aged care supports.
The Agency submits that is a distinction with no difference. For example,
assistance with home cleaning duties is the same support, whether it
is categorised as a ‘disability support’ or an ‘aged
support’. Further, such a distinction is inconsistent with the Full
Court’s decision in Foster
Re Peters and National Disability Insurance
[2025] ARTA 2053, GM Proske observed:
[101] In closing
submissions, counsel for the Applicant contended that s 22 provides that it does
not matter, if someone is granted
access as a participant of the NDIS before the
age of 65, the NDIS will provide supports for life. It is not in contest that
Applicant was under 65 when her access request was made and she therefore
meets the age requirement in s 22; however, at the time
the Tribunal is
considering whether she is likely to require support under the NDIS for her
lifetime, she is aged 67. Consistent
with the view expressed by the Tribunal
(differently constituted) in
Morris and National Disability Insurance
[2024] ARTA 186, which was included in the joint bundle of
authorities filed by the parties, this Tribunal considers that for the
of accessing whether the Applicant is likely to require support under the NDIS,
or whether those support needs are most appropriately
met by other systems, it
is her age at the time of this decision that must be considered.
[102] The Tribunal notes that s 3(3)(b) provides that in giving effect to the
objects of the NDIS Act, regard is to be had to the
need to ensure the financial
sustainability of the NDIS; and s 4(17) provides that it is the intention of
Parliament that the Ministerial
Council, the Minister, the Board, the CEO, the
Commissioner and any other person or body is to perform functions and exercise
under the NDIS Act in accordance with the principles in s 4, having
regard to the need to ensure the financial sustainability of
the NDIS. The
Tribunal agrees with the submission made by counsel for the Respondent in
closing that this statutory context supports
a construction of s 24(1)(e) that
requires the Tribunal to undertake an assessment of whether the supports
required by the Applicant
could be provided by other services systems when
considering whether it is satisfied the requirement in s 24(1)(e) is met.
[103] The Tribunal has previously considered whether a person who is eligible
to receive supports under My Aged Care is likely to
require support under the
NDIS for their lifetime; and has found that in those circumstances the support
needs were most appropriately
met by My Aged Care. In
Brickhill and
National Disability Insurance Agency
[2025] ARTA 707 the Tribunal
dismissed a review application pursuant to s 101(1)(b) of the ART Act on the
basis it had no reasonable
prospects of success because it considered the
Applicant incapable of meeting the disability requirement in s 24(1)(e) in
circumstances
where she was the current recipient of a Home Care Package.
[107] Whilst it may be the case that supports provided under My Aged Care are
delivered in a way that is not ideal for someone such
as the Applicant who is
well but for her impairments and continues to work as a general practitioner;
and that programs available
under My Aged Care are intended to support older
people to remain living independently and safely rather than to support an
who only requires support because of a non-age related impairment or
impairments; the fact remains that the Tribunal has accepted
at paragraph [100]
that the supports required by the Applicant in respect of her reduced functional
capacity are available through
My Aged Care; and in those circumstances, in the
absence of evidence the Applicant is ineligible for support under that system,
Tribunal is not satisfied she is likely to require support under the NDIS
for her lifetime.
am not satisfied that the reasoning in the above decision, and the other
Tribunal decisions to which it refers, are plainly in error.
Accordingly, it is
appropriate that I follow
those reasons, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the Applicant is likely to
require support under the NDIS for his lifetime.
He therefore does not satisfy s
24(1)(e) of the NDIS Act.
EARLY INTERVENTION REQUIREMENTS
are two things which may be said about the early intervention requirements
considering the findings made above in respect of
the disability requirements.
(a) The Tribunal is not satisfied that provision of early intervention supports
for the Applicant is likely to benefit him by
reducing his future needs
for supports in relation to disability (s 25(1)(b) of the NDIS Act; rr 6.8-6.9
of the Access Rules). As the evidence demonstrates,
the requested supports are
He separately has degenerative
disc disease, which is highly likely to
exacerbate those future disability needs over time; and
(b) The Tribunal is satisfied that early intervention support for the Applicant
is most appropriately funded or provided through
the systems of service delivery
or support services offered under the
Aged Care Act
, being another law dealing
with discrimination based on disability (s 25(3); rr 6.1, 8.4).
Ovid is reported to have said in the English translation of
Metamorphoses
, Book XV, 234-236 (Pythagoras’s Teachings: The Four
Ages of Man):
When the middle years are also done, life takes the
downward path of declining age. Milon, the athlete, grown old, cries when he
at those weak and flabby arms, that were once, like those of Hercules, a
solid mass of muscle. Helen, the daughter of Tyndareus,
also weeps, when she
sees an old woman’s wrinkles in the glass, and asks why she has been twice
ravaged. Devouring Time, and
you, jealous Age, consume everything, and slowly
gnawing at them, with your teeth, little by little, consign all things to
is catching up with Mr Warren, and it is the aged care system which should now
respond to his disability needs rather than the
Accordingly,
the Tribunal is not satisfied that the Applicant meets the early intervention
requirements for the purposes of s 25 of
the NDIS Act.
Tribunal is not satisfied that the Applicant meets either the disability
requirements or the early intervention requirements necessary
for him to become
a participant of the NDIS. Accordingly, the correct or preferable decision is to
affirm the reviewable decision.
I certify that the preceding 90 (ninety)
paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for the decision herein of General
Member J Papalia
...................[SGD].....................................................
Dated: 13 November 2025
Date(s) of hearing:
2-3 July 2025, 22 August 2025
for the Applicant:
Ms C Faulkner, Legal Aid WA
Counsel for the Respondent
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Ms T Martin, Moray & Agnew Lawyers
See Exhibit 1, pp 90-117; but
cf. an earlier request and decision in February/March 2023, pp 54-86.
Exhibit 1, p 8; RSFIC, [24];
ASFIC, [17]; but Cf RSFIC, [33], [35].
Respondent’s closing
submissions, [1].
B Kraft, R Bo, R Jonassen, A
Heeren, VS Ulset, TC Stiles and NI Landro, ‘The association between
depression symptoms and reduced
executive functioning is primarily linked by
fatigue’ (2023) 3
Psychiatry Research Communications
Respondent’s closing
submissions dated 31 July 2025, [17].
Reply closing submissions dated
7 August 2025, [9].
Reply closing submissions dared
7 August 2025, [13].
See Exhibit 1, A25.
Administrative Review
Tribunal Act 2024
), ss 49, 50, 52, 55, 56; See also
v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] FCA 1497
, [35]-[36];
Re Kowalski and Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Commission
[2007] AATA 1988
(2007) 47 AAR 300
, [21]-[22], [26], [30], [35]-[36];
Re BQRW and Commissioner
of Taxation
[2014] AATA 410
(2014) 63 AAR 503
, [60]-[61];
Re Superannuation Warehouse
Australia Pty Ltd and Australian Securities and Investments Commission
(2019) 77 AAR 300, [78]-[80].
[6.4(a)] and [6.5].
National Disability
Insurance Scheme Amendment (Getting the NDIS Back on Track No
1) Act 2024
(Cth), sch 1, item 125.
See Exhibit 1, T1A;
Respondent’s closing submissions, [2]; RSFIC, [22].
VFWQ v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
, [22]-[27]
NDIS Act, s 18.
Stewart v Minister
for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2020] FCAFC 196
(2020) 281 FCR 578
, [43], [50].
See Exhibit 1, T1B and T17.
See Exhibit 1, T4.
See Exhibit 1, T2, p 27;
T14, p 56; T15, p 83.
Repatriation Commission
[2015] FCAFC 165
(2015) 68 AAR 23
National Disability
Insurance Agency v Davis
[2022] FCA 1002
National Disability
Insurance Agency v Davis
[2022] FCA 1002
National Disability
Insurance Agency v Lampard
[2025] FCAFC 139
, [27]-[29].
Mulligan v National
Disability Insurance Agency
[2015] FCA 544
(2015) 233 FCR 201
National Disability
Insurance Agency v Davis
[2022] FCA 1002
National Disability
Insurance Agency v Davis
[2022] FCA 1002
Exhibit 1, T28,
‘Applying to the NDIS’ (dated 1 July 2022).
Clive Elliot Jennings
& Co Pty Ltd v Western Australian Planning Commission
[2002] WASCA 276
See Exhibit 1, T4, p 35.
Exhibit 1, T7, pp 40-41
Exhibit 1, T9, pp 43-44.
See Exhibit 1, T12, p 50
See Exhibit 1, T13, pp
See Exhibit 1, A12, pp
See Exhibit 1, A13, p 69,
See Exhibit 1, A15.
Exhibit 1, R2, p 166.
See Exhibit 1, R2, p 167.
See Exhibit 1, R2, p 167 Q1
[2], [3], [5].
See Exhibit 1, R2, pp
167-168 Q1 [7]-[10].
See Exhibit 1, R2, p 168 Q2.
See Exhibit 1, R2 Q1 [9]
See Exhibit 1, R2, Q5-6 p
See Exhibit 1, A21, pp
116-146; R4, pp 179-203.
Exhibit 1, R4, p 187
Exhibit 1, R4, p 188.
Exhibit 1, R4, pp
Exhibit 1, R4, p 191.
Exhibit 1, R4, p 191-192
Exhibit 1, R4, pp 185-186.
Exhibit 1, R4, p 187.
Exhibit 1, R4, p 188.
Exhibit 1, R4, p 189.
Exhibit 1, R4, p 191.
Exhibit 1, R4, p 192.
Exhibit 1, R4, p 196
Exhibit 1, R4, pp 197-198.
Exhibit 1, R4, pp
Exhibit 1, R4, p 199.
Exhibit 1, R4, p 200.
Exhibit 1, R4, pp 200-201.
See Exhibit 1, A21, p
See Exhibit 1, A21, p 121.
Exhibit 1, A21, pp 124-125.
Exhibit 1, A21, p 126.
Exhibit 1, A21, pp 127-129.
Exhibit 1, A21, pp 130-131.
Exhibit 1, A21, pp
ASFIC, [17].
RSFIC, [32]-[33].
Re Burrows and CEO,
National Disability Insurance Agency
[2025] ARTA 607, [24].
Accessible online
https://icd.who.int/browse/2025-01/icf/en#894218497.
See Exhibit 1, R2, p 167.
Re Burrows and CEO,
National Disability Insurance Agency
[2025] ARTA 607, [36(ii)(b)].
Closing submissions, [1(a)],
[3], [5]-[9], [11]-[14].
See Exhibit 1, T10, p 45.
Exhibit 1, A17, pp 89-90,
See e.g. Exhibit 1, R2, p
National Disability
Insurance Agency v Davis
[2022] FCA 1002
See Exhibit 1, p 199.
See Exhibit 1, p 124.
RSFIC, [24].
Respondent’s closing
submissions, [1](c)], [37]; Exhibit 1, R6, R7, R8, R9, R10.
National Disability
Insurance Agency v Foster
[2023] FCAFC 11
(2023) 295 FCR 521
National Disability
Insurance Agency v Foster
[2023] FCAFC 11
(2023) 295 FCR 521
National Disability
Insurance Agency v Foster
[2023] FCAFC 11
(2023) 295 FCR 521
Aged Care Ace, s 2(1).
Applicant’s closing
submissions.
Respondent’s closing
submissions.
Re Scott and
Commissioner of Superannuation
(1986) 9 ALD 491
Re The Owners of
Strata Plan 18449 and City of Joondalup
[2005] WASAT 304
(2005) 150 LGERA
Gemmill Homes Pty Ltd v Sanders
[2018] WASC 179
, [87]-[94];
Commonwealth of Australia v Snell
[2019] FCAFC 57
(2019) 269 FCR 18
Accessible online at
https://ovid.lib.virginia.edu/trans/Metamorph15.htm
RTF format (13 MB)
Signed PDF/A format