URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1976/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Commissioner of Stamp Duties (NSW) v Bone [1976] UKPCHCA 1; (1976) 135 CLR 223 (5 April 1976)
PRIVY COUNCIL
COMMISSIONER OF STAMP DUTIES (N.S.W.) v. BONE
[1976] UKPCHCA 1
(1976) 135 CLR 223
Wills - Death Duties (N.S.W.)
Privy Council
Lord Wilberforce(1), Viscount Dilhorne(1), Lord Cross of Chelsea(1), Lord
Fraser of Tullybelton(1) and Lord Russell of Killowen.(1)
Wills - Release - Debts - Debtor named as executor - Express forgiveness of
debts in will - Effect of appointment of debtor as executor
- Whether debt
thereby released - Whether debt released upon death of testator.
Death Duties (N.S.W.) - Property of deceased to &which any person becomes
entitled under will - Debts repayable to deceased
annual instalments -
Appointment of debtors as executors of the will - Express forgiveness of debts
in will - Whether debts released
upon death of deceased - Lender entitled to
give notice under own hand requiring repayment of debt in full - Notice not
given before
death of deceased - Whether power to give notice ceased at death
- Valuation of debt for duty -
Stamp Duties Act 1920
(N.S.W.), s. 102(1),
[1976] UKPCHCA 1
(1976) 135 CLR 223
, at pp 226-227
January 26-29; April 5. 5:4:1976
APPEAL from the High Court of Australia.
LORD RUSSELL OF KILLOWEN delivered the judgment of their Lordships as
This appeal by the Commissioner of Stamp Duties by special leave granted by
Her Majesty in Council from a decision of the High
Court of Australia
(reversing a decision of the Supreme Court of New South Wales) concerns
liability to death duty in respect of
the death of Mrs. Alice Bone under the
Stamp Duties Act 1920
(N.S.W.). More specifically, but still in general
terms, it concerns the effectiveness of an ingenious device - a term not
in a pejorative sense - for transferring the greater part of a
parent's fortune to her children inter vivos without risk of liability
death duty in respect of that greater part, even should the parent die next
day. Their Lordships are informed that, once thought
of, the device became
popular: so that, though counteracting legislation has now been introduced,
the liability for death duty in
respect of a number of estates depends upon
the decision in this case. (at p225)
2. Mrs. Bone the testatrix, on 16th May 1969, as witnessed by three
agreements of that date, lent to the respondents, her two sons
daughter, sums of $25,000, $25,000 and $44,600 respectively. These loans were
each repayable by annual instalments of $375
payable on differing dates so
that the testatrix would receive from one or other child that sum every four
months. Provision was
made for the whole of each loan to become immediately
repayable in certain circumstances. Further details of these loan agreements
fall to be considered later in connexion with the quantum upon which death
duty is chargeable should the scheme not have wholly succeeded
in its aim, the
point on quantum being shortly whether it is the amount outstanding of the
loans at the death of the testatrix ($93,475)
the actuarial value at the death
of the remaining annual instalments of $375 ($13,651). (at p225)
3. On the same day as the loan agreements the testatrix made her will. By it
she appointed the three children her executors. She
bequeathed certain
chattels to the daughter. Clause 4 was in these terms:
"4. I FORGIVE AND RELEASE unto the said LILLA KATHLEEN
BONE free from any contribution whatsoever towards payment
of my debts funeral and testamentary expenses death
estate probate succession and other duties all sums whether
for principal or interest which she owes me."
respectively. Residue was given upon trust to pay thereout debts, funeral and
testamentary expenses and death duties, and subject
thereto on trust for such
of the three children as should survive the testatrix in equal shares. The
testatrix died on 1st May 1970:
the three children survived her and proved
the will: the estate after payment of debts but excluding the loans was some
The appellant assessed the death duty payable on the basis that it was
chargeable on the principle sum outstanding of the loans ($93,475).
request the appellant stated a case to the Court of Appeal of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales. The questions for decision
were whether death duty
was chargeable as the appellant contended: or whether it was chargeable on
the basis of the actuarial value
of the instalment obligations: or whether in
assessing death duty the amount of the loans was to be ignored. The duty
in the three cases would be $16,732, $1,516 and $477 respectively.
4. The Supreme Court (Jacobs P., Hope and Reynolds JJ.A.) unanimously upheld
the appellant's contention
(1972) 2 NSWLR 651
High Court (Barwick C.J.,
McTiernan, Menzies, Stephen and Mason JJ.) unanimously reversed the decision
of the Supreme Court
ground that the amount of the loans was to be
ignored in assessing the duty chargeable in respect of the death of the
which was accordingly only $477
[1974] HCA 29
(1974) 132 CLR 38
. The question
of the value of the debts under the loan agreements
consequently
did not arise
for decision in the High Court. (at
5. The immediate relevant provisions of the
Stamp Duties Act
are contained in
s. 102(1) (a) and (2) (a). These are as follows:
"102. For the purposes of the assessment and payment of
death duty but subject as hereinafter provided, the estate of
a deceased person shall be deemed to include and consist of
the following classes of property:-
(1) (a) All property of the deceased which is situate in
New South Wales at his death
to which any person becomes entitled under the will or upon
the intestacy of the deceased, except property held by the deceased
as trustee for another person under a disposition not
made by the deceased.
(2) (a) All property which the deceased has disposed of,
whether before or after the passing of this Act, by will or
by a settlement containing any trust in respect of that property
to take effect after his death, including a will or
settlement made in the exercise of any general power of
appointment, whether exercisable by the deceased alone or
jointly with another person:
..." (at p227)
6. Their Lordships first summarize the contentions. (at p227)
7. For the appellant it is contended that upon the true construction of
sub-s. (1) (a) the outstanding loans were either (i) property
to which the
three children in their capacity as executors became persons legally entitled
under the will or (ii) property to which
the three children became persons
beneficially entitled under cll. 4, 5 and 6 of the will. Alternatively under
sub-s. (2) (a) they
were property which the testatrix disposed of by her will.
For the respondents it is contended (i) that sub-s. (1) (a) refers to
beneficial entitlement and not to such legal entitlement as is conferred upon
an executor as such; (ii) that the release of the debts
extinguished them, and
while it is correct to say that the children took a benefit under the will by
the releases, it is not correct
to say that they became entitled to any
property thereunder, since the very benefit conferred annihilated at the same
instant (the
death) the choses in action (the debts) which had previously
belonged to the testatrix, and (iii) alternatively that since the appointment
of a debtor as executor transmutes his obligation in law as a debtor to an
obligation in equity to account for an equivalent sum
to the estate, the
benefit of the latter obligation could not in any event be property of the
deceased at her death. As to sub-s.
(2) (a) the respondents contend that
"disposed of" is not to be taken as embracing an act of extinction of a
property (the chose
in action) but relates rather to a displacement or
transfer of property which remains in existence after the act: further they
that sub-s. (2) as a whole does not extend to free estate of the
deceased which is exhaustively dealt with by sub-s. (1). (at p227)
8. Their Lordships consider it convenient at this stage to deal with some of
these points separately, the answers to which can admit
of little doubt. (at
9. The appointment of a debtor as executor has undoubtedly the effect at law
that the cause of action in debt is extinguished:
the liability of the debtor
as such is extinguished, granted that the executor proves the will, with
effect from the death. The
reason is that at law the executor cannot sue
himself: and their Lordships as at present advised see no sufficient reason
for holding
that the interim vesting of the estate in the Public Trustee under
the law of New South Wales pending the grant of probate affects
that general
position. But it is fully established, and their Lordships consider that
there is no need to expound the theory behind
the outcome, that equity will at
once fasten upon the executor an exactly equivalent obligation to account to
those interested in
the estate (whether creditors, legatees, residuary
legatees, or next of kin) for the amount of the debt. The obligation of the
to the testator which existed at the moment of death is converted by
the combined operation of law and equity into exactly the same
obligation with
a different technical character or label or method of enforcement. Their
Lordships in those circumstances can find
no substance in the contention of
the respondents that the result of the appointment of the debtors as executors
is to deny to any
claim against them the quality of property of the testatrix
at her death. The change of label or method of enforcement has no more
effect than has a conversion after the death of loan stock into shares. Their
Lordships observe that this point is advanced
by the respondents on the
(denied) assumption that cll. 4, 5 and 6 would otherwise not assist them: and
it clarifies the matter
to remark that the particular argument - that the
appointment of a debtor as executor would exclude the amount of the debt from
charge to death duty - would be equally valid or invalid if the executor
was not a beneficiary and the residuary legatee was entitled
administration action to an order declaring that the executor was accountable
to him for the amount of the debt; a declaration
that would be followed by
appropriate consequential order and execution, theoretically based on a
devastavit. (at p228)
10. Accordingly their Lordships reject the contention of the respondents that
in any event sub-s. (1) (a) is excluded by the appointment
of the children
debtors as executors. (at p228)
11. The next point to be dealt with is the contention of the appellant that
sub-s. (1) (a) is satisfied by the vesting in law of
the estate in the
executors so as to make them "persons entitled under the will" to property of
the deceased. It was contended that
"entitled" includes entitlement whether
legally or beneficially, and much reliance was placed upon the exception to
sub-s. (1) (a).
This point was withdrawn in the High Court, but their
Lordships allowed it to be taken in a supplementary case for the appellant.
Their Lordships share the inability of the Board in Commissioner of Stamp
Duties v. Perpetual Trustee Co., Ltd.
(1943) AC 425
attribute any
statutory significance, or indeed meaning, to this exception, and must reject
it as a contribution to construction.
A further argument on these lines was
mounted upon consideration of schedule 7A to the
Stamp Duties Act
Lordships are however
wholly unpersuaded that the
Stamp Duties Act
this regard from the general philosophy behind all legislation imposing tax
a death on the free estate of a deceased,
that it looks to beneficial mutation
as the taxable occasion. It would in their Lordships'
opinion be a very
strange system of legislation
that refers chargeability to death duty to the
legal entitlement of a proving executor
as such, and to the legal entitlement
intestacy of an administrator as such, but in the case of an
administrator with will
annexed refers only to beneficial entitlement.
Accordingly their Lordships reject the supplementary contention of the
12. Their Lordships turn now to the basic question in this appeal, upon which
the High Court and the Supreme Court have differed:
whether in view of cll. 4,
5 and 6 it can be rightly said that the forgiveness and release by those
clauses operated to confer upon
the three children an entitlement to property
of the deceased. (at p229)
13. At the moment of her death the testatrix owned the property consisting of
the debts owed to her. She was in a position to confer
on whom she pleased by
her will the benefit of that property, the value of that property, as an act
of testamentary benevolence.
In their Lordships' opinion the essence of the
property is its value - the benefit derivable therefrom: the construction of
(1) (a) which found favour with the High Court, which distinguishes
between the property and its essence, appears to their Lordships
upon too narrow a view of the language of the sub-section. The debt of (for
example) the daughter was undoubtedly property
of the testatrix at her death,
and in the context of the imposition of duty on the death of their Lordships
would construe "to which
any person becomes entitled under the will" as
pointing to the devolution under the terms of the will of the benefit or value
such property. (at p229)
14. The point can be considered in another way. There was not truly a
release of the debt. A debt can only be truly released and
extinguished by
agreement for valuable consideration or under seal. By "giving" or
"forgiving" or "releasing" by will a debt to
the debtor a testator, in their
Lordships' opinion, is but leaving a legacy of the amount of the debt: for it
is clear that by such
purported release the testator cannot remove this asset
from the claims of creditors of the estate and the requirements of funeral
administration expenses: the testator can give to his benefaction no other
status than that of a specific legacy of the value
of the debt. The debt
remains outstanding as an asset of the estate: but, on analysis, the debtor
is in a position to deny an obligation
to pay it to the extent that the
specific legacy is effective as such. The equation of such a testamentary
provision with a legacy
has a long history in authority, with particular
reference to matters such as ademption and lapse: hereunder reference may be
to Izon v. Butler (1815) 2 Price 34
(146 ER 13)
; Sidney v. Sidney
LR 17 Eq 65
; In re Wedmore
(1907) 2 Ch 277
; Attorney-General
v. Holbrook
(1823) 12 Price 407
[1829] EngR 207
(147 ER 761)
(1829) 3 Y & J 114
(148 ER 1115)
Attorney-General v. Hollingworth
[1857] EngR 577
(157 ER 172)
Wentworth on Executors, 14th ed. (1829), p. 71 et seq. - reputedly of the
authorship of
J.; Toller on Executors,
5th ed. (1822), p. 307;
Roper on Legacies, 4th ed. (1847), p. 843. (at p230)
15. In the opinion of their Lordships a "release" such as is to be found in
cll. 4, 5 and 6 is accordingly not a provision which
truly extinguishes the
asset of the estate: it is in truth and reality a legacy of property forming
part of the estate of the testatrix
at her death to which the debtor can only
become entitled under the will, within s. 102 (1) (a). Moreover it is
immaterial if the
same debtor is appointed executor and proves: for as
earlier indicated, that event per se does no more than transmute the liability
in debt into exactly equivalent liability to account which remains property of
the estate. (at p230)
16. In the Supreme Court Jacobs P. reached the conclusion that the case was
covered by s. 102(1) (a) by a different route (1972)
2 NSWLR, at p 654 , a
route which their Lordships with respect do not find easy to follow. No
mention is there made of cll. 4, 5
and 6: reference is made only to the
appointment of the debtors as executors. If it were merely a case of
appointment of executors,
without cll. 4, 5 and 6, the substituted obligation
to account to the estate for the amount of the debts would remain, though on
the facts of the case, having regard to the division of residue in equal
shares, the final distribution of the estate would be achieved
circuited by the daughter paying to each son one-third of the difference
between her indebtedness and that of a son. It
is cll. 4, 5 and 6 that
require an analysis of their effect for the present question, and to those the
learned President on this
question did not advert. (at p230)
17. Hope J.A. dealt first (1972) 2 NSWLR, at pp 658-661 with a submission
that appears to have been made for the present respondents
based solely upon
the appointment of the debtors as executors: which their Lordships understand
to have been a wider submission
than that already dealt with in this opinion -
viz. that accountability in equity of a debtor executor was not property of
the testatrix
at her death. Hope J.A. rightly rejected such submission and
proceeded in terms (1972) 2 NSWLR, at pp 661-662 to find that the provisions
of cll. 4, 5 and 6 were to be considered as legacies and therefore within s.
102 (1) (a), relying particularly upon, and quoting
appositely from, In re
(1907) 2 Ch 277
and Attorney-General v. Holbrook (1823) 12 Price 407;
[1829] EngR 207
(147 ER 761)
(1829) 3 Y &
(148 ER 1115)
. Reynolds J.A. did not add
any reasons of his own. (at p231)
18. In the High Court the principle judgments were those of Stephen J. and
Mason J., the other members of the Court agreeing. (at
19. Stephen J. (1974) 132 CLR, at pp 43-45 concluded that the appointment of
the debtors as executors had no relevant effect upon
the operation of s. 102
(1) (a): and with that their Lordships agree. He then concluded that the
accountability in equity of the
executor debtors, which would not be denied by
the gift of residue in equal shares, is excluded by cll. 4, 5 and 6: but
answer to that in the special feature of the law of New South Wales
that the estate does not vest in the executor on the death but
in the Public
Trustee until grant. However he then considers the argument for the present
respondents based solely upon cll. 4,
5 and 6. He said this (1974) 132 CLR,
"The appellants' alternative submission is that by cll. 4,
5 and 6 of the will the executors' debts were extinguished at
the moment of death: thereafter they were incapable of constituting
property of the deceased and no person could become
entitled to them under the will. This submission has the
merit of giving to these clauses an effect which accords precisely
with their ordinary meaning; each expressly forgives
and releases unto the particular child all sums, whether for
principle or interest, which he or she owes to the testatrix.
There is no question of any gift of the debt itself being made
but only of its forgiveness; claims are relinquished, not transferred.
Only if faced with compelling authority would I be
disposed to regard these clauses in the light for which the
respondent contends, as conferring legacies of the debts upon
the three children. This would be a conceivable, although
curious, mode of discharging indebtedness but the words of
the testatrix do not suggest that this was the course which
recommended itself to her; she adopted, instead, the straight-forward
course of forgiveness and release."
Stephen J. then discusses and analyses a number of the cases already cited in
this opinion on whether such a provision is a legacy.
He placed some reliance
upon the decision of Lord Hardwicke L.C. in Sibthorp v. Moxon
[1747] EngR 192
(1747) 1 Ves Sen
(26 ER 1134)
; 3 Atk 579
in concluding that such a provision is truly an
extinction of the liability rather than a legacy: that decision has
universally
applauded, and their Lordships regard it rather as a decision that
in the particular circumstances of the case
there was a legacy
with sufficient
indication that it was to take effect in favour of the estate of the debtor
rather than lapse
by his predecease of
the testator. Stephen J. concluded
that the cases showed that for many purposes a provision such as this was
analogous to a legacy,
but, not being in reality a legacy but a release, did
not come within the particular language of s. 102(1)
(a). For the reasons
that their Lordships have set out they are unable, with respect, to agree with
that conclusion: however expressed
(and there are
many modes of expression
designed to confer the same benefaction, some of which were admitted to
constitute purely
a legacy) the
benefaction can only be a legacy, and lacks
the full indicia of a true release in the sense of extinction or annihilation
obligation so as to result in no entitlement being conferred to
property of the deceased. (at p232)
20. Mason J. initially said (1974) 132 CLR, at p 54 :
"In relation to the express provision for release of the
debts, the point at issue is whether it exonerated or extinguished
the debts or was a bequest of property operating
as a legacy".
Mason J. also considered the authorities and text books on the nature of such
a provision to which reference has been made, with especial
reference to
Attorney-General v. Holbrook (1823) 12 Price 407
[1829] EngR 207
(147 ER 761)
3 Y & J 114
(148 ER 1115)
and In re Wedmore
. He criticizes the judgment
of Graham B. in the former case in its equation of the debt to a sum of money
in the hands
- an approach which appears to be reflected in the
judgment of Jacobs P. in the Supreme Court - with, in their Lordships'
justification. Nevertheless their Lordships are unable to agree with the
conclusion, based as it is upon the view that
in this form is other
than a disposition of an asset of the estate in favour of the debtor. (at
21. In the event their Lordships find it unnecessary to decide whether in the
alternative there is here a case of "property disposed
of by will" within s.
102(2) (a), a contention that was not considered to be worthy of discussion in
the judgments of either the
Supreme Court or in the High Court. (at p232)
22. There remains for determination the question whether the quantum upon
which duty is chargeable in respect of these debts is
the amount outstanding
at the date of death, or the actuarial value at the death of the obligation to
repay those amounts by instalments
of $375 annually. This depends upon
consideration of the true construction and effect of the loan agreements, and
in particular
whether the executors of the testatrix were able thereunder to
call in the principal of the debts or not. Another possibility was
before their Lordships, that perhaps the executors had no such power, but had
the ability to assign on sale the benefit
of the debts to another who could
call for the principal outstanding: if that were the correct conclusion it
was accepted by counsel
for the appellant that the matter should be remitted
for ascertainment of the value of such right of disposal. (at p233)
23. The Supreme Court decided that the value of the property that was
chargeable in respect of these debts was the full amount outstanding:
declined to follow a decision in the contrary sense of Owen J. in Bray v.
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1968] HCA 56
117 CLR 349
on a loan agreement in
relevantly identical terms. In the High Court it was not necessary to decide
this point: but
indicated that he would have been prepared to
follow Owen J. (1974) 132 CLR, at p 43 : and Mason J. expressed a "firm
preference"
for the views of Owen J. (1974) 132 CLR, at p 56 . (at p233)
24. It is necessary in order to examine this point to set out an example of
the loan agreements in full. That of one son was as
"THIS AGREEMENT made this sixteenth day of MAY one
thousand nine hundred and sixty-nine BETWEEN ALICE BONE
...(hereinafter called the 'Lender') of the one part and
TREVOR DONALD BONE...(hereinafter called the 'Borrower')
of the other part WHEREAS the Lender at the request
of the Borrower has agreed to lend to the Borrower on the
terms and conditions hereinafter set out the principal sum of
Twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) the receipt whereof
is hereby acknowledged AND WHEREAS the Borrower has
agreed to repay the said principal sum to the Lender on the
terms and conditions hereinafter set out
NOW IT IS HEREBY AGREED as follows:
1. The said principal sum or so much thereof as for the
time being remains owing by the Borrower to the Lender is
hereinafter called 'the loan debt'.
2. The loan debt shall be paid in full by the Borrower to
the Lender upon the expiration of ninety (90) days written
notice given by the Lender under her own hand to the Borrower
requiring the Borrower to pay in full the amount of
the said loan debt.
3. If the Lender by assignment made in accordance with
Section 12 of the Conveyancing Act 1919-1954 of the State of
New South Wales should assign the said loan debt to any
person then the assignee shall be entitled to obtain payment
in full of the said loan debt in the same manner as the
Lender could have obtained payment thereof in pursuance
of Clause 2 thereof.
4. Subject to Clauses 2 and 3 hereof the Borrower shall
pay to the Lender or her assignee in reduction of the said
debt annual instalments of not less than three hundred and
seventy-five dollars ($375) the first of such annual payments
to be paid on the first day of December 1969 and subject to
Clauses 2 and 3 hereof each subsequent annual payment is to
be paid at the end of each succeeding year ending on the
first day of December.
5. If default be made in payment of the first or any subsequent
payment payable in pursuance of Clause 4 hereof for
a period of more than sixty (60) days after the date herein-before
fixed for the payment of any such annual payment
then simple interest at the rate of five per centum (5%) per
annum shall be payable on the loan debt in respect of the
period during which such default continues.
6. Should the Borrower having been required to pay the
loan debt pursuant to either Clause 2 or Clause 3 hereof fail
so to do then simple interest at the rate of five per centum
(5%) per annum shall be payable on the amount of the loan
debt outstanding at the date when the Lender or her assignee
shall have given written notice to the Borrower in pursuance
of Clauses 2 or 3 hereof and shall be payable in respect of the
period commencing at the date of the expiration of the aforesaid
written notice and ending on the date when the loan
debt is paid in full to the Lender or her assignee.
7. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this agreement
the Borrower shall have the right to repay the loan debt in
full at any time or to anticipate the payment of any one or
more of the aforesaid annual payments and for the purposes
of the foregoing provisions of this agreement the payment in
anticipation of any such annual instalment shall be treated
as the payment of that instalment on the date fixed for the
payment thereof by Clause 4 hereof.
8. If requested in writing by the Lender or by an assignee
to whom or to which the loan debt has been assigned in
accordance with the foregoing provisions hereof the Borrower
shall execute a charge over his property for the
amount of the loan debt."
It is contended for the respondents that the only persons who can call up for
payment the whole amount of the debt are (a) the lender
himself in vivo and
(b) an assignee inter vivos of the lender: and that neither the lender's
personal representative, nor that assignee's
personal representative, nor an
assign of that assignee or of any such personal representative has the right
to do so. (The point
was not debated whether an involuntary assignee in
bankruptcy would have the ability.) The respondents, and Owen J. in the Bray
[1968] HCA 56
(1968) 117 CLR 349
, founded upon the words "under her own hand" in cl.
2, and their incorporation by the words
"in the same
manner" in cl. 3 in the
case of an assignee. Jacobs P. considered that those words were satisfied by a
requirement that,
to the ordinary situation
in law, the notice be not
given by an agent: that it was in the ordinary nature of a debt that
of it were enforceable
by assignees in due form, and by persons such
as personal representatives standing in the shoes
of the original
creditor or
taking his place as owner of the debt by due assignment or further
assignment: and he remarks
correctly that
in many places the word
manifestly included the personal representatives of the original lender (1972)
at pp 654-656
. Hope J.A. arrived
at the same conclusion for similar
reasons (1972) 2 NSWLR, at pp 663-666 . (at p235)
25. Their Lordships are of opinion that in this respect the Supreme Court was
right, and that the decision of Owen J. in the Bray
[1968] HCA 56
(1968) 117 CLR 349
should not be followed. (at p235)
26. The recital of an agreement to repay to "the Lender"; the agreement in
cl. 2 to repay to "the Lender"; the reference in cl.
3 to repayment to "the
assignee"; the agreement in cl. 4 to pay instalments to "the Lender or her
assignee"; the second reference
in cl. 6 to "the Lender or her assignee": in
all these instances it is clear in their Lordships' opinion that personal
representatives
are included. It is not to be expected that the calling in of
the full debt should be restricted to the original lender inter vivos,
(supposedly) to the first assignee from the original lender in that assignee's
lifetime, whether that assignee be an individual
or a corporation. Such a
scheme would not appear to have any rational basis, granted that the testatrix
intended to preserve some
ability to make the debt worth its principal value:
for a purchaser of the debt by assignment from the testatrix might be
to pay a full price if his personal representatives (should the
purchaser die before giving notice) could not give it: and still
more so if,
as seems implicit in the argument for the respondents, he could not in turn on
further sale confer upon his assignee
a right to call in the whole debt.
Their Lordships do not say that it would be impossible so to draft such an
agreement as to make
the principal sum immediately repayable only if called
for by the original lender in her lifetime: though it might be that under
some other provision for a charge to death duty a chargeable benefit might
arise on the death in those circumstances. But their
Lordships are of opinion
that the particular language relied upon by the respondents to exclude the
normal ability of personal representatives
to exercise all rights to enforce a
debt belonging to a testatrix is insufficient for that purpose. (at p236)
27. In summary therefore their Lordships are of opinion that the appeal
should be allowed, and the order of the Supreme Court restored
accordingly the questions posed by the case stated by the Commissioner of
Stamp Duties should be answered (1) Yes; (2)
$93,475; (3) $16,732.96. They
will humbly advise Her Majesty accordingly. In accordance with the
undertaking which he lodged
the appellant must pay the respondents' costs of
this appeal and the order for costs made by the High Court will be left
undisturbed.
(PRIVY COUNCIL.)
THE COMMISSIONER OF STAMP DUTIES.......APPELLANT;
FOR THE STATE OF NEW SOUTH
BONE AND OTHERS........................RESPONDENTS.
ON APPEAL FROM THE HIGH COURT OF
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter