Liu and Minister for Immigration and Citizenship (Citizenship) [2025] ARTA 2437 (14 November 2025)
Liu and Minister for Immigration and Citizenship (Citizenship) [2025] ARTA
2437 (14 November 2025)
Applicant: Jiaqi Liu
Respondent: Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
Tribunal Number: 2025/1299
Tribunal: General Member K Thornton
Place: Melbourne
Date: 14 November 2025
The Tribunal affirms the decision under review.
........................[SGD].............................
General Member K Thornton
CITIZENSHIP
– citizen of China – application for Australian citizenship –
failure to satisfy general residence requirement
– spouse of Australian
citizen – Ministerial discretion at
Australian Citizenship
(Cth) – whether close and continuing association with Australia
– whether discretion enlivened – decision affirmed
Legislation
Citizenship Act 2007
Fricke and Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
(Citizenship)
[2024] AATA 964
Hammad v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
Judd v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v Han
[2015] FCAFC 79
Re Drake and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No
(1979) 2 ALD 634
See and Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,
Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs (Citizenship)
[2020] AATA
Secondary Materials
Australian Citizenship Policy Statement
(approval date 19 December
CPI 1 – Citizenship by Conferral – General Eligibility
(issued 9 May 2025)
CPI 8 – Residence Requirements and Discretions
(reissued 1 July
CPI 11 – Assessing likelihood to reside or continue to reside in, or
maintain a close and continuing association with Australia
(as updated 4
October 2024)
CPI 17 – Decision-making under the
Citizenship Act
(as updated 7
February 2025)
CPI 33 – Prohibitions on approval
(reissued 31 October 2021)
Statement of Reasons
INTRODUCTION
application is about the exercise of the Ministerial discretion under
Australian Citizenship Act 2007
(Cth) (‘the Act’).
Applicant is a 40-year-old citizen of China. She applied for Australian
citizenship by conferral under the general eligibility
criteria of the Act. The
Applicant sought to rely on the Ministerial discretion under
to overcome her failure to meet the general residence requirement under
of the Act.
delegate of the Respondent refused the application (‘decision under
review’). The delegate decided not to exercise the
Ministerial discretion
in the Applicant’s favour as they were not satisfied the Applicant had a
close and continuing association
with Australia during the relevant period as
required by
of the Act. The Applicant sought review of this decision
with the Tribunal.
the following reasons, the Tribunal has decided to affirm the decision under
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
of the Act provides that a person may make an application to the Minister
to become an Australian citizen.
provides that if a person makes an application under
, the Minister
must, by writing, approve or refuse to approve the person becoming an Australian
states that an application may be made to the Tribunal for review of
decisions made under
to refuse to approve a person becoming an Australian
General eligibility criteria
contains the general eligibility criteria for Australian citizenship.
Relevant to this application,
provides that a person is eligible to
become an Australian citizen if the Minister is satisfied that the person
satisfies the general
residence requirement under
of the Act, or the
special residence requirement under
of the Act or satisfies the
defence service requirement under
, at the time the person made the
application.
of the Act contains the general residence requirement.
Section 22(1)
(1) Subject to this section, for the purposes of
satisfies the general residence requirement if:
(a) the person was present in Australia for the period of 4 years
immediately before the day the person made the application;
(b) the person was not present in Australia as an unlawful
non‑citizen at any time during that 4 year period; and
(c) the person was present in Australia as a permanent resident for the
period of 12 months immediately before the day the person
application.
(1B) provide for allowances of overseas absences for the purposes
ss 22(1)(a)
and (c) of the Act as follows:
(a) the person was absent from Australia for a part of the period of 4
years immediately before the day the person made the application;
(b) the total period of the absence or absences was not more than 12
then, for the purposes of paragraph (1)(a), the person is taken to have been
present in Australia during each period of absence.
(a) the person was absent from Australia for a part of the period of 12
months immediately before the day the person made the
application; and
(b) the total period of the absence or absences was not more than 90 days;
(c) the person was a permanent resident during each period of
then, for the purposes of paragraph (1)(c), the person is taken to have been
present in Australia as a permanent resident during each
period of absence.
Ministerial discretion
, (4A), (5), (5A), (6), (9) and (11) provide for partial exemptions or the
exercise of Ministerial discretions in relation to the
requirements of
of the Act. Relevantly,
contains the following Ministerial discretion:
(9) If the person is the spouse, de facto partner or surviving spouse or de
facto partner of an Australian citizen at the time the
person made the
application, the Minister may treat a period as one in which the person was
present in Australia as a permanent resident
(a) the person was a spouse or de facto partner of that Australian citizen
during that period; and
(b) the person was not present in Australia during that period; and
(c) the person was a permanent resident during that period; and
(d) the Minister is satisfied that the person had a close and continuing
association with Australia during that period.
has been considered by the Full Court of the Federal Court in
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v Han
held that the purpose of provisions such as
‘is to qualify or
ameliorate the strictness of the general residence
requirement.’
The Court also
held that the intent of
was to ensure that spouses of Australian
citizens meet the same criteria as other adult applicants and don’t merely
a spousal relationship.
Court held that
confers a discretion upon the Minister ‘to
“waive” part or all of the residence requirements for the spouse of
an Australian citizen who could demonstrate a close and continuing association
with Australia.’
was held by Perry J in
Judd v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
that the expression “close and continuing
association” should be given its ordinary
Her Honour held:
As such, I accept that the expression requires more than that there be some
evidence of a relevant kind of association. Rather it
is to be objectively
assessed, and requires “
a qualitative assessment of the ultimate
significance of an applicant’s circumstances
”: Re Sabumei and
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2014] AATA 648
it in issue that the concept of a “
close and continuing
association
” is a broad one, requiring the Minister to adopt what
senior counsel for the applicant described as “
a multi-factorial
was also considered by Abraham J in
Hammad v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
The purpose of
is to enliven a discretion to treat a period of time
when an applicant for citizenship is outside of Australia as time spent in
in circumstances where a decision-maker is satisfied as a matter of
fact that such an association has been established. Given the
requirements for
citizenship, the Citizenship Act approaches an application on the basis that
time spent in Australia is prima facie
indicative of a close association with
As the respondent submitted,
a person does not come within the exception
simply by establishing some form of connection with Australia or with
Australians or with
something that is connected to Australia
. Rather, the
nature of the proximity to Australia needs to be assessed in light of the
statutory scheme.
It needs to be of such a nature as to warrant a departure
from the application, that is the strict application, of the residence
requirements.
That is a factual assessment.
POLICY GUIDANCE
Citizenship Policy and Citizenship Procedural
Instructions
Department has issued policy guidance for considering whether a person has a
close and continuing association with Australia.
Australian Citizenship
Policy Statement
(‘Policy’) outlines the legislative
requirements for citizenship, the rights and responsibilities of an Australian
and other citizenship related
It also provides context
for the Citizenship Procedural Instructions (‘CPI’) used by
decision-makers when making decisions
Whilst the Policy and CPI are
not binding on the Tribunal, decision-makers should generally apply such policy
unless there are cogent
reasons not
The Tribunal finds that
there is no reason why the Policy or CPI should not be applied in this
relevant CPIs that provide policy guidance in this case are
Citizenship by Conferral – General Eligibility
(issued 9 May
Residence Requirements and Discretions
(reissued 1 July
Assessing likelihood to reside or continue to reside in, or maintain a close and
continuing association with Australia
(as updated 4 October
Decision-making under the Citizenship Act
(as updated 7 February
Prohibitions on approval
(reissued 31 October
The Tribunal has had
regard to the CPIs and has applied them to the circumstances of this
Applicant’s personal circumstances
Applicant was born in Guangdong, China. She first arrived in Australia on 28 May
2006 on a Student visa at 21 years of
20 May 2007, she married her husband Mr Chin Hung Yip in Melbourne,
2 November 2009, she was granted permanent residence via a Partner (Permanent)
(Subclass 801) visa.
4 November 2009, her husband Mr Yip obtained Australian
citizenship.
9 October 2018, the Applicant departed
10 November 2018, Mr Yip also departed
Applicant and her husband did not return to Australia until 15 December
Application for Australian citizenship
4 December 2023, the Applicant applied for Australian citizenship by
The Applicant was
outside of Australia at the time of her application. She sought to rely on the
Ministerial discretion at s 22(9)
of the Act which would in effect treat a
period of absence from Australia, as a period in which she was present in
Australia for
the purposes of satisfying the general residence requirements of
15 November 2024, the Department requested further information from the
Applicant regarding her relationship with her
The Department also
requested the Applicant provide any additional evidence which would allow her to
demonstrate that she had a close
and continuing association with Australia
during her period of
or about 18 November 2024, the Applicant provided a written statement to the
Department.
She addressed the
following dot points that were raised in the Department correspondence dated 15
November 2024 as follows:
(a) Current living arrangements in China.
(i) The Applicant wrote that she and her husband sometimes stay at her
parents’ house in Guangzhou and sometimes they stay
at her husband’s
parents’ house in the city of Hong Kong. She said they do not have any
lease or permanent accommodation
(b) Property usage in Australia:
(i) She stated that her property in Australia is not leased out and they always
keep it available for their use and they intend to
their mortgage and rates on the property and their furniture and belongings are
in the property. She
also has an active Australian superannuation
The Applicant provided
copies of her home loan bank statement, council rates notice, and superannuation
account statement.
(c) Employment and evidence of income tax payment in Australia:
(i) The Applicant stated that the reason for their absence from Australia is to
visit her husband’s parents and for tourism.
She said they have not been
employed for the past four
(ii) She provided ATO Notices of Assessment for the past four
(d) Active participation in Australian community-based activities or
organisations during overseas absence:
(i) The Applicant stated that when they are in Melbourne, they participate in an
organisation known as Global Galaxy Systems Pty
Ltd. She said they make active
contributions to this organisation during their overseas absence. She provided a
letter of support
organisation.
They also have
ongoing connections with their friends in
(e) Expected date of return to Australia:
(i) The Applicant stated they expect to reside permanently in Australia on 15
December 2024 and attached a copy of her flight
January 2025, the Applicant provided the Department with an updated Chinese
Criminal Record Clearance
Certificate.
15 December 2024, the Applicant and her husband returned to
this stage, the Applicant had been absent from Australia for over six years and
two months. She was not present in Australia at
all during the four-year period
immediately prior to her application for Australian citizenship, nor in the
12-month period immediately
prior to her application.
Delegate’s decision
29 January 2025, the delegate refused the application for Australian citizenship
on the basis the Applicant did not satisfy the
general residence requirement
under s 21(2)(c) of the Act.
delegate decided not to exercise the Ministerial discretion under s 22(9) of the
Act as they were not satisfied that the Applicant
had a close and continuing
association with Australia during the relevant four-year period (s
delegate was satisfied that the Applicant was a spouse of an Australian citizen
(s 22(9)(a)). The delegate was also satisfied
that the Applicant was not present
in Australia during the relevant period (s 22(9)(b)) and that she was a
permanent resident (s
delegate had regard to the Applicant’s written statement lodged at the
time of her application that she had travelled to
China in late 2018 to visit
her husband’s parents and
grandmother.
She also stated
that she was unable to return to Australia due to COVID-19 travel restrictions
and health concerns. She stated her
grandmother-in-law had passed away in
September 2023 and she had always intended to return to
The Applicant also
declared ties with her Australian citizen husband and her parents who live in
Australia as permanent
delegate was not satisfied that the Applicant’s familial ties alone equate
to a close and continuing connection to
The delegate gave
less weight to the fact of home ownership in Australia, as she had been residing
in China for the entire four years
prior to the lodgement of her application.
The delegate also noted that the Applicant had not paid any income tax in the
prior to lodgement.
The delegate had regard to the Applicant’s Australian bank accounts and
superannuation but considered that these claims do
not demonstrate a strong
ongoing link with Australia in the
delegate therefore was not satisfied that the Applicant had a close and
continuing association with Australia during the relevant
period, and therefore
decided not to exercise the discretion at s 22(9) of the
Applicant was found to have not satisfied the general residence requirement
under s 21(2)(c) of the Act.
delegate therefore refused to approve the Applicant becoming an Australian
citizen under s 24(1) of the
Application for review
15 February 2025, the Applicant lodged an application for review of the
delegate’s decision with the
6 April 2025, the Applicant provided the Tribunal with a seven-page overview of
her close and continuing association with
She stated that she
and her husband jointly own three properties in Australia, one of which is their
primary residence. She stated
they do not own any property in
stated that during her absence from Australia she has actively contributed to
the Australian community through her volunteer work
with Global Galaxy Systems
Pty Ltd. She also stated she was on unpaid leave from her Australian employer
(Wimble St Childcare) and
has now resumed this employment. She spent over 10
years in Australia prior to her departure. She stated that her entire extended
family and professional network is in
She does not own
property or businesses in China, nor does she have employment or community work
She said she initially
planned to spend one year with her husband and his family overseas, however the
COVID-19 pandemic and various
lockdowns triggered widespread travel restrictions
across China which prevented their return to
The Applicant also
referred to previous Tribunal decisions in support of her contentions that she
has demonstrated a close and continuing
association with Australia.
29 April 2025, the Applicant provided the Tribunal with a copy of an employment
contract with Wimble St
The employment
contract states that the Applicant commenced employment as an Early Childhood
Educator on 31 March 2025.
contract was said to be valid only while the child she is caring for is actively
enrolled in an Inclusion Support Program, and
should the child exit the program,
the employment contract will
29 May 2025, the Applicant provided the Tribunal with a document containing
information on Global Galaxy Systems Pty
The document states that
the Applicant has served as a Global Committee Member since the company’s
founding in 2014. Since
2019, the Applicant has been serving as a Program
Coordinator and has oversight and leadership of the ‘Pre-FCC Exam
2 June 2025, the Respondent lodged its Statement of Facts, Issues and
Contentions
provided an Australian National Audit Office Report titled
Management of
International Travel Restrictions during COVID-19
and a report on the
Review of the Pandemic (Quarantine, Isolation and Testing) Orders
the Parliament of Victoria’s Pandemic Declaration Accountability and
Oversight Committee dated July
15 June 2025, the Applicant filed a Reply to the Respondent’s SOFIC and
provided the following further
(a) Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development,
Communications and the Arts report titled ‘Australian aviation
2024-2050’ dated May
(b) Internet article titled ‘Chinese Taken From Homes by Police to
Coronavirus Quarantine Camps’ by the National Vaccine
Information Center
dated 12 February 2020 and accessed on 15 June
(c) Internet article titled ‘Control policies for intl (sic) flights to
end after restrictions ease’ by the State Council,
the People’s
Republic of China dated 30 December 2022 and accessed on 15 June
(d) Australian National Audit Office Report titled ‘COVID-19 Support to
the Aviation Sector’ dated
(e) Australian Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman article titled
‘Small business worth more than half a trillion
dollars to the Australian
economy’ dated 26 June
20 June 2025, the Respondent filed Reply
Submissions.
Tribunal hearing
17 September 2025, the Tribunal hearing was held by video at the
Tribunal’s Melbourne Registry. The Applicant was self-represented
proceedings. The Respondent was represented by Ms Mary Baras-Miller of the
Australian Government Solicitor.
Tribunal received into evidence as Exhibit R1 a combined Joint Hearing Book
which comprised 986 pages of material. The Applicant
was given an opportunity to
make opening submissions. During these submissions the Applicant referred to a
number of authorities
in support of her review. The Applicant was granted leave
to provide a list of these authorities by 19 September 2025. The Applicant
provided her list of authorities on 18 September 2025.
the Tribunal hearing, the Applicant gave evidence and was cross-examined. The
Applicant also called evidence from the following
(a) Mr Chin Hung Yip (the Applicant’s husband);
(b) Ms Lisa Fitzgerald (the Applicant’s employer at Wimble St Childcare);
(c) Mr Kevin Yu (Vice-President, Global Galaxy Systems Pty Ltd).
hearing was completed on 17 September 2025 and the Tribunal reserved its
ISSUE TO BE DETERMINED
central issue to be determined in this case is whether the Tribunal should
exercise the Ministerial discretion at s 22(9) of the
Applicant’s favour. Exercising the discretion in the Applicant’s
favour would allow the Applicant to satisfy
the general residence requirement at
s 21(2)(c) which is one of eight general eligibility criteria under the
Ministerial discretion in s 22(9) may be exercised in a person’s favour
(a) the person was a spouse or de facto partner of an Australian citizen
during that period; and
(b) the person was not present in Australia during that period; and
(c) the person was a permanent resident during that period; and
(d) the Minister is satisfied that the person had a close and continuing
association with Australia during that period.
Respondent accepts that the Applicant meets s 22(9)(a), (b) and (c) of the
This is because during the
relevant period the Applicant was married to her Australian citizen spouse, she
was not present in Australia,
and she was a permanent
The Tribunal also
accepts that the Applicant meets s 22(9)(a), (b) and (c) of the Act and makes
this finding.
issue to be determined by the Tribunal therefore is whether it is satisfied the
Applicant had a close and continuing association
with Australia during the
relevant period under s 22(9)(d). If the Tribunal determines that s 22(9)(d) is
satisfied, then it must
consider whether to exercise the Ministerial discretion
in s 22(9) in the Applicant’s favour. If the Tribunal determines that
22(9)(d) is not satisfied, then the decision under review must be affirmed.
relevant period in the Applicant’s case is 3 December 2019 to 3 December
CONTENTIONS
Applicant’s contentions
Applicant filed a Reply to the Respondent’s SOFIC. In this document, the
Applicant set out her contentions in support of
the exercise of the Ministerial
discretion in her favour. She stated that she was prevented from returning to
Australia during the
relevant four-year period due to ‘compelling and
compassionate reasons’, which were predominantly the result of the
restrictions.
Applicant stated that from 1 February 2020, the Australian Government imposed
travel restrictions on foreign nationals entering
She also noted that
until 22 April 2022, various pandemic orders remained in force. She said that
although Australian permanent residents
were eligible for exemptions to return
to Australia between February 2020 and April 2022, she faced difficulties
securing a flight
due to limited flight availability and a significant increase
in airfare prices.
She and her
husband also experienced illness in 2023, and her husband’s grandmother
passed away.
said she has been continuously employed in Australia since 2010 until her last
departure. She purchased properties in Melbourne
in 2011, 2013 and finally her
principal place of residence in 2016. The Applicant states this demonstrates a
pre-existing connection
with Australia and an ongoing intention to reside
permanently in Australia.
Applicant stated she has also established strong and personal community ties
through her ongoing active involvement in Global
Galaxy Systems Pty Ltd since
She stated that the
contribution of Global Galaxy Systems should be recognised for its broader
contribution to Australian
Since returning to
Melbourne, she has resumed employment with her former employer. She stated that
her ownership of two investment
properties in Melbourne has also contributed to
the Australian economy by providing rental
Applicant also referred to a number of previous Tribunal decisions in support of
She stated that each
of these decisions support her contentions that she has a close and continuing
association with Australia, because
her circumstances are stronger than the
circumstances of the applicants referred to in those
her closing submissions, she said significant weight should be attributed to the
health and safety considerations which prevented
her return to Australia. She
said her physical absence from Australia is relevant but not decisive in these
circumstances. She relied
upon her participation and volunteer work with Global
Galaxy Systems Pty Ltd since 2014 as evidence of providing a significant
contribution
to the Australian community. She said that otherwise she has lived
in Melbourne since 2006 and she and her husband own three properties
Melbourne, with one of those properties being their principal place of
residence. She now lives and works in Melbourne and has
genuine ties in
Australia. She said these factors support her contention that the Tribunal
should set aside the decision under review
and exercise the Ministerial
discretion in her favour.
Respondent’s contentions
Respondent contends that the Ministerial discretion under s 22(9) should not be
exercised in this case. The Respondent notes that
the Applicant was not present
at all during the relevant four-year period before the application, or in the 12
months before the
date of the
application.
It is contended
that the Applicant did not have a close and continuing association with
Australia during the relevant period, and
therefore s 22(9)(d) is not
is submitted that her absence from Australia, whilst not determinative, is a
highly relevant and important factor in determining
the Applicant’s close
and continuing association with Australia during the relevant
The Respondent contends
there is a lack of evidence to establish that the Applicant attempted to, or was
unable to, leave China or
enter Australia during the relevant
It is submitted that the
Applicant’s physical absence from Australia for the duration of the
relevant period should weigh heavily
against a finding that she maintained a
close and continuing association with Australia during that
is further submitted that the purchase of investment properties is a financial
decision and is not indicative of a close and continuing
association with
The Respondent
submits that the Applicant’s involvement in Global Galaxy Systems Pty Ltd
whilst overseas was limited, as is
the impact this organisation has on the
Australian community. It is submitted that this should only be given minor
is acknowledged that her spouse, her parents, and friends and colleagues are
located in Australia, but the requirement to maintain
a close and continuing
association refers to an association with Australia, not with
Australians.
Documentary evidence
Applicant’s written statements
support of her application, the Applicant submitted various materials including
a 14-page written statement. The Applicant’s
main points are as follows:
(a) The COVID-19 pandemic travel restrictions, combined with public protests and
the health crisis in China and Australia hindered
She states that by
January 2020, China had implemented strict lockdowns and imposed stringent
travel restrictions. According to the
Applicant, from March 2020 to early 2023,
China enforced strict travel restrictions which drastically reduced the number
of available
international
(b) Although travel restrictions began easing in January 2023, international
travel remained challenging. She noted that China was
experiencing a high number
of COVID-19 cases and deaths which further hindered her return to
(c) In early 2023, the Applicant and her husband contracted COVID-19, as did her
elderly grandmother-in-law. She passed away later
that year, and the Applicant
remained in China to support her husband through his
(d) She became aware that Melbourne was subject to significant lockdowns, public
protests and unrest which made it difficult for
her to return to
(e) She otherwise relies on her ownership of three properties in Melbourne, that
her and husband have a longstanding history of tax
compliance, her maintenance
of bank accounts and her contribution to Australia through Global Galaxy Systems
(f) She also has strong family ties to her husband who is an Australian citizen
and her parents who are permanent
Applicant also lodged two further statements in support of her citizenship
application with the Department (both dated 3 December
2023) in which she refers
to her close ties with her family and friends in Melbourne, and the fact she has
lived in Melbourne since
She described the difficulties she experienced in China with lockdown
restrictions, and the passing of her
grandmother-in-law.
Department requested further information in November 2024, the Applicant
provided a written statement confirming that she
and her husband own a home in
Australia and plan to return to live there when she returns in December 2024.
She also relied upon
contributions she made whilst overseas to Global Galaxy
Systems Pty Ltd.
Applicant’s financial evidence
Applicant provided the following financial evidence in support of her
application which can be divided into the following broad
categories.
Evidence of home ownership
Applicant provided the following evidence which establishes that she and her
husband jointly own three properties in Melbourne.
The evidence shows that two
of these properties are investment properties and one is their principal place
of residence. That evidence
is as follows:
(a) Council rate notices for the Applicant’s three properties for the
period 2019 to 2024;
(b) Home loan statements for the period 2019 to
(c) Body corporate fees for the period 2019 to
(d) Home insurance documents;
(e) Utility bills for the investment
properties.
Evidence of payment of income tax
Applicant provided ATO Notices of Assessment which showed that the Applicant and
her husband paid income tax for the financial
years ending 2011 to
Applicant also provided Notices of Assessment which showed that she did not pay
income tax for the financial years 2021 through
Applicant’s husband did not pay income tax for the financial years 2021 to
2023 but did pay income tax in
Evidence of Australian-held bank accounts and
superannuation
Applicant has provided evidence that she jointly holds Australian bank accounts
with her husband.
has also provided evidence that she holds an Australian superannuation account
and has been a member of this fund since December
Oral evidence
Tribunal received oral evidence from the following witnesses:
The Applicant
Applicant told the Tribunal that she jointly owned three properties in Melbourne
during the relevant period. She kept their belongings
in their principal place
of residence so that the couple could return at any time. She said during that
period, they paid the mortgages
and land tax as required.
terms of her employment, she said her previous role was always open to her and
when she returned, she was offered her role back.
described the volunteer work she does with Global Galaxy Systems Pty Ltd.
said she had a strong association with Australia during the relevant period. Her
friends and family reside in Australia. She only
travelled to China to accompany
her husband to visit his family. The COVID-19 pandemic prevented their return.
Despite this absence,
she never abandoned her commitment to Australia.
cross-examination, the Applicant gave evidence that flights from China to
Australia were very limited, and she was also concerned
with the health risks of
taking a long-haul flight. She acknowledged that an exemption existed for
Australian citizens and permanent
residents to return to Australia, but she said
the flights from China at that time were very costly and limited.
Applicant was cross-examined about the relevance in her personal statements
regarding the Victorian lockdowns. She said she was
worried about her personal
safety upon returning from China, and she did not want to leave one city to go
to another city and still
experience lockdowns. She didn’t want to lose
her freedom in Victoria because of the lockdowns, and she was very concerned
have prevented her return, but she didn’t want
to lose her freedom if she
did return. She returned in 2024 and has remained in Australia since.
was also cross-examined about her role with Global Galaxy Systems Pty Ltd. She
said she was involved in organising personal development
courses and helping
people to build communication skills. She helps to prepare materials for the
courses and develops programs.
Mr Chin Hung Yip
Yip confirmed that he is the Applicant’s husband, and the pair were
married in 2007. He first came to Australia in 2001 and
obtained Australian
citizenship in 2009.
left Australia for China in November 2018 to visit family. He had intended to
of 2020. He is not currently
employed but was previously employed as an engineer. He wasn’t employed
while he was in China.
cross-examination, he said when the pandemic started it was not possible to
conscious at the time and
didn’t want to risk being placed in detention in China if he tested
positive for COVID-19. He said
that when the airports opened in China, a lot of
people were getting sick. He then got the news that his grandmother was very
and she later passed away. Mr Yip recalled researching flights from China
to Australia but said the availability was very low and
the cost was very high.
He said they couldn’t book any flights home at the time, and they also had
major concerns for their
health if they did travel.
Ms Lisa Fitzgerald
Fitzgerald confirmed she has worked at Wimble St Childcare for 30 years and is
the Applicant’s current employer. She has
responsibility for managing the
hiring of staff across the childcare centre. She confirmed that the Applicant
first commenced working
at the centre in 2012. When the Applicant returned from
China, she offered the Applicant a role as an educator which she commenced
February 2025. She confirmed the Applicant works two days a week and her
fixed-term role will last at least one year.
cross-examination, she clarified that the Applicant’s employment is
ongoing but that her role may change. She said the
Applicant commenced unpaid
leave when she left the centre in 2018. They kept extending her leave due to the
pandemic. Ms Fitzgerald
said that the Applicant kept in email contact with the
centre while she was away. She thinks the Applicant emailed at least once
year, but she can’t be certain about that.
Mr Kevin Yu
Yu gave evidence via telephone from Hong Kong. He is the current vice-president
of Global Galaxy Systems Pty Ltd. He said he has
known the Applicant since 2014
through various roles she has undertaken in that company. He said Global Galaxy
Systems is a not-for-profit
organisation. The Applicant has contributed to the
organisation by helping to develop programs and as a trainer for some of their
cross-examination, Mr Yu said Global Galaxy Systems has contributed to
Australian society by helping people develop healthy
lifestyles. The Applicant
has helped run programs that have approximately 200-300 participants. She has
worked at some of the local
churches across Melbourne to help develop and
facilitate these programs.
CONSIDERATION
Does the Applicant satisfy s 22(9)(d) of the Act?
22(9)(d) requires the Tribunal to be satisfied that the Applicant had a close
and continuing association with Australia during
the four-year period
immediately before the day she made her citizenship application. The Applicant
applied for Australian citizenship
on 4 December
The relevant four-year
period is therefore 3 December 2019 to 3 December 2023.
assess whether the Applicant had a close and continuing association with
Australia during the relevant period, the Tribunal has
had regard to the factors
identified at paragraphs 3.5 and 3.6 of CPI 11.
Close and continuing association with Australia
3.5 of CPI 11 provides guidance on what is meant by close and continuing
association with Australia:
The words comprising the phrase 'likely to maintain a close and continuing
association' are given their ordinary meaning in the context
in which they
appear. The Macquarie Dictionary Online defines:
• 'maintain' as to keep in existence or continuance; preserve;
• 'close' as near, or near together, in space, time, or
• 'continuing' as to last or endure;
• 'association' as the act of associating ... connection or
combination.
requirement to maintain a close and continuing association refers to an
association with Australia, not
Australians.
It also requires
an applicant to demonstrate that they are participating in the Australian
community, although they are not residing
in Australia. The CPI provides that
this may include, but is not limited to:
participation in
a community group that provides services or engages in activities of benefit to
the Australian community;
undertaking
education or profession-based studies with an Australian institution; or
membership of a
board or committee of a club, charity or other entity that provides services,
recreational or educational opportunities
Tribunal has had regard to the guidance at paragraph 4 of CPI 11 which states
that an assessment of an applicant’s close
and continuing association with
Australia for the purposes of s 22(9)(d) requires an assessment of a
person’s association with
Australia in the four years prior to the
application, as opposed to other sections of the Act which concern an
applicant’s
intentions.
The CPI provides
that it is possible that a person assessed as eligible for the exercise of the
discretion under s 22(9)(d) could
also be assessed as not likely to reside, or
continue to reside in Australia, or to maintain a close and continuing
association with
Factors that may be relevant
3.6 of CPI 11 contains a list of factors that may be relevant in assessing
whether an applicant has demonstrated a close
and continuing association with
Australia. The Tribunal has been mindful of the policy guidance that the
following factors are a
guide only and that each case must be assessed on its
These factors
Pre-existing
connection with Australia;
relationships;
Return travel
to, and periods of residence in, Australia; and
Intention to
Tribunal has considered each of these factors against the Applicant’s
circumstances for the relevant period as follows.
Pre-existing
connection with Australia:
factor requires decision-makers to consider whether an applicant had a close
connection to Australia prior to their
Some of the
relevant considerations include whether they established a home in Australia
after migration, did they establish ties
in the Australian community, are they
married to an Australian citizen, and did they participate in local community
events and groups
while resident in
Applicant first arrived in Australia on 28 May 2006 as a 21-year-old. She
arrived in Australia on a Student
She married her husband
in Australia on 20 May 2007.
Her husband was born in China but obtained his Australian citizenship on 4
November 2009.
The Applicant
obtained her permanent residency on 2 November
She then departed
Australia on 9 October
the relevant four-year period (from 3 December 2019 to 3 December 2023), the
Applicant and her husband jointly owned three properties
The Applicant
states that one of these properties served as their primary residence during
this period, and the other two properties
were leased out
consistently.
Applicant and her husband were in China, her parents have been residing
The Applicant states
that property had always remained available for her and her husband to return to
at any time, without
restriction.
She submits that
her continued ownership and maintenance of this property demonstrates her
ongoing commitment and intention to make
Australia her primary and permanent
place of residence.
states that by allowing her parents to reside in her home, she is upholding her
responsibilities as a family member and
contributing positively to Australian
society by fostering family stability and
Applicant submits that she has spent over 10 formative years in Australia prior
to her departure. During that period, she has
built up an extended network of
close friends and colleagues who are all located in
The Applicant
states that she has closer relations with her friends in Australia than that of
her hometown in China.
the CPI notes, the requirement to maintain a close and continuing association
refers to an association with Australia, not just
Australians.
It is accepted
however that the Applicant has established an extended network of friends and
colleagues in Australia, after having
moved here in 2006. During the relevant
period, the Applicant gave evidence that she maintained contact with her former
The Tribunal has had regard to the Applicant’s written statement
that she is closer with her friends in Australia than in China.
The Tribunal
finds that the personal and professional networks she has built since living in
Australia weighs in the Applicant’s
Applicant also relies on her contribution to Global Galaxy Systems Pty Ltd. She
states that she has been a committee member of
this organisation since 2014, and
she has ‘attended online activities and meetings regularly and made
consistent contributions’
organisation.
The Applicant
submits that her family support and community engagement are tangible
demonstrations of her close and continuing association
Tribunal accepts that during the relevant period, the Applicant maintained a
property in Melbourne that she intended to return
to when she returned to
Australia. This property was occupied by her parents during her absence from
Australia. The other two properties
were also leased out during the relevant
period. The Tribunal considers that home ownership alone does not establish a
pre-existing
connection with Australia. In the Applicant’s case, she
jointly owned three properties in Melbourne during the relevant period.
investment properties and the third was considered her primary residence which
was occupied by her parents whilst she was
overseas. The Tribunal accepts the
Applicant was able to return to the primary residence at any time, but otherwise
considers the
purchase of investment properties to be a financial decision and
does not in and of itself reflect a close and continuing association
Australia. The maintenance of a third home which serves as her primary residence
does weigh in her favour, but that factor alone
is not reflective of a close and
continuing association with Australia.
Tribunal considers that the Applicant’s contributions to the Australian
community through her work with Global Galaxy Systems
does weigh in her favour.
The Applicant maintains that the contribution of Global Galaxy Systems should be
recognised for its ‘broader
contribution to Australian
Respondent however contended that the extent of the Applicant’s
involvement in this organisation is limited, and there
is no evidence before the
Tribunal of the extent of the impact this organisation had on the Australian
community during the relevant
Whilst the Applicant
has made non-specific statements outlining her involvement in this organisation
(such as attending online activities
it is accepted
that she has contributed to this organisation during the relevant four-year
period. Further detail of the Applicant’s
involvement has been stated in
the oral and written evidence of Mr Kevin
The Tribunal has had
regard to her ongoing involvement in this organisation and finds that her
involvement weighs in her favour.
Employment status:
factor requires decision-makers to consider whether an applicant is on leave
from employment in Australia while working overseas
or accompanying an
Australian citizen spouse or de facto partner overseas for
Applicant was overseas during the entire four-year period immediately prior to
her citizenship application. During this time,
the Applicant was on
‘unpaid leave’ from her former position at Wimble St
position was as a Cook and Child Care Assistant. Her former employer (Ms Lisa
Fitzgerald) wrote that the Applicant was
initially expected back to work by
early 2020 but was unable to return due to COVID-19, and therefore her leave was
In the meantime, Ms
Fitzgerald wrote that they had to hire another cook to fill the
Applicant has since provided an employment contract from Wimble St Childcare
which states that she resumed employment on 31 March
2025 as an Early Childhood
Educator. The contract further states that her employment contract is valid only
while the child she is
providing care for remains actively enrolled in a
particular program.
Applicant is contracted to work 14 hours a
Applicant has also provided bank statements and evidence of an Australian held
superannuation account.
records show that the Applicant has been a member of her superannuation fund
since December 2010.
of these bank accounts and superannuation accounts weighs in her favour but only
slightly, as she was seemingly able to
service her loans and accounts from
Tribunal must consider the Applicant’s employment status during the
relevant four-year period. During the relevant four-year
period, the Applicant
was on unpaid leave from her former role, which was later filled in her absence.
She was not accompanying her
Australian citizen spouse overseas for work, but
rather moved overseas to spend time with her husband’s family. She has
resumed employment with her former employer.
this factor is given very limited weight in the Applicant’s favour. It is
accepted that she has maintained contact
with her former employer during her
absence and was offered a position upon return to Australia. However, during her
period of absence,
her previous position was filled. According to the Applicant,
neither she nor her husband worked overseas at all during the relevant
period. The policy guidance states that decision-makers are to consider whether
an applicant is on leave from employment,
accompanying an Australian citizen
spouse overseas for work, whether an applicant is working overseas for an
Australian-owned company
or whether an applicant owns a business in Australia.
None of these situations apply to the Applicant’s circumstances. She
on leave from her employer but only for a defined period. Therefore, this factor
is given only very limited weight in her favour.
factor asks decision-makers to consider whether the person has paid income tax
during the four years prior to
application.
Applicant acknowledges that she did not pay income tax at all during the
relevant period.
otherwise submits that during her time in Australia, she has been a responsible
resident, adhering to all of her tax
obligations.
factor does not weigh in the Applicant’s favour. Evidence of previous
compliance with her taxation obligations outside
of the relevant period is not
relevant to the Tribunal’s consideration.
relationships:
factor asks decision-makers to consider whether members of the applicant’s
immediate family are permanent residents or
The policy guidance
notes however that the requirement to maintain a close and continuing
association refers to an association with
Australia, not just Australians.
However, close and continuing associations with Australian family, or other
social relationships
and networks in Australia, may be a contributing factor
that demonstrates the applicant’s close and continuing association
Applicant’s parents reside in Australia as permanent residents, as does
her Australian-citizen husband. The Tribunal accepts
that she is close with
these immediate family members and was overseas with her husband for the entire
period. However, the requirement
to maintain a close and continuing association
refers to an association with Australia, not just Australians. Although her
are permanent residents, and her husband is an Australian citizen, this
factor alone does not demonstrate a close and continuing
association with
Australia and is afforded limited weight.
Return travel to, and
periods of residence in, Australia:
factor requires decision-makers to consider whether the person returned to
Australia during their absence, how often they stayed
and for how long. A
further consideration is where the person stayed while visiting
Applicant was absent from Australia for the entire four-year period. This is a
factor that weighs heavily against a finding that
she maintained a close and
continuing association with Australia during the relevant period.
Applicant relies upon the various COVID-19 restrictions which she submits
prevented her return to Australia. The Applicant submits
that although permanent
residents were eligible for exemptions to return to Australia between February
2020 and April 2022, the limited
flight availability and significant increase in
airfare prices prevented her
Applicant also gave oral evidence to the Tribunal that she did not want to leave
China to return to Melbourne and enter further
lockdowns. She said that she was
aware that Melbourne was under significant lockdowns and there were a number of
public protests
occurring because of this issue. She also expressed concern for
her personal health and safety in travelling from China to Australia
global pandemic. The Applicant also informed the Tribunal that her
husband’s grandmother had passed away, and she
wanted to remain in China
to provide support to her husband and his family. The Applicant and her husband
also experienced a period
of illness with COVID-19 which also prevented their
Respondent does not dispute that the COVID-19 pandemic made international travel
However it is
submitted that the Applicant’s contention that the pandemic reduced
international air travel is not relevant
to the question of whether she had a
close and continuing association with Australia during the relevant
The Respondent
otherwise submits that there is no evidence to establish that the Applicant
attempted to, or was unable to, leave
China during the relevant period. The
Applicant’s husband gave evidence to the Tribunal that they were regularly
checking flights
to Australia but the limited availability of flights meant that
the prices were prohibitively high. He also gave evidence that they
monitoring Victoria’s lockdowns from overseas and did not want to risk
their health and safety by leaving one country
that was already subject to
strict regulations to enter another country and be subject to further lockdowns
and restrictions.
Respondent does not dispute that the Applicant and her husband experienced
illness in 2023 or that the Applicant’s grandmother-in-law
passed away
However, it is
submitted that these circumstances are irrelevant in determining whether the
Applicant had a close and continuing
association with Australia during the
relevant period.
Applicant relied on two previous Tribunal cases in which those applicants were
found to have demonstrated a close and continuing
association with Australia
during the relevant period.
The first decision is that of
Fricke and Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs (Citizenship)
in which the applicant was only present in Australia
for 12 days during the relevant
The Tribunal found in
that case that the Applicant’s absence from Australia was due to project
delays during his employment
overseas. The Tribunal was persuaded that the
applicant and his wife had maintained a close and continuing association with
during the relevant
second decision is that of
See and Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,
Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs (Citizenship)
which the Applicant was absent for a total of 894 days in the four years prior
to lodging her citizenship application, and 173
days in the 12 months prior to
lodging her citizenship
application.
The Applicant in
that case had resided in Australia since she was seven years of age, and had
grown up in Australia. She completed
her schooling and university studies in
Australia, before marrying her Australian citizen husband and going overseas
with him. She
also intended to return so her child could undergo her schooling
in Australia. The Tribunal found that these factors weighed in the
Applicant’s favour and determined that the Applicant in that case had
maintained a close and continuing association with Australia
during the relevant
the Tribunal’s view, the above cases are distinguishable from the
Applicant’s circumstances. Firstly, in each of the
above cases, the
applicants spent some time in Australia, albeit a short period in the case of
. In each of these cases, the Tribunal considered that the
applicants had demonstrated other factors which established a close and
continuing association with Australia, such as ongoing continual employment with
an Australian employer here and overseas (in the
close association with Australia during which the applicant had grown up and
resided in Australia since a very young age
(in the case of
the Applicant’s case, she has not spent any time in Australia during the
relevant period. She was on leave from her Australian
employer for part of this
period, before her position was filled. She arrived in Australia as a
21-year-old, having spent her formative
years in China. She was overseas with
her husband for over six years visiting family. Like the applicants in
, the Applicant does own investment properties in
Australia, but the Tribunal has found that this factor alone is not indicative
a close and continuing association with Australia. Overall, the Tribunal
considers that this factor weighs heavily against a finding
that the Applicant
maintained a close and continuing association with Australia during the relevant
Intention to reside in Australia:
factor requires decision-makers to consider whether an applicant intends to
the person has
maintained a property in Australia and do they have belongings in Australia in
Applicant has given evidence that she and her husband have maintained a primary
place of residence in Australia, which contains
their belongings, and they were
free to return there at any time. The Applicant did in fact return to Australia
with her husband
on 15 December 2024 and returned to that residence. The
Tribunal accepts that the Applicant has an intention to reside in Australia
the present time. Whilst it is accepted that the Applicant had intended to
reside in Australia during her absence, the Tribunal
does not accept that the
Applicant was prohibited from returning to Australia during the relevant period.
It is accepted that while
the COVID-19 pandemic made return travel difficult,
the pandemic did not prevent the Applicant from returning earlier than 15
The decision
of the Applicant and her husband to remain in China to be with family was a
personal choice. The question the Tribunal
must consider is whether the
Applicant maintained a close and continuing association with Australia during
the relevant four-year
period. Her absence from Australia for the entire
four-year period, despite an intention to reside here, weighs heavily against a
finding that she maintained a close and continuing association during this
issue the Tribunal must consider is whether the Applicant satisfies s 22(9)(d)
of the Act. That is, it must consider whether the
Applicant maintained a close
and continuing association with Australia during the relevant four-year period
immediately prior to
her application for Australian citizenship. The relevant
four-year period applicable in this case is 3 December 2019 to 3 December
Applicant was absent from Australia during this entire period. She claims that
the COVID-19 pandemic made it difficult for her
to return, due to the travel
restrictions and the prohibitively high cost of travel at the time. She also
states that during this
time she and her husband were themselves unwell, and
that her husband’s grandmother passed away which meant they had to remain
in China to look after themselves and provide support to family members.
Tribunal accepts that the pandemic made travel difficult, and that they were
dealing with personal ill-health and the unfortunate
passing of the
Applicant’s grandmother-in-law. These factors are not disputed by the
Respondent. However, the Applicant’s
absence from Australia for the
entirety of the relevant period cannot be explained by these factors. The
Applicant gave evidence
that she was monitoring the situation in Melbourne from
her location in China and was reluctant to leave China and the local
restrictions
she was encountering, to enter another location and face similar
lockdowns. She also expressed concern for her health and did not
want to travel
at this time. The Applicant relies heavily on the fact of her ownership of three
properties across Melbourne as evidence
of her close and continuing association
with Australia. However, the Tribunal does not consider that home ownership
alone equates
to a close and continuing association.
is no evidence before the Tribunal that the Applicant had attempted to return to
Australia any time prior to her return date
of 15 December 2024. By the time of
her return, she had been absent from Australia for over six years. This lengthy
period of absence
weighs significantly against a finding that she maintained a
close and continuing association with Australia during the relevant
considered the factors referred to above, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the
Applicant maintained a close and continuing
association with Australia during
the relevant period. The Tribunal therefore makes a finding that s 22(9)(d) of
the Act is not satisfied.
The Tribunal’s finding means the Applicant
cannot rely on the Ministerial discretion under s 22(9) of the Act to treat her
period of absence from Australia as a period in which she was present in
Australia for the purposes of her citizenship application.
Tribunal affirms the decision under review.
Date of hearing:
Advocate for the Respondent:
Ms Mary Baras-Miller
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Australian Government Solicitor
[2015] FCAFC 79
(2015) 231 FCR 113
[2017] FCA 827
Ibid (emphasis in
[2022] FCA 833
’) (emphasis added).
Exhibit R1, 488.
Re Drake and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
Affairs (No 2)
(1979) 2 ALD 634.
Exhibit R1, 954-64.
Ibid 513-34.
Ibid 965-73.
Ibid 974-86.
Ibid 553-61.
Ibid 355, 382.
Ibid 423-8.
Ibid 428-51.
Ibid 422, 453.
Ibid 460-1.
Ibid 467, 469.
Ibid 581-3.
Ibid 562-70.
Ibid 706-831.
Ibid 832-953.
Ibid 571-3.
Ibid 608-22.
Ibid 623-8.
Ibid 630-704.
Ibid 574-7.
Ibid 567 [20].
The application for
Australian citizenship having been made on 4 December 2023. See s 22(1) of the
Exhibit R1, 571-2.
Quilatan and
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
(Citizenship)
[2024] AATA 417
(8 March 2024);
Fricke and Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
(Citizenship)
[2024] AATA 964
(28 March 2024);
See and Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
(Citizenship)
[2020] AATA 1327
(15 May 2020);
Manase and Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs (Citizenship)
[2025] ARTA
1337 (8 August 2025);
Chippa and Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
(Citizenship)
[2025] ARTA 823 (26 June 2025);
Kumar and Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2014] AATA 944
Taher and Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2013] AATA 917
Musleh and Minister
for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
(Citizenship)
[2020] AATA 4651
(19 November 2020).
Email from the Applicant to
Tribunal dated 18 September 2025 (received post-hearing).
Exhibit R1, 567-8 [17].
Ibid 567 [20].
Ibid 568 [23.1].
Ibid 568 [23.2].
Ibid 568 [23.3].
Ibid 568 [23.4].
Ibid 568-9 [24.2].
Ibid 569 [27].
Ibid 49-52.
Ibid 59-63.
Ibid 65-73.
Ibid 75-92.
Ibid 99-116.
Ibid 319-28, 330-8.
Ibid 434-41.
Ibid 442-51.
Ibid 387-9, 423.
Ibid 428-33.
See s 22(1) of the
Exhibit R1, 968.
Ibid 968-70.
Ibid 355, 382.
Ibid 968, 970.
Ibid 576 [15].
See for example
correspondence dated 3 March 2025 at pp 342-3 of Exhibit R1.
Exhibit R1, 969.
Ibid 969-70.
Ibid 575 [9].
Ibid 576 [11].
[2024] AATA 964
[2020] AATA 1327
Exhibit R1, 970.
See for example Table
1.1: Automatic exemptions from the inward and outward travel restrictions from
Management of International Travel Restrictions during COVID-19
report of the Australian National Audit Office at pp 723-4 of Exhibit R1.
RTF format (13.1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format