Ms Madeleine Greer v Recording Oasis Pty Ltd as trustee for Recording Oasis Trust [2025] FWC 3409 (13 November 2025)
[2025] FWC 3409
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Application to deal with contraventions involving dismissal
Madeleine Greer
Recording Oasis Pty Ltd as trustee for
Recording Oasis Trust
(C2025/5292)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT BUTLER
BRISBANE, 13 NOVEMBER 2025
Application to deal with contraventions involving dismissal –
application for summary dismissal of proceedings
Applicant Ms Madeleine Greer has filed an application under
section 365
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) (“the
Fair Work Act
Respondent objects on the ground that it says Ms Greer was not
issued directions to deal with that objection on 22 September 2025. Ms Greer has
not complied with those directions. On 14 October
2025 my chambers put Ms Greer
on notice that if she did not file material, the application may be dismissed on
the basis that I could
not be satisfied that there was any live dispute on foot
capable of being dealt with under the general protections, or that the
objection may be decided on the basis of the materials presently
October 2025 the Respondent applied for summary dismissal of the
Applicant’s application.
the reasons that follow I dismiss the Respondent’s summary dismissal
application on the grounds that it is misconceived.
However, I accept that the
Applicant was not dismissed and so I find that the Commission lacks jurisdiction
to deal with Ms Greer’s
application. Accordingly, Ms Greer’s
application is dismissed.
Legislation
Fair Work Act
relevantly provides that if a person has been
dismissed, and they allege that they were dismissed in contravention of
Fair Work Act
, the person may apply for the Commission to deal with the
someone has been dismissed under the Act is to be determined by reference to
sections 12
Fair Work Act
, the Dictionary, defines
the expression ‘dismissed’ by referring to
section 386.
(1)A person has been dismissed if:
(a) the person’s employment with his or her employer has been
terminated on the employer’s initiative; or
(b) the person has resigned from his or her employment but was forced to do
so because of conduct, or a course of conduct, engaged
in by his or her
Procedural history of this application
application was filed on 3 June 2025. Ms Greer subsequently sought to file a
supporting document on 16 June 2025, described as
“Statement &
Evidence.” The document was copied to the Respondent. The
Respondent’s response was filed on 25
June, and raised a jurisdictional
objection, on the basis that the Applicant was not dismissed. I issued
directions on 22 September
2025, to deal with the Respondent’s objection.
I issued further directions on 2 October. Pursuant to that further directions
order the Applicant was due to file her materials by 10 October 2025. She did
not do so. On 14 October 2025 the Respondent’s
solicitor wrote to my
chambers indicating they had not received Ms Greer’s materials. That same
day my chambers wrote to the
parties as follows.
“We have not received Ms Greer’s materials.
Ms Greer, it appears you have not complied with the Directions issued on 1
October by Deputy President Butler. You were to file your
witness statements and
outline of submissions by 10 October.
You should, as soon as possible, explain your non-compliance.
Non-compliance with directions has the potential to adversely affect the
continuation of these proceedings. The Commission may form
the view that there
is no longer a dispute between you and the Respondent, and it no longer has
section 368
, in which case your matter may be
Alternatively the Commission consider deciding the Respondent’s
objection on the basis of the materials that it filed on 1 October,
further notice to you.
In either case, if your case is dismissed then it is likely that a public
decision will be issued explaining your failure to participate
and prosecute
this application.
If you do not wish to continue with your application, you may discontinue by
• sending us an email saying so, or
• filling out the discontinuance form: Notice of discontinuance (Form
F50) | Fair Work Commission.
Once you notify the Commission of your discontinuance, the Commission will
then be able to assess your application to confirm if you
are eligible for a
refund of your application fee.
Parties are reminded that requests for extensions or adjournments should be
made in advance.”
October 2025, Respondent wrote to my chambers. That correspondence included,
inter alia:
“The Applicant has failed to comply with the directions, neither has
she provided any reason for her delay or sought an extension
to file her
material. Accordingly, the Respondent seeks that the Application be dismissed
pursuant to
sections 399(1)(b)
(1)(c) of the
Fair Work Act 2009
that request was made by correspondence and not via an application in an
approved form, I have treated it as an application
for summary dismissal.
16 October 2025 my chambers wrote to the parties in the following
“Ms Greer, if you wish to show cause why your application should not be
dismissed, either on the Commission’s own motion
on the bases set out in
the correspondence of 14th October, or on the basis the Respondent has put
forward in its application of
15 October 2025, please do so by filing
submissions of not more than five pages, and supporting witness statement(s) (if
4 pm on 23 October 2025.”
Greer has not responded to the directions or subsequent emails in this matter.
Indeed, my chambers has no record of receiving any
correspondence from Ms Greer
since this matter was allocated to me. Noting that Ms Greer’s emails in
June came from an “icloud”
address, and emails have been sent to a
“me.com” address, I have confirmed that my chambers has used the
email address
Ms Greer gave on her application. The “me.com” address
also appears in the signature of the email received from Ms Greer
provided her materials of 16 June, notwithstanding that email’s
“from” field displays the “icloud”
address. I am
satisfied the directions and correspondence have been sent to the address Ms
Greer provided.
Consideration
Fair Work Act
does not provide a power to dismiss proceedings.
The Respondent’s solicitor may have meant
section 399A
, but that provision
does not apply to applications brought under
section 365
, as is the case here.
subsection 587(2)
Fair Work Act
, the Commission cannot dismiss
Ms Greer’s application under
subsection 587(1)(c).
Accordingly, the
Respondent’s summary dismissal application is misconceived. That
application is dismissed.
the absence of any contact from Ms Greer I am, though, unable to be satisfied
that there is any live dispute capable of being dealt
with under the general
protections.
or in the alternative, I am unable to find that the Applicant was dismissed on
the basis of the material before me. Even
putting aside any question of the
status of the documents filed without leave on 16 June 2025, and taking that
document into account,
on the Applicant’s own material there is no basis
for me to find that the employer took some action with the intent of ending
employment. Nor do I find that its conduct forced Ms Greer to resign, or had the
probable effect of forcing her to do so. She
had other options including
pursuing other causes of action in this or another tribunal or court, seeking
the assistance of a regulator,
continuing to negotiate, or simply biding her
time until she found another job.
the circumstances the Commission lacks jurisdiction to deal with Ms
Greer’s application.
Disposition
Greer’s application is dismissed. I order
accordingly.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
On the papers
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth
Government Printer
RTF format (2.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format