Labuguen v Commonwealth of Australia (Department of Defence) [2012] FWAFB 9875 (20 December 2012)
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Act 2009
- Appeal of decisions
Jocelyn Labuguen
Commonwealth of Australia (Department of Defence)
(C2012/5868)
JUSTICE BOULTON, SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
COMMISSIONER LEE
SYDNEY, 20 DECEMBER 2012
Appeal against decision
[2012] FWA 8522
]] of Senior Deputy President Drake at Sydney on 12 October 2012 in matter number U2011/10591.
This is an appeal by Jocelyn Labuguen (the Applicant) pursuant to
Fair Work Act 2009
(the Act), against a decision
of Senior Deputy President Drake. In the decision, the Senior Deputy President found that the Applicant had been unfairly dismissed
and determined that an order for the payment of compensation in lieu of reinstatement was appropriate in the circumstances of the
case. The Senior Deputy President awarded the maximum amount of 26 weeks’ compensation (see
The background to the appeal may be briefly described as follows.
The Applicant commenced employment in the Australian Public Service in 1988. At the time of her termination she was employed as a
Psychology Assistant by the Department of Defence (Defence) in the Fleet Information System Support Organisation at Garden Island,
Sydney. The Applicant worked at Garden Island from November 1999, although she had an appointment in the Navy and Shore Communications
Sustainment Management Office between 31 August 2000 and 1 July 2002. Prior to working for Defence, the Applicant worked for the
Department of Veterans’ Affairs.
The Applicant’s employment was terminated on 25 July 2011 for misconduct. This followed an investigation into certain events
which took place in June 2010.
On 21 June 2010 the Applicant and her husband, Michael Hickey, met at the Defence Plaza Sydney (DPS) in the Sydney CBD so that the
Applicant could complete a Performance Feedback Assessment and Development Scheme (PFADS) document. Mr Hickey accompanied his wife
into the building to assist her with proper syntax and grammar and in transferring data from a draft of the PFADS document that the
Applicant had prepared at home and emailed to her work account, to a document on the work computer.
The Applicant signed her husband in on the Visitor’s Register at DPS and entered the name and telephone extension number of
another DPS employee, Ms Logathassan, in the “Person Visited” field of the Register. The Applicant and Mr Hickey went
to level 24 of DPS where the Applicant accessed an available computer terminal. The Applicant experienced technical difficulties
when attempting to copy the content from the PFADS draft document to the document on the work computer. Mr Hickey attempted to verbally
instruct the Applicant how to perform the “cut and paste” but was unsuccessful. Mr Hickey then took control of the Applicant’s
computer mouse and keyboard and performed the copy and paste operation for her.
The misconduct which was relied upon by Defence in terminating the Applicant’s employment included the provision of a false
name in the “Person Visited” field of the Visitor’s Register at DPS and facilitating unauthorised access to the
Defence Restricted Network (DRN) by Mr Hickey in contravention of the
Information Systems Security Practices and Procedures for the Defence Restricted Network
(IS-SPP). It was said that the use of Ms Logathassan’s name by the Applicant on the Visitor’s Register was without her
knowledge or approval.
While it was not relied upon in the termination documentation, it was also said that the Applicant printed documents marked “Psychology-In-Confidence”
located in a folder titled “PSYMAN” on the Navy Psychology Fleet’s network G drive, which she had been expressly
instructed not to do.
The Applicant filed an application in Fair Work Australia pursuant to
of the Act alleging that the termination of her employment was unfair and seeking reinstatement. The application was heard by Senior
Deputy President Drake on 10, 11, 12 and 13 July 2012. The proceedings included the hearing of evidence from eleven witnesses.
In her decision, the Senior Deputy President found that the Applicant was aware that access to the DRN by non-Defence employees was
contrary to Defence policy and that Mr Hickey was not cleared for access to the DRN. The Senior Deputy President held that the Applicant’s
conduct in facilitating Mr Hickey’s access to the DRN was misconduct that amounted to a valid reason for the Applicant’s
termination
(s.387(a)).
The Senior Deputy President also found that printing documents marked “Psychology-in-Confidence” was a breach of a direct
instruction and would have constituted a valid reason for termination.
In relation to the considerations in
-(h) of the Act, the Senior Deputy President found that the Applicant was notified of the reason for her termination
; that she was given an opportunity to respond to the reason relied on for the termination
; that there was no unreasonable refusal to allow the Applicant to have a support person present
was not relevant to the application; that the size of the employer’s enterprise had not impacted on the procedures followed
in terminating the Applicant’s employment
; and that there was no absence of dedicated human resource management specialists or expertise that was likely to affect the procedures
followed in affecting the termination of employment
(s.387(g)).
The Senior Deputy President considered a number of other relevant matters (see
These included: that the Applicant did not understand the nature of the DRN policy or appreciate that her conduct was contrary to
it, or understand that printing “Psychology-in-Confidence” documents was contrary to the instruction given to her; that
the breach of policy was minor and had minor consequences; that Mr Hickey did not view any Defence information; and the adverse financial
consequences of the dismissal for the Applicant and her family. The Senior Deputy President also considered the purpose of Defence’s
policy and the expense of resources and time that investigation into the Applicant’s breach of policy necessitated. It was
noted that while length of service is usually a factor that weighs in favour of a dismissal being unfair, it was arguable that an
employee with the Applicant’s length of service should be aware of the policy, the obligation not to breach it, and the manner
in which it is expected to be applied. The Senior Deputy President also recognised that Defence may have had underlying concerns
regarding the Applicant’s performance and that the Applicant’s breach of policy presented an opportunity for the termination
of her employment. The Senior Deputy President said that various findings by Defence in relation to the conduct, including that the
conduct was dishonest and unethical, were inappropriate and unsupported by the facts.
The Senior Deputy President concluded:
“[113] After having given consideration to the matters set out above I am satisfied and find that the termination of Ms Labuguen’s
employment was harsh, unjust or unreasonable. I am satisfied that the outcome of termination of employment was harsh.”
The Senior Deputy President then considered whether an order for reinstatement should be made. The Applicant sought reinstatement
to a position no less favourable than her previous position, as it was recognised that there would be difficulties because of past
history with reinstatement to her position in the Navy Psychology Unit.
The Senior Deputy President decided that reinstatement was not appropriate and that the Applicant should be awarded the maximum amount
of compensation available under the Act. The reasons for not ordering reinstatement are set out in the following paragraphs of the
“[115] I have given consideration to the remedy of reinstatement but, in all the circumstances of this case, I am satisfied
and find that reinstatement is inappropriate for the following reasons.
[116] Ms Labuguen has been employed by Defence for many years. She was aware of the policy regarding restricted use of the DRN.
She understood that she was obliged to comply with that policy. Despite those understandings, even at the end of these proceedings,
Ms Labuguen still did not understand or acknowledge that what she had done was in breach of the policy.
[117] I do not believe that Defence could have any confidence that Ms Labuguen would apply the policy regarding restricted access
to the DRN in the future and I am not persuaded that it would not
be appropriate to impose an employee on Defence in whom they could not have confidence regarding this issue.
[118] In addition Ms Labuguen could not perform a satisfactory "drag and drop" or "cut-and-paste" of one document
into another. Even though she was convinced that the mouse was dysfunctional, her husband understood that the problem was not likely
to be a dysfunction of the equipment but rather, a failure by Ms Labuguen. She ought to have been able to confidently perform this
function. I am satisfied that Ms Labuguen has very low skill level in relation to such tasks. I gave consideration to this matter
when considering reinstatement.
[119] I gave consideration to returning Ms Labuguen to a restricted position, one with the type of interim restrictions that Ms Billett
imposed during her investigation. I have concluded that that is not a viable long-term solution.
[120] Defence’s answers to my enquiries at the end of the arbitration convinced me that there was no position to which I could
return Ms Labuguen that did not require some access to the DRN.
[121] I am satisfied and find that an order for payment of compensation in lieu of reinstatement is appropriate in all the circumstances
of this case.”
In the appeal, the Applicant submitted that the Senior Deputy President erred in several respects and reached the wrong conclusion
on the appropriateness of reinstatement. It was said that the Senior Deputy President misconstrued the IS-SPP and erred in finding
that the Applicant had breached the policy, and that these erroneous findings were the primary reason for refusing reinstatement.
Further, it was submitted that the Senior Deputy President erred in her consideration as to whether the Applicant could be reinstated
to a “restricted position”. If the Applicant’s conduct was not in breach of the IS-SPP, there would be no need
for a restricted position.
The Applicant submitted that permission to appeal should be granted because the appeal raises a matter of wide importance concerning
the construction of Defence policy that applies to a very large workforce and the decision under appeal manifests an injustice.
Appeal Principles
An appeal under
of the Act involves an appeal by way of rehearing, with the powers of the Full Bench being exercisable only if there is error on
the part of the primary decision-maker: see
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission.
The majority of the High Court in that case explained in the following passage how error may be identified where a discretionary
decision is involved:
“Because a decision-maker charged with the making of a discretionary decision has some latitude as to the decision to be made,
the correctness of the decision can only be challenged by showing error in the decision-making process
Norbis v Norbis
[1986] HCA 17
(1986) 161 CLR 513
at 518-519)
. And unless the relevant statute directs otherwise, it is only if there is error in that process that a discretionary decision can
be set aside by an appellate tribunal. The errors that might be made in the decision-making process were identified, in relation
to judicial discretions, in
House v The King
in these terms:
‘If the judge acts upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or irrelevant matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes
the facts, if he does not take into account some material consideration, then his determination should be reviewed and the appellate
court may exercise its own discretion in substitution for his if it has the materials for doing so’
[1936] HCA 40
(55 CLR 499
An appeal under
of the Act may only be pursued with the permission of FWA. This would normally require an Applicant to demonstrate an arguable case
of appealable error and to refer to other considerations which would justify the granting of permission to appeal. Although
requires FWA to grant permission to appeal if it is satisfied that it is in the public interest to do so, there is a note following
the subsection to the effect that this does not apply in relation to an application to appeal from an unfair dismissal decision (see
The effect of
of the Act is that the general approach to dealing with appeals is varied in two significant respects in relation to appeals from
unfair dismissal decisions. First, permission to appeal may only be granted where FWA considers it is in the public interest to do
(s.400(1)).
Second, where an appeal is based on error of fact, the appeal can only be made on the ground that the decision involved a significant
error of fact
(s.400(2)).
The meaning to be given to “public interest” in
of the Act was considered in
GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty Ltd v Makin
where the Full Bench said that:
“Appeals have lain on the ground that it is in the public interest that leave should be granted in the predecessors to the Act
for decades. It has not been considered useful or appropriate to define the concept in other than the most general terms and we do
not intend to do so. The expression ‘in the public interest’, when used in a statute, classically imports a discretionary
value judgment to be made by reference to undefined factual matters, confined only by the objects of the legislation in question.
Although the public interest might be attracted where a matter raises issues of importance and general application, or where there
is a diversity of decisions at first instance so that guidance from an appellate court is required, or where the decision at first
instance manifests an injustice, or the result is counter intuitive, or that the legal principles applied appear disharmonious when
compared with other recent decisions dealing with similar matters, it seems to us that none of those elements is present in this
Where, as in the present case, a decision appealed against involves the consideration of extensive witness evidence, an appellate
body should exercise caution in departing from the evidential findings of the initial decision maker. It has been said that an appellate
court should not interfere in a factual finding based on the credit and character of witnesses unless the first instance judge’s
finding is “glaringly improbable” or cannot rationally be reconciled with incontrovertible facts, uncontested testimony
or compelling inferences.
This principle recognises that the decision maker at first instance has seen witnesses and had the evidence presented in the context
of the case as a whole, for which the transcript is not an adequate substitute.
Consideration
The finding by the Senior Deputy President that the termination of the Applicant’s employment was unfair and the award of compensation
is not challenged in the appeal. The appeal is solely directed at the decision of the Senior Deputy President not to order reinstatement.
The Senior Deputy President’s primary reason for not reinstating the Applicant related to the breach of the IS-SPP in facilitating
unauthorised access to the DRN. In the appeal, the Applicant submitted that her conduct did not breach the IS-SPP and that the Senior
Deputy President’s finding to the contrary was an error of law or a significant error of fact for the purposes of
of the Act.
It was submitted that the Senior Deputy President misconstrued the IS-SPP and erred in finding that the conduct of the Applicant
contravened it. It was said that, in concluding that the Applicant had contravened the IS-SPP, the Senior Deputy President relied
on clause 91 of the IS-SPP and what she considered to be the Applicant’s failure to satisfy its conditions. Implicitly, it
was said that the Senior Deputy President found that no other provision of the IS-SPP prohibited the Applicant from receiving assistance
from her husband at DPS on 21 June 2010.
It was submitted that clause 91 of the IS-SPP contemplates and allows visitor access to the DRN so long as a DRN user ensures that
access is strictly supervised at all times, and information is not displayed or a capability demonstrated unless the visitor is cleared
for access at the security classification and has a need to know. However, as the Senior Deputy President found that “no Defence
information was viewed by Mr Hickey”, it was not necessary for him to be cleared and have a need to know when accessing the
DRN. Therefore it was said the Senior Deputy President fell into error in concluding that Mr Hickey’s access to the DRN was
not the kind of access that was contemplated by clause 91 of the IS-SPP and that the Applicant had breached the policy.
We consider that these submissions cannot be sustained and that there was a clear breach of the IS-SPP by the Applicant in relation
to Mr. Hickey’s access to the DRN. There was extensive evidence and material before the Senior Deputy President regarding the
relevant Defence policy, including detailed witness statements filed on behalf of the Applicant and Defence. The Senior Deputy President
found that the Applicant’s conduct amounted to facilitating Mr. Hickey’s access to the DRN contrary to Defence policy.
It is understandable that the Senior Deputy President’s conclusions refer in particular to the provisions of clause 91 of the
IS-SPP. This clause was relied upon in the submissions made on behalf of the Applicant to the Senior Deputy President.
However, we do not consider that the finding of the Senior Deputy President that the Applicant’s conduct was contrary to Defence
policy was in error or that such finding was necessarily confined to a consideration of clause 91 of the IS-SPP. There was extensive
evidence before the Senior Deputy President regarding Mr. Hickey’s access to the DRN, including detailed evidence given by
the Applicant and Mr Hickey in examination in chief and on cross-examination.
The IS-SPP seeks to limit the access of individuals who do not have a security classification to the DRN. This is clear when regard
is had to the following clauses of the IS-SPP:
The IS-SPP applies to all Defence employees, Australian Defence Force members, contract staff and Defence Industry staff who require
access to Defence Information Systems (Clause 29);
The DRN is for the exclusive use of authorised users conducting Australian Defence business (Clause 31);
All users are responsible for the integrity of their DRN account, and are advised to maintain the integrity of their DRN account
and passwords by not disclosing their DRN account password to another individual, not using or attempting to use the user identity
and password of another DRN user, and not allowing another individual unsupervised use of or DRN access via any active DRN session
operating under their DRN account (Clause 37 (b)(1)-(3)); and
There is a requirement on DRN users to position their desktop monitors such as to prevent oversight from outside the work area (Clause
Clause 91 of the IS-SPP deals with the responsibilities of DRN users in relation to access by visitors to the DRN. The clause provides
as follows:
Local protective security procedures for areas housing DRN equipment are to ensure that all visitors are logged and escorted in accordance
with the requirements of the DSM. DRN users shall ensure that:
a. any access by visitors to the DRN (e.g.. impromptu demonstration of information or capability) is strictly supervised at all times;
b. information displayed or capability demonstrated to visitors is of a security classification for which the visitors are cleared
and have a need-to-know.”
In relation to what took place at DPS on 21 June 2010, the following is clear from the evidence given by the Applicant and Mr. Hickey
in the proceedings before the Senior Deputy President:
While the Applicant was logged on to the DRN, Mr. Hickey was able to view the screen;
Both the Applicant and Mr. Hickey were aware that he was not authorised to access the DRN;
Mr. Hickey viewed the screen and used the computer terminal to assist the Applicant while it was logged into the DRN; and
The Applicant was or at least ought to have been aware of the requirements relating to access to the DRN.
In these circumstances, we consider that there was ample basis for the finding that the Applicant’s conduct in facilitating
the access to the DRN by her husband was contrary to Defence policy.
It is clear that clause 91 does not relate to access of the kind contemplated by the Applicant. Rather, the clause is concerned with
access for such purposes as demonstrations of capability or information and does not allow visitors to become “users”
of the DRN. Further, the IS-SPP imposes a requirement on DRN users to ensure that visitors accessing the DRN are supervised at all
times, are security classified, are cleared, and have a need to know the information that they are viewing.
It is also relevant that the Applicant, as a long-standing employee of Defence, should have had a sufficient understanding and respect
for the importance of the IS-SPP. The Applicant had signed a DRN request form and agreed to abide by the requirements of the IS-SPP.
On each occasion that the Applicant used a Defence computer a pop up screen would appear alerting her to the requirements relating
to access to the DRN and asking her to confirm that she understood the IS-SPP. The Applicant was aware that Mr Hickey was not authorised
to access the DRN. Despite this, the evidence was that she facilitated his access to the DRN in contravention of the IS-SPP. Furthermore,
at no time did the Applicant acknowledge that her conduct was in breach of the IS-SPP. As the Senior Deputy President noted in the
decision, the Applicant “still did not understand or acknowledge that what she had done was in breach of the policy.”
In some respects it might be considered that the actual consequences of the Applicant’s breach were not serious as it would
seem that Mr Hickey was only providing assistance to his wife in the completion of her PFADS document and did not access any Defence
information. However, the issue is not the degree of seriousness of a particular breach of the IS-SPP, but the potential for such
breaches to have serious consequences for national security.
It is understandable that there is concern that if such actions as the Applicant’s were to be condoned, this may give the impression
that the Department’s attitude towards security and the application of the policy and procedures relating to access to the
DRN was lax.
Although the breach of the Defence policy on access to the DRN was not the only matter considered by the Senior Deputy President
in deciding that reinstatement was not an appropriate remedy, it was accepted in the appeal that this was the primary reason for
refusing reinstatement. From our examination of the evidence and material before the Senior Deputy President, the conclusion reached
on the breach of the Department’s policy on access to the DRN was reasonably open and appropriate. It has not been demonstrated
in the appeal proceedings that there was any error of fact or law in relation to the findings made by the Senior Deputy President
or in the conclusions reached.
The Defence policy relating to access to the DRN is well-developed and the importance of compliance with the policy should be well
understood by all Defence personnel, especially long-serving employees like the Applicant. The evidence in the present matter demonstrated
that there had been a breach and disregard of the policy in circumstances such that the reinstatement of the employee concerned was
not considered to be appropriate. The factors which were taken into account in reaching this conclusion included the evidence regarding
the breach of the policy, the failure of the Applicant to acknowledge the breach which had occurred or its seriousness, the acceptance
that it would be inappropriate for the Applicant to be reinstated to her former position in the Navy Psychology Unit, and the unavailability
of other suitable positions in Defence or elsewhere. In these circumstances, it was reasonable to conclude that no order for reinstatement
should be made.
In the appeal proceedings, the Applicant also put submissions relating to other alleged errors by the Senior Deputy President in
considering whether reinstatement was appropriate. These included submissions that went to the findings in relation to the cut and
paste incident and the Applicant’s capability to perform her role and the finding that there was no suitable position to which
the Applicant could be returned that did not require some access to the DRN. It was also submitted that the Senior Deputy President
erred in not considering the financial consequences for the Applicant in relation to whether reinstatement was appropriate.
In the course of the appeal proceedings, we were referred to the relevant evidence before the Senior Deputy President relating to
these matters. We do not find it necessary to refer in detail to this evidence. We note that there was evidence concerning the following:
The difficulties of the Applicant in performing her duties in the role of Psychology Assistant in the Navy Psychology Unit and her
reluctance to be reinstated to that role;
The need for the Applicant to be assisted in completing the performance appraisal form and undertaking various simple computer functions
such as ‘drag and drop’ or ‘cut and paste’;
The enquiries made by Defence as to the availability of other suitable positions for the Applicant with Defence or other Australian
public service agencies; and
The difficulties of finding a suitable position for the Applicant with Defence which did not require access to the DRN.
We also note that the Senior Deputy President earlier in her decision referred to the dire financial consequences for the Applicant
and her family arising from the termination of her employment.
However the possibility of such consequences is not such as to override all other considerations relevant to the question of reinstatement.
Clearly the Senior Deputy President was aware of the financial position of the Applicant but, having regard to other considerations,
decided that reinstatement was not appropriate.
Having regard to the submissions on appeal and the evidence and material presented in the initial proceedings, it has not been demonstrated
that there was any error of law or any significant error of fact made by the Senior Deputy President in her consideration and determination
of the appropriate remedy. Further, the appeal does not raise any issue of general principle. The determination on the question of
reinstatement was based on a consideration of the facts and circumstances of the particular case, mainly those relating to the breach
of Defence policy on network access and the availability of other suitable positions. The Senior Deputy President considered the
relevant evidence and circumstances and reached a conclusion which was reasonably open to her. In our view there is nothing raised
in the appeal which is of such a nature as to attract the public interest and therefore to warrant granting permission to appeal.
For all the above reasons, permission to appeal is refused.
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
of Counsel with
for Jocelyn Labuguen
Mr R Warren
of Counsel with
for the Commonwealth of Australia (Department of Defence)
Hearing details:
29 November.
[2012] FWA 8522
See Transcript 10 July 2012, PN86.
It was conceded in the appeal that the Senior Deputy President intended to say in her decision “I am not persuaded that it
would be appropriate to impose an employee on Defence in whom they could not have confidence regarding this issue.”
[2000] HCA 47
(2000) 203 CLR 194
[2010] FWAFB 5343
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118
per Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ
See Decision, pars [88]-[89].
See Decision, par [87]
See Decision, par. [116].
See Decision, par. [100].
See Decision, par. [107].
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR531579>
No downloadable files available