1503300 [2015] MRTA 857 (12 June 2015)
[2015] MRTA 857
(12 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
REVIEW APPLICANT:
Joondalup Brothers Rugby
Union Football Club Inc
MRT CASE NUMBER:
DIBP REFERENCE(S):
CLF2015/22675
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Tony Caravella
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal sets aside the decision not to approve the
application and substitutes a decision that the nomination is approved.
Statement made on 12 June 2015 at 12:17pm
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration on 16 February 2015 to refuse to
approve the applicant’s
nomination under s.140GB of the
Migration Act 1958
(the Act) and r.2.72J
of the Migration Regulations 1994 (the Regulations).
applicant applied for approval on 28 August 2014. A nomination of an occupation
for a Temporary Work (Long Stay Activity) Subclass
401 visa is made under
s.140GB of the Act and r.2.72A and r.2.72J of the Regulations. Regulations 2.72A
and 2.72J prescribe the criteria
that must be satisfied for the Minister to
approve a nomination by a person. These criteria are extracted in the attachment
is one of three similar nominations made by the sponsor and lodged at the same
time. The sponsor seeks to employ three rugby
players who are Fijian nationals.
In this particular case, the nominee is Mr. Ratu Vukeiono
delegate decided not to approve the nomination on the basis that the applicant
did not satisfy r.2.72J(4)(b)(i) because the delegate
was not satisfied that the
sponsor’s proposed arrangement for the nominee to perform additional
employment outside of the contracted
player arrangement was consistent with the
primary purpose of the Long Stay Activity (Subclass 401) visa.
8 May 2015, the Tribunal received a detailed written submission with various
attachments. The submission declares that the Joondalup
Brothers Rugby Union
Football Club Inc (JBRUFC) now proposes to directly employ the nominee as a full
time premier league rugby union
player for 2015-2017 seasons. This proposal has
been modified from the original proposal which was lodged at the time of
application.
In that proposal, it was proposed that the nominee would work with
one of the Club’s sponsors, Aussie Scaffolds, whereby the
nominee would,
in addition to his duties and responsibilities to the JBRUFC, work on a casual
basis for between 25 to 30 hours per
also submits that the arrangement in the original nomination lodged with the
Department whereby a third party, Aussie Scaffolding,
was to employ the nominee
in addition to the nominee’s duties as a player with the JBRUFC has been
removed from the nomination.
submission also states that the contract between the JBRUFC and the nominee has
been amended, and the JBRUFC will be responsible
“for all the immigration
issues and other matters relating to the [nominee] while he is in
Australia.”
submission refers to the JBRUFC being established in 1988 and in 2015 was, for
the first time, promoted to the Premiere Division
of the sport in Western
Australia. It is submitted the nominee is an integral part of the team and
contributed to the club’s
promotion to the Premiere Division. It is also
submitted that to be competitive, JBRUFC has had to recruit quality rugby
from interstate and overseas. It is submitted this is JBRUFC’s
first experience in nominating players from overseas and that
this is the reason
why there were shortcomings with the nomination applications that were first
submitted to the Department.
to the submission referred to in the preceding paragraphs, is a copy of the
signed employment contract between the JBRUFC
and the nominee. Relevantly, the
Tribunal notes the employment contract shows the nominated position is for a
Contracted Rugby Player,
and that the contract provides that it will remain in
place for 2 years. It also specifies the hours of work to be 9.00am to 5.00pm
Monday to Friday but with provision to vary the hours from time to time in
respect of game days and after hours training.
applicant, represented by Mr David Wells and Mr Anthony Wall, appeared
before the Tribunal on 22 May 2015 to give evidence and present
arguments. The
Tribunal also received oral evidence from the nominated visa applicants, namely
Epi Satavu, Lui Guivalu and Ratu Vukeiono.
The Tribunal also received evidence
from Raijelli Talemaira, and Oscar Talemaira.
Wells advised the Tribunal he is the Premier Grade Coach for the sponsor
Joondalup Brothers Rugby Union Football Club Inc (JBRUFC).
He told the Tribunal
that he understands the reason why the delegate refused the nomination. He then
referred the Tribunal to the
revised employment contract included in the
pre-hearing submission provided to the Tribunal on 8 May 2015. He confirmed the
proposal whereby one of JBRUFC’s sponsors, Aussie Scaffolds,
would employ the nominee on a casual basis for between 25 to 30
hours per week,
had been reviewed and ultimately abandoned. It was resolved by the JBRUFC that
it would be the nominee’s sole
Wells told the Tribunal that the JBRUFC has a number of significant sponsors who
have provided signed sponsorship agreements.
He said the JBRUFC’s
sponsorship base is broad. He told the Tribunal that in terms of financial
viability to engage the nominee
as proposed in the revised employment contract,
in addition to significant sponsorship income, the club earns revenue by hiring
its facilities for functions when they do not have home games. He said the
City of Joondalup also supports the club, and they have
revenue from merchandise
sales and from player registrations. He said JBRUFC presently has around 500
junior player registrations,
and over 200 senior player registrations. He said
they expect registrations will grow further this year, as it is a World Cup year
Wells told the Tribunal that JBRUFC is the largest club in Western Australia.
He told the Tribunal that its coaches must be accredited
and that the three
nominees, including the particular nominee in this case, have all completed the
Rugby W.A. coaching accreditation
course. He said this was completed in 2014.
Mr Wells told the Tribunal that the nominee’s role includes training
junior coaches.
He said the nominee also conducts training and demonstration
sessions with junior players and that the nominee has highly developed
this respect. He said that the nominee is utilised for at least four days a
week for training. He said the nominee is
heavily involved in coaching clinics
and has special skills to be able to coach and demonstrate rugby strategy and
Vukeiono told the tribunal that he plays in the hooker position and in addition
to playing in the competition has been providing
training in this very technical
Wells told the Tribunal that JBRUFC has a very significant role in the
community. He said that they have a close association with
the RSL who contact
the club to assist in various practical ways such as providing gardening
services and other forms of assistance
to persons in need in the local
community. He said that the nominee is always first to contribute in this
Anthony Wall told the Tribunal that he is the Vice President of JBRUFC and the
Premier Grade Manager. He said JBRUFC has worked
very hard to be promoted to
the Premier league and that they have worked hard to recruit high-quality
players such as the nominee.
He said JBRUFC’s proposed nomination is
supported by Rugby W.A. and by the national rugby body.
Raijeli Talemaira introduced herself as the nominee’s aunt. She told the
Tribunal the nomination by the JBRUFC provides
an excellent opportunity for the
nominee. She said there was also a lot of interest from other clubs to recruit
the nominee. She
said the nominee really likes the club and there is a good
community vibe within the club. She told the Tribunal that this is the
club’s first such nomination, and they did not want to do anything wrong
in the application process. She said she tried to
advice in the nomination, and in the subclass 401 visa application processes,
but was unable to get through.
the hearing, the Tribunal explained that it appeared it did not have
refuse the related
Subclass 401 visa application. It explained this is in contrast to the
has to review the delegate’s
decision to refuse the nomination. It explained that, on the evidence before
the Tribunal, it
appeared that the application for review of the
delegate’s decision to refuse the visa application was made to this
to the delegate actually refusing the visa application.
In particular, it explained that the application for review of the purported
delegate’s decision was made on 11 March 2015, whereas the delegate
refused the nominee’s visa application on 19 March
2015. The Tribunal
explained that under the provisions of the
Migration Act 1958
Regulations, it appeared it would have no choice but to make a finding of no
visa refusal decision, even if it
were satisfied that the relevant nomination should be approved.
Oscar Talemaira told the Tribunal he is the nominee’s uncle. He indicated
that he was also involved in assisting in the
nomination and visa application
process. He explained, amongst other things, that he wanted to make sure after
receiving advice
that the nominations had been refused, that the nominees would
not miss out on the opportunity to apply for a review of their visa
He explained his thinking was that the nominations had been refused, because
each of the nominees, including the particular
nominee in this case, had
received letters from the Department on the 16
2015 notifying them that the visa application could not be approved (since the
JBRUFC nomination had been refused). Mr Oscar
Talemaira said he thought it
would be acceptable to lodge applications for review of the nominee’s visa
application refusal
at that time, notwithstanding that the nominee had not
actually received notification of the visa refusal.
Tribunal indicated it could understand Mr Talemaira’s thinking, however,
the relevant law in respect of decisions that are
MRT reviewable is very
specific and allows no discretion. It explained to the nominees, and to Mr
Wells, to Mr Wall, and to Mr and
Mrs Talemaira, that even if it was able to
approve the nomination, assuming it found the nomination satisfied the relevant
in r.2.72A and r.2.72J, the nominees, and JBRUFC would continue to have
a problem because it could not review the visa refusal decisions
for lack of
approve the nomination, the sponsor and
the nominee would need to obtain advice
on whether the nominee might be eligible to lodge a fresh application for the
relevant visa.
It explained the nominee would need to satisfy any applicable
provisions pursuant to s.48A of the Act, and satisfy any applicable
return criteria in Schedule 5 of the Regulations. It also pointed out that in
some cases applications for visas can only
be made when an applicant is
offshore, and this may necessitate the nominee leaving the migration zone and
making an application
offshore, if they were eligible to make a valid
application.
Talemaira told the Tribunal that he sent an email to the Department upon receipt
of the nomination refusal and asked for a review
of the visa refusals. He then
referred to an email which he had sent on 15 April 2015 to the Tribunal and
where he sets out his
actions and his request that the applications for review
of the visa refusal decision be found to be valid.
Wells told the Tribunal that the proposed nomination, and the continuation of
the three nominees, including the particular nominee,
would bring very
significant benefits to the sport in Western Australia. He said the talent of
the nominees adds depth to the playing
Tribunal asked Mr Wells to explain why three nominations were made, it asked him
to explain why three players were required and
whether as a result of the
approval of all three nominations, including the particular nominee for whom
this nomination is made,
local players might be disadvantaged by not having the
opportunity to play in the Premiere Division. He submitted that Rugby W.A.
provided complete support for all three of the nominations. He said that Rugby
W.A. has requested that JBRUFC do not seek to
attract players from the other
clubs. He said that the Rugby W.A. has informed JBRUFC that there are not
enough local players to
fill all the positions in the 10 clubs in the Premier
League in Western Australia. He referred to a letter dated 2 February 2015
the national rugby organisation, Australian Rugby Union Ltd. That body has
supported the nomination and also expressed the
view that the nominee has the
ability to play, coach or instruct at the Australian National level, and that
the nominee will benefit
the sport in Australia through their participation in
rugby union.
Wells referred to the nominees’ skills and to their established reputation
as summarised in the relevant nominees’
playing CV.
Wells also referred to the nominees being scheduled to complete a referee
training course conducted by Rugby W.A.
the following reasons, the Tribunal has decided to set aside the decision under
review and substitute a decision approving the
nomination.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
issue in the present case is whether the applicant meets the criteria for
approval of the nomination. The Tribunal must approve
the nomination if the
applicable requirements in r.2.72A and r.2.72J of the Regulations are satisfied.
In reviewing this matter,
and in light of the Tribunal’s finding that it
does not have jurisdiction to review the nominee’s visa refusal decision,
the Tribunal proceeds with the review with the understanding that the nominee
will make a fresh application for a Subclass 401 visa
in accordance with all the
relevant provisions in the Act and in the Regulations.
reviewing this matter, the Tribunal had regard to, but is not bound by, the
Department’s policy guidance contained in the
Procedures Advice Manual
(PAM3), which in respect of the issue in dispute, that is, r.2.72J(4)(b)(i),
relevantly states:
When assessing a nomination for a contracted
player, coach or instructor, officers must be mindful that the nominee will not
be permitted
to undertake additional employment such as bar or grounds work to
supplement the income they derive from their sporting activities.
Nor are they
permitted to undertake employment with another employer who is not their
sponsor. Sportspersons with an international
reputation should not require
additional employment outside their sport.
The nominee is only allowed to play or work for their sponsoring club and
must be able to support themselves and any dependents through
their sporting
activities for the period of their stay in Australia. However, they may
undertake incidental employment for their
sponsor provided it is related to the
primary purpose of stay, such as coaching juniors, and it is not the main source
Sportspersons may engage in sport related activities for another organisation
providing it is consistent with the nominated activity,
detailed in the
nomination by the sports sponsor and incidental to the primary purpose of stay.
For example, a sport sponsor nominates
a sportsperson as a contracted player and
advises, at time of nomination, that the visa applicant will also be coaching
their sport at another (named) club for 3 hours a week. This may be
considered to be consistent with condition 8107.
Tribunal finds that based on the records on the Department’s file the
JBRUFC is an approved sponsor, and that under paragraph
140GB(1)(b) it has
nominated an occupation, a program or an activity in relation to a visa and a
person for a Subclass 421 (Sport)
visa. The Tribunal therefore finds that
r.2.72A applies in the assessment of the nomination application.
For subsection
of the Act, the criteria that must be satisfied for the Minister to approve a
nomination by the person are set out in subregulations
to (9) of r.2.72A.
regard to the records held on the Department’s file, the Tribunal finds
that the JBRUFC has made a nomination of an occupation
or activity in relation
to a holder of, or an applicant for, a Subclass 421 (Sport) visa in accordance
with the process set out in
regulation 2.73C. The nomination therefore meets
the requirement in r. 2.72A(3)(c).
regard to the sworn oral evidence of Mr Wells, Mr Wall, and of the nominee, and
having regard to the signed employment contract
between the JBRUFC and the
nominee, the Tribunal is satisfied that the JBRUFC has identified in the
nomination the visa holder, or
an applicant or a proposed applicant for a visa,
(the identified visa holder or applicant) who will work or participate in the
occupation, program or activity. The nomination therefore meets the
requirement specified in cl.2.72A (4) of the Regulations.
Subregulation
2.72A(5) requires that if the nomination identifies a visa holder for
subregulation
the Minister is satisfied that the person has listed on the nomination each
secondary sponsored person who holds the same visa
as the visa holder on the
basis of the secondary sponsored person's relationship to the visa holder. The
Tribunal finds in this case,
no secondary sponsored person has been identified.
It is therefore satisfied the nomination meets the requirement in r.2.72A(5),
and that r.2.72A(6) is not applicable.
Subregulation
2.72A(7) requires that the Minister, or the Tribunal on review, is satisfied
that the person has provided the following:
information that identifies the employer or employers in relation to the
nominated occupation, program or activity, including:
(i) the location and contact details of each employer;
(ii) if the person and the employer are not the same
person — the relationship between the person and the employer;
(b) information that identifies the location or locations
where the nominated occupation, program or activity will be carried
(c) information that identifies each
member of the family unit
of the identified
visa holder or applicant who holds, or proposes to apply for, the same visa as
the identified visa holder or applicant
on the basis of satisfying the secondary
Tribunal finds that the nomination application identifies the nominated activity
as a Contracted Player. It identifies the activity
will take place at the
Joondalup Brothers RUFC HBF Arena, Joondalup. The Tribunal finds that although
the original nomination proposed
that in addition to the sponsor being the
employer, the nominee would also be employed by another employer, Aussie
Scaffolds. However,
as a result of the amended proposal and revised employment
contract provided to the Tribunal, the Tribunal finds that the sponsor
the employer for the purposes of this nomination. The Tribunal finds that the
nomination application identifies, and the
particular nominee states he has no
family members who accompany him to Australia. Having regard to these findings,
the Tribunal
is satisfied the nomination meets the criteria specified in
r.2.72A(7).
2.72A(8) provides that for paragraph
in the case of a nominated occupation, program or activity that is a
, employer includes the person or organisation responsible for the tasks
to be carried out as part of the nominated occupation, program
or activity. The
’ is defined in subregulation 2.57(5). That definition provides
that a volunteer will not receive remuneration for performing
the duties of the
position, other than reimbursement for reasonable expenses incurred by the
person in performing the duties, prize
money, and the duties would not otherwise
be carried out by an Australian citizen or an Australian permanent resident in
wages. As the nominee in this case will be paid a base salary of
$54,000 per annum, the Tribunal is satisfied this is not a volunteer
2.72A(9) requires the Minister, or the Tribunal on review, is satisfied
that there is no
information
Immigration
the person; or if any
information
is known to
Immigration
the person — it is reasonable to disregard the information. For
these purposes, ‘adverse information’ and ‘associated
with’ have the meaning given in r.2.57(2) and (3). Having regard to the
sworn oral evidence of Mr Wells and Mr Wall, and to
the Department’s
records, the Tribunal is satisfied that there is no adverse information of the
kind contemplated in r.2.57(3)
known to Immigration about the applicant or a
person associated with the applicant. The nomination therefore meets the
in r.2.72A(9).
the basis of the above individual finds, the Tribunal finds the nomination meets
all the requirements specified in r.2.72A of the
Regulations.
Assessment of r.2.72J
2.72J regulation applies to a person a
and who, under paragraph
140GB(1)(b)
of the Act, has nominated an occupation or an activity in relation to a holder
of, or an applicant or a proposed applicant for, a
(Temporary Work (Long Stay Activity)) visa (the identified visa holder or
applicant).
reference to the Department’s data base which is accessible to the
Tribunal, the Tribunal finds that the sponsor, JBRUFC,
has an approved 401
sponsorship in place effective from 29/10/2014 to 29/10/2017.
2.72J] (2) provides that for subsection
of the Act, and in addition to the criteria set out in regulation
the criteria that must be satisfied for the Minister to approve the nomination
by the person are set out in one of subregulations
of r.2.72J. Relevantly r.2.72J(4) applies to ‘Sporting
2.72J(4) provides if the person is a long stay activity sponsor who is a
sporting organisation, or a sport
(a) the Minister is
satisfied that:
(i) the identified visa holder or applicant:
(A) is entered individually or as a member of a team to
compete in a sporting event, or sporting events, in Australia, and is
entered as a Taiwanese national claiming to represent Taiwan, China or the
Republic of China; or
(B) has been, or will be, appointed or employed, under a
contractual agreement, to assist a participant or team of a kind mentioned
sub-subparagraph (A); or
(C) has been, or will be, appointed or employed, under a
contractual agreement, to assist a sportsperson who:
(I) is an Australian citizen or an Australian permanent
resident; and
(II) is known internationally in the field of sport;
(III) has a record of participation in international
in one or more specified sporting events; and
(ii) the identified visa holder or applicant is not a
player, a coach or an instructor in relation to an Australian sporting
sporting organisation; or
(b) the Minister is satisfied that:
(i) the person and the identified visa holder or
applicant have entered into a formal arrangement that provides for the
visa holder or applicant to be a player, a coach or an instructor in
relation to an Australian sporting team or sporting organisation;
(ii) the formal arrangement specifies the period during
which the identified visa holder or applicant will be a player, a coach
instructor in relation to the Australian team or organisation; and
(iii) the arrangement will be of benefit to the sport in
Australia; and
(iv) the identified visa holder or applicant has an
established reputation in the field of sport; and
(v) the person has provided a letter of endorsement from
the national sporting body responsible for administering the sport in
certifying that:
(A) the identified visa holder or applicant has the
ability to play, coach or instruct at the Australian national level; and
(B) the participation of the identified visa holder or
applicant in the sport in Australia would benefit the sport in Australia
raising the standard of competition; or
(c) the Minister is satisfied that the identified visa
holder or applicant:
(i) will act as a judge or adjudicator at one or more
sporting events or sporting competitions in Australia; and
(ii) has the appropriate experience and skills to perform
Tribunal finds that although the nominee will not have any role in any sporting
event in respect of Taiwan, China or the Republic
of China, as he is a nominated
as a player, the nomination does not meet the requirements specified in
r.2.72J(4)(a)(ii), and the
nomination therefore does not satisfy
r.2.72J(4)(a).
respect of r.2.72J(4)(b), having regard to the revised employment contract
submitted in respect of the nominee by the JBRUFC, the
Tribunal is satisfied
that the JBRUFC as the sport sponsor in this case, and the identified applicant
have entered into a formal
arrangement that provides for the identified
applicant to be a player, a coach or an instructor in relation to an Australian
team or sporting organisation. The nomination therefore meets
r.2.72J(4)(b)(i).
regard to the revised employment contract submitted to the Tribunal by the
sponsor, the Tribunal finds it specifies the period
during which the identified
applicant will be a player in relation to the Australian team, namely JBRUFC.
The nomination therefore
meets r.2.72J(4)(b)(ii).
regard to the sworn oral evidence given by Mr Wells and Mr Wall, and having
regard to the correspondence submitted by the sponsor
from Australian Rugby
Union Limited and from Rugby WA which both support the nomination, the Tribunal
finds that the arrangement
will be of benefit to the sport in Australia. The
nomination therefore meets r.2.72J(4)(b)(iii).
regard to the nominee’s CV, to the sworn oral evidence of the sponsor, and
to the correspondence submitted from Australian
Rugby Union Limited and from
Rugby WA, the Tribunal finds the identified nominee has an established
reputation in the field of sport.
The nomination therefore meets
r.2.72J(4)(b)(iv).
Tribunal accepts the letter from Australian Rugby Union Limited submitted by the
sponsor and which certifies that the nominee
has the ability to play, coach or
instruct at the Australian national level, and the participation of the
identified nominee in the
sport in Australia would benefit the sport in
Australia by raising the standard of competition. The Tribunal finds the
therefore meets r.2.72J(4)(b)(v).
the above reasons, the Tribunal finds the nomination meets the requirements in
r.2.72J(4)(b).
the Tribunal finds the nomination meets the requirements specified in
r.2.72J(4)(b), it is not necessary for it to consider whether
the nomination
meets the requirements specified in r.2.72J(4)(c).
the reasons given above, the Tribunal finds the applicant meets all the criteria
prescribed in r.2.72A and r.2.72J and therefore
meets all the applicable
criteria for the nomination to be approved.
Tribunal sets aside the decision not to approve the application and substitutes
a decision that the nomination is approved.
Tony Caravella
ATTACHMENT - EXTRACTS FROM THE
MIGRATION REGULATIONS 1994
Criteria for approval of nomination —
various visas
[(1) substituted by SLI 2012, 238 with effect from 24/11/2012 - LEGEND
[2.72A] (1) This regulation applies to a person:
(a) who is an
(b) who, under paragraph
140GB(1)(b)
of the Act, has nominated an occupation, a program or an activity in relation to
a visa and a person, as explained by the table.
Visa to which the nomination relates
Person to whom the nomination relates
(Temporary Work (Long Stay Activity)) visa
Proposed applicant
(Training and Research) visa
Proposed applicant
Subclass 411 (Exchange)
Subclass 419 (Visiting Academic)
420 (Temporary Work (Entertainment)) visa
Proposed applicant
Subclass 421 (Sport)
Subclass 423 (Media and Film Staff)
Subclass 427 (Domestic Worker (Temporary) -
Subclass 428 (Religious Worker)
Subclass 442 (Occupational Trainee)
[2.72A] (2) For subsection
of the Act, the criteria that must be satisfied for the Minister to approve a
nomination by the person are set out in subregulations
[regulations in force for the purposes of s140GB(2) before 23/11/2013
continue in effect on and after that commencment as if they
had been made for
s140GB(2)(b) as in force on and after 23/11/2013 - see
of Schedule 2 of Act No. 122 of 2013 which deals with saving/application -
LEGEND note]
[(3) substituted by SLI 2012, 238 with effect from 24/11/2012 - LEGEND
[2.72A] (3) The Minister is
satisfied that the person has:
(a) made a nomination of an occupation or activity in
relation to a holder of, or an applicant or a proposed applicant for, a
420 (Temporary Work (Entertainment)) visa
in accordance with the process set
out in regulation
(b) made a nomination of an occupation or activity in
relation to an applicant for a
Subclass 423 (Media and Film Staff)
accordance with the process set out in regulation
(c) made a nomination of an occupation or activity in
relation to a holder of, or an applicant for, a
Subclass 421 (Sport)
visa in accordance with
the process set out in regulation
(d) made a nomination of an occupation, a program or an
activity in relation to a visa and a person, as explained by the table
accordance with the process set out in regulation
Visa to which the nomination relates
Person to whom the nomination relates
(Temporary Work (Long Stay Activity)) visa
Proposed applicant
(Training and Research) visa
Proposed applicant
Subclass 411 (Exchange)
Subclass 419 (Visiting Academic)
Subclass 427 (Domestic Worker (Temporary) —
Subclass 428 (Religious Worker)
Subclass 442 (Occupational Trainee)
[2.72A] (4) The Minister is
satisfied that the person has identified in the nomination the visa holder, or
an applicant or a
proposed applicant for a visa, (the identified visa holder or
applicant) who will work or participate in the nominated occupation,
[2.72A] (5) If the person identifies a visa holder
for subregulation
the Minister is satisfied that the person has listed on the nomination each
sponsored person
who holds the same visa as the visa holder on the basis of
sponsored person's
relationship to the visa holder.
[2.72A] (6) However, the Minister may disregard
the fact that 1 or more
sponsored persons
are not listed on the nomination if the Minister is
satisfied that it is reasonable in the circumstances to do so.
[2.72A] (7) The Minister is satisfied that the
person has provided the following:
information that identifies the
employer or employers
in relation to the
nominated occupation, program or activity, including:
(i) the location and contact details of each employer;
(ii) if the person and the employer are not the same
person — the relationship between the person and the employer;
(b) information that identifies the location or locations
where the nominated occupation, program or activity will be carried
(c) information that identifies each
member of the family unit
of the identified
visa holder or applicant who holds, or proposes to apply for, the same visa as
the identified visa holder or applicant
on the basis of satisfying the secondary
[2.72A] (8) For paragraph
in the case of a nominated occupation, program or activity that is a
, employer includes the person or organisation responsible for the tasks
to be carried out as part of the nominated occupation, program
or activity.
is defined in subregulation 2.57(5).
[2.72A] (9) The Minister is
satisfied that:
(a) there is no
information
Immigration
the person; or
information
is known to
Immigration
the person — it is reasonable to disregard the information.
Criteria for approval of nomination —
Subclass 401 (Temporary Work (Long Stay Activity)) visa
[2.72J] (1) This regulation
applies to a person:
(a) who is:
stay activity sponsor
worker sponsor
(b) who, under paragraph
140GB(1)(b)
of the Act, has nominated an occupation or an activity in relation to a holder
of, or an applicant or a proposed applicant for, a
(Temporary Work (Long Stay Activity)) visa (the identified visa holder or
applicant).
[2.72J] (2) For subsection
of the Act, and in addition to the criteria set out in regulation
the criteria that must be satisfied for the Minister to approve the nomination
by the person are set out in one of subregulations
Sporting Activity
[2.72J] (4) If the person is a
stay activity sponsor
who is a sporting organisation, or a sport
(a) the Minister is satisfied that:
the identified visa holder or
is entered individually or as a member of a team to compete in a
sporting event, or sporting events, in Australia, and is
not entered as a
Taiwanese national claiming to represent Taiwan, China or the Republic of China;
(B) has been,
or will be, appointed or employed, under a contractual agreement, to assist a
participant or team of a kind mentioned
in sub-subparagraph (A); or
(C) has been,
or will be, appointed or employed, under a contractual agreement, to assist a
sportsperson who:
is an Australian citizen or an
permanent resident
is known internationally in the field of sport; and
has a record of participation in international
in one or more specified sporting events; and
the identified visa holder or applicant is not a player, a
coach or an instructor in relation to an Australian sporting
team or sporting
organisation; or
the Minister is satisfied that:
the person and the identified visa holder or applicant have
entered into a formal arrangement that provides for the identified
visa holder
or applicant to be a player, a coach or an instructor in relation to an
Australian sporting team or sporting organisation;
the formal arrangement specifies the period during which the
identified visa holder or applicant will be a player, a coach
or an instructor
in relation to the Australian team or organisation; and
the arrangement will be of benefit to the sport in
Australia; and
the identified visa holder or applicant has an established
reputation in the field of sport; and
the person has provided a letter of endorsement from the
national sporting body responsible for administering the sport in
certifying that:
the identified visa holder or applicant has the ability to
play, coach or instruct at the Australian national level; and
(B) the participation of the identified visa holder or
applicant in the sport in Australia would benefit the sport in Australia
raising the standard of competition; or
(c) the Minister is
satisfied that the identified visa holder or applicant:
will act as a judge or adjudicator at one or more sporting events
or sporting competitions in Australia; and
has the appropriate experience and skills to perform that role.
RTF format (239 KB)
Signed PDF/A format