Twardowski & Twardowski [2025] FedCFamC1F 542 (15 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Twardowski & Twardowski
FedCFamC1F 542
File number(s):
CAC 1969 of 2016
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– Appointment of a single expert – Where the parties agree that the
evidence of a single
expert would assist in the resolution of an issue of
significant controversy – Where orders have been made previously providing
for the appointment of a single expert and the process for doing so –
Where the parties remain unable to agree on who should
be the single expert
– Where there remains substantial disagreement as to the letter of
instruction to be provided to the single
expert – Orders made selecting
the single expert – Where further submissions are required before
determining the letter
of instruction to be provided to the single expert.
Legislation:
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) r 7.04
Cases cited:
Twardowski & Twardowski
[2018] FamCAFC
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Ms Neilan of Neilan Stramandinoli Family Law
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Ms Tresise of Baxter Warne Legal
For the Second Respondent:
The Second Respondent appeared in person
CAC 1969 of 2016
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
MS TWARDOWSKI
MR A TWARDOWSKI
MR B TWARDOWSKI
Second Respondent
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
to r 7.04 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law)
(Cth), Ms L be appointed as a single expert in these proceedings.
THE COURT NOTES THAT:
parties were informed by my associate by way of email, that following the
delivery of my reasons with respect to the appointment
of the single expert, the
court would hear further submissions as to the matters about which the single
expert will provide their
expertise and for that purpose, the parties will be
invited to address the court further about the substantial differences between
the two proposed letters of instruction.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
& Twardowski
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
an Application in a Proceeding filed on 30 May 2025, the wife sought orders
relating to the appointment of a single expert to prepare
a report with respect
to certain matters relating to Country K Law. The parties agreed that the
evidence of a single expert would
assist in the resolution of an issue of
significant controversy, being the nature of particular orders and a judgment
delivered by
a court in Country K and about proceedings commenced subsequently
in courts in that country.
order for the appointment of a single expert had been made on 9 December 2024
and despite a mechanism in those orders, as to the
process to be followed to
choose the single expert, the parties remain unable to agree to the appointment.
In addition, the parties
remain in disagreement as to the terms of
reference/letter of instruction to be provided to the single expert, again,
despite that
process being set out in the orders made on 9 December
Proceedings
in this court for property and financial orders (commenced by the wife in
December 2016) were dismissed by orders of the
primary judge on 22 December
2017. Those orders were the subject of an appeal. After hearing submissions on
that occasion, “the
husband conceded that given the errors of law that
attended the primary judge’s orders” (
Twardowski & Twardowski
[2018] FamCAFC 153
) the appeal would succeed, and the primary
judge’s orders would be set aside. The parties then agreed to orders
staying the
wife’s Australian proceedings, pending the resolution of the
Country K proceedings (commenced by the husband), and a number
of injunctions
were agreed to ensure the preservation of the Australian property. The
Australian proceedings have been stayed ever
circumstances where it appears the Country K proceedings may have
“recently” concluded (in early 2024), the wife sought
orders in this
court to lift the stay. She filed her application (an Application in a
Proceeding) on 21 October 2024. The hearing
of that application to lift the
stay has been set down for 10 September 2025 but the ability of the parties to
secure the single
expert evidence prior to that date is now looking somewhat
number of matters relating to the Country K proceedings are in dispute. The
parties have identified that it would be useful to
obtain single expert evidence
in accordance with r 7.04 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) (“the Rules”). While
the parties readily agreed that some expert evidence about the nature and status
of the Country
K legal proceedings (including the judgment and orders of early
2024) would be useful, they have disagreed for some time as to how
that expert evidence (from whom and to answer what questions).
matters and the management of the matter generally, came before the court on 9
December 2024 before a Senior Judicial Registrar,
in part, for further case
management. That day, certain orders were made, including for the appointment
of a single expert and the
process for such to occur.
appears that despite those orders having been made in December 2024, there was
subsequently little success between the parties
in advancing the appointment of
a single expert. In her Application in a Proceeding filed on 30 May 2025, the
wife sought orders
for the appointment of a particular named person as the
single expert and for the court to settle the disputed letter of instruction.
The wife also sought orders about the mechanism for payment of the single
expert’s costs, though consistently with the premise
(as expressed in the
orders made on 9 December 2024) that the parties will share those costs
husband filed his Response to an Application in a proceeding on 13 June 2025.
He sought different orders about the process for
the appointment of a single
expert and particular orders as to the management of the process of instructing
the expert. Like the
wife, the husband sought orders that the court settle the
joint letter of instructions to be provided to the single expert, should
parties be unable to reach agreement following participation in an
“informal mediation”.
matter came before me on 16 July 2025 for interim hearing in respect of these
issues. I heard submissions on behalf of the husband
and the wife. The second
respondent in these proceedings is the husband’s brother. The second
respondent, whilst present
at the interim hearing, did not wish to be heard.
wife continued to propose (as per her Application in a Proceeding) that Ms L, a
lawyer based in City D, Country K, be appointed
as the single expert.
circumstances where the wife’s filed evidence revealed that she had some
direct contact with Ms L, I made further directions
at the conclusion of the
interim hearing for the wife to file an additional affidavit to address the
nature and extent of her communications
with Ms L, as these matters were one of
the reasons expressed by the husband for his reluctance to agree to Ms L’s
appointment.
I gave liberty to the parties to relist the matter if that further
evidence filed by the wife gave rise to any additional concerns.
party sought the relisting of the matter after the wife filed her further
affidavit on 29 July 2025 nor after the wife’s
affidavit (about her role in discussions with Ms L) had been filed on that same
7 August 2025, the husband confirmed, by way of correspondence on his behalf
with chambers, that he did not wish to be heard further.
I thereafter reserved
my interim decision.
WHAT QUESTIONS NEED TO BE RESOLVED?
have regard to the orders made on 9 December 2024. Each party in their
affidavits sets out reasons for, and explanation as to,
the difficulties they
each claim they have experienced in securing agreement as to the single expert
and the terms for which the
single expert ought to receive. However, neither
party formally seeks the discharge of the orders made on 9 December
orders of 9 December 2024 set out a clear and straightforward pathway for the
process of nominating, selecting, and engaging the
single expert. Despite that
clear pathway, the parties have been unable to resolve their differences
relating to engaging a single
expert and a further 12 months in this iteration
of their litigation has almost passed, with very little progress having been
questions to be immediately resolved are limited and are as follows:
(a) Given the terms of the orders made on 9 December 2024, which expert should
be appointed?;
(b) What terms of reference/letter of instruction should be provided to the
single expert; and
(c) Given there is agreement (and an order) that the parties are to pay the
costs of the expert equally, are any further orders needed
with respect to that
Material relied upon
determining the questions identified above (save for the issue as to what terms
of reference/letter of instruction should be provided
to the single expert
– the present difficulty about which is outlined below), I have had regard
to the following documents:
(a) On behalf of the wife:
(i) Application in a Proceeding filed on 30 May 2025.
(ii) Affidavit of the wife’s lawyer, Ms Neilan, filed on 30 May 2025.
(iii) Affidavit of the wife filed on 29 July 2025 (in accordance with directions
made on 16 July 2025).
(iv) Affidavit of the wife’s sister filed on 29 July 2025 (also filed in
accordance with directions made on 16 July 2025).
(v) Case outline document filed on 9 July 2025.
(b) On behalf of the husband:
(i) Response to an Application in a Proceeding filed on 13 June 2025.
(ii) Affidavit of the husband filed on 13 June 2025.
(iii) Case outline document filed on 9 July 2025.
have also had regard to the various documents that were tendered and made
exhibits at the interim hearing.
Which expert?
neither party has made an application to set aside or vary the orders made on 9
December 2024, in effect, each party appears
to argue that there are reasons why
they have not been able to comply with the terms of those orders.
wife’s solicitor in her affidavit, deposes to the steps taken on behalf of
her client, after the 9 December 2024 orders
had been made, in compliance with
those orders – nominating three proposed experts, and subject to some
delay, eventually providing
details of their expertise and their estimated fees.
It is asserted on behalf of the wife that the process was completed by late
January 2025 (around 11 days later than had been directed in the orders).
husband did not accept that the nominated people were suitable experts. There
was also apparently disagreement as to the terms
of the letter of instruction to
be provided to the expert. Further communication between the solicitors for the
parties continued
and no agreement was reached about an agreed expert.
Ultimately,
the wife’s solicitors proposed an additional expert, Ms L, in
correspondence dated 27 March 2025 and provided her
curriculum vitae at that
wife in the current application continues to propose Ms L as the single expert.
Particulars of her qualifications and expertise
are set out in the affidavit of
Ms Neilan filed on 30 May 2025 (and were provided to the husband’s lawyers
in late March).
There does not appear to be challenge to Ms L’s
expertise, and she has confirmed her availability to prepare the report and
shared information as to her fees, which appear to be within the range that
other experts under consideration in this matter
have suggested (based on the
limited evidence about such in the affidavits).
Dissatisfied
with the information provided by the wife’s solicitors about the expertise
of her nominated experts, the husband
proposed an alternate pathway, suggesting
that the parties obtain a referral to a lawyer from the International Academy of
Lawyers (“IAFL”). In March 2025, the husband’s lawyers
proposed three experts sourced from the IAFL, however there
was no reply to that
correspondence from the wife’s lawyers.
instructions and copying in the wife’s lawyers, the husband’s
lawyers wrote to the three IAFL sourced experts on 21
March 2025. No response
to those inquiries was received. The husband states that as at 1 April 2025,
his lawyers still had not
heard from the IAFL sourced experts and on that basis,
he was prepared to engage Ms L.
agreed on 1 April 2025 to Ms L being appointed as the single expert, the husband
subsequently changed his mind and nominated
a different expert to be appointed.
His previous acceptance of Ms L weighs heavily in favour of her appointment at
his affidavit, the husband expresses “concern” about the choice of
expert. His solution to that concern however, according
to his Response to an
Application in a Proceeding, is to seek orders about making further inquiries of
the IAFL and attempting to
secure an expert from that resource. The fact that
he had already tried that pathway, without success, weighs against repeating
that exercise at this late stage. The uncertainty around that pathway (of
making further inquiries of the IAFL) also weighs heavily
against the proposed
orders sought by the husband and it is likely to lead to further delay.
will order the appointment of Ms L as the single expert with respect to Country
K Law and noting the existing order. While it remains
unclear why the pathway
provided for by the orders of 9 December 2024 has proven so challenging for the
parties, the appointment
of Ms L was nominated by the wife as part of that
initial process (later on, when one of the wife’s previously nominated
was no longer available and to assuage the husband’s concerns as
to the expertise of the previously nominated experts, Ms L
was added to the list
of the three nominated experts from which the husband was at liberty to make his
selection).
appointment of Ms L will complete the process for the appointment of the single
expert and her nomination and selection by both
parties (before the husband
changed his mind), had occurred with reasonably close adherence to the pathway
as set out in the orders
made on 9 December 2024
have considered the evidence of the wife and her sister as to the process of
making contact with Ms L and ascertaining her willingness
and availability to
assist the parties. I am satisfied that such does not impugn her independence
or otherwise make her unsuitable
for appointment as a single expert.
Letter of instruction/terms of reference
it is unfortunate that the parties have not been able to settle the letter of
instructions for the single expert.
7 of the orders made on 9 December 2024 provides as follows:
the event the parties cannot agree as to a draft joint letter of instruction
then each party is to send a separate letter of facts
to the Single Expert
two (2) days
of having been selected.
would appear that the parties are jointly of the view that such an option is not
sufficient to ensure that the single expert is
properly instructed.
husband seeks orders that the parties engage in “an informal mediation to
agree on the questions to be put to the expert,
with the scope defined by
Registrar Buttriss”. That approach is not embraced by the wife and the
risk of further delay and
additional costs weigh heavily against such an option.
I am not persuaded that any further processes which may cause additional delay
are warranted. The prospects of such a mediation, informal or otherwise,
resulting in agreement between the parties, based on recent
experiences, must be
assessed as remote.
the wife has sought orders (and the husband, similar orders, failing his
proposal for an informal mediation) to the effect that
she desires the court to
settle the disputed joint letter of instructions, regrettably, I remain in a
position where it would not
be proper to make determinations as to the contents
of that letter, without further input from the parties.
disputed joint letter produced by the husband is different to that produced by
the wife. Accordingly, I do not have one document
within which there may be
identified disputed parts or conflict as to certain additions or deletions.
Instead, it appears that I
am to undertake an assessment of the two proposed
letters and identify the areas of agreement and where the two letters contain
that are not agreed. I will not embark on this process without further
assistance from the parties.
range of different matters the parties have expressed in their respective draft
letters, about which they appear to seek the input
of the single expert, are
broad and differ from the summary of matters to be addressed as noted in the
orders made on 9 December
2024. Additionally, the separate draft letters
prepared and provided by the parties include an extensive list of documents to
provided to the expert.
is to this end that I will require the parties to make further submissions as to
what ought to be included in the joint letter
of instruction to be provided to
the single expert, now, Ms L.
Are additional orders needed for the payment of the
orders made on 9 December 2024 provide that the parties will share equally in
the payment of the fees of the single expert, which
is also consistent with the
usual approach under the Rules with respect to single experts.
should not be necessary for the court to particularise how the parties manage
those matters with the expert. The order makes the
obligation clear. One
expects that Ms L will establish those matters directly with the parties and I
note the draft letters to the
expert, as provided by each of the parties, sets
out that process as part of their engagement. I decline to make any further
this stage, I make orders appointing Ms L as the single expert.
consider that I have not heard from the parties sufficiently as to the diverging
approaches to the letter of instruction to be provided
to the single expert.
When the matter was set down for delivery of these reasons, I had my associate
write to the parties to inform
them that in addition to handing down these
reasons, I would hear further from them as to the substantial differences
between the
parties’ proposed letters of instruction, before making any
determination as to that outstanding issue.
I certify that the preceding forty-two (42)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 15 August 2025
RTF format (420 KB)
Signed PDF/A format