URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1990/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:32:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Concrete Constructions (NSW) Pty Ltd v Nelson [1990] HCA 17; (1990) 169 CLR 594 (3 May 1990)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
CONCRETE CONSTRUCTIONS (N.S.W.) PTY LTD v. NELSON
[1990] HCA 17
; (1990) 169 CLR 594
F.C. 90/018
Trade Practices
High Court of Australia
Mason C.J.(1), Brennan(2), Deane(1), Dawson(1), Toohey(3), Gaudron(1) and
McHugh(4) JJ.
Trade Practices - Consumer protection - Misleading or deceptive conduct - In
trade or commerce - False statement by employer to
employee as to condition of
work site in course of employment - Resultant injuries to employee - Whether
conduct "in" trade or commerce
Trade Practices Act 1974
1990, February 6; May 3. 3:5:1990
APPEAL from the Federal Court of Australia.
MASON C.J., DEANE, DAWSON AND GAUDRON JJ. The appellant ("the Company") is a
corporation which was, in July 1987, constructing a
building in Grosvenor
Square, Sydney. The respondent ("the worker") was one of the Company's
employees on the site. He sustained
injuries when he fell to the bottom of an
air-conditioning shaft while attempting to remove a grate positioned at the
entry point
of the shaft. He alleges that his injuries were caused by the
conduct of the Company's foreman who wrongly informed him that the
the entry points of the air-conditioning shafts were fixed by three bolts on
each side and that it was safe to remove them
in the manner explained by the
foreman. On the worker's case, he fell down the shaft when "one of the grates
gave way by reason of
the fact that it was not affixed by bolts or otherwise".
2. The worker instituted proceedings for damages against the Company in the
Federal Court. The statement of claim contained the
above allegations about
the cause of the worker's injury and, attributing the conduct of its foreman
to the Company, asserted that
those injuries were occasioned to the worker "by
reason of conduct of the (Company) ... which was misleading or deceptive or
to mislead or deceive". By consent, an order was made pursuant to the
Federal Court Rules (O.29, r.2(a)) that the following question
before trial:
"Do the facts pleaded and particularized in the Statement of
Claim give rise to a cause of action under the Trade
Practices Act, 1974?"
who answered it in the affirmative. The present appeal is brought from his
Honour's judgment that the question be so answered. It
is common ground that
the issue which the question raises is one of statutory construction. Briefly
stated, it is whether, accepting
all of the worker's allegations about the
cause of his injuries and that the misleading or deceptive conduct of its
foreman is to
be attributed to the Company, the conduct constituted a
contravention of the provisions of
Trade Practices Act 1974
("the Act"). If it did, it is not disputed that the worker's action for
damages lies, pursuant to s.82 of the Act, in the Federal
3. Section 52 is in Div.1 of Pt V of the Act. That Part is headed "Consumer
Protection". Division 1 is headed "Unfair Practices".
Section 52 reads:
"(1) A corporation shall not, in trade or commerce, engage
in conduct that is misleading or deceptive or is likely to
mislead or deceive.
(2) Nothing in the succeeding provisions of this Division
shall be taken as limiting by implication the generality of
sub-section (1)."
It is common ground that the Company is a "corporation" for the purposes of
the section. The Company's argument that the case does
not fall within s.52
is essentially based upon the combined effect of the heading "Consumer
Protection" and the section's express
confinement of the scope of its
provisions to conduct "in trade or commerce".
4. There have been numerous cases in which consideration has been given to
the scope of s.52 of the Act. They include decisions
of this Court (Hornsby
Building Information Centre Pty. Ltd. v. Sydney Building Information Centre
[1978] HCA 11
; (1978) 140
CLR 216; Reg.
v. Federal Court of Australia; Ex parte
Pilkington A.C.I. (Operations) Pty. Ltd.
[1978] HCA 60
; (1978) 142 CLR 113;
and Parkdale
Custom Built
Furniture Pty. Ltd. v. Puxu Pty. Ltd.
[1982] HCA 44
; (1982) 149 CLR 191),
decisions of the Federal Court
and some decisions of State Supreme Courts.
Reference to many of them was made
by Lee J. of the Federal Court in the
course of a
Ltd. v. Cockburn
Cement Ltd. (1988)
10 ATPR 40-915, at pp 49,833-49,838; 84 ALR 521,
525-531. To the cases there mentioned,
we would add a reference to the
of the New South Wales Court of Appeal in
Wright v. TNT Management
Pty. Ltd. (1989) 15 NSWLR
679. The actual decision in none of
those cases is,
however, either directly
applicable to the circumstances of the present case
or decisive of the question whether
s.52's prohibition of misleading or
conduct by a corporation in trade or commerce extends
internal affairs of the
corporation or to purely internal communications
between employees of a corporation in the course
of their employment. That
so, it is unnecessary that we refer to the decided
cases in any detail.
It suffices, for present
purposes, to say that we regard
it as settled by
earlier decisions that an action to
restrain a contravention of s.52 can, in
appropriate
circumstances, be maintained
by a person who is not a consumer
(see Hornsby
Building Information Centre Pty. Ltd. v. Sydney Building
Information Centre Ltd.,
at p 226; Reg. v. Federal Court of Australia, at
120, 128, 131; Parkdale, at pp 197, 202, 212) and that
we consider that,
the cases make plain that consumer protection
lies at the heart of the
legislative purpose to be discerned
in s.52, the precise boundaries
territory within which that section
operates remain undetermined (cf. Hanimex
Pty. Ltd. v.
Kodak (Australasia) Pty. Ltd. (1982)
4 ATPR 40-287, at p 43,599;
Equity Ltd. v. North Broken Hill Holdings Ltd. (1986)
9 FCR 385, at
5. The general heading "Consumer Protection" at the commencement of Pt V is
part of the Act (Acts Interpretation Act 1901 (Cth),
s.13). It constitutes
part of the context within which the substantive provisions of Pt V must be
construed and should be taken into
consideration in determining the meaning of
those provisions in case of ambiguity. The heading does not, however, control
the permissible
scope of the substantive provisions of Pt V and cannot
properly be used to impose an unnaturally constricted meaning upon the words
of those substantive provisions (see Hornsby Building Information Centre Pty.
Ltd., at p 225; Parkdale, at p 202). As a matter
of language, s.52 prohibits
a corporation from engaging in misleading or deceptive conduct "in trade or
commerce" regardless of whether
the conduct is misleading to, or deceptive of,
a person in the capacity of a consumer. In these circumstances, it is not
permissible
to give to the heading of Pt V the effect of confining the general
words of s.52 to cases involving the protection of consumers alone.
constrict the provisions of s.52 would be to convert a general prohibition of
misleading or deceptive conduct by a corporation,
be it consumer or supplier,
in trade or commerce, into a discriminatory requirement that a corporate
supplier of goods or services
should observe standards in its dealings with a
corporate consumer which the consumer itself was left free to disregard. That
so, the general words of s.52 must be construed as applying
even-handedly to corporations involved in a transaction or dealing with
another "in trade or commerce". So to say is not, however, to deny the
significance of the heading "Consumer Protection" for
the purposes of the
present case. In particular, as will appear, that heading is of importance in
determining the effect of the
words "in trade or commerce" in s.52 (see
Hornsby Building Information Centre Pty. Ltd., at p 224).
6. It is well established that the words "trade" and "commerce", when used in
the context of
Constitution
, are not terms of art but are terms
of common knowledge of the widest import. The same may be said of those words
as used in s.52(1)
of the Act. Indeed, in the light of the provisions of
s.6(2) of the Act which give an extended operation to s.52 and which clearly
use the words "trade" and "commerce" in the sense which the words bear in
Constitution
, it would be difficult to maintain that those
words were used in
with some different meaning. The real problem
involved in the construction of s.52 of the Act does not, however, spring from
use of the words "trade or commerce". It arises from the requirement that
the conduct to which the section refers be "in" trade
or commerce. Plainly
enough, what is encompassed in the plenary grant of legislative power "with
respect to ... Trade and commerce"
Constitution
assistance on the question of the effect of the word "in" as part of the
requirement that the conduct proscribed by s.52(1)
of the Act be "in trade or
7. The phrase "in trade or commerce" in s.52 has a restrictive operation. It
qualifies the prohibition against engaging in conduct
of the specified kind.
As a matter of language, a prohibition against engaging in conduct "in trade
or commerce" can be construed
as encompassing conduct in the course of the
myriad of activities which are not, of their nature, of a trading or
commercial character
but which are undertaken in the course of, or as
incidental to, the carrying on of an overall trading or commercial business.
the words "in trade or commerce" in s.52 are construed in that sense, the
provisions of the section would extend, for example, to
a case where the
misleading or deceptive conduct was a failure by a driver to give the correct
handsignal when driving a truck in
the course of a corporation's haulage
business. It would also extend to a case, such as the present, where the
alleged misleading
or deceptive conduct consisted of the giving of inaccurate
information by one employee to another in the course of carrying on the
building activities of a commercial builder. Alternatively, the reference to
conduct "in trade or commerce" in s.52 can be construed
as referring only to
conduct which is itself an aspect or element of activities or transactions
which, of their nature, bear a trading
or commercial character. So construed,
to borrow and adapt words used by Dixon J. in a different context in Bank of
N.S.W. v. The
Commonwealth
[1948] HCA 7
; (1948) 76 CLR 1, at p 381, the words "in trade or
commerce" refer to "the central conception" of trade
or commerce and
"immense field of activities" in which corporations may engage in the
course of, or for the purposes of,
carrying on some
commercial business.
8. As a matter of mere language, the arguments favouring and militating
against these alternative constructions of s.52 are fairly
evenly balanced.
The scope of the prohibition imposed by s.52 is, however, governed not only by
"the terms in which it is created"
but by "the context in which it is found"
(see Yorke v. Lucas
[1985] HCA 65
; (1985) 158 CLR 661, at p 668; and, generally, Bank
N.S.W. v. The
Commonwealth, at p 285). In that regard, it is of particular
significance that the words "trade" and "commerce"
have "about them
chameleon-like hue, readily adapting themselves to their surroundings"
(O'Brien v. Smolonogov (1983) 53 ALR 107,
at p 113, quoting
Commissioner of Taxation v. Whitfords Beach Pty. Ltd.
[1982] HCA 8
; (1982) 150 CLR 355, at
pp 378-379).
Section 52(2) precludes limiting
the scope of s.52(1) by
implication drawn from the contents
of other provisions of Pt V. Nonetheless,
when the section is read in
the context provided by other features of the Act,
"An Act relating to certain Trade Practices",
the narrower (i.e. the
second) of the alternative constructions of the requirement
"in trade or
commerce" is the preferable one.
Indeed, in the context
of Pt V of the Act
with its heading "Consumer Protection",
it is plain that s.52 was not intended
to all conduct, regardless
of its nature, in which a corporation
might engage in
the course of, or for the purposes of, its overall
commercial business.
Put differently, the section was not intended
by a side-wind, an overlay of Commonwealth
law upon every field of legislative
control into which a corporation might
stray for the purposes of, or in
connection with, carrying
on its trading or commercial activities.
section is concerned
with is the conduct of a corporation towards persons, be
consumers or not, with whom it (or those
whose interests it represents
is seeking to promote) has or may have dealings in the
course of those
activities or transactions
which, of their nature, bear
a trading or
commercial character. Such conduct includes,
of course, promotional
activities in relation
to, or for the purposes
of, the supply of goods or
services to actual or potential
consumers, be they identified persons or
an unidentifiable section
of the public. In some areas, the dividing
line between
what is and what is not conduct "in trade or commerce"
and may require the identification of what imports a trading
commercial character to an activity which is not,
without more, of
character. The point can be illustrated by reference
to the examples
mentioned above. The driving of a truck
for the delivery
of goods to a
consumer and the construction of a building
for another pursuant to a building
contract are, no doubt,
trade or commerce
in so far as the relationship
between supplier and actual
or potential customer or between builder and
owner is concerned.
That being so, to drive a truck with a
competitor's name
upon it in order to mislead the customer or to conceal
defect in a building
for the purpose of deceiving the building owner may
constitute misleading or deceptive conduct "in trade
or commerce" for the
purposes of s.52. On the other hand, the mere driving
of a truck or
construction of a building is not, without
more, trade or commerce
engage in conduct in the course of those
activities which is divorced from any
relevant actual or
potential trading or commercial
relationship or dealing
will not, of itself,
constitute conduct "in trade or commerce" for the
of that section. That being
so, the giving of a misleading handsignal
by the driver of one of its trucks is not, in the relevant
sense, conduct by a
corporation
"in trade or commerce". Nor, without more,
is a misleading
statement by one of a building company's
own employees to another employee
the course of their ordinary activities.
The position might well be different
if the misleading
statement was made in the course
of, or for the purposes of,
some trading
or commercial dealing between the corporation and the particular
9. The alleged misleading or deceptive conduct of the Company's foreman in
the present case consisted of an internal communication
by one employee to
another employee in the course of their ordinary activities in and about the
construction of a building. It follows
from what has been said above that
that conduct was not, for relevant purposes, conduct "in trade or commerce"
and would not, if
established, constitute a contravention of s.52 of the Act.
That being so, the appeal must be allowed and the preliminary question
was answered by the learned primary judge in the affirmative must be answered
in the negative.
BRENNAN J. Section 52 is the leading provision in Pt V of the
Practices Act 1974
is headed "Consumer Protection"; Div.1 is
headed "Unfair Practices". For the reasons stated by McHugh J., I would
in the light of the heading to
and hold that the conduct it
proscribes is limited to conduct which misleads or deceives or is likely to
mislead or deceive a person
in his capacity as a consumer. That is not to say
protects only the interests of consumers.
is enforceable
by civil proceedings, pursuant to provisions in
persons other than consumers - for example, trade competitors - may protect
their own interests by taking proceedings, the joint
operation of
enforcement provisions in
confers protective rights on persons other
than consumers. That consideration, however, does not affect the construction
or alter the character of the conduct it proscribes. As Mason J. said
in Reg. v. Federal Court of Australia; Ex parte Pilkington
A.C.I. (Operations)
[1978] HCA 60
; (1978) 142 CLR 113, at p 128:
" There is, in my view, no incongruity in making the
provisions of
of the Act, notwithstanding they have
been enacted for the protection of consumers, enforceable
at the instance of a competitor who is not a consumer. The
enforcement, at least by injunction, by such a person of
the Pt V provisions enhances the protection which they give
to consumers. Indeed, it constitutes the most effective
sanction for that protection because the consumer who is
misled or deceived in consequence of an unfair practice
is unlikely to be a suitor for an injunction against the
contravening corporation; he is more likely to seek
Non-consumers acquire (by ss.80,82 and 86) a right to take proceedings to
protect their own interests, but the conduct on which the
proceedings are
founded must answer the s.52 description, that is to say, conduct which
misleads or deceives or is likely to mislead
or deceive a person in his
capacity as a consumer.
2. Although I agree with the majority that the phrase "in trade or commerce"
qualifies the operation of s.52, I am respectfully
unable to agree that that
phrase restricts the operation of s.52 to conduct which is in itself of a
trading or commercial character.
The question whether conduct is engaged in
"in trade or commerce" cannot be answered by reference to the conduct divorced
circumstances in which it is engaged in; it can be answered only by
reference to the surrounding circumstances. Those are the circumstances
which the conduct is engaged in. There is no scalpel of principle which can
dissect the conduct out of the activity or transaction
"in" which it is
embedded. Therefore, in my opinion, if misleading or deceptive conduct occurs
in the course of carrying on an activity
or carrying out a transaction of a
trading or commercial character, the test imported by the phrase "in trade or
commerce" is satisfied.
3. The activity in which the defendant corporation was engaging in this case
- building construction for reward - was its business
and was clearly a
trading activity. It is therefore unnecessary to consider the different
meanings which may be attributed to the
terms "trade" and "commerce" in
differing contexts. The conduct on which the plaintiff relies was engaged in
in the course of and
as an integral part of the defendant corporation's trade.
4. There is only one argument of substance which might be thought to justify
a reading down of the general language of s.52 by restricting
the meaning of
the phrase "in trade or commerce", namely, that s.52 can hardly have been
intended to apply across the broad canvas
of activities which reach out to the
periphery of trade or commerce. An example was offered of a truck driver who,
driving in the
course of his employment by a corporation in its carrying
business, gives a misleading traffic signal. Would the misleading signal
contravention of s.52? That argument would have some cogency if, but only if,
s.52 were construed without reference to the
heading "Consumer Protection".
Once it is understood that the section prohibits only that conduct which
misleads or deceives or is
likely to mislead or deceive a person in his
capacity as a consumer, there is no warrant for reading down s.52 by imposing
some artificial
restriction on the meaning of the phrase "in trade or
commerce". True it is that that construction does not impose on corporations
which are engaged in trade or commerce as consumers an obligation not to
mislead or deceive but, with great respect for the contrary
view, it is
unlikely that the Act intended to impose that obligation on corporate
consumers. If the Act imposes an obligation on
corporate consumers not to
mislead or deceive, it imposes the same obligation on consumers who are
natural persons and who mislead
or deceive when they are using the postal
services or the telephone: s.6(3). It is unlikely that a Part which is headed
Protection" contains what is, in combination with s.6(3), a fertile
source of consumer liability.
5. To give "in trade or commerce" its ordinary meaning does not render the
qualification otiose. No doubt the greater proportion
of conduct engaged in
by foreign corporations, trading or financial corporations formed within the
limits of Australia or the holding
companies of such corporations is likely to
be in trade or commerce, so that the qualification in the case of those
corporations
is of little practical importance. But the definition of
"corporation" includes any body corporate incorporated in a Territory,
it ordinarily engages in trade or commerce or not, and its holding company
(s.4(1)), and there is significant work for the
qualification to do in the
case of non-trading, non-commercial Territorial corporations. Section 52 will
apply only if such corporations
engage in activity falling within the general
meaning of "trade or commerce".
6. As I construe s.52 to apply only to conduct which (relevantly to the
present case) misleads a person in his capacity as a consumer,
conduct complained of did not affect Mr Nelson in his capacity as a consumer,
nor did it affect any other person in that
capacity, the case as pleaded is
not supportable by s.52. The appeal must be allowed.
TOOHEY J. The language of
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) ("the
") is deceptively simple. It reads:
" (1) A corporation shall not, in trade or commerce,
engage in conduct that is misleading or deceptive or is
likely to mislead or deceive.
(2) Nothing in the succeeding provisions of this
Division shall be taken as limiting by implication the
generality of sub-section (1)."
However, a glance at the reports of Australian trade practices cases soon
discloses the volume of litigation spawned by this provision.
Reference in
summary form to many of the decisions may be found in Miller, Annotated
Practices Act
, 10th ed. (1989), pp 135-162.
2. The present appeal arises from a novel use of
The respondent was
employed by the appellant company in the construction
of a building in
Grosvenor Square, Sydney. The respondent's
work necessitated the removal of
grates positioned at the entry points
of air-conditioning shafts. The
respondent was instructed
how to do the work by the appellant's foreman who
told him that each of
the grates was secured on either side by three bolts.
of the grates was not so secured and it gave way, causing the respondent
to fall into the shaft and sustain serious injuries. The
respondent brought
action against the appellant, claiming damages pursuant
3. These are not facts as found by a court. They are the facts pleaded in a
statement of claim. The matter came before the Federal
Court of Australia on
motion by the appellant to have determined as a separate question whether "the
facts pleaded and particularized
in the Statement of Claim give rise to a
cause of action under the
Trade Practices Act 1974
". That question was
determined separately
and favourably to the respondent. From that decision
the appellant appeals to this Court.
4. About certain matters there is no dispute. The appellant is a
corporation. On the facts pleaded, there was conduct by the appellant
form of statements made by its foreman to the respondent and it was conduct
that was misleading or likely to mislead him.
The issues now before the Court
are the extent to which the language of
is controlled by or gains
meaning from the context
in which the sub-section appears, namely in
, and whether the conduct which was misleading or likely to mislead was
in trade or commerce within the meaning of the sub-section.
5. As Fox J. pointed out in Brown v. Jam Factory Pty. Ltd.
[1981] FCA 35
; (1981) 53 FLR 340,
"does not purport to create liability
at all; rather does it
establish a norm of conduct, failure to observe which has consequences
provided for elsewhere in the same
statute, or under general law".
is expressed in the widest terms:
" A person who suffers loss or damage by conduct of
another person that was done in contravention of a
provision of
or V may recover the amount of the
loss or damage by action against that other person or
against any person involved in the contravention."
A contravention of a provision of
or V may lead to the grant of an
injunction on the application of "the Minister, the Commission
or any other
With certain exceptions, contravention of a provision of
also constitutes an offence punishable
on conviction and attracts a
monetary penalty.
is one of those exceptions:
perhaps not surprising; the
nature of the section does not lend itself
particularly to criminal sanctions.
Section 52(1)
does not exist in a vacuum. It is to be found in
, headed Consumer Protection. The section is
in Div.1 of
Unfair Practices. By reason of
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth), the headings of parts, divisions and subdivisions of an
deemed to be part of the
". It is of some interest
to note the other
divisions of
They are Div.1A - Product Safety and Product Information;
Div.2 - Conditions and Warranties
in Consumer Transactions; Div.2A - Actions
against Manufacturers and Importers of Goods; Div.3 - Miscellaneous.
7. It is well settled that, notwithstanding the heading to
, a person is
not precluded from asserting a breach of
that person does not
answer the description of consumer: Hornsby Building Information Centre Pty.
Ltd. v. Sydney Building
Information
Centre Ltd.
[1978] HCA 11
; (1978) 140 CLR 216, at p 226;
The Queen v. Federal Court of Australia; Ex parte Pilkington A.C.I.
(Operations)
[1978] HCA 60
; (1978) 142 CLR 113, at pp 120-121, 128, 131; Parkdale
Custom Built Furniture Pty. Ltd. v. Puxu Pty. Ltd.
[1982] HCA 44
; (1982) 149 CLR 191, at pp
197, 202, 212. But the extent to which the section is concerned with consumer
and with conduct
directed at consumers is
still occasion for
contains no definition of "consumer". Section 4B provides that,
unless the contrary intention appears, a person shall
be taken to
acquired particular goods or particular services as a consumer only where the
price does not exceed the prescribed
otherwise in the circumstances
there mentioned. While the section provides no definition of "consumer", it
is relevant
as suggesting
that a consumer will ordinarily be a person who
acquires goods or services. This of itself has some significance,
it clear that "consumer" is not confined to one who acquires goods: see
Stephen J. in Hornsby, at p 224. This wider
notion is carried
into certain
sections within Div.1 - ss.52A,
in particular - which speak
expressly of various forms
of conduct "in connexion with the supply or
possible supply of goods or services".
These words do not appear in
it should be noted that the expressions "goods" and "services" are
, the latter in particularly wide terms.
9. Stephen J. commented in Hornsby, at p 226:
"To interpret the provisions of Div.1 in the light of the
quasi-definitions (in s.4B), applied, through this heading,
to the entire Part, will be to distort in numerous respects
the otherwise clearly apparent legislative pattern manifest
It has been said also that the general words of
, the generality of
which is emphasized by
, are not to be read down
by reference to the
Stephen J. in Hornsby, at p 225; Mason J. in Parkdale, at p
10. Nevertheless, there are dicta which set
within a framework of
consumer protection. In Hornsby, at p 220, Barwick C.J.
concerned with conduct which is deceptive of members of the public in their
capacity as consumers of goods or
services". And
Stephen J., contrasting
with s.5 of the United States Federal Trade Commission
(15 USC 45) said,
is on the contrary exclusively concerned
with consumer protection." Jacobs J. agreed generally with Stephen
Aickin J. agreed
generally with Barwick C.J. On the other hand, Murphy J.
said, at p 234, that
was "not limited or qualified"
by the heading of
In Parkdale, at p 197, Gibbs C.J. spoke of
as "intended for the
protection of consumers". At p 202,
Mason J. commented: "Although
intended to protect members of the public in their capacity as consumers of
goods and services
..." and, at p 203, that the conduct
complained of "must
mislead or deceive or be likely to mislead or deceive members of the public
their capacity as consumers".
The notion of consumer protection is implied,
rather than expressly stated, by Mason J. in The
Queen v. Credit Tribunal; Ex
General Motors Acceptance Corporation (1977) 137 CLR 545, at p 561.
11. To a large extent the various observations set out in the preceding
paragraph were made to stress, in the circumstances of the
particular case
before the Court, that
is not directly concerned with unfair methods of
competition in commerce or with the
protection of the reputation or goodwill
competitors. At the same time they were made so as to put beyond doubt
that any remedy
deriving from the operation of
is not confined to
consumers but is available as well to competitors in business. In The Queen
v. Credit Tribunal, at p 561, referring
to the context in which
appears, Mason J. said that "the prohibition contained in
the sub-section
emerges as an important general prohibition against a corporation
course of trade or commerce engaged in a
form of conduct, a trade practice,
which is unfair."
12. The justification for bringing within the scope of
actions which
in character differ little from passing off actions
is explained by Stephen J.
in Hornsby, at p 226, in terms of "the
very direct relationship which
necessarily exists between the deception
of consumers in the course of trade
and the injury caused
by the unfair practices of a trade rival" and by Mason
J. in Parkdale,
at p 202, in these words: "The remedy to prevent deception
the public often has the incidental effect of protecting a competing
goodwill which would be also injured by that deception."
13. There can be no doubt that
is intended to protect
consumers against unfair trading practices. The very structure
of the Part
makes that clear, as do its contents.
achieves this end by proscribing
in various ways, and most widely in
conduct which if left unchecked
may constitute an unfair trading practice. I take it that this is what
Stephen J. had in mind when
in Hornsby, at p 224, he said that the heading in
, Consumer Protection, "does colour the meaning to be given to the sort of
conduct against which the section is aimed". The breadth
contrasted with ss.52A,
, has already been
noted, as has the
very clear direction given by
And, as already stated, a person who
suffers loss or damage by the conduct
of another which answers the language of
even though that person may not be a consumer in
respect of the
transaction in question. But that conduct will not answer the
unless it is conduct of a character which misleads
deceives or is likely to mislead or deceive persons in their capacity as
of goods or services.
14. Despite the emphasis placed in some of the judgments on deception of
members of the public, it does not follow that
confined to statements
directed to the public or some identifiable section of it: see Bevanere Pty
Ltd v. Lubidineuse
[1985] FCA 134
; (1985) 7 FCR
325, at p 332. Certainly, Yorke v. Lucas
[1985] HCA 65
; (1985) 158 CLR 661 proceeded on the assumption, which was not challenged
any stage of
the proceedings, that a statement made
by a land agent to the
potential purchaser of a business concerning the turnover
of that business
fell within
And there have been a number of decisions of the Federal
Court in which an oral or written representation
directly to the
has been held misleading or deceptive conduct within
Menhaden Pty Ltd v. Citibank N.A.
[1984] FCA 183
1 FCR 542, at pp 545-546. Such a
representation may readily possess the character referred to in the preceding
reasons, that is, be capable of misleading or deceiving
persons in their capacity as consumers of goods or services. In
we are not concerned with the acquisition of particular goods or services or
in turn with the limitation in s.4B by
the price or nature of the
goods or services. See for instance Jillawarra Grazing Co. v. John Shearer
Ltd. (1984) 6
ATPR 40-441
and Atkinson v. Hastings Deering (Queensland) Pty
[1985] FCA 135
; (1985) 6 FCR 331, where s.4B(1)(a)(ii) was invoked in support of implied
under Div.2 of
It is with consumers in the widest sense of
that term that
is concerned.
15. Before this Court, counsel for the appellant attacked the decision of
Wilcox J. in Lubidineuse v. Bevanere Pty Ltd
[1984] FCA 252
FCR 1, a decision which
was upheld by the Full Court of the Federal Court: Bevanere Pty Ltd v.
Lubidineuse. In particular,
was made of the following statement by
Wilcox J., at p 17:
"I hold that there is no implication in
limiting the
relevant conduct to conduct which affects a person properly
to be described as a 'consumer'. It is enough that the
conduct of the corporation be misleading or deceptive and
that it has occurred in trade or commerce."
16. If Wilcox J. meant no more than that it was unnecessary that the
applicant answer the description of "consumer", the statement
unexceptionable. If, on the other hand, his Honour was suggesting that
is not concerned with protecting persons in their
capacity as
consumers, the statement is at odds with the dicta of this Court referred
earlier in these reasons and indeed with
dicta mentioned by his Honour earlier
in his judgment. It is therefore likely that it
was the first of these
possibilities to which
he was referring. The primary issue in Lubidineuse was
whether the sale of a business
used and intended to be used for commercial
gain was a transaction in trade and commerce. And it is significant that the
in the judgment of Wilcox J. to which exception
was taken by the
present appellant was not even mentioned in the judgment of the
when that case went on appeal. It can
hardly have been the linchpin on which
the judgment depended.
17. The generality of the language of
must be accorded full weight
within the framework of consumer protection in the sense
described in these
reasons. But, at the same
time, the conduct complained of must be conduct in
trade or commerce within the language
of the provision, for only then is
attracted. The expression "in trade or commerce" recurs throughout
Div.1. There is a
definition of "trade or commerce" in
it is geographical and does not assist in resolving the issue presently
the Court. Heydon, Trade Practices Law, (1989)
comments at par.11.210:
"The better view is that 'in' means 'within, as part of'.
It does not mean 'in connection with' or 'in relation to'.
The view that 'in' means 'within' is supported by Larmer v.
Power Machinery Pty Ltd ((1977) 29 FLR 490, at p 493).
Even so limited, the expression 'in trade or commerce' is a
broad one, as the
cases indicate.
While the conduct must be in the trade or commerce of
the defendant, the party deceived need not be in actual or
prospective trading relations with the defendant."
18. The present appeal proceeded on the assumption, tacit if not express,
that the conduct said to have been misleading or deceptive
must have been
conduct in the trade or commerce of the appellant. No doubt, in most cases the
focus will be on the nature of the
defendant's business but the section is not
so limited. It does not, in terms, refer to the trade or commerce of the
particular corporation.
It seems unlikely, given the nature of the activities
, Div.1 of the
is concerned, that it should be necessary
consider closely the character of a corporation's business and in particular
to determine
whether or not the conduct relied upon
by an applicant or
plaintiff can fairly be said to be in the trade or commerce of that
corporation.
Notions of ultra vires can hardly
have a part to play in this
area of the law. The position of the expression "in trade or commerce"
, and indeed in other
sections in
, Div.1, suggests that it is
trade or commerce in general terms with which the statute is concerned.
19. In my view,
is aimed at conduct in which a corporation engages
when that conduct takes place in a situation which fairly
answers the
description
"in trade or commerce". The words "trade or commerce" are of wide
import: see Re Ku-ring-gai Co-operative
Building Society (No.12)
[1978] FCA 50
36 FLR 134, at pp 139, 167. But their focus is on commercial activity, the
providing of goods
and services for reward. There
is no reason why they
should bear a different meaning to that which they bear in
Constitution
, particularly when regard is had to
which seeks
to give the
an additional operation by reference to various
heads of power
Constitution
. It is of interest to note that in Larmer, which
was decided fairly soon after the
came into operation, Nimmo J. said, at p
" I do not think that the expression 'in trade or
commerce' should be given the narrow interpretation
contended for by counsel for the company. On the contrary
I think the provisions of the
Trade Practices Act
including the definition given to the expression in
demand that a very wide meaning be given to it. In my
view, the expression is intended to cover the whole field
in which the nation's trade or commerce is carried on. I
reject the view that it is confined to any particular event
which may occur in the conduct of a business which operates
within that field."
20. Even taking such a broad view of
, the preposition "in" clearly
operates by way of limitation. The question is not whether
the conduct
engaged in was in connection
with trade or commerce or in relation to trade or
commerce. It must have been in trade or
commerce. While there are dangers in
for the meaning of an expression through the substitution of another,
the phrase "as
part of trade or commerce" does, I think, come
close to what is
intended. Thus, when the appellant's foreman described the grates
secured on either side with bolts, that
statement must have been made as part
of trade or commerce before an action could
21. This appeal must succeed. To begin with, the assurance given by the
appellant's foreman to the respondent cannot, on any view
of the matter, be
regarded as conduct which was deceptive of persons in their capacity as
consumers of goods and services. This
is not because the assurance was given
only to the respondent; it is because the assurance was not capable of
misleading or deceiving
persons in their capacity as consumers. It was given
to a workman employed by the appellant and for the purpose of carrying out
that employment.
22. Secondly, the appellant's conduct was not in trade or commerce within
If it is the trade or commerce of the appellant
with which we are
concerned, it may be said that the assurance given by its foreman
relation to or in respect of that business.
But so to conclude does not
answer the question whether that assurance was in
the trade or commerce of the
appellant. In my view
it was not, for the conduct was not part of the
appellant's trade or commerce,
which was that of constructing buildings for
for reward. It was, at most, incidental to that business. Likewise,
question is whether the assurance was given in trade
or commerce
generally, the answer must be no. Again, it may have been given
in relation
to or in respect of trade or commerce in
the sense that it was incidental to a
commercial activity. But it was not given
as part of trade or commerce in any
general sense;
rather, it was given by an employer to an employee, only for
the purpose of the
latter carrying out the work for which he had been
is confined in the manner suggested in these reasons, it
becomes an overriding norm of conduct, a departure from
which in any
circumstance
may give rise to a cause of action. The structure of the
and its intent, as found in the language
used and the legislative history, as
well as its judicial history to date, tell strongly
against such an operation.
24. The appeal should be allowed and the question asked of the Federal Court
answered in the negative.
McHUGH J. Concrete Constructions (N.S.W.) Pty. Limited ("the employer")
appeals against a decision, made by Einfeld J. in the Federal
Court, that the
facts pleaded and particularised in a statement of claim filed by Mr Grant
Nelson ("the worker") gave rise to a cause
of action against it pursuant to
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth). In his statement of claim, the worker
alleged that in July 1987 he was employed by the employer on a building site
His duties included the moving of grates positioned at the entry
points to air-conditioning shafts. Before he carried out that work
foreman informed him that each grate was secured by three bolts on either
side. That statement was untrue. While the worker
was removing one of the
grates, it gave way and caused him to fall to the bottom of an
air-conditioning shaft. He suffered serious
injuries. The issue in the
appeal is whether
Trade Practices Act
applies to representations
made by an employer to his
employee concerning matters relating to the safety
of the latter's employment.
The Object of
Trade Practices Act
"(1) A corporation shall not, in trade or commerce, engage
in conduct that is misleading or deceptive or is likely to
mislead or deceive.
(2) Nothing in the succeeding provisions of this Division
shall be taken as limiting by implication the generality of
sub-section (1)."
3. Mr Bennett, Q.C., for the employer contended that
is confined to the
protection of consumers and that it does not extend
to the protection of
members of the public in their capacity
as employees. In Lubidineuse v.
Bevanere Pty Ltd
[1984] FCA 252
; (1984) 3 FCR 1, after
examining a number of decisions in this
Court, Wilcox J. held (at p 17) that there was "no implication in
limiting the relevant
conduct to conduct which affects a person properly to be
described as a 'consumer'". On appeal, the Full Court
of the Federal Court
unanimously upheld the reasoning of Wilcox J. on this point: Bevanere Pty Ltd
v. Lubidineuse
[1985] FCA 134
; (1985) 7 FCR 325, at p 332. In Wright
v. TNT Management Pty
Ltd (1989) 15 NSWLR 679, sitting as a member of the Court of Appeal
South Wales, I held (at p 693) that
that Court should follow a decision of the
Full Federal Court on federal legislation unless
it was convinced that the
decision was
"clearly erroneous" and that it should apply the holding in
Bevanere Pty Ltd v. Lubidineuse.
However, while the construction which
Federal Court placed on
in Bevanere Pty Ltd v. Lubidineuse is one that is
open, the correct construction of that section,
in my opinion, is that it is
to the protection of consumers and not to the protection of members of
the community in other
capacities.
is found in Div.1 of
Trade Practices Act
itself is described as "An
relating to certain Trade
Practices".
has the heading "Consumer Protection".
does not identify the
persons who are protected from misleading
or deceptive conduct. On its face,
the section applies to any misleading
or deceptive conduct which occurs in
trade or commerce.
Consequently, Mr F.M. Douglas, Q.C., for the worker
contended that there
was no warrant for confining the protection of
members of the public in their capacity as consumers. But the "words of any
statutory provision must be first read in the context
provided by the statute
as a whole": K. and S. Lake City Freighters Pty. Ltd. v. Gordon and Gotch Ltd.
[1985] HCA 48
; (1985) 157
CLR 309, per Gibbs
C.J. at p 312. The context of a provision in a
includes any relevant heading, for a heading is part
of a federal
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
5. If recourse could be had to the succeeding provisions of Div.1, as well as
the headings of
and Div.1, it would be easy to conclude that the object
is the protection of consumers and that only members of the public in
their capacities as consumers are protected by s.52 from misleading
deceptive conduct by corporations in trade or commerce. When originally
contained three divisions. Division 1 had the heading "Unfair
Practices". Division 2 had the heading "Conditions and Warranties in
Transactions". Division 3 was headed "Miscellaneous". Leaving aside s.52, the
provisions of
, except for ss.59 and 75, prescribed rules for or in
relation to the supply of goods and services. Section 59 prohibited false or
misleading statements concerning the profitability or risk or any other
material aspect of any business activity that the corporation
represented
could be carried on at a person's place of residence. Section 75 dealt with
the saving of other laws and remedies.
has been amended since it was
enacted and new divisions and headings added. But, except in two respects,
the amendments have not
changed its basic subject matter - the prescription of
rules for or in relation to the supply of goods and services. The two
are ss.53A and 53B. Section 53A prohibits false representations
and other misleading or offensive conduct in relation to the sale
of or grants
of interest in land; s.53B prohibits misleading conduct in relation to offers
of employment.
6. Except for s.59, therefore, and leaving aside s.52, the provisions of
Div.1, when originally enacted, were designed to protect
the consumers of
goods and services. And even s.59 was a consumer protection provision, in a
broad sense, since its chief area of
operation was in respect of the
acquisition of franchises, expertise or stock required for the carrying on of
a domestic business.
Notwithstanding the various amendments to
1974, the protection of consumers has continued to be the chief, and almost
exclusive, object or purpose of
In this context, it would be easy to
conclude that the purpose of Parliament in enacting s.52 was to protect
consumers, but not
other persons, against every kind of misleading or
deceptive conduct irrespective of whether the conduct otherwise fell within
of the specific provisions of
Moreover, the terms of the Second
Reading speeches and debates in the Senate and the House of Representatives
confirm that consumer
protection was the object of
and, consequently, of
s.52. However, the terms of s.52(2) preclude the succeeding provisions of
Div.1 from being "taken as limiting
by implication the generality of
sub-section (1)". No doubt there is much to be said for the conclusion that,
while s.52(2) precludes
use of the succeeding provisions to limit the general
words of s.52(1), it does not preclude the use of those provisions to identify
the scope or object of s.52(1). But whether that is so or not, I think that,
even if regard is had only to the headings of
and Div.1 of that Part, the
proper conclusion to be drawn from the enactment of those headings is that the
object or purpose of s.52
was, and remains, the protection of consumers and
not other persons.
The Use of the Heading to
7. In Silk Bros. Pty. Ltd. v. State Electricity Commission of Victoria
[1943] HCA 2
67 CLR 1, Latham C.J. said (at p 16):
"The headings in a statute or in Regulations can be taken
into consideration in determining the meaning of a provision
where that provision is ambiguous, and may sometimes be of
service in determining the scope of a provision (see In re
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd. ((1893) 19 VLR 333, at
p 375)). 'But where the enacting words are clear and
unambiguous, the title, or headings, must give way, and full
effect must be given to the enactment' (Bennett v. Minister
for Public Works (N.S.W.)
[1908] HCA 50
; ((1908) 7 CLR 372, at p 383),
per Isaacs J.)."
8. It may be that this passage represents too limited an approach to the
construction of federal statutes and that their headings
must always be taken
into account in determining the meaning of their provisions. But in any
event, a heading may be taken into
account to determine the scope of a
provision expressed in general terms: cf. Ragless v. District Council of
Prospect (1922) SASR
299, at p 311. As Holroyd J. pointed out (at p 375) in In
re The Commercial Bank of Australia Limited (1893) 19 VLR 333, a heading
is "intended to indicate a certain group of clauses as relating to a
particular subject".
9. In Reg. v. Credit Tribunal; Ex parte General Motors Acceptance Corporation
[1977] HCA 34
; (1977) 137 CLR 545, Mason J., with
whose judgment
Barwick C.J., Gibbs, Stephen
and Jacobs JJ. agreed, held (at p 561) that the headings
could be used
the meaning of "misleading" in
Mason J. said
(at p 561):
"'Misleading' is a word which is capable of expressing
various shades of meaning, sometimes signifying that which
is subjectively misleading and at other times that which is
objectively misleading. Its meaning therefore is apt to be
influenced, indeed decisively influenced, by the context
in which it is found. Here the setting in which
appears is shown by the headings '
Protection' and 'Division 1 - Unfair Practices'."
Reg. v. Credit Tribunal, therefore, is a precise authority for the proposition
that the headings of
and Div.1 may be used to
determine the scope and
And just as the context created by the headings to
Div.1 was used in that case
to determine the meaning of the term "misleading",
so it seems proper, and indeed necessary, to use
the same context to determine
who are the persons whom
protects from misleading and deceptive conduct
as opposed to those persons who can enforce the section
10. If the argument of the worker is correct, the object of
protect, in trade or commerce, every person from any conduct
of a corporation
which is misleading or deceptive or is likely
to mislead or deceive. It is
not apparent why, in the course of enacting
Trade Practices Act
the headings "Consumer Protection" and "Unfair Practices", the Parliament
should intend to regulate
all conduct of a corporation,
engaged in for the
purpose of its trade or commerce, which misleads or deceives or is likely to
or deceive. Nor is there
anything in the Second Reading speeches or
debates in the House of Representatives and the Senate which
slightest support
for that proposition.
11. If the contention of the worker is correct, it logically follows that
a person can bring an action against a corporation
for conduct in
its capacity as a consumer. But if the conclusion that a section
Part enacted to protect consumers creates
a cause of action against corporate
consumers produces some surprise, it is
no greater than the surprise that is
produced by holding
also regulates the conduct of a corporation in
its relations with members of the community in their capacities as government
shareholders and environmentalists or electors: see Merman Pty Ltd
v. Cockburn Cement Ltd (1988) 84 ALR 521; Orison Pty
Ltd v. Strategic
Corporation NL (1987) 77 ALR 141; Glorie v. W.A Chip and Pulp Co. Pty. Ltd.
[1981] FCA 224
; (1981) 55 FLR 310; 39 ALR 67.
Moreover, once it is held that
confined to the protection of members of the public in their capacity as
consumers, it
is very difficult to confine the section
by giving the words "in
trade or commerce" a narrow construction. It seems almost paradoxical
that the general prohibition
of misleading or deceptive conduct in
requires rejection of the construction that the section
is limited to
consumers and at the same time to hold that the words "in trade
or commerce"
which are part of that general prohibition
have a restricted meaning. If the
general words of the section require that
it be read as going beyond the
protection of consumers,
then I can see no reason for confining those words to
misleading or deceptive
conduct of a trading or commercial character or to
conduct in the course of activities which are of the essence of trade or
Rather the general nature of the words would
require them to be
read as including any misleading or deceptive conduct which occurs
course of trade or commerce. It would
seem most unlikely that the Parliament,
ex hypothesi, having gone beyond consumer protection,
would intend those
general words to
proscribe only some kinds of misleading or deceptive conduct
occurring in the course of trade
or commerce.
12. Moreover, to interpret the words "in trade or commerce" by reference to
the trading or commercial character of the conduct rather
than by reference to
its relationship with the course of trade or commerce must result in a
reduction of protection for consumers,
the very persons whose interests
was intended to protect. Much conduct which affects the marketplace, and
thereby affects the
choices of consumers, is of a social,
sporting, industrial
or political character and cannot properly be described as being of a
or commercial character or as
being made in the course of activities which are
of the essence of trade or commerce. Statements
concerning the environment,
issues, industrial practices, women and ethnic groups, for example,
may influence consumers
interested in those matters to deal with
one trader in
preference to another even though the statements are not made as part of those
activities which are of the essence
of trade or commerce. Many corporations,
without referring to their goods or services, also
spend much time and money
their corporate images. They take these steps to enhance the
goodwill of their corporations
and to influence the attitudes of consumers
towards them. It would unduly limit the operation of
if a corporate
was liable for the misleading statement that its products were safe
but not for the misleading window sign
that it financially supported
Australian Olympic team. Both statements would be designed - one directly,
the other indirectly
- to induce consumers to buy
the corporation's goods. In
Larmer v. Power Machinery Pty. Ltd. (1977) 29 FLR 490, at p 493; 14 ALR
at pp 245-246, Nimmo J.
asserted that the words "in trade or commerce" were
intended "to cover the whole field in which the
nation's trade or commerce is
carried on" and that they were not "confined to any particular event which may
occur in the conduct
of a business which operates
within that field". I think
that this assertion was correct. The words "in trade or commerce" in
my opinion, cover the
whole range of activities which are directed to the
exchange of goods and services in Australia.
13. If the headings to
and Div.1 cannot be used to cut down the scope of
, then its range is very wide indeed. However,
as I have pointed out,
Reg. v. Credit Tribunal is authority for the proposition that
the "Consumer
Protection" heading may be used
to interpret the word "misleading" in
and I can see no reason why that heading should not be used to identify the
14. Once the heading of
is taken into account in determining the scope
, no reason exists for applying the section to
conduct beyond that
which affects or is apt to affect members of the public in their
capacities as
consumers or potential consumers.
As a matter of construction, the headings
and Div.1 identify the scope of
as being limited to unfair
practices which
mislead or deceive or are likely to mislead or deceive
consumers. Those headings are
also inconsistent with any hypothesis that
is directed to unfair practices generally or to those unfair practices which
are of an essentially trading or commercial character.
The heading to
a strong indication that the object of
was the proscription of any
conduct by a corporation, in the
course of the nation's trade or commerce,
which misleads or deceives
or is likely to mislead or deceive consumers.
Thus, a non-trading,
non-commercial corporation may be liable under
in the course of the nation's trade and commerce, it engages in conduct which
affects or may affect consumers.
15. A construction of
, limited to the protection of consumers, does
not contradict any of the express words of the section
and it gives it a
meaning which
is in harmony with its terms and the succeeding provisions of
Div.1. Such a construction of
also fits the framework of
than a construction which extends to protecting members of the community in
capacities other
than that of consumers.
16. However, Mr Douglas contended that the reasons for judgment of this Court
in Hornsby Building Information Centre Pty. Ltd. v.
Sydney Building
Information Centre Ltd.
[1978] HCA 11
; (1978) 140 CLR 216 and in Parkdale Custom Built
Furniture Pty. Ltd. v. Puxu
[1982] HCA 44
149 CLR 191 precluded the use of
the heading of
to limit the scope of
In Lubidineuse
v. Bevanere
Pty Ltd, Wilcox J.
came to the same conclusion and, as I have mentioned, the
Full Court adopted his reasoning.
17. Mr Douglas placed much reliance on a passage in the judgment of Stephen
J. in Hornsby Building Information Centre Pty. Ltd.
v. Sydney Building
Information Centre Ltd., where his Honour said (at p 225):
"To subject the clear and quite general words of
to some limitation derived from the heading to
I think, especially inappropriate in the case of this
particular legislation. The
is intricately drafted,
some of its provisions being expressed in terms of broad
generalities, as is
, others in elaborate detail. Each
may be seen to take the precise form it does because of the
particular work intended for it."
18. In Lubidineuse v. Bevanere Pty Ltd, at pp 15-16, Wilcox J. also regarded
this passage as supporting the proposition that the
be used to determine the meaning of
But the remarks of Stephen J.
were directed to rebutting
an argument that
was to be read in the light
of the definition of "consumer" in
. This is clear from an
passage in his Honour's reasons where he said (at pp 223-224):
"It was upon the heading to
, 'Consumer
Protection', that reliance was principally sought to be
placed, that heading being interpreted in the light of the
quasi-definition of 'consumer' in
view this heading does not restrict the effect of
the manner contended for, although it does colour the
meaning to be given to the sort of conduct against which the
section is aimed." (My emphasis.)
19. The emphasised passage rejects the notion that the heading to
be used to determine the scope of
that it can.
Significantly, in a later passage in his judgment, Stephen J. said (at p 227)
was "exclusively concerned with
consumer protection". Jacobs J.
agreed (at p 232) with the judgment of Stephen J. In the same case
C.J. said (at p 220)
is concerned "with conduct which is deceptive
of members of the public in their capacity as consumers of goods or services".
J. agreed (at p 235) with the judgment of the Chief Justice. Of the
judges who decided Hornsby, only Murphy J. said (at p
"limited or qualified by the heading of the Part 'Consumer Protection'". With
great respect to Wilcox J.
and the members
of the Full Court in Bevanere Pty
Ltd v. Lubidineuse, Hornsby does not support the proposition that the headings
and Div.1 cannot be used to interpret
Indeed, with the
exception of Murphy J., their Honours in that case assumed
that the effect of
the headings was to confine the protection
to consumers.
20. Nor, apart from one passage in the judgment of Mason J., do the reasons
for judgment in Puxu assist the worker. Puxu concerned
an action brought by
one trader against another to restrain a breach of
In that case Gibbs
C.J. said (at p 199) that, while
did not expressly state what persons or
class of persons should be considered as possible victims for the purpose of
conduct was likely to mislead or deceive, it seemed clear
enough "that consideration must be given to the class of consumers
be affected by the conduct". In his reasons for judgment, however, Mason J.
said (at p 202) that the general words of
"should be widely
interpreted without being read down by reference to the heading of
'Consumer Protection' or to the
more specific succeeding sections". But,
immediately after this passage, his Honour said that, although
intended to
protect members of the public in their capacity as consumers of
goods and services, competitors may seek an injunction
to restrain
Later his Honour said (at p 203) that it "is not enough that conduct damages a
rival trader; it must mislead
or be likely to mislead or deceive
members of the public in their capacity as consumers". Other passages in his
for judgment show that he perceived the object of
the protection of consumers (see pp 204-205, 206). The remarks of Mason
Puxu should not be read as supporting the proposition
that the heading cannot
be taken into account to determine whether consumers
are the persons intended
to be protected by
It would be surprising if, sub silentio, his
Honour intended to reject what
he said in Reg. v. Credit Tribunal as to the
headings to
and Div.1. His Honour's remarks in Puxu have to
in accordance with the facts of that case. He was concerned to deny
the heading to
meant that only consumers could enforce
21. Apart from the above passage in the reasons for judgment of Mason J. in
Puxu and the statement of Murphy J. in Hornsby, nothing
in any previous
decision of this Court gives support to the conclusion that
persons other than consumers from misleading
or deceptive conduct. To the
contrary, the reasons for judgment of the majority
of the members of the Court
in Hornsby support the
conclusion that
was enacted for the exclusive
protection of consumers.
22. Since there is no authority in this Court which stands in the way of
in the light of its heading, I would hold
is confined
to conduct which affects or is apt to affect members of the public in their
capacity as consumers, using that
a broad and general sense.
"Consumer" in the heading of
is not confined to those persons fulfilling
the conditions set
out in s.4B. That section is concerned to limit the
classes of consumers
who may recover losses sustained by proscribed kinds of
23. It follows that, since the worker's statement of claim does not allege
any conduct which affected him in his capacity as a consumer,
it discloses no
cause of action. The appeal must be allowed. The answer of the Federal Court
to the question asked must be set
aside. In lieu thereof, the question should
be answered - No. The respondent (worker) must pay the costs of the appeal
and the determination
of the preliminary question in the Federal Court.
Appeal allowed with costs.
Set aside the orders of the Federal Court made on 15 March 1989 and in lieu
thereof order that the preliminary question be answered:
Order that the respondent pay the appellant's costs of the notice of motion.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter