URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1946/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Grain Elevators Board (Vic) v Dunmunkle Shire [1946] HCA 13; (1946) 73 CLR 70 (31 May 1946)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Grain Elevators Board (Victoria) Defendant,
Appellant; and President, Councillors and Ratepayers of the Shire
of Dunmunkle Plaintiff,
Respondent.
On appeal from the Supreme Court of Victoria.
31 May 1946
Latham C.J., Rich, Starke, Dixon, McTiernan and Williams JJ.
H. Walker, for the appellant.
Dean K.C. (with him Mulvany), for the respondent.
H. Walker, in reply,
The following written judgments were delivered:—
Latham C.J.
The question which arises upon this appeal is whether the Grain
Elevators Board constituted under the
Grain Elevators Act
Vict. is entitled to exemption from municipal rating
Local Government Act 1928
Vict. by reason of s.
249 (1) of that Act, which is as follows:—
All land shall be ratable property within the meaning
of this Act save as is next hereinafter excepted (that is to
Land the property of His Majesty
which is unoccupied or used for public purposes.
The Board was rated for the year ending 30th September 1943 by
the Shire of Dunmunkle in respect of land owned and occupied by the
Board upon which were grain elevators and other machinery necessary
for the bulk handling of grain.
C.J. held that the
Board was liable and ordered that judgment be entered for the
amount claimed, £158 6s. 8d., with interest.
The Board is a body corporate (
Grain Elevators Act
4 (3)). It is the registered proprietor of the land in question. It
is contended on behalf of the Board that it holds the land
trustee for either the Commonwealth Government or the State
Government, or that the Board is simply an agency of the
Commonwealth
Government or is a part of the State Department of
Agriculture.
An arrangement was made between the Commonwealth Government and
the Government of Victoria whereby the Board undertook the duty of
storing wheat on behalf of the Commonwealth during the war. This
arrangement resulted only in the Board being employed by the
Commonwealth
for the purposes mentioned subject to the terms of the
arrangement. The argument was not pressed that the Board was in any
entitled to any immunity as representing the Government of
the Commonwealth. The question which was argued upon the appeal was
the land which the Board owned and occupied and in respect
of which it was rated was land the property of His Majesty in right
the State of Victoria.
If the Board held the land merely as a trustee for the
Government of the State the land would be the property of the State
exemption contained in the
Local Government Act
s. 249 (1), would apply:
Perry v. Eames
Hornsey Urban District Council v.
would in my opinion be wrong to hold that the Board holds land upon
any trust. There is no provision in the Act which makes
the Board a
trustee for the Crown of the land vested in it. It holds its land
subject to the provisions of the statute by which the
constituted. It is by these provisions and not by any part of the
law of trusts that the rights and duties of the Board
determined.
The substantial defence to the claim is that the Board is a
Government department acting for and on behalf of the State of
Victoria—that
it is a servant of the Crown, its acts being
part of "the use and service of the Crown."
Various tests have been proposed and applied from time to time
for the purpose of determining whether a person or a body is
to the privileges and immunities of the Crown. The fact
that an authority discharges public functions and makes no private
is not sufficient to identify it with the Crown:
Docks v. Cameron
In order to be entitled to the immunity of the Crown an authority
must show that the functions which it discharges are governmental
in character. There are cases in which it has been held that some
functions are inalienable functions of government, so that any
which discharges them is necessarily entitled to the privileges and
immunities of the Crown.
Coomber v. Justices of Berks
] has from time to time been
referred to in this Court as establishing a fundamental distinction
between certain governmental functions
which are "inalienable" and
other functions: See e.g.
Federated Municipal and Shire Council
Employees' Union of Australia v. Melbourne Corporation
Merchant Service
Guild of Australasia v. Commonwealth Steamship Owners' Association
Commonwealth v. Colonial Combing, Spinning and Weaving Co.
]. But it is
not necessary to determine in this case whether there are
governmental functions which are "inalienable." It is not suggested
that the storage of grain is such a function. The argument for the
appellant is that it has, in Victoria, been made a governmental
function by statute.
It is necessary to consider all the circumstances of each case
in which the question arises. The fact that a function has been a
traditional
function of government and that no intention of
"alienating" it appears is sufficient to answer the question in
many cases. No-one
would doubt, for example, that ordinary State
departments such as the Lands Department or the Chief Secretary's
Department were departments
of government in the fullest sense and
that what was done by their officers in the course of their duties
was done on behalf of the
Government. An incorporated body may be a
government department and entitled to Crown immunity:
Works Commissioners v. Pontypridd Masonic Hall Co. Ltd.
]. The fact that financial
control is in the Crown—that revenues of an authority go into
consolidated revenue and that its expenditure
is made out of
consolidated revenue—is another element which helps to show
the identity of an authority with the Crown:
Fox v. Government
of Newfoundland
Metropolitan Meat Industry Board v. Sheedy
]. Where persons or an
incorporated authority are subject to direct ministerial control so
that they act under the direction of a
Minister, such persons or
authorities act on behalf of the Crown and any provision, whether
express or implied, for Crown exemption
is applicable to them:
Marks v. Forests Commission
Repatriation Commission v.
But if a board is a body independent of the Government with
discretionary powers of its own, so that it is not a mere agent of
Government, then such a body does not represent the Crown. This
was the criterion which was applied in
Fox v. Government of
Newfoundland
and by this Court in
Repatriation Commission v.
Ex parte Graham: Re Forestry Commission
]. The question was put in the
following form in
Roper v. Public Works Commissioners
]—whether the
persons in question were acting as servants of the Crown or merely
as a statutory body invested with public rights,
liabilities like the trustees of a public dock or public park. Were
they Government servants doing the work of the Government?
Metropolitan Meat Industry Board v. Sheedy
], their Lordships of the
Privy Council described the Board there under consideration as "a
body with discretionary powers of their
own. Even if a Minister of
the Crown has power to interfere with them, there is nothing in the
statute which makes the acts of administration
his as distinguished
from theirs." I proceed, therefore, to examine the terms of the
relevant statutes independently of any preliminary
presumption that
the storage of grain is or is not itself a governmental
In the first place, the
Local Government Act
(3), contains a number of exemptions from rating of statutory
bodies discharging public functions. These are the Victorian
Railways Commissioners, the Minister of Public Instruction, the
Board of Land and Works, the Commissioners of the Melbourne Harbour
Trust, the Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works, the
Commissioners of the Geelong Harbour Trust and the Geelong
Waterworks and
Sewerage Trust. When the
Grain Elevators
was passed no provision was made to add the Board to the
class of exempted statutory authorities specifically mentioned in
In the next place, the
Grain Elevators Act
contains an express provision exempting the Board from liability
for income tax. There is no corresponding provision exempting
Board from liability for municipal rates.
Further, the
Grain Elevators Act 1942
Vict., which came
into operation on 21st December 1942, provided in s. 3 that,
"notwithstanding anything in any Act, land used exclusively
grain elevator under the Principal Act shall not be deemed to be
rateable property within the meaning of any Act." (This
is not applicable to the rates claimed in these proceedings because
the rate was levied before the Act came into operation.)
provision exempts land used for grain elevators for the future, but
it has no reference to the past. Moreover, it is limited
used for grain elevators, a term defined in s. 3 of the Principal
Act, and does not apply to other land occupied or owned
These three facts—the failure to include the Board within
the express exemptions applying to similar bodies by virtue of s.
249 (3) of the
Local Government Act
, the express exemption
of the Board from income tax with no reference to liability for
municipal rates, and the limited character
of the exemption from
rates created by the
Grain Elevators Act 1942
tend to show that the Board was not, by reason of its constitution
and functions, entitled to the immunity which it now
If, however, the
Grain Elevators Act
showed that the
Board was a Crown agency, the considerations mentioned would have
to yield to the terms of the Act. I proceed, therefore,
On the one hand there are many provisions which emphasize the
public nature of the functions of the Board and which associate the
Board with the Government of the State. I refer to s. 6 (6), copies
of decisions of the Board to go to the Minister: s. 6 (7), a
Government financial officer to attend meetings of the Board; s.
10, acquisition of elevators, arrangements for use of existing
construction of elevators and operation of elevators by
the Board require the approval of the Minister, that is, the
Minister of
Agriculture (s. 3); s. 10 (2) introduces a control of
delivery of wheat within proclaimed areas which can give to the
Board a monopoly
of storage of wheat within those areas and
therefore excludes private enterprise; s. 11 (1) and s. 45, the
Board reports upon certain
matters to the Minister; s. 11 (4), the
Board may, with the approval of the Minister and of the Minister
for Railways, arrange for
certain work to be done by the Railway
Construction Branch of the Board of Land and Works; s. 33,
contracts involving over £1,000
require the approval of the
Governor in Council; s. 35, consent of the Governor in Council
required for the borrowing of money by
the Board; the Principal Act
and amending legislation provide for the Governor in Council
raising money on the credit of the State
for the purposes of the
Board (see Act No. 4379); s. 45, the Board to report to the
Minister as directed upon any matter relating
to the handling of
the grain. These provisions show a close association with the
Government, but the question is whether they are
sufficient, having
regard to other provisions in the statute, to make it proper to
hold that the acts of the Board are the acts of
the Government of
In my opinion consideration of other provisions shows that this
is not the case. The business of the Board in the storage of wheat
is carried on under authority conferred upon the Board principally
by ss. 17 and 18. Section 17 authorizes the Board to acquire land.
Section 18 provides that the Board may store grain in elevators,
handle such grain, sell surplus grain and buy grain in cases
This section relates to the ordinary day to day work of
the Board. In relation to this work there is no provision
authorizing ministerial
control, or even requiring ministerial
approval. Other provisions to which reference has already been made
show that certain things
can be done by the Board only with the
approval of the Minister, so that the Minister has a veto. But
there is no provision in the
Act which entitles the Minister to
give directions to the Board in the performance of its statutory
function of storing grain. In
performing its ordinary functions the
Board acts at its own discretion.
Several provisions of the Act emphasize the separation of the
Board from ordinary governmental services controlled by Ministers.
example, under s. 22 (3) an officer of the Department of
Agriculture, nominated by the Minister, may determine disputes as
to dockages
between the Board and owners of wheat or their agents.
Under s. 22 (5) that officer may make a determination the result of
is that the Board shall pay moneys to the Department of
Agriculture. Such a provision assumes that the Board is not a part
Department of Agriculture.
The finances of the Board are kept separate from the finances of
the Government. Section 35 provides that the Board may, with the
consent of the Governor in Council, borrow money. Here it is the
Board, and not the Government, which borrows. Under the
Elevators (Financial) Act 1936
the Government may make money
borrowed by the Government available for expenditure by the Board.
The distinction between the two
forms of borrowing emphasizes the
fact that the Board is separate from the Government. Further, under
s. 37 (9) of the Principal
Act the Government of Victoria
guarantees the due repayment of moneys secured by debentures issued
by the Board. This provision shows
that acts of the Board are not
treated by the statute as acts of the Government. The same
observation applies to the provision in
s. 38 (2) which enables the
Treasurer to guarantee overdrafts of the Board. The
Elevators (Financial) Act
, s. 7, requires the Board to pay to
the Treasurer of Victoria as they become due such sums as the
Treasurer may require in order
to provide for the payment of
interest and contributions to the National Debt Sinking Fund in
respect of loan moneys raised under
the Act. If the moneys of the
Board were the moneys of the Government, no such provision would be
necessary. Here again the separation
of the Board and the
Government of the State is apparent.
Under s. 27 of the Principal Act it is the Board which may
demand and receive charges in respect of services rendered by the
Under s. 29 the Board may enter into contracts for the
purposes of the Act. Section 31 provides that contracts made
according to
the provisions of the Act shall be effectual in law
and binding on the Board. It is plain that the Board would be the
person to sue
and be sued upon such contracts. Section 48 refers to
writs or other processes against the Board. The Crown would have no
suit upon contracts made by the Board and would not be
liable to proceedings in respect of such contracts by petition of
I am therefore of opinion that the Board is a statutory body,
the powers, rights and duties of which are defined by the
Elevators Acts
; that it is a body which in doing its business
exercises an independent discretion of its own; and that, though a
Minister of the
Crown may prevent the Board acting in certain
cases, he does not control or direct the acts of the Board. The
acts of the Board are
therefore not the acts of the Crown, and land
the property of the Board cannot be described as the property of
His Majesty within
the meaning of the
Local Government
, s. 249 (1). I am therefore of opinion that the decision
of the Chief Justice was right and that the appeal should be
The question involved in the present appeal is whether land
vested in the Grain Elevators Board of the State of Victoria for
the purposes
of its functions is exempt from liability to rates
Local Government Act 1928
Vict. which, by s. 249
(1), excepts from ratability "land the property of His Majesty
which is unoccupied or used for public purposes."
Two questions are
involved, (1) Is the land vested in the Board land the property of
His Majesty?, and (2) Is it used for public
I feel no doubt that land vested in the Board is land the
property of His Majesty. The Board, by reason of s. 10 of the
Grain Elevators Act 1934
Vict., is so much under the
control of the Minister that it is, in my opinion, a branch or
department of the Government (and therefore
"the Crown") rather
than a body independent of the Government having, as its primary
function, the exercise of independent powers
and discretions free
of governmental control. In
Mersey Docks v. Cameron
], the criterion of
taxability imposed by a statute was occupancy of land. Hence, since
the Act did not bind the Crown, the criterion
of exemption was
whether it was the Crown which occupied the land, not whether the
occupant was using it for a public purpose or
for the general good
of the realm: to be exempt, the land had to be occupied by the
Crown or by a servant of the Crown for the purposes
of the Crown,
as distinguished from merely public purposes. In the case now
before us, it is property in land which is one of the
criteria of
exemption. To be capable of being exempt, the land must be the
property of the Crown. It is clear that the Board, which
agency of the Crown, has no beneficial interest in any land which
it may acquire for the purposes of its functions; for example,
the permission of the Minister under s. 10 (1) (a), or by agreement
or compulsory purchase under s. 17 (1) (a), of the
Elevators Act
, any title to land so acquired it holds as
trustee for the Crown.
The next question is whether the land is used for public
purposes. In my opinion, it is. It is used, not by a private
concern, but
by a Crown agency for the purpose of supplying the
public at large with facilities for the storing and delivery of
grain, and ancillary
purposes. No doubt, charges are made for the
services so supplied; but these do not enure, in whole or in part,
for the benefit of
private individuals, but wholly for the benefit
of the Crown. There is nothing in the case of
Corporation v. Blackwood
] inconsistent with this: Cf.
Council of Mosman v. Spain
]; and, as was pointed out by
South Australia v. The Commonwealth
], "any activity may become a
function of government if parliament so determines."
The appeal should be allowed.
The appellant is the registered proprietor and the occupier of
certain lands within the Shire of Dunmunkle. It is a body corporate
constituted under the
Grain Elevators Act 1934
acquired the lands pursuant to the powers contained in that Act,
erected buildings, elevators and machinery thereon necessary
the bulk handling of grain and uses the land for that purpose.
The Shire, pursuant to the
Local Government Act 1928
Vict., s. 249, levied a rate for the year ending in the month of
September 1943 upon all land within its municipal district. The
Local Government Act
, s. 249, provides:—
All land shall be ratable property within the meaning
of this Act save as is next hereinafter excepted (that is to
Land the property of His Majesty
which is unoccupied or used for public purposes.
The appellant claims that the land registered in its name and
occupied by it is not ratable property by reason of this
In England the exemption of the Crown from ratability is based
upon the doctrine that the Crown is not bound by statute unless
named or clearly intended. But in Victoria there is the
express statutory exception already mentioned.
The land must be the property of His Majesty, but the provision
does not require that it be vested in His Majesty (cf. s. 249,
(3) (a) and (b)). Land may be the property of His Majesty
because it is vested in him or because the land is held in trust
or for his use by some other person or body (
Corporation v. Blackwood
Commissioners of Government Savings Bank
v. Temora Municipal Council
Public Trustee v. Waipawa
Land, however, vested in or belonging to statutory bodies for
purposes defined in the statutes constituting them and which confer
upon them discretionary powers of their own in relation to the use
of the land is not property vested in or belonging in any sense
His Majesty (cf.
Fox v. Government of Newfoundland
Metropolitan Meat
Industry Board v. Sheedy
The land must also, if not unoccupied, be used for public
purposes. "It is not easy," said the Judicial Committee in
Essendon Corporation v. Blackwood
], "to define generally what is meant by
the words of the exemption the property of the Crown used for
public purposes, though land
used for the public service, or as a
public park, may be mentioned as instances which would clearly fall
within them." It was long
ago held in Victoria that the land must
be used "purely and solely" for public purposes (
Seymour Road Board
Essendon Corporation v.
Hanna's Case
] a bridge the property of His Majesty was
occupied by the Board. The only question was whether it was used
for public purposes. The
public had a right of passage over the
bridge but only on payment of a toll "so that it was not for public
purposes only, it subserved
a private purpose also, and was
therefore ratable."
Lastly, though property may belong to His Majesty it may yet be
used and occupied by persons or bodies, other than for public
and be ratable in respect of that occupation or use
Melbourne Tramway and Omnibus Co. v. Fitzroy
Corporation
In my judgment, the land of which the appellant is the
registered proprietor and occupier is neither the property of His
Majesty nor
used for public purposes. It is vested, as already
indicated, in the appellant for the purposes of carrying out the
powers, authorities
and obligations conferred upon it by the
Grain Elevators Act 1934
. The appellant acquired the land
for those purposes and upon it erected buildings, elevators and
machinery for the storage and bulk
handling of grain. It was
empowered to and did store in the elevators under its control all
grain of the prescribed quality offered
for that purpose and it was
required to afford all reasonable, proper and equal facilities for
the storage of grain in elevators
under its control and for
receiving, forwarding and delivering of grain so stored. It was
empowered to make by-laws for the operation,
control and
maintenance of all elevators of the Board and appurtenances
connected therewith and also for a scale of charges for the
handling and storage of grain and all operations connected
therewith in its elevators and for many other purposes.
It is true that the members of the Board were appointed by the
Governor in Council, that many of its powers and functions were
to the approval of the responsible Minister and that the
Government of Victoria might within prescribed limits guarantee the
debentures or its overdraft with any bank. But the Board
had wide discretionary powers for carrying on its operations and
bulk handling
and storing grain.
And it was empowered to and did make charges for its services in
handling and storing grain on the rated land which is plainly not
use of the land for public purposes.
It is unnecessary, I think, to examine the Act in more detail
Grain Elevators Act 1942
Vict., passed after the
making of the rate, provided in s. 3 that "notwithstanding anything
in any Act, land used exclusively for
any grain elevator under the
Principal Act shall not be deemed to be rateable property within
the meaning of any Act."
So, it is improbable that the matter involved in this appeal
will again arise.
The appeal should be dismissed.
We are not here concerned with a question arising under the rule
that the Crown is not bound by statute unless the intention to bind
it is expressed or positively indicated. It is under that rule that
the occupation of premises for the naval, military, judicial
administrative purposes of the central government of the country
has been considered to lie outside the area of liability for
under the Poor Law of England. It is an occupation of the land
which, if not that of the Crown itself, is at least to be regarded
as part of the use and service of the Crown. In England it was
necessary to find a ratable occupier.
Local Government Act 1928
Vict. contains a general
but emphatic formulation of the principle that all land shall be
ratable subject to specified exceptions
and it proceeds to name the
Crown as the object of an exemption the conditions of which are
distinctly defined. "In this country,"
for the Judicial Committee in
Essendon Corporation
v. Blackwood
"the exemption of Crown property rests on the omission in the Poor
Law Acts of any words to bind the Crown. In Victoria the exemption
is defined and limited by express enactment." The basis of the
exemption is property not occupation, and, though the distinction
would not perhaps matter much were we considering the ambit of the
immunity arising from the failure of a rating statute to affect
Crown (see per Lord
Coomber v. Justices of
Victorian legislation it means that this particular condition of
the exemption depends on conceptions of property rather
governmental relations. It is true that the governmental character
of the person or body actually rated may be relevant
question where the property resides. But, in the end, it must be
found that the land is the property of the Crown before it
qualify for the particular exemption. It is only in that event that
the question arises whether the land is unoccupied or is
public purposes. If it is claimed that the land is used for public
purposes, the governmental character of the occupier
may then again
become relevant, but, in my opinion, it is not upon that question
that this case turns. It turns upon the fact that
Elevators Board, a statutory corporation authorized, for the
purposes of and subject to its statute, to purchase, take,
sell and dispose of real and personal property, is the owner in fee
simple of the land rated. That is not conclusive because
that the legal estate is vested in the corporation leaves it
possible that the equitable or beneficial interest is in the
There should not be left out of account the further possibility of
the statute itself creating in the Crown a special right
interest, or congeries of rights or interests, in relation to the
land which, either because of the degree of control they involve
of the beneficial enjoyment they confer, should be regarded as
amounting to a form of property, not common law or equitable, but
But it appears to me to be clear that under the
Government Act
the expression "land the property of His
Majesty" is not used in any loose or figurative sense to include
property vested in public
bodies simply because they are answerable
to or controlled by the central government of the State. For, if it
were so used, there
would have been no need for the specific
exemptions in sub-s. (3) of s. 249, in sub-s. (1) of which the
exemption occurs of land
the property of the Crown unoccupied or
used for public purposes. Sub-section (3) exempts land vested in,
among other bodies, the
Victorian Railways Commissioners, the
Minister for Public Instruction and the Board of Land and Works.
These are corporations closely
related to the government of the
The parties seemed inclined to argue the case as if the question
was whether the Board was an agency of the Crown enjoying the
privileges and immunities and as if the consequence of an
affirmative answer to that question would be that the land rated,
vested in point of property in the Board, would enjoy the
exemption conferred upon land the property of His Majesty. I cannot
in the adoption of any such test. The exemption under s. 249
(1) does not attach unless, according to some legal sense of the
"property," it can correctly be said that the land is the
property of the Crown. This, in my opinion, cannot be said of land
in the Grain Elevators Board. The Board is clearly an
independent corporation established by statute to perform the
services and
carry out the duties, indicated particularly by ss. 10
and 11 of the
Grain Elevators Act 1934
connection with what the long title describes as "the handling of
grain in bulk by means of the elevator system." That
fulfilment of its functions it is subject to ministerial control,
at all events at many points, is undeniable. Moreover, the
closeness of its relation to the government of the State is shown
by the constitution and mode of appointment of the Board and by
financial provisions of the legislation, especially those contained
Grain Elevators (Financial) Act 1934
Vict. and the
Grain Elevators (Financial) Act 1939
Vict. considered
together. It is probably correct to say, as counsel for the Board
said, that it conducts what is just as much a
governmental
undertaking as the State railways and that it falls within the
Department of the Minister of Agriculture of the State
But that appears insufficient to overcome the plain intention of
the legislation that, like the Victorian Railways Commissioners,
the State Savings Bank Commissioners, the State Electricity
Commission and many other statutory governmental bodies, the Grain
Board should be an independent corporation owning its own
property legally and beneficially and acquiring its own rights and
its own obligations.
in pari materia
Commissioner of the
Government Savings Bank v. Temora Municipal Council
], an example will be seen of
an express provision that the corporation should hold property
vested in it for and on behalf of the
government. This, it was
held, created property in the Crown. No such provision is contained
Grain Elevators Acts
, nor do they imply any such
consequence. On the contrary, they appear to intend to constitute a
body for the conduct of what may
be regarded as a public utility,
as a separate responsible entity, owning its own undertaking both
in law and in equity.
The draftsman of the legislation recognized that this was so
when he considered it necessary by s. 44 to add the Board to the
of agencies protected from income tax by s. 21 of the
Income Tax Act 1928
Vict.. Whether, at that time, the
legislature overlooked liability for municipal rates or decided
against exempting the Board cannot,
of course, be known. But in
1942 a specific exemption was conferred. The
Grain Elevators
Vict., which was enacted only three weeks after the
striking of the rate now in question, provides by s. 3 that,
notwithstanding
anything in any Act, land used exclusively for any
grain elevator under the
Grain Elevators Act 1934
not be deemed ratable property within the meaning of any Act.
"Elevator" is defined comprehensively by the
Grain Elevators
, s. 3, to mean "any elevator warehouse building or
depot under the control of the Board at which grain is received ...
for storage
or forwarding and whether the same is provided with
mechanical grain handling appliances or not." The exemption,
therefore, covers
the substantial part of the Board's undertaking.
But, at the same time, it is carefully guarded by the word
"exclusively" and it
does not extend to mere offices or to land not
yet put to use for receiving, storing or forwarding wheat.
Although the provision was passed too late to apply to the
present case, I think that it may be considered on the question of
interpretation.
It would be a strange result if we were to
interpret the prior legislation as giving a wider exemption than
that conferred by the
provision so that the express exemption it
makes would prove unnecessary and the qualifications it places upon
that exemption would
In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed.
McTiernan J.
I agree that the appeal should be dismissed.
The question in this case arises upon s. 249 (1) of the
Local Government Act 1928
Vict.. The provision says that
all land shall be ratable property within the meaning of that Act
except land the property of His
Majesty which is unoccupied or used
for public purposes.
The appellant is constituted by the
Grain Elevators Act
Vict.. By this legislation it is made a corporation and
is made capable in law of,
, purchasing and
holding real and personal property for the purposes of the Act. The
question in the case is whether certain land
which the appellant
purchased and of which it has been at all material times the
registered proprietor is land the property of His
Majesty which is
used for public purposes. If such land is within that description
it is not ratable. The appellant claims that while
the land in
question is at law its property, the land is in equity the property
of the Crown. The words "land the property of" the
Crown in s. 249
(1) include land which is the equitable property of the Crown.
Hence if the appellant's claim is substantiated, the
question is not ratable.
Section 4 (3) of the
Grain Elevators Act 1934
capacity in the Board to purchase or hold land only "for the
purposes of the Act and subject to the Act." Hence the appellant
Board holds the land now in question for those purposes and subject
to those provisions. Does this make the Board a trustee for the
Crown? I do not repeat the provisions of the Acts. The powers and
duties given to the Board are directed to supplying the public
the service of handling grain in bulk by means of the elevator
system. The Acts entrust the responsibility of carrying on this
service to the Board. Under the Acts, the Board is subject to a
measure of control by the Executive Government. This control is a
check upon the Board in the exercise of its powers and duties. But
the result of the control is not that the Board is the servant
agent of the Crown or that the service of bulk handling of grain is
made a function of the Crown. It is not a tenable view that
purposes for which the Board holds the land in question under the
Acts are the purposes of the Crown, or that the effect of the
is to make the Board a trustee of the land for the Crown.
In my opinion the appellant's claim that the land in question is
the property of His Majesty fails.
Williams J.
The question is whether 24 acres of land situated in the shire
of Dunmunkle on which are erected buildings with elevators and
machinery necessary for the bulk handling of grain by the
appellant, the Grain Elevators Board, and which has at all material
been exclusively used for those purposes, is exempt from
rates under s. 249 (1) of the
Local Government Act 1928
Vict.. This sub-section exempts "land the property of His Majesty
which is unoccupied or used for public purposes." To qualify for
this exemption two requisites are necessary, (1) that the land
shall be the property of the Crown, and (2) that it shall be
or used for public purposes. It is not disputed that the
subject land is being used for public purposes, so that the crucial
is whether it is the property of His Majesty. The land is
vested in the Board at law and in Equity and so can only be the
of His Majesty if the Board can claim to represent the
Crown. In order to determine this question it is necessary to
consider the
legal effect of the Acts by which the Board is
incorporated and from which it derives its functions, duties and
The Principal Act is the
Grain Elevators Act 1934
Act has been amended by the
Grain Elevators Acts 1935, 1942,
. The only provision in these amending Acts that needs
to be noticed is s. 3 of the Act of 1942, which provides that,
"notwithstanding
anything in any Act, land used exclusively for any
grain elevator under the Principal Act shall not be deemed to be
ratable property
within the meaning of any Act." This Act is not
applicable because it was not in force when the present rate was
struck, and we were
also informed that the same point will arise in
the future because the Board owns other land which is not entitled
to the benefit
of this exemption.
There is also the
Grain Elevators (Financial) Act 1936
which provides for the raising of money by sale of Victorian stock
and debentures for the purposes of the
Grain Elevators
. This Act provides that the Grain Elevators Board shall
pay to the Treasurer of Victoria as they become due such sums as
the Treasurer
may require in order to provide for the payment of
interest and contributions to the National Debt Sinking Fund in
respect of the
moneys so raised. The Act provides an alternative
method of raising money for the purposes of the Board to that
provided by the principal
Act but the total amount to be raised by
either method is limited to £2,000,000.
The Principal Act provides that the Board shall consist of three
members and be a body corporate under the name of the Grain
Board and shall have perpetual succession and a common
seal and be capable in law of suing and being sued and of
purchasing, taking,
holding, selling, leasing, taking on lease,
exchanging and disposing of real and personal property for the
purposes of and subject
to the Act. The members of the Board are
appointed and may be removed from office by the Governor in
Council. They are appointed
for a term but may be removed at any
time. Section 7 empowers the Board, with the approval of the
Governor in Council, to appoint
a general manager and in the
exercise of its discretion to appoint and remove such other
officers and employees as it requires. This
section and s. 8
provide that no officer or other employee of the Board shall be
subject to the
Public Service Act 1928
Vict., but that the
general manager or other officer of the Board who at the date of
his appointment is an officer of the Public
Service shall, in the
event of his office under the Board being discontinued or the Board
dissolved, be eligible to be reappointed
to the Public Service on
the basis that his service under the Board has been service in the
Public Service.
Section 10 authorizes the Board, with the approval of the
Minister of Agriculture, to acquire existing elevators and
appurtenances
for handling wheat grown in bulk as well as the land
upon which they are situated, to enter into arrangements for the
use of existing
elevators and appurtenances, to construct new
elevators and appurtenances, and operate, maintain and control such
elevators and appurtenances.
Section 11 requires the Board to carry
out a number of surveys and investigations with respect to the
construction of new elevators,
and the most effective design and
method of construction, and to report to the Minister and cause to
be prepared schemes for new
country and terminal elevators and
estimates of costs and, if the Governor in Council approves, to
proceed to carry any such scheme
into effect. Sections 17 and 18
confer upon the Board powers and duties which it is authorized to
exercise in its discretion. Section
17 authorizes the Board to
enter upon and use land subject to the payment of compensation.
Section 18 authorizes the Board to store
in the elevators under its
control all grain of the prescribed quality offered for the
purpose, and requires it to afford all reasonable
proper and equal
facilities for the storage of grain and to buy grain where
necessary for the purpose of delivering grain to persons
present warrants. Sections 25 and 26 protect the Board and its
officers from actions for conversion and detinue of any grain
from responsibility for loss of or damage to grain due to certain
causes. Section 27 authorizes the Board in respect of its services
to demand and receive such reasonable charges as are prescribed.
Sections 29-32 confer wide contractual powers on the Board, but
33 provides that no contract for a consideration in excess of
£1,000 or extending over a period exceeding one year shall
have effect unless sanctioned by the Governor in Council. Sections
35-40 confer power on the Board, with the consent of the Governor
in Council, to borrow upon debentures at interest sums not
exceeding £2,000,000 and on overdraft, a sum not exceeding
Section 37 (9) provides that the repayment of the
principal and the payment of interest on the debentures shall be
guaranteed by
the Government of Victoria. Sections 41 and 42
provide for the audit of the accounts of the Board by the
Auditor-General at the expense
of the Board and for the Board
presenting an annual report to Parliament.
Section 43 provides that the Board shall establish a general
fund into which all moneys, including loan moneys, shall be paid,
that the general fund shall be applied by the Board for the
doing and performing of all acts, matters and things which the
is under this or any other Act empowered or required to do.
Section 50 confers on the Board a wide power to make by-laws,
prescribing the scales of charges for the handling and
storage of grain. Sub-section (2) provides that in determining
scales of charges
the Board shall fix the charges at such amounts
as in its opinion will enable the cost of the operation of its
elevators and other
works and undertakings and interest on loans
and payments into sinking funds and into renewal and depreciation
funds and the cost
of the administration of the Act to be covered.
Sub-sections (3) and (4) provide that every by-law shall be subject
to confirmation
by the Governor in Council and shall not have any
force or effect until so confirmed.
It was contended for the appellant that the effect of the Acts
is to make the Board a branch of the Department of Agriculture so
it is performing its functions, powers and duties as part of
the Executive Government of Victoria. The decision of this Court in
Repatriation Commission v. Kirkland
] was strongly relied on, but that case is
plainly distinguishable. The Commission was there held to represent
the Crown because it
was charged with the administration of an Act
which was designed to carry out two objects which are peculiarly
within the province
of the Government. At page 8 it is stated in
the joint judgment of
that:—"The provisions of the Act taken generally, and
especially those contained in ss. 7 (1), 11 (2), 50, 52, 57 (b) and
58, establish that the Commission is in the strictest sense a
department of government, or at all events so practically
with it as to be indistinguishable. It is a statutory
corporation charged with the administration of an Act designed to
two objects which are peculiarly within the province of
the Government, namely, the re-establishment in civil life of
persons who
have served in the defence forces, and the provision of
pensions and benefits for persons incapacitated and the dependants
killed or incapacitated as a result of active service in
those forces."
The Grain Elevators Board is not charged with the administration
of a governmental function which a State must necessarily undertake
but with an ordinary operation of trade and commerce, that is to
say, the handling and storing of wheat in bulk. So long as
Constitution
is not infringed, there is no
constitutional difficulty to prevent the State of Victoria carrying
on such a business. If the duties
and powers of the Board were
carried out by the Department of Agriculture the business would be
done on behalf of His Majesty in
right of the State of Victoria.
The beneficial interest in the land would then be in the Crown,
even if the legal estate was vested
in a nominee.
But in my opinion the
Grain Elevators Acts
operate to make the Board a branch of the Department of
Agriculture. The Minister may give express directions to the Board
under s. 11 of the Principal Act to make the report already
mentioned, and under s. 45 to report to him upon any matter
to the handling of grain in bulk. Many important functions
of the Board are made subject
to the approval of the Governor in
or of the Minister of Agriculture. But it is not uncommon
to subject a statutory body
exercising public duties to some degree
control by the executive. All moneys borrowed to enable the
Board to acquire the requisite
assets are raised as part of the
funds of the State or by the Board upon a State guarantee,
so that it would be natural for
the executive to control the manner
which these funds are to be applied. But the Board has important
powers and duties in the
performance of which it is not subject
any executive or ministerial control. Broadly speaking, capital
expenditure is subject
to the approval of the Minister, but the
carrying on of the business of receiving, storing and delivering
grain is left entirely
under the control of the Board.
The Board exhibits all the outward characteristics of an
independent entity: it is a separate corporation; it has extensive
contractual
powers; it has power to own land; it has power to
engage and dismiss its own servants; it has its own separate funds.
To obtain these
funds it has power to raise moneys by public
subscription and by way of overdraft; and to make charges for
services rendered. It
has power to sue and be sued, and it is given
immunity from legal proceedings in certain respects. If it is, as
its counsel alleged,
subservient to the Government, the
subservience must mainly arise from the power of the executive to
remove the members of the Board
at any time. But the Board is a
legal entity quite separate from that of its members, and the
question falls to be determined from
a consideration of the extent
of the executive control over the corporate body. None of these
would of themselves necessarily prevent the Board
from being a branch of the Department of Agriculture but their
cumulative effect
is considerable.
There are two minor provisions in the Act inconsistent with such
an agency. Section 16 provides that the Governor in Council shall
by order determine any difference arising under the Act between the
Board and the bodies defined in s. 3 as public corporations.
Section 22 (3) provides that an officer of the Department of
Agriculture shall arbitrate between an owner of wheat and the Board
as to the amount
of dockage to be imposed in respect of such
owner's wheat. Section 22 (5) (b) provides in effect that the
if it loses, shall pay the fees of the arbitrator. It is an
elementary principle of natural
justice that no person shall be a
in his own cause, and this principle would be completely
violated unless the executive in
the first and the Department of
Agriculture
in the second instance should be treated as separate
entities from the Board.
Similar problems to that under discussion have arisen before.
Each case must be resolved by a consideration of the purpose and
of the particular Act by which the statutory body is
established.
The decision bearing the nearest analogy to the present case
would appear to be
Metropolitan Meat Industry Board v.
Grain Elevators Acts
contain similar provisions to those
relied upon by the Privy Council as indicating that the
Metropolitan Meat Industry Board was
not a servant of the Crown. It
can also be said here that, although a Minister of the Crown has
power to interfere with the Board,
"there is nothing in the Statute
which makes the acts of administration his as distinguished from
Counsel for the appellant relied on the provisions of the
Grain Elevators Acts
whereby the Board is directed to make
an annual report to Parliament and whereby its charges are
restricted to an amount required
to meet the outgoings. But similar
provisions will be found in the Acts discussed in the leading case
Mersey Docks v. Cameron
] and in subsequent cases. Counsel also relied
on the provision that the repayment of principal and payment of
interest on the debentures
shall be guaranteed by the Government of
Victoria. But this tells against the appellant because, as the
Privy Council pointed out
International Railway Co. v.
Niagara Parks Commission
]: "This provision would be meaningless if the
Commission" (here the Board) "was not to be under any liability in
the first instance."
For these reasons I would dismiss the appeal.
Appeal dismissed with costs.
Solicitor for the appellant, Bernard Nolan.
Solicitors for the respondent, McInerney, Williams &
] (1891) 1 Ch. 658,
at pp. 668, 669.
] (1902) 2 K.B.
[1865] EngR 610
; (1865) 11 H.L. Cas.
] (1883) 9 A.C.
[1919] HCA 73
; (1919) 26 C.L.R.
508, in particular at pp. 528, 530.
] (1920) 28 C.L.R.
436, at p. 454.
[1922] HCA 62
; (1922) 31 C.L.R.
421, at p. 446.
] (1920) 2 K.B.
] (1898) A.C. 667, at
pp. 671, 672.
] (1927) A.C. 899,
at pp. 905, 906.
[1936] VicLawRp 58
; (1936) V.L.R.
[1923] HCA 18
; (1923) 32 C.L.R.
] (1898) A.C.
[1923] HCA 18
; (1923) 32 C.L.R.
] (1945) 45 S.R.
(N.S.W.) 379; 63 W.N. 29.
] (1915) 1 K.B.
45, at p. 52.
] (1927) A.C. 899,
[1865] EngR 610
; (1865) 11 H.L.
] (1877) 2 App.
] (1929) 29 S.R.
(N.S.W.) 492; 46 W.N. 174.
[1942] HCA 14
; (1942) 65 C.L.R.
373, at p. 423.
] (1877) 2 App.
] (1919) 19 S.R.
(N.S.W.) 111.
] (1921) N.Z.L.R.
] (1898) A.C.
] (1927) A.C.
] (1877) 2 App.
Cas., at p. 584.
] (1865) 2 W.W.
& a'B. (L.) 93.
] (1877) 2 App.
Cas., at pp. 584-585.
] (1865) 2 W.W.
& a'B. (L.) 93.
] (1901) A.C. 153,
at pp. 168, 169.
] (1877) 2 App.
Cas. 574, at p. 587.
] (1883) 9 App.
Cas. 61, at p. 75.
] (1919) 19 S.R.
(N.S.W.) 111.
[1923] HCA 18
; (1923) 32 C.L.R.
] (1927) A.C.
[1865] EngR 610
; (1865) 11 H.L.
] (1941) A.C. 328,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (1.41 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter