Benjamin & Benjamin [2025] FedCFamC1A 199 (31 October 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1) APPELLATE
Benjamin & Benjamin
[2025] FedCFamC1A
Appeal from:
Benjamin & Benjamin (No 2)
[2025] FedCFamC2F 866
Appeal number:
NAA 387 of 2025
File number:
BRC 11032 of 2023
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – Where the
primary judge was satisfied that there had been substantial compliance with
directions and made an
order for costs in a fixed sum in the appellant’s
absence – Where the appellant sought to appeal the costs order on grounds
of a lack of procedural fairness – Where the respondent opposed the appeal
– Discussion of r 10.13(1)(a) ––
Appeal dismissed.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) r 10.13
Cases cited:
Nellie & Nellie
[2024] FedCFamC1A 171
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
The Appellant:
Self-represented litigant
The Respondent:
Self-represented litigant
BRC 11032 of 2023
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
DIVISION 1 APPELLATE JURISDICTION
MS BENJAMIN
MR BENJAMIN
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Notice of Appeal filed 22 August 2025 is dismissed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Benjamin & Benjamin
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
SCHONELL J:
Notice of Appeal filed 22 August 2025, the appellant appeals an order as to
costs made in her absence by a judge of the Federal
Circuit and Family Court of
Australia (Division 2).
order the subject of the appeal required the appellant to pay the
respondent’s costs fixed in the sum of $11,725.
appellant and respondent were engaged in parenting proceedings which were
resolved by consent orders on 7 April 2022.
to the making of those orders, on 21 August 2023 the appellant filed an
Initiating Application seeking to set aside the
orders. The Initiating
Application was dismissed by the primary judge in circumstances where the Court
was not satisfied that there
had been a significant or material change in
circumstances pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
(“the Act”). Consequent on the dismissal, the primary judge made
orders as to the procedure to be adopted in the
event that any party sought
respondent sought the appellant pay his costs. The appellant did not comply with
the orders for the filing of submissions and
did not appear at the hearing. On
the hearing, one of the issues before the primary judge was whether the
application for costs sought
by the respondent was brought in compliance with
the orders made by the primary judge and if so whether the circumstances
the making of an order and whether that order should be on an
indemnity or a party/party basis.
primary judge was satisfied that there had been substantial compliance with her
directions, declined to make an order for indemnity
costs, but made an order in
a fixed sum.
the commencement of the hearing of the appeal the appellant’s attention
was drawn to the provisions of r 10.13 of the
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) (“the Rules”)
which provides as follows:
(1) The court may at any time vary or set aside an order, if:
(a) it was made in the absence of a party...
appellant indicated that she was unaware of the rule until it was brought to her
attention. Albeit quaintly expressed as
ignorantia juris non excusat
fact remains that benightedness does not absolve compliance.
proper course for the appellant to have adopted is to have made an application
pursuant to r 10.13(1)(a) challenging the orders
made in her absence rather than
filing a Notice of Appeal. The jurisdiction of this Court to hear appeals should
not be resorted
to where there exist alternate remedies at first instance.
that respect, I note the Full Court in
Nellie & Nellie
FedCFamC1A 171
recently observed as follows:
this case, we have decided to dismiss the appeal on the basis that the appellant
has not, prior to filing the appeal, taken all
reasonably available steps to
address his grievance that he had not been afforded the opportunity to make
submissions in respect
to the question of costs. Further, we question how the
appellant can logically advance a complaint of a denial of procedural fairness
where they have not availed themselves of every opportunity to advance their
appellant did not follow the proper procedural steps before filing his Notice of
Appeal in respect to the question of costs. In
Lorde & Chu
FamCAFC 228
, the Full Court stated:
... it has long been established in this jurisdiction that where a party seeks
to set aside orders made in his or her absence, the
proper course is for that
party to apply at first instance for a rehearing rather than seek to have the
matter dealt with by a way
of an appeal (
Wilkes and Wilkes
[1981] FamCA 41
Moreover, Rule 16.05 of the
Federal Circuit Court Rules 2011
(Cth) [now r 10.13] provides for a rehearing at first instance in such
circumstances.
Beale & Harvie
[2023] FedCFamC1A 181
, Austin J echoed these
sentiments when summarily dismissing an appeal in circumstances where,
notwithstanding its lack of reasonable
prospects of success, the appellant had
commenced the appeal without exhausting their remedies at first instance. There
are significant
public policy reasons for requiring parties to take that course
which is “more appropriate, and far less expensive”.
observations of that Full Court are apposite to Ground 2 in the Notice of
Appeal. I am not persuaded that there is any reason
why this court should depart
from the clearly expressed position of earlier Full Courts.
Consequently,
the appeal will be dismissed. In doing so I note that there is no time limit
specified in r 10.13 that prevents the
appellant from following the course she
should have followed, albeit she may be at risk on costs.
DISPOSITION
appeal will be dismissed.
circumstances where each party was unrepresented, no order for costs will be
I certify that the preceding fourteen (14)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the ex tempore Reasons for Judgment of
the Honourable
Dated: 5 November 2025
RTF format (302 KB)
Signed PDF/A format