Sutton v Sharp (No 3) [2000] IRCA 1 (10 March 2000)
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Sutton v Sharp (No 3)
[2000] IRCA 1
INDUSTRIAL LAW - registered organisations - purported merger of deregistered
organisation (BLF) with registered organisation (CFMEU)
- possession and
control of property of BLF committed to Custodian by Order in Council
- prohibition on disposition of property of
BLF without consent of Custodian -
filing of defence by Custodian constituting exercise of option to avoid
disposition of property
of BLF - whether vitiated by mistake of law or
otherwise an improper exercise of discretion.
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION - where continued operation of legislation expressed
to be dependent on provisions having been proclaimed
to commence - whether
purported proclamation that different provisions commence on different days
effective - whether necessary for
continued operation that proclaimed
commencement take effect - where decision-maker believed transaction void
without any exercise
of option to avoid - whether option validly exercised by
decision-maker manifesting intention to avoid transaction
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW - where rule of registered organisation allegedly denied
effect because of inconsistent state legislation - whether
same rule a "law of
the commonwealth" by virtue of provisions of
Industrial Relations Act 1988
(Cth) prescribing procedures for alteration of rules - whether state
legislation invalid for inconsistency - where state legislation
enacted scheme
to deal with state assets of deregistered organisation on behalf of former
members - whether purpose of scheme imposed
burden or restriction on interstate
intercourse - whether scheme appropriate and adapted to expressed purpose
Commonwealth Constitution
BLF (De-recognition) Act 1985
BLF (De-recognition) (Amendment) Act 1987
Industrial Relations Act 1988
Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904
Builders Labourers' Federation (Cancellation of Registration) Act 1986
Builders Labourers' Federation (Cancellation of Registration -
Consequential
Provisions) Act 1986
Interpretation of Legislation Act
Sutton v Sharp
(1995) 62 IR 121
State of Victoria v Sutton
[1998] HCA 56
(1998) 156 ALR 579
Sharp v Sutton
(1996) 73 IR 185
Entwistle v Parkes
[1991] VicRp 24
[1991] 1 VR 317
Flinn v James McEwan & Co
[1991] VicRp 83
[1991] 2 VR 434.
Bailey v Krantz
(1985) 13 IR 339
R v Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration; Ex parte Barrett
[1945] HCA 50
(1945) 70 CLR 141
Collins v Charles Marshall Pty Ltd
[1955] HCA 44
(1955) 92 CLR 529
Charles Marshall Pty Ltd v Collins
[1957] UKPCHCA 2
(1957) 96 CLR 1
T.A. Robinson & Sons Pty Ltd v Haylor
[1957] HCA 76
(1957) 97 CLR 177
Metal Trades Industry Association v Amalgamated Metal Workers and
Shipwrights' Union
[1983] HCA 28
(1983) 152 CLR 632
Sharp v ABLF (W.A. Branch)
[1989] WAR 138
Cunliffe v Commonwealth of Australia
[1994] HCA 44
(1994) 182 CLR 272
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills
[1992] HCA 46
(1992) 177 CLR 1
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1992] HCA 45
(1992) 177 CLR
SPENDER, RYAN and NORTH JJ
10 MARCH 200
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
DISTRICT REGISTRY
4819 OF 1995
DAVID SUTTON
First Applicant
CONSTRUCTION, FORESTRY, MINING & ENERGY UNION
Second Applicant
GORDON SHARP
First Respondent
THE STATE OF VICTORIA and STEPHEN GEORGE ALLEY
Second Respondents / Appellants
JOHN ATKINSON & ORS
Third Respondents
JOSEPH FERGUSON & ORS
Fourth Respondents
MICK YOUNG & ORS
Fifth Respondents
RONALD GEORGE OWENS (as representing the members of the BLF at 31 March 1994
other than those otherwise represented herein)
Sixth Respondent
JOHN CUMMINS, JOHN SETKA and ROBERT GREGORY WILSON (as Trustees of the BLF)
Seventh Respondents
VI 4820 OF 1995
DAVID SUTTON
First Applicant
CONSTRUCTION, FORESTRY, MINING & ENERGY UNION
Second Applicant
GORDON SHARP and STEPHEN GEORGE ALLEY
First Respondents / Appellants
THE STATE OF VICTORIA
Second Respondent
JOHN ATKINSON & ORS
Third Respondents
JOSEPH FERGUSON & ORS
Fourth Respondents
MICK YOUNG & ORS.
Fifth Respondents
RONALD GEORGE OWENS (as representing the members of the BLF at 31 March 1994
other than those otherwise represented herein)
Sixth Respondent
JOHN CUMMINS, JOHN SETKA and ROBERT GREGORY WILSON (as Trustees of the BLF)
Seventh Respondents
VI 4821 OF 1995
ATKINSON & OTHERS
DAVID SUTTON & OTHERS
Respondents
VI 4822 OF 1995
DAVID SUTTON
First Applicant
CONSTRUCTION, FORESTRY, MINING & ENERGY UNION
Second Applicant
GORDON SHARP and STEPHEN GEORGE ALLEY
First Respondents / Appellants
THE STATE OF VICTORIA
Second Respondent / Appellant
JOHN ATKINSON & ORS
Third Respondents
JOSEPH FERGUSON & ORS
Fourth Respondent / Appellants
MICK YOUNG & ORS
Fifth Respondents
RONALD GEORGE OWENS (as representing the members of the BLF at 31 March 1994
other than those otherwise represented herein)
Sixth Respondent
JOHN CUMMINS, JOHN SETKA and ROBERT GREGORY WILSON (as Trustees of the BLF)
Seventh Respondents
RYAN AND NORTH JJ
MINUTES OF ORDER
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The appeals from the judgment and orders of Wilcox CJ of 23 August 1995 be
allowed in part.
2. Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the declarations and orders made by Wilcox CJ on 23
August 1995 be set aside.
3. Liberty be reserved to any party to apply on not less than 72 hours notice
in writing to the other parties.
Note: Settlement and entry of orders is dealt with in Order 36 of the Federal
Court Rules.
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
DISTRICT REGISTRY
4819 OF 1995
DAVID SUTTON
First Applicant
CONSTRUCTION, FORESTRY, MINING & ENERGY UNION
Second Applicant
GORDON SHARP
First Respondent
THE STATE OF VICTORIA and STEPHEN GEORGE ALLEY
Second Respondents / Appellants
JOHN ATKINSON & ORS
Third Respondents
JOSEPH FERGUSON & ORS
Fourth Respondents
MICK YOUNG & ORS
Fifth Respondents
RONALD GEORGE OWENS (as representing the members of the BLF at 31 March 1994
other than those otherwise represented herein)
Sixth Respondent
JOHN CUMMINS, JOHN SETKA and ROBERT GREGORY WILSON (as Trustees of the BLF)
Seventh Respondents
VI 4820 OF 1995
DAVID SUTTON
First Applicant
CONSTRUCTION, FORESTRY, MINING & ENERGY UNION
Second Applicant
GORDON SHARP and STEPHEN GEORGE ALLEY
First Respondents / Appellants
THE STATE OF VICTORIA
Second Respondent
JOHN ATKINSON & ORS
Third Respondents
JOSEPH FERGUSON & ORS
Fourth Respondents
MICK YOUNG & ORS.
Fifth Respondents
RONALD GEORGE OWENS (as representing the members of the BLF at 31 March 1994
other than those otherwise represented herein)
Sixth Respondent
JOHN CUMMINS, JOHN SETKA and ROBERT GREGORY WILSON (as Trustees of the BLF)
Seventh Respondents
VI 4821 OF 1995
ATKINSON & OTHERS
DAVID SUTTON & OTHERS
Respondents
VI 4822 OF 1995
DAVID SUTTON
First Applicant
CONSTRUCTION, FORESTRY, MINING & ENERGY UNION
Second Applicant
GORDON SHARP and STEPHEN GEORGE ALLEY
First Respondents / Appellants
THE STATE OF VICTORIA
Second Respondent / Appellant
JOHN ATKINSON & ORS
Third Respondents
JOSEPH FERGUSON & ORS
Fourth Respondent / Appellants
MICK YOUNG & ORS
Fifth Respondents
RONALD GEORGE OWENS (as representing the members of the BLF at 31 March 1994
other than those otherwise represented herein)
Sixth Respondent
JOHN CUMMINS, JOHN SETKA and ROBERT GREGORY WILSON (as Trustees of the BLF)
Seventh Respondents
RYAN AND NORTH JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
1 On 23 August 1996, this Court as presently constituted, dismissed an appeal
from orders made by Wilcox CJ, which are to be found
Sutton v Sharp [No
(1995) 62 IR 121.
By special leave, an appeal from the orders of this
Court was heard by the High Court and allowed on 2 September 1998. By its
of that date the High Court directed that:
"2. The order of the Full Court of the Industrial Relations
Court of Australia be set aside.
3. The matter be remitted to the Full Court of the Industrial Relations
Court of Australia to determine any remaining issues under
a notice of
contention in or to the effect of that filed by the respondent in this Court
[the High Court] and dated 1 April 1997."
2 That notice of contention was in these terms:
"NOTICE OF CONTENTION
The First and Second Respondents wish to contend that the decision of the Court
below should be affirmed but on grounds other than
or in addition to those
relied upon by the Court below.
1. Section 11 of the
BLF (De-recognition) Act 1985
required all the provisions
of the Act be proclaimed to commence before the expiration of one year.
BLF (De-recognition) (Amendment) Act 1987
was not effective to revive
the provisions of the
BLF (De-recognition) Act 1985
which ceased to have effect
on 30 July 1986.
BLF (De-recognition) (Amendment) Act 1987
was not effective to validate
the Order in Council of 13 October 1987.
4. Clause 2 of the Supplemental Order in Council of 10 November 1987 was
5. The Victorian legislation was overridden by
Section 205
Relations Act 1988
6. The Victorian legislation was invalid in that it sought to affect and/or
restrict the activities and actions of persons outside
the State of Victoria.
In this case it is relied upon to avoid an agreement entered into by parties in
New South Wales.
7. The Victorian legislation was invalid in that it contravened the provisions
of Section 92 of The Constitution in that it restricted,
impeded or hindered
intercourse among the States."
3 By order made by consent on 9 March 1999 the following words were added to
paragraph 3 of the order quoted above:
"or such other issues as that Court may allow."
4 The respondents Sutton and the Construction Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
("the CFMEU") sought to invoke the exercise of the
discretion thus reposed in
this Court by the High Court by raising the following issue expressed as an
additional paragraph 8 to
the notice of contention which we have already set
"8. The exercise of the power of avoidance by the Custodian by
the filing of his Defence on 28 October 1994 was contrary to law and/or
(a) It was not for a purpose prescribed by the
BLF (De-recognition) Act 1985
(Vic) and the Orders in Council validly made thereunder;
(b) In the exercise of the power, the Custodian misdirected himself in law,
took into account extraneous matters, failed to take
into account relevant
matters, and made a decision which was wrong in all the circumstances;
(c) The Custodian's decision was so unreasonable that no reasonable decision
maker, properly exercising the discretion reposed,
could have come to it;
(d) The Custodian in deciding to void the transaction, failed to afford
procedural fairness to the persons affected by it, including
the Respondents
for whom we act;
(e) The Custodian did not, as required by the Orders in Council, act to void
the transaction within a reasonable time;
(f) In the alternative to the immediately preceding paragraph, the Custodian,
by failing to exercise his discretion, to void the
transaction within a
reasonable time, had waived or was estopped by 28 October 1998 from exercising
said discretion."
5 Before proceeding to examine the issues raised by the amended notice of
contention, we should rehearse part of the factual background
to the earlier
proceedings in this Court and the High Court.
A. LEGISLATIVE AND FACTUAL BACKGROUND
6 The Australian Building Construction Employees' and Builders Labourers'
Federation ("the BLF") had for many years been an organisation
of employees
registered under the
Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904
force of that legislation the BLF enjoyed the legal personality of a body
corporate. Another Commonwealth Act, the
Builders Labourers' Federation
(Cancellation of Registration) Act 1986
Cancellation Act
") which came
into operation on 14 April 1986 cancelled the registration of the BLF under the
Conciliation and Arbitration Act
. In conjunction with the
Cancellation
Builders Labourers' Federation (Cancellation of Registration -
Consequential Provisions) Act 1986
("the Consequential Provisions Act")
provided that in consequence of the
Cancellation Act
the property of the BLF
was to belong to an incorporated association and to be administered in
accordance with its constitution and
rules. That had the effect, as explained
by Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ in
State of Victoria v Sutton
[1998] HCA 56
at 581, of preserving, in relation to the BLF, the operation of
s 143(6) of the
Conciliation and Arbitration Act.
7 Legislation of the State of Victoria, the
BLF (De-recognition) Act
(Vic) ("the
De-recognition Act
") was also directed to the BLF. The
De-recognition Act
received the Royal Assent on 30 July 1985 and s 7 which
commenced on 1 August 1986 provided:
(1) For the purpose of protecting the rights of persons who have
ceased to be members of BLF, the Governor in Council may by Order
published in
Government Gazette
provide for the restriction of the use of funds
or property of BLF and for the control of those funds or that property.
(2) An Order made under sub-section (1)-
(a) shall come into force upon the date of publication of the Order in the
Government Gazette; and
(b) shall, unless sooner revoked, cease to be in force at the expiration of 6
months from the date on which it came into force
but may, at any time while it
remains in force (including a time when it remains in force by virtue of a
previous extension or previous
extensions under this paragraph), be extended in
duration by a further Order made by the Governor in Council and published in
Government Gazette.
3. A person shall not contravene an Order made under sub-section
8 Section 11 of the
De-recognition Act
"This Act shall cease to have effect at the expiration of one
year after the day on which it receives the Royal Assent unless-
(a) all of the provisions of this Act have by then been proclaimed to come
into operation; or
(b) this Act is sooner repealed."
9 However, ss 2(2) and 6 of the
BLF (De-recognition) Amendment Act
(Vic) ("the 1987 Act") operated to repeal s 11 of the
De-recognition Act
. Accordingly, as noted in the joint judgment in
Victoria v Sutton
"the operation of the
De-recognition Act
continued beyond 30 July 1986".
The 1987 Act also amended s 7(1) of
De-recognition Act
with effect from 13 October 1987. As so amended,
s 7(1) of the
De-recognition Act
"For the purpose of protecting the rights of persons who are or
have ceased to be members of BLF, the Governor in Council may by Order
published in the
Government Gazette
provide for the restriction or
distribution of the use of funds or property of BLF and for the control,
vesting and realisation of
those funds or that property."
10 An Order in Council made on 13 October 1987 committed
"possession custody and control of the funds and property of the BLF in Dr
Sharp as `Custodian'".
By cl 7 of the Order in Council, the
Custodian was required
"forthwith"
"take possession custody and
of the funds and property of the BLF. Clause 5 of the
Order in Council restricted the ability of other persons to deal with
funds and property, and by cll 2 and 3, it was provided:
"2. No person shall pay or dispose of any of the funds or
property of BLF or of any interest therein, or create any encumbrance or
in respect thereof, without the prior written consent of the Custodian. Any
such payment disposition encumbrance or charge
shall be void, at the option of
the Custodian.
3. The Custodian may refuse to give consent referred to in clause 2 hereof
if he in his absolute discretion is not satisfied that
the payment disposition
encumbrance or charge is desirable to be made for the carrying out of the
ordinary and proper affairs of
BLF and for the benefit of its
11 The 1987 Act which was deemed to commence on 13 October 1987 inserted into
De-recognition Act
the following new sub-section:
"7(4) The Order in Council declared to be made pursuant to
section 7 of this Act and Section 5 of the
Police Regulation Act 1958
and published in the
Government Gazette
on 13 October 1987 is hereby
declared to be and to always have been as valid as if enacted
12 On 10 November 1987 a Supplemental Order in Council was made which
contained, amongst others, these clauses:
"Vesting Assets
2. The Custodian may vest in himself as Custodian any funds or property of
Powers of Custodian
3. In addition to any other powers the Custodian shall have absolute power to
bring and defend any action in relation to such funds
or property in his
position as Custodian.
4. The Custodian may pay out of the funds or property of BLF the costs, charges
and expenses which he incurs or is put to in or
powers or duties as Custodian, but not so as to include his remuneration or
that of any of his assistants
or employees, or any of his office costs, charges
or expenses, or any costs, charges or expenses of any investigation into the
of the BLF.
5. The Custodian may pay out of the funds or property of BLF any debt or
liability of BLF or of its members as such which is established
to this [sic]
satisfaction."
13 A further supplemental Order in Council made on 22 December 1987
was designed to facilitate an investigation of the affairs of
the BLF by two
investigators who had been named in the earlier Order of 10 November 1987. The
Orders in Council were extended pursuant
to s 7(2) of the
De-recognition Act
at intervals of more or less six months each. The most
recent extension for present purposes occurred on 2 March 1995 and operated
until 1 September 1995.
14 The steps taken by the Custodian by way of taking possession, custody and
control of the funds and property of the BLF have been
described as follows in
the joint judgment in
State of Victoria v Sutton
"21. Pursuant to the first Supplemental Order, the Custodian
took steps to vest in himself the funds on deposit of the BLF in Victoria.
Custodian did not obtain the registered title of the parcels of land. However,
the Custodian caused the entry on the relevant
certificates of title of Queen's
caveats under s 106 of the
Transfer of Land Act
. These were lodged
on 16 May 1988 and forbade the registration of any dealing by the registered
proprietors `without the consent
of the Custodian under the [De-recognition
Act] first obtained (Order of the Governor in Council made 13 October 1987,
Clause 2)'.
Yet, in circumstances apparently not disclosed by the evidence, by
order of the Registrar of Titles dated 26 October 1993, [presumably
Transfer of Land Act
s 58] the lands were `vested' in three persons
who appear to have been officers or members of the BLF and were, it may be
new trustees. The order was entered on each certificate of title on 9
22. Accordingly, even after the Supplemental Orders took effect, the legal
title of the parcels of land was retained by the respective
proprietors, although the Custodian had placed Queen's caveats on the titles.
It would appear that the beneficial interest
in the land was retained by the
members of the unincorporated association collectively.
23. However, the funds on deposit in Victoria were vested in the Custodian
and insusceptible of disposition by the unincorporated
association. Thus,
irrespective of any subsequent avoidance of the amalgamation agreement by the
Custodian, the subject matter of
that agreement could not have included the
funds on deposit. They could not be included in the assets of the BLF of which
that instrument
15 On 30 March 1994 an agreement ("the amalgamation agreement") was concluded
between the BLF and the CFMEU. The relevantly operative
clauses of the
amalgamation agreement were:
"3. On and from 31 March 1994 all assets and liabilities of the
BLF shall merge with the assets and liabilities of the CFMEU to be
controlled in accordance with the rules of the CFMEU and this agreement and
shall be treated as if such assets and liabilities
were, at all times, the
assets and liabilities of the CFMEU. Such funds shall, to the extent that
prior to 31 March 1994 they were
funds under the control of a BLF branch, other
than the BLF, Victorian Branch, be and become funds under the control of the
Construction Labourers' Divisional Branch established consequent
upon this agreement and, otherwise, the funds of the BLF shall be
accordance with para 11 herein. In the case of the funds of the BLF, Victorian
Branch they shall be and become funds under
the control of the Building Unions
Division, Victorian Divisional Branch.
4. For all purposes and in all proceedings, an asset or liability of the BLF
existing immediately before 31 March 1994 is taken to
have become and to have
been at all times an asset or liability of the CFMEU on and from 31 March
7. On and from 31 March 1994 any and all members of the remaining branches
of the BLF, if not already members of the CFMEU, shall
be and become members of
the CFMEU and be treated in the CFMEU as if all of the period of their
membership in the BLF was membership
in the CFMEU and all other persons who,
prior to the day fixed for the amalgamation and/or merger, were members of the
BLF, shall,
on and from 31 March 1994 cease to be members of the BLF.
11. In relation to the funds of the BLF not under the control of any branch
those funds shall also merge with the funds of the CFMEU
and be and become the
funds of the Building Unions Division of the CFMEU through its Divisional
Office or funds under the control
of the Building Unions Division of the CFMEU
through its Divisional Office."
16 There were complementary agreements between the CFMEU and State-registered
analogues of the former federally-registered BLF and,
purportedly, the
Victorian Branch of the BLF. Each of the CFMEU and the BLF also adopted
changes to its rules to effectuate the
amalgamation agreement. The following
description of those complementary arrangements is taken from the earlier
reasons of the present
Court; sub nom
Sharp v Sutton
(1996) 73 IR 185
"Corresponding agreements were entered into between the CFMEU
and the State-registered Unions which had separate corporate existence
States of Tasmania, South Australia, Western Australia and Queensland and were
analogues of the Branches of the BLF as formerly
registered under the
Commonwealth legislation. There was no analogous agreement with any similar
entity in Victoria because the
industrial legislation of that State did not
confer separate legal personality on any such entity. Nevertheless there was
an agreement
purportedly between the Victorian Branch of the BLF and the BLF
itself on the one hand and the CFMEU on the other, whereby it was
amongst other things, that `the Victorian Branch should amalgamate with the
CFMEU on and from 31 March 1994'. By way of
supporting the agreements to which
we have just referred, the BLF had purported to amend its Rules by inserting
the following new
`SPECIAL RULE - AMALGAMATION
Notwithstanding any other rule, it is and shall be an object of the
Federation, and the Federal Council shall have the power to
take all or any
steps to amalgamate, federate, affiliate and otherwise merge the Federation,
and/or any Branch of the Federation
and/or any State registered organisation to
the extent that the State registered organisation is a Branch of the Federation
the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union by resolution of a
simple majority of those in attendance at the Federal Council
Another new r 29 provided part of the machinery for implementing the proposed
amalgamation by providing, amongst other things:
`(ii) On and from the day fixed for the amalgamation and/or merger to take
effect, all assets and liabilities of the Federation
shall merge with the
assets and liabilities of the CFMEU and become assets and liabilities of the
CFMEU to be held and controlled
in accordance with the agreements for
amalgamation and/or merger, and shall be treated as if they always were assets
and liabilities
of the CFMEU.
(iii) For all purposes and in all proceedings, an asset or liability of the
Federation existing immediately before the day fixed
for the amalgamation
and/or merger is taken to have become and to have been at all times an asset or
liability of the CFMEU on and
from the day fixed for the amalgamation and/or
The CFMEU also amended its national Rules to facilitate the merger by inserting
a new r 42B which provided for the treatment of
the former assets and
liabilities of the BLF as assets and liabilities of the CFMEU and directed that
the funds comprised in those
assets should `be and become funds under the
control of the respective Construction Labourers' Division Branch established
upon these Rules and otherwise held by the Building Union's Division
as Divisional Funds'. Amongst other clauses of r 47B was:
`(vi) On and from the day fixed for the amalgamation and/or merger any and all
members of the remaining branches of the BLF, if
not already members of the
CFMEU, shall be and become members of the CFMEU and be treated in the CFMEU as
if all of the period of
their membership in the BLF was membership in the CFMEU
(except as otherwise provided for in the specific rules dealing with the
in the rules of the Building Unions Division).'"
17 On 24 August 1995, Wilcox CJ as reported in
Sutton v Sharp
(1995) 62 IR 121
at 149, made various orders including declarations that the
amalgamation agreement
"was and is valid and effective in law"
"no invalidity has occurred in the management or administration of
and that the CFMEU was
"beneficially entitled"
to the funds or property in the possession, custody or control of the Custodian
including any funds or property vested in him as
Custodian under any Order in
Council. His Honour also directed that within 60 days or such further time as
a judge might allow,
the Custodian do all things necessary to vest those funds
and property in the CFMEU. The Custodian and the State of Victoria appealed
this Full Court against those orders. While the appeal was pending this Court
stayed so much of the Order of Wilcox CJ as required
the Custodian to transfer
real estate to the CFMEU. However, there was no stay of that part of his
Honour's Order which required
the Custodian to transfer to the CFMEU funds on
deposit. As to those funds, this observation was made in the joint judgment in
State of Victoria v Sutton
in the High Court
[1998] HCA 56
(1998) 156 ALR 579
"32. However, as indicated earlier in these reasons,
irrespective of the effectiveness of any subsequent avoidance by the Custodian
under cl 2 of the Order, the subject matter of the amalgamation agreement could
not and did not include in the first place the funds
on deposit vested in the
Custodian under cl 2 of the first Supplemental Order. That statutory title was
superior to any rights which
the BLF would otherwise have had under the general
law to transfer to the CFMEU."
18 On 23 August 1996 this Full Court dismissed the appeal from the judgment of
Wilcox CJ. In the meantime, the Custodian, Dr Sharp,
had died and on 20 August
1996 a further Order in Council committed possession, custody and control of
the funds and property of
the BLF to the Honourable Stephen George Alley. The
same Order in Council stipulated that Mr Alley should have the same functions
and powers as had been exercised or held by Dr Sharp immediately before his
death. By order made on 1 February 1999, this Full Court
directed, amongst
other things, that Mr Alley, as the existing Custodian under the
De-recognition
be added as an appellant to the appeals herein.
19 On 14 February 1997, the High Court granted leave to appeal from this
Court's dismissal of the appeal from Wilcox CJ and on 2
September 1998 were
published the reasons for judgment of the High Court to which we have already
referred. In the course of those
reasons it was observed, in the joint
judgment, at 589 (para 35):
"... The purported disposition of the BLF's interest in the real
estate was voidable. The funds on deposit stand in a different position.
had been vested in the Custodian before the amalgamation agreement and thus, in
any event, could not have been divested by
the BLF, so no question of later
avoidance by the Custodian arose. However, there remain for consideration
certain grounds upon
which, by notice of contention, the respondents seek to
retain the orders in their favour made by Wilcox CJ and affirmed by the Full
20 The High Court also found itself called upon to construe cl 2 of the
Order in Council of 13 October 1987 as to which it was observed
the joint judgment at 589 (para 38):
"... In particular, where (as here) a disposition between two
parties is described as `void' at the will of a third, the preferred
construction is to read `void' as `voidable'. The submission to the contrary
which was at the forefront of the appellants' submissions
should not be
accepted. However, in the alternative, the appellants proffered the
construction which we would accept.
39 The Order uses the expression `at the option of the Custodian'. There is no
specification of a temporal limitation upon the
exercise of the `option'. It
is sufficient for the purposes of the present litigation to construe cl 2 as
authorising the Custodian
to exercise his `option' and communicate the fact of
that exercise within a reasonable time of awareness of the facts giving rise
40 In submissions, the term `election' was used as a synonym for `option' as it
appears in cl 2. The true nature of `election'
is the confrontation of the
person electing with two mutually exclusive courses of action between which a
choice must be made, for
example, to terminate or keep a contract on foot
(Immer (No 145) Pty Ltd v Uniting Church in Australia Property Trust(NSW)
[1993] HCA 27
(1993) 182 CLR 26
[1993] HCA 27
112 ALR 609).
In its setting in cl 2 of the Order,
`option' is best understood as identifying a power, but not a duty, which is
thereby conferred
upon the Custodian.
41 Clause 2 of the Order prescribes no particular formality for the exercise of
the power conferred therein. However, that power
is supplemented by the power
conferred by cl 2 of the first Supplemental Order. This enables the Custodian
to `vest in himself ...
any funds or property of [the] BLF'. The avoidance by
the Custodian, under the Order, of a disposition of the property of the BLF
does not thereby vest in the Custodian any title which before the disposition
was vested, not in the Custodian, but in the disponor.
However, the disponor
is to be treated as if the disposition had not taken place. In that state of
affairs, the Custodian may exercise
the power conferred by cl 2 of the first
Supplemental Order to vest the property in himself. Clause 2 includes the
taking of such
steps as the notification of a debtor of an assignment of a debt
and the securing of registration as a shareholder or as registered
21 There was then imputed to the Custodian from the statement in the defence
filed on his behalf in this Court on 28 October 1994
"the purported
amalgamation agreement was and is void"
a sufficient exercise of the power
of avoidance and communication of its exercise. This passage follows in the
joint judgment at
591 (para 44):
"... It follows that on 24 August 1995 the IRC should not have
granted a declaratory order that the CFMEU was `beneficially entitled'
or property vested in the Custodian. As to beneficial entitlement to real
property, any such disposition in favour of the
CFMEU had been avoided. As to
the funds on deposit, they had been vested in the Custodian and his statutory
title to them had not
been divested by the amalgamation
agreement."
22 In the course of separate reasons for judgment McHugh J, who was also in the
majority in
State of Victoria v Sutton,
adverted to the capacity in
which the Custodian held the property and funds of the BLF, observing, at 595
"...Nevertheless, although the Custodian did not hold the legal
or beneficial title to the real property, he had a statutory right
the disposition of that property and to avoid any disposition made without his
written consent.
67 It is not open to doubt that the Custodian had the legal title to the funds
which were invested in his name. Furthermore, in
my opinion, he held those
funds as trustee for the members of the BLF, notwithstanding that the BLF
De-recognition Act
and the Orders in Council vested the Custodian with a wide
discretionary power to deal with the property of the BLF and does not
the term `trust'. Section 7 of the BLF
De-recognition Act
[as amended on 13
October 1987 by
BLF (De-recognition) (Amendment) Act 1987
(Vic)] emphasises
that the restriction on use or distribution of the funds of the BLF was
undertaken `[f]or the purpose of protecting
the rights of persons who are or
have ceased to be members of BLF'. Further, cl 3 of the Order of 13 October
1987 provided:
`3. The Custodian may refuse to give consent referred to in clause 2 hereof if
he in his absolute discretion is not satisfied that
the payment disposition
encumbrance or charge is desirable to be made for the carrying out of the
ordinary and proper affairs of
BLF and for the benefit of its members.'
68 It follows from these provisions that, when the Custodian took control of
the funds and invested them in his name, he became
the trustee and not the
beneficial owner of the funds. It is true that neither the legislation nor the
orders described the Custodian
as a `trustee'. However, the purpose of the
legislation was to protect the property for the members of the BLF. That is a
indication that the Custodian was to hold the property as trustee
and not beneficially. In Registrar of the Accident Compensation
Tribunal v FCT
[1993] HCA 1
178 CLR 145
117 ALR 27)
, this court found that a trust arose out of
legislation which similarly did not expressly provide for a trust and allowed a
discretion to the trustee. The court said that ((1993)
[1993] HCA 1
178 CLR 145
[1993] HCA 1
at 39 per Mason CJ, Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ):
`A trust may be created without use of the word `trust' (See Re Kayford Ltd
[1975] 1 WLR 279
[1975] 1 All ER 604
at 607 per Megarry J; Tito v
Waddell (No 2)
[1977] Ch 106
at 211 per Megarry V-C. See also Brisbane City
Council v Attorney-General (Qld)
[1979] AC 411
at 421) And, unless there is
something in the circumstances of the case to indicate otherwise, a person who
has `the custody and
administration of property on behalf of others' (Taylor v
[1920] AC 636
at 651) or who `has received, as and for the beneficial
property of another, something which he is to hold, apply or account for
specifically for his benefit' (Cohen v Cohen
[1929] HCA 15
(1929) 42 CLR 91
at 100 per Dixon
J) is a trustee in the ordinary sense.'
To the extent that it is relevant, the Custodian also recognised that he held
the funds as trustee and not beneficially, for he
deposited the funds in his
name `as trustee'."
B. ISSUES RAISED BY AMENDED NOTICE OF CONTENTION
23 Against that background, as indicated earlier, we shall now proceed to
consider, in order, each of the issues raised by the notice
of contention as
amended by the addition of Ground 8.
1. The effect of s 11 of the
De-recognition Act
24 Section 11 of the
De-recognition Act
has already been set out. On behalf of
the CFMEU and Mr Sutton it was argued that a proper construction of paragraph
(a) of that
section entailed that all of the provisions of the
De-recognition
had to be in operation by the expiration of one year from the date on which
De-recognition Act
received the Royal Assent, ie. 30 July 1985. On that
De-recognition Act
ceased to have effect on 30 July 1986.
25 The construction favoured by the CFMEU and Mr Sutton was rejected at first
instance by Wilcox CJ in
Sutton v Sharp [No 2]
(1995) 62 IR 121
his Honour observed, at 141:
"I accept the construction of s 11 suggested by counsel for
the first and second respondents. The condition of par (a) is that all
provisions of the Act `have by then been proclaimed to come into operation',
not that they have come into operation. The effect
of the two proclamations
was that, by 30 July 1986, all the provisions of the Act had been proclaimed to
come into operation, albeit
that three sections would not commence operation
until after that day. This satisfies the condition contained in
26 The interpretation for which the CFMEU and Mr Sutton have contended equates
"proclaimed to come into operation"
"have come into
operation".
What the framers of the
De-recognition Act
understood to be
the effect of a proclamation can be gleaned from s 2 of that Act which
stipulated:
"2. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), the several provisions of
this Act shall come into operation on a day or on the respective days
fixed by proclamation or successive proclamations of the Governor in Council
published in the
Government Gazette
(2) A proclamation made under this Act shall not fix a day for a provision
of this Act to come into operation that is before -
(a) the day on which the right of The Australian Building Construction
Employees' and Builders Labourers' Federation to represent
employees in the
State of Victoria is limited or restricted by or under the Commonwealth Act or
any other Act of the Parliament of
the Commonwealth; or
(b) the day on which the registration pursuant to the Commonwealth Act of The
Australian Building Construction Employees' and Builders
Labourers' Federation
is cancelled -
whichever first occurs."
27 That section makes it clear that different provisions might have come
into force on different dates. In our view, it was open
to fix, by the same
proclamation, different dates of operation for different provisions. That is
consistent with the acknowledgment
Halsbury's Laws of England
Edn. Vol 44 (1) para 1279 that:
"Different dates may be fixed for the commencement of different
provisions of the same Act, or authority may be given to appoint different
dates for different provisions or for different purposes."
28 See also
Interpretation of Legislation Act 1984
(Vic) which provides;
"If an Act provides for the Act or a provision of the Act to
come into operation on a day or days to be proclaimed, the Act confers
the Governor in Council to fix by proclamation or proclamations published in
Government Gazette
(a) a day for the Act or provisions to come into operation; or
(b) different days for different provisions of the Act to come into
operation."
29 The ways in which that subsection can operate to allow different
provisions in the same legislation to come into force at different
been explained by Marks J in
Entwistle v Parkes
[1991] VicRp 24
[1991] 1 VR 317
Fullagar J in
Flinn v James McEwan & Co
[1991] VicRp 83
[1991] 2 VR 434
30 We therefore conclude that the proclamation of 28 July 1986 which proclaimed
De-recognition Act
to come into operation on 1 August 1986 and
ss 4 and 5 to come into operation on 1 January 2000 had the effect that,
by 28 July 1986,
all the provisions of the
De-Recognition Act
proclaimed to come into operation. Accordingly, the requirement in s 11
that all requisite proclamations be made by the
expiration of one year after
De-recognition Act
had received the Royal Assent, ie. by 31 July 1986, was
satisfied. We consider that this interpretation is borne out, first, by
element of futurity conveyed by the expression
"to come into operation"
which is inconsistent with reading s 11(a) as equivalent to a stipulation
that the Act should cease to have effect unless, by 31
July 1986, all of its
"had come into operation".
Secondly, the syntax of
s 11(a) makes the expression
referable to
"have .....
been proclaimed"
rather than
"to come into operation."
31 It was said in support of this ground that the repeal of s 11 by the
1987 Act acknowledged that s 11 was still operating to deprive
those sections which had not come into operation by 30 July 1986. However, the
view is equally open that the 1987 Act
was framed to effect, amongst other
things, the repeal of a section which had, in the events which had happened, no
further work
32 For these reasons, we are unable to uphold Ground 1 of the Notice of
Contention.
2. Was the 1987 Act effective to revive the
De-recognition Act
33 This ground depends upon the premise sought to be erected by Ground 1. As
Counsel for Mr Sutton and the CFMEU put it in their
written submissions:
"The [1987] Act proceeded on the premise that the
De-recognition
was still in effect. On that basis it purported to make certain amendments
to it. By reason of the submissions made in relation
to Ground 1 above, that
was an incorrect premise. As there was no principal Act in existence, the
purported amendments were ineffectual."
34 Because of our rejection of Ground 1, it is strictly unnecessary for us
to consider Ground 2. However, even if we were wrong in
the view we have taken
of Ground 1, we consider that the 1987 Act, by repealing s 11 of the
De-recognition Act
with effect from 30 July 1985, obliterated whatever
nullifying effect s 11 may have had, (assuming, contrary to our view, that
to have been predicated on all the provisions of the
De-recognition Act
having come into operation by 31 July 1985). That revival by retrospective
repeal may not have been the most elegant drafting solution,
but as Wilcox CJ
Sutton v Sharp
(supra) at 142:
"If the 1985 Act had ceased to have effect on 30 July 1986, the
course taken by the Victorian Parliament would have been unusual.
fairly have been described as messy and confusing. But a Parliament acting
within its constitutional competence may structure
its legislation any way it
likes. It is not bound to take the usual course of enacting fresh,
self-contained legislation. It may
breathe new life into lapsed (or repealed)
provisions, retaining their original form or amending them as desired. The
critical need
is for the Parliament to make its intention clear. The Victorian
Parliament did that in this case."
3. Was the 1987 Act effective to validate the Order in Council
October 1987?
35 In their written submissions in support of this ground Counsel for Mr Sutton
and the CFMEU contended:
"At the time when the Order in Council of 13 October, 1987 was
made there was no statutory authority for it because the
De-recognition Act
upon which it purported to rely, was not in effect. It was thus a complete
The [1987] Act was ineffectual to legitimise the Order in Council because
it purports to do so by way of amendment to the
De-recognition Act
cannot be done for the reasons advanced in relation to Ground 2
36 Section 5 of the 1987 Act, amongst other amendments, inserted in s 7 of
De-recognition Act
the following sub-section:
"(4) The Order in Council declared to be made pursuant to
section 7 of this Act and section 5 of the Police Regulation Act 1958 and
published in the
Government Gazette
on 13 October 1987 is hereby
declared to be and to always have been as valid as if enacted
37 As we construe it, that sub-section gave to the Order in Council
of 13 October 1987 the same effect and validity which it would
have had if it
had been enacted as part of the
De-recognition Act
. However, it has been
submitted on behalf of Mr Sutton and the CFMEU that
"the amendment of
sub-section 7(4) does not give the Order in Council an operation beyond its
legislative basis in section 7 at a
time when the principal Act had ceased to
That submission has been foreclosed by our rejection of Ground
4. Validity of Clause 2 of Supplemental Order in Council of 10 November
38 Clause 2 of this Order in Council provided that:
"The Custodian may vest in himself as Custodian any funds or property of the
39 It was made pursuant to s 7(1) of the
De-recognition Act
which enabled
the Governor in Council
"for the purpose of protecting the rights
of persons who have ceased to be members of the BLF"
by Order to
"provide for the restriction of the use of funds or property of the BLF and
for control of those funds or that property."
40 It was submitted on behalf of Mr Sutton and the CFMEU that the funds, in the
sense of all the assets, of the BLF became the property
of the de-registered
association on and from 14 April 1986. No individual member or group of
members aggregated in a Branch of the
BLF, it was submitted, could assert an
interest in any particular part of those funds or assets. The force of those
submissions
may be conceded but they do not entail that cl 2 of the
Order in Council of 10 November 1987 was invalid. All that the Order
was to empower the Custodian to vest in himself any funds or property of
the BLF. There was, of course, an implication derived from
s 7(1) of the
De-recognition Act
, that the power was to be exercised for the purpose of
protecting the rights of former members of the BLF. However, the exercise
the power did not depend on some prior ascertainment of existing rights of that
kind. It was exercisable, in our opinion, for
the purpose of protecting the
of the former members of the BLF.
5. Was the Victorian legislation overridden by
Industrial Relations Act
March 1994 the CFMEU amended its rules to add rule 42B,
providing for the amalgamation of the BLF (and associated State branches)
the CFMEU. Subrules 42B(ii) and (iii) purport to provide for the transfer of
assets and liabilities of the BLF, which are to
become assets and liabilities
of the CFMEU from the date of the amalgamation. The contention on behalf of
the respondents is that:
"Insofar as the
De-Recognition Amendment Act
Orders in Council made thereunder, purport to deprive the CFMEU of the benefits
of that beneficial ownership of the former
BLF's assets by purporting to vest
the assets in the Custodian, they are invalid as being inconsistent with
section 205
Industrial Relations Act
(Cth) and the
rules made thereunder."
42 Implicit in that submission is the claim that the State legislation
purports to interfere with the operation of rule 42B by denying that rule
its effect unless prior written consent of the Custodian
is forthcoming. From
that premise it is argued that there is an inconsistency between the
Industrial Relations Act
(Cth) ("the
Victorian legislation which renders the latter inoperative by s 109 of the
Constitution.
43 Reliance is placed on the observation of Gray J in
Bailey v Krantz
(1985) 13 IR 339
"The rules of a federally registered organisation derive their
force and effect from the federal Act. See s 141 of the federal Act
Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904]
Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration; Ex parte Barrett
[1945] HCA 50
, at 151 per Latham CJ. If there is present in those rules any
express limitation on the right of the organisation to register one
branches under the law of a State, such right would not exist. There would, of
necessity, be an inconsistency between the
registration provision of the State
law and the federal Act in the particular circumstances."
44 The respondents also rely on the observation of Latham CJ in
Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration; Ex parte Barrett
[1945] HCA 50
at 151, referred to by Gray J in the above passage :
"In my opinion the rules as rules of the organization derive
their force from the Act, and, therefore, a controversy as to the observance
performance of the rules is a matter arising under the Act. A claim that the
rules should be observed and performed is a claim
to a right conferred by or
under the statute. It therefore arises under the statute. When a member
applies for an order under s.
58E, he is seeking to enforce a right which would
not exist, as it actually exists, apart from the Federal law contained in the
Arbitration Act
, and he is necessarily litigating a claim arising under
45 However, the fact that the rules of a federally registered organisation
derive their force from a federal Act does not mean that
they are `laws of the
Commonwealth' within s 109 of the Constitution.
Victoria v Sutton
[1998] HCA 56
(1998) 156 ALR 579
Gummow and Hayne JJ said at 586 that
"the funds on deposit in Victoria were
vested in the Custodian and insusceptible of disposition by the unincorporated
association".
Their Honours further said at 589:
"The purported disposition of the BLF's interest in the real
estate was voidable. The funds on deposit stand in a different position.
had been vested in the Custodian before the amalgamation agreement and thus, in
any event, could not have been divested by
the BLF, so no question of later
avoidance by the Custodian arose."
47 On that basis, rule 42B can have no application in relation to the funds.
The rules of the CFMEU cannot confer on the CFMEU any
better title than the
transferor (the BLF) could pass under State law. If the Victorian legislation
provided that the BLF could
confer only a voidable title to its assets on the
CFMEU, then that is the only title which the CFMEU received.
48 In our opinion, neither the Victorian legislation nor any Order in Council
made thereunder is inconsistent with s 205 of the
IR Act (now the
Workplace Relations Act
Section 205
dealt with the alteration of the rules (other than the eligibility rules) of a
registered organisation and provided, at the relevant
time, that such an
alteration did not take effect unless an Industrial Registrar had certified
that, in his or her opinion, the alteration:
complied with, and was not
contrary to, the Act and awards; was not otherwise contrary to law; and, had
been made under the rules
of the organisation. Subsection 205(3) provided that
an alteration of rules was to take effect on the day of certification.
49 In our opinion, the rules of an industrial organisation are not "laws of the
Commonwealth" for the purposes of s 109 of the Constitution.
certification of a rule alteration under
change that position.
Section 205
does not provide either expressly or by
necessary implication that the rules of an industrial organisation shall, upon
certification,
take effect notwithstanding any State law to the contrary.
50 The position here is to be contrasted with that in relation to federal
awards. The
expressly provided in
that such awards should
operate to the exclusion of State laws and awards dealing with the same
matters. Federal awards made pursuant
were, by the terms of the
Act, brought into force as part of the law of the Commonwealth: see
v Charles Marshall Pty Ltd
[1955] HCA 44
(1955) 92 CLR 529
, where Dixon CJ, McTiernan,
Williams ,Webb, Fullager and Kitto JJ said at 547:
"The basis of the application of s 109 to a State law
affecting industrial relations regulated by an award is not that the award is
law of the Commonwealth within the meaning of s.109 but that the
Conciliation and Arbitration Act
constitutes the inconsistent Federal
law inasmuch as it means that an award purporting to make an exhaustive
regulation shall be
treated as the exclusive determination of the industrial
relations which it affects. `The award itself is, of course, not law, it
merely. But once it is completely made, its provisions are
the terms of the Act itself
brought into force as part of the law of the
Commonwealth...' per Isaacs CJ and Starke J, Ex parte McLean [(1909)
[1909] HCA 43
(emphasis added)
51 See also
Charles Marshall Pty Ltd v Collins
[1957] UKPCHCA 2
(1957) 96 CLR 1
T.A. Robinson & Sons Pty Ltd v Haylor
[1957] HCA 76
(1957) 97 CLR 177
Metal Trades Industry Association v Amalgamated Metal Workers and
Shipwrights' Union
[1983] HCA 28
(1983) 152 CLR 632
at 641-2, 648-9. There is no
provision of the
which has a similar application in relation to
certified rules of an organisation.
52 There was nothing in the
to support a construction of
would lead to the far-reaching consequence that the rules of an industrial
organisation might displace the general law. On
the contrary, Division 2 of
of that Act revealed an intention that the rules of an organisation
were subject to and operated against the background of the general
including any relevant State laws. By s 196(a) and (b)(i) the rules must
not be contrary to law, and must not prevent or hinder
members from observing
the law. By s 208(2) and (5), the Court was empowered to make an order
that there had been a failure to comply
with these requirements, with the
effect that the relevant rule was void from the date of the order. Also,
before certifying an
alteration to the rules, the Industrial Registrar was
obliged, by s 205(1)(b), to form an opinion that the alteration was not
53 Section 205 of the Act specified the requirements which had to be certified
before an alteration to the rules of an organisation
could take effect.
However, certification did not enhance the position of an alteration which
would otherwise have been ineffective,
because, for example, of the operation
of State law. We conclude that neither the Victorian legislation nor the
Orders in Council
made thereunder could alter, impair or detract from the
operation of
, with the consequence that s 109 of
the Constitution does not have the effect of invalidating the State
legislation.
6 and 7. The Validity of the Victorian Legislation
54 Grounds 6 and 7 are:
"6. The Victorian legislation was invalid in that it sought to
affect and/or restrict the activities and actions of persons outside
of Victoria. In this case it is relied upon to avoid an agreement entered into
by parties in New South Wales.
"7. The Victorian legislation was invalid in that it contravened the
provisions of Section 92 of The Constitution in that it restricted,
hindered intercourse among the States."
55 The respondents' submissions on these grounds are admirably brief. They
contend that:
"The second reading speech leading to the
(De-recognition) Act
makes clear that one of the purposes of that Act
and the Orders in Council was to prevent the movement interstate of the funds
the realisation of the funds of the BLF and the movement out of the
56 It was further submitted on behalf of the respondents that:
BLF (De-recognition) Act
had a purpose of
preserving an ordered society under a system of representative government and
democracy, the burden and/or restriction
on the transfer of property by the BLF
was disproportionate to that end."
57 The short submission is that such a legislative scheme contravenes
s 92 of the Constitution because it constitutes a restriction
interstate intercourse.
Cole v Whitfield
[1988] HCA 18
(1988) 165 CLR 360
, the High Court said at 391:
"The purpose of the section is clear enough: to create a free
trade area throughout the Commonwealth and to deny to Commonwealth and
alike a power to prevent or obstruct the free movement of people, goods and
communications across State boundaries."
Cunliffe v Commonwealth of Australia
[1994] HCA 44
(1994) 182 CLR 272
CJ said at 307:
"Communication across State borders constitutes `intercourse
among the States' within the meaning of s. 92 of the Constitution.
left open the question: what burden, if any, can be imposed on
freedom of interstate intercourse? That decision recognized that
not require `that every form of intercourse must be left without any
restriction or regulation'. As the Court went on
to point out, `[m]uch will
depend on the form and circumstance of the intercourse involved'. Although the
guarantee of freedom of
interstate intercourse, not forming part of trade and
commerce among the States, is not directed to preserving interstate intercourse
from discriminatory burdens of a protectionist kind, the freedom which it
guarantees is nonetheless not absolute. Hence, a law which
in terms applies to
movement across a border and imposes a burden or restriction is invalid. But,
a law which imposes an incidental
burden or restriction on interstate
intercourse in the course of regulating a subject matter other than interstate
intercourse would
not fail if the burden or restriction was reasonably
necessary for the purpose of preserving an ordered society under a system of
representative government and democracy and the burden or restriction was not
disproportionate to that end." (
footnotes omitted)
60 In the second reading speech, it was said of Clause 7:
"Clause 7 provides the Governor in Council with the power to
make an order, for the purpose of protecting the rights of former members
the union, to restrict the use of funds or property of the Builders Labours
Federation and to control those funds or property."
61 There is nothing in the second reading speech which indicates that one of
the purposes of that Act and the Orders in Council made
under it was
to prevent the movement interstate of funds, the realisation of funds of the
BLF and their movement out of the jurisdiction
of Victoria. The fact that the
Custodian in
Sharp v ABLF (W.A. Branch)
[1989] WAR 138
successfully
sought orders from the Supreme Court of Western Australia in connection with
the telegraphic transfer of funds in an
aggregate amount of $766,234.34 from
the BLF's bank in Melbourne to an account of the State registered BLF (W.A.
Branch) in Perth
does not mean that the purpose of the Victorian legislation
included the prevention of movement of BLF funds out of Victoria.
62 It is to be noted that Grounds 6 and 7 do not rely on the operation of
s 92 of the Constitution in relation to interstate trade
or commerce.
Such an operation is distinct from the operation of s 92 in relation to
interstate intercourse. In
Cole v Whitfield
the High Court said at
"The notions of absolutely free trade and commerce and
absolutely free intercourse are quite distinct and neither the history of the
clause nor the ordinary meaning of its words require that the content of the
guarantee of freedom of trade and commerce be seen as
governing or governed by
the content of the guarantee of freedom of intercourse."
63 At 394, the High Court said that it had always been accepted that
s 92 did not guarantee freedom, in the sense of anarchy. Their
"Once this is accepted, as it must be, there is no reason in
logic or commonsense for insisting on a strict correspondence between
freedom guaranteed to interstate trade and commerce and that guaranteed to
interstate intercourse."
64 While the present challenge based on s 92 does not rely on
participation by the BLF in interstate trade or commerce, the position
the Victorian Act and the Orders in Council are laws of general
application which do not discriminate against interstate
trade and commerce.
Nor do they have any protectionist purpose or object, and therefore they do not
contravene the freedom of interstate
trade and commerce guaranteed by
65 Notwithstanding that the notion of freedom of interstate trade and commerce
is distinct from the notion of freedom of interstate
intercourse, the concepts
of "intercourse" and "trade and commerce" are not mutually exclusive. Brennan
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills
[1992] HCA 46
(1992) 177 CLR 1
"Although the conception of
intercourse
is distinct from
the conception of `trade' or of `commerce', instances of intercourse may be,
and frequently are, instances of trade
and commerce."
66 Dawson J observed in
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[1992] HCA 45
(1992) 177 CLR 106
"...the answer was given in
Cole v Whitfield
relation to interstate trade and commerce, `absolutely free' means free from
discriminatory burdens of a protectionist kind.
That answer does not greatly assist in identifying the freedom which
s 92 guarantees to intercourse. Nevertheless the same approach
should be adopted. The intercourse with which the section is concerned is
confined to intercourse among the States. That
is to say, it is confined to
movement or activity across State borders."
67 Brennan J in
Nationwide News
said at 55:
"The characteristic of every phenomenon falling within the
section, however, is geographical movement. Each of the terms `trade,
and intercourse' in s.92 is qualified by the phrase `among the States' and that
qualification is essential to attract the
operation of the section. There must
be some border crossing involved before any phenomenon of trade, commerce or
intercourse comes
within the reach of a section.
68 At least to the extent that the Victorian Act and the
Orders in Council apply to any real property owned by the BLF, they
restrict the interstate movement of that property, and so any
restriction on the disposition of real property imposed under the Victorian
does not impose a burden or restriction on interstate intercourse.
69 As the High Court made plain in
Cole v Whitfield
, at 393, the freedom
of interstate intercourse guaranteed by s 92 is not absolute. A law will
generally be contrary to s 92 if the
law is aimed at, or directed against,
interstate intercourse by imposing a burden or restriction on intercourse by
reference to the
crossing of a State border. In that consideration, the "real
object" of the law said to restrict interstate movement needs to be
identified.
So also, a non-discriminatory law of general application to both intrastate and
interstate intercourse might nevertheless
offend s 92 if it has the effect
of imposing a burden or restriction on interstate commerce, unless the law is
appropriate and adapted
to the fulfilment of some purpose or object other than
the restriction of interstate intercourse, and the burden or restriction on
interstate intercourse is merely incidental to the fulfilment of that purpose.
70 The test of proportionality requires an assessment of the burden or
restriction on interstate intercourse in the context of the
purpose or object
for which the Parliament decided to legislate.
71 In the present case, the Victorian legislation and the
Orders in Council impose general restrictions which do not
discriminate
between intrastate and interstate dispositions of funds or
property. As s 7(1) of the State Act makes plain, the restrictions have
been imposed for a purpose other than restricting interstate intercourse -
namely the purpose of protecting the past and present
members of the BLF. Even
if the Victorian legislation imposes a restriction on the disposition of the
funds or property of the BLF
which might amount to a restriction on interstate
intercourse, any such burden or restriction is appropriate and adapted to the
72 We conclude that the Victorian Act and the Orders in Council do
not contravene s 92 of the Constitution.
8. Challenge to the exercise of power constituted by the Custodian filing
his defence
73 Paragraph 8 of the Notice of Contention challenges the act of avoidance
under cl 2 of the Order in Council constituted by the
filing his defence in this proceeding.
74 The High Court held that the funds on deposit were vested in the Custodian
by operation of the Order in Council. Thus, the present
challenge to
the exercise of the power of the Custodian to avoid the disposition by filing
his defence can only affect the purported
disposition of the real estate by the
BLF to the CFMEU.
75 The parts of the pleadings relevant to this argument commence with paragraph
5 of the amended statement of claim which reads:
"5. On 30 March 1994, the Second Applicant executed an agreement
with the Australian Building Construction Employees and Builders
Federation (hereinafter "the BLF") which agreement had effect on
and from 31 March 1994."
76 In response, paragraph 5 of the defence pleaded relevantly:
"5. They deny each and every allegation made in paragraph 5 and,
without prejudice to the generality of that denial, deny that any
agreement was concluded:
(f)(i) The purported agreement was conditional on merger agreements being
concluded between the second applicant and the State branches
(ii) The State branches of the BLF being integral parts of the BLF and
inseverable therefrom, lacked the capacity to enter into such
merger agreements
or to agree to dispose of branch assets pursuant to such merger
(iii) Accordingly, the purported agreement was and is
77 The joint judgment in the High Court described one of the submissions of
the State of Victoria
as follows:
"35. In this Court, the appellants made three principal
challenges to the judgment of the Full Court:
(2) in the alternative, if the Order rendered any disposition of property
of the BLF voidable, the Full Court erred in concluding
that the Custodian had
not elected to treat the disposition as void;..."
78 The majority accepted this submission. Paragraphs 38-41 of the judgment,
which have been set out earlier in these reasons, and
which dealt with the
construction of cl 2 of the Order in Council, addressed the
method by which the Custodian could exercise his
power to avoid the
disposition. Their Honours continued at paragraphs 43-4:
"43. The Order does not stipulate any means for the
communication to the parties to a disposition of the exercise of the power of
avoidance conferred by cl 2 thereof. Any means will suffice, at least if it is
apt to draw to the attention of the parties to the
dealing in question the
exercise by the Custodian of the power conferred by cl 2. A pleading in
litigation in which the relevant
actors are parties may be a sufficient
vehicle. The respondents submitted that this could be so in the present
litigation only if
the pleading had been tendered in the appellants' case at
trial. This submission should be rejected.
The Custodian became aware of what had been done only with the
initiation by the CFMEU of the litigation in the IRC. The pleading
Custodian in the defence on 28 October 1994 that "the purported amalgamation
agreement was and is void" was sufficient exercise
of the power of avoidance
and communication of its exercise. It follows that on 24 August 1995 the IRC
should not have granted a
declaratory order that the CFMEU was "beneficially
entitled" to funds or property vested in the Custodian. As to beneficial
entitlement
to real property, any such disposition in favour of the CFMEU had
been avoided. As to the funds on deposit, they had been vested
Custodian and his statutory title to them had not been divested by the
amalgamation agreement."
79 The position of the Custodian throughout the proceedings has been that he
did not exercise a power to avoid the disposition. He
contended that there was
no occasion to do so because, on his construction of the
Order in Council, the disposition was void if he
did not consent to
it, and he had not so consented. The High Court rejected this construction.
80 The respondents' argument under paragraph 8 of the Notice of Contention
underwent a degree of re-fashioning in the course of
the appeal. The argument
did however, focus on the fact that the Custodian at no stage intended to act
under a power to avoid.
As finally formulated in written submissions and
addressed in oral argument, the contentions of the respondents were that the
of the Custodian under cl 2 of the Order in Council
required the exercise of a discretion. As he did not exercise the discretion,
he misunderstood the nature of his power to avoid. The written submissions
"That misunderstanding is a mistake of law as to the proper
construction of the instrument investing him with power, and in consequence
it the custodian misconceived his duty and did not apply himself to the
question which the law prescribes, namely, whether he
should exercise the
discretion to void. The result is a constructive failure to exercise the power
with the consequence that the
avoidance is a nullity.
CFMEU v AIRC
(1999) 159 ALR 1
Craig v South Australia
[1995] HCA 58
(1995) 184 CLR 163
Further and in the alternative, the purported exercise of the power by the
custodian was based on a further error of law, namely that
the disposition was
void ab initio."
81 The appellants contended that the decision of the High Court foreclosed
the respondents' contention that the Custodian had not
effectively avoided the
disposition. They relied on paragraphs 39-44 of the joint judgment which have
already been set out in these
reasons. In those paragraphs the majority
explained that the Custodian was granted power to avoid the disposition. There
reference to a discretion having been reposed in the Custodian. The
Order in Council does not stipulate any means of communication
parties to a disposition of the exercise of the power of avoidance. Any means
will suffice, at least if the means are apt
to draw the attention of the
parties to the dealing in question and the exercise by the Custodian of the
power. The joint judgment
"The pleading by the Custodian in the defence on 28 October 1994
that "the purported amalgamation agreement was and is void" was sufficient
exercise of the power of avoidance and communication of its
82 McHugh J construed cl 2 of the Order in Council as giving
the Custodian a right to avoid a dealing made without his written consent
(para 70). His Honour observed that, by contesting the transfer of
property and pleading that the transfer was void, the Custodian
had exercised
his legal right to avoid the transfer (para 71). His Honour specifically
found that there was nothing in the terms
or purpose of cl 2 requiring him
to make an election. The Custodian was only required to choose between
competing alternatives at
a particular time or during a particular period. His
Honour said:
"In its context and having regard to the purpose of the
legislation, the better view of clause 2 is that it simply confers a power
the Custodian and does not put him to an election. It simply gives the
Custodian power to avoid a disposition made without his
83 He then observed that the question in each case is not whether the
Custodian has elected to avoid a disposition of property, but
whether he has
manifested an intention to avoid the disposition (para 72). His Honour
found that the Custodian had manifested such
an intention by filing his defence
in the terms in which it was drawn.
84 The respondents' present challenge to the Custodian's act of filing the
defence was argued but was not articulated in those terms
before the High
Court. However, the foundation of the argument is that the Custodian believed
he did not have to avoid the disposition.
That the Custodian had that belief
was well known to the High Court. It was the basis of the primary argument put
to the High Court
by the State of Victoria. Paragraph 35 of the joint judgment
set out that argument as the first challenge made by the appellants
"(1) the Full Court erred in treating a disposition of property
of the BLF as voidable at the option of the Custodian and not
85 It must therefore be concluded that the High Court determined that the
power to avoid the disposition had been exercised by the
Custodian even though
he was unaware of his power to do so, or, as was put in the further written
submission of the Attorney-General
for the Commonwealth:
"...the majority judgments clearly proceed on the basis that the
action of the Custodian in filing the defence to these proceedings
amounted on
its face to a legally effective exercise of the power to avoid the disposition,
irrespective of whether of not the Custodian
consciously adverted to the fact
that he was exercising that power."
86 That analysis, which we consider to be mandated by the joint judgment of
the High Court, entails that it is not permissible in
the circumstances to
attack the Custodian's exercise of power as based on a mistake of law or a
miscarriage of discretion.
87 It will be apparent from the foregoing reasons that we have resolved,
adversely to Mr Sutton and the CFMEU, who were the respondents
in the High
Court, each of the issues raised by their notice of contention in that Court
and the additional issue sought before this
Full Court to be added to that
notice. That resolution, it seems to us, requires that the appeals from the
judgment of Wilcox CJ
be allowed in part and that paragraphs 3 and 4 of the
declarations and orders made by his Honour on 24 August 1995 be set aside.
case any party wishes to contend that some further or other orders are
necessary to dispose fully and effectively of the appeals,
we shall reserve
liberty to apply.
certify that the preceding eighty-seven (87) numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment herein of this Honourable
Dated: 10 March 2000
for the Appellants the State of Victoria and Stephen George Alley:
A G Uren QC
with Mr I G Sutherland QC and with
Mr L Kaufman
for the Appellants the State of Victoria and Stephen George Alley:
Victorian Government Solicitor
for the Respondents John David Sutton and the CFMEU:
S Rothman SC
with Mr H Borenstein
for the Respondents John David Sutton and the CFMEU:
L Whyburn & Associates
for the Respondents Mr Ronald George Owens as representing the Members of the
BLF as at 31 March 1994 and for the Respondents
John Cummins, John Setka and
Robert George Wilson as Trustees of the BLF:
S Rothman SC
with Mr H Borenstein
for the Respondents Mr Ronald George Owens as representing the Members of the
BLF as at 31 March 1994 and for the Respondents
John Cummins, John Setka and
Robert George Wilson as Trustees of the BLF:
L Whyburn & Associates
for Mr J Atkinson and ten other persons as Appellants in VI 4821 of 1995 and as
Respondents in the remaining appeals:
J W Robinson
for Mr J Atkinson and ten other persons as Appellants in VI 4821 of 1995 and as
Respondents in the remaining appeals:
for the Respondent John James McKeown (as Respondent in VI 4821 of 1995):
for the Respondent John James McKeown (as Respondent in VI 4821 of 1995):
N Zigouras & Co
Dalton and Martin Greany,
Respondents in VI 4821 of 1995:
Ferguson and others, Fourth Respondents in VI 4819, VI4820 and VI 4821 of 1995
and Appellants in VI 4822 of 1995:
not appear and were not represented at the hearings on 9 10 and 11 March 1999.
for Joseph Ferguson and others, Fourth Respondents in VI 4819, VI4820 and VI
4821 of 1995 and Appellants in VI 4822 of 1995:
for the Attorney-General for the Commonwealth (intervening)
A Robertson SC with Mr C Horan
for the Attorney-General for the Commonwealth (intervening):
Government Solicitor
of Hearing:
10 and 11 March 1999
Submissions Filed:
March, 16 and 30 April 1999
of Judgment:
No downloadable files available