Youssef Ahmad v Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd T/A Uber Australia [2025] FWC 3224 (13 November 2025)
[2025] FWC 3224
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Application for an unfair deactivation remedy
Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd T/A Uber Australia
(UDE2025/274)
COMMISSIONER REDFORD
MELBOURNE, 13 NOVEMBER 2025
Application for an unfair deactivation remedy – extension of time
– no exceptional circumstances – application dismissed
October 2025, Mr Youssef Ahmad filed an application pursuant to
Fair Work Act 2009
) seeking an unfair deactivation
remedy. The application concerns Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd T/A Uber Australia
). Mr Ahmad had a digital account operated by Uber in connection
with his work as an Uber driver and performed work through or by
means of that
objects to the application on the basis it says that Mr Ahmad is not a person
protected from unfair deactivation pursuant to
of the Act because Mr
Ahmad did not perform work through or by means of its digital labour platform on
a regular basis for a period
of at least 6 months. It also claims the
application was made outside the prescribed time limit. Uber seeks that the
application
be dismissed for these reasons.
directed both parties to file and serve material in support of their respective
positions in relation to this matter and indicated
that, upon receipt of that
material, I would advise parties as to whether I considered it could be dealt
with on the papers, or whether
a hearing was required. When I received the
parties’ material, I advised parties I considered the matter could be
on the basis of what had been filed without a hearing. Both parties
confirmed they agreed the matter could be dealt with on the papers.
Ahmad began working as an Uber driver from 25 January 2018. Uber says his
account was deactivated on 30 April 2025. Mr Ahmad says
the deactivation of his
account took effect on 1 May 2025 – a discrepancy that is not material in
this matter. On the basis
of the material filed, I consider it more likely that
the deactivation took effect on 30 April 2025 and find as such.
Ahmad filed his application seeking relief in respect to unfair deactivation on
10 October 2025. Section 536LU(3)(a) of the Act
provides that an application for
unfair deactivation must be made within 21 days after the deactivation took
effect, or within such
further period as the Commission allows. Mr Ahmad’s
application should have been filed by 21 May 2025. It was therefore filed
days out of time.
Ahmad says that between 1 November 2024 and 1 May 2025 he performed work on the
Uber platform from 28 March 2025 to 9 April 2025.
Uber submitted that Mr Ahmad
performed no work in the six months prior to his deactivation or, even if he
did, he clearly did not
work on at least an average of 60 hours of paid work per
month or on at least 3 days of each week. None of the materials provided
indicated whether Mr Ahmad, across the lengthy duration of his employment, has
performed work through or by means of the Uber platform on a regular
basis for a period of at least 6 months.
Ahmad said that the reason he did not file his application within time was
because he didn’t know what to do, and got frustrated,
depressed and
confused. He said he is “on the DSP” and facing a “very bad
financial hardship”, and that he
cannot afford to pay for a lawyer. He
said he called the Commission and got advice from one of its
“friendly officers”.
relation to what he did to dispute the deactivation of his account, Mr Ahmad
said he tried to call Uber support but did not reach
anyone and received an
automatic answer reply.
Ahmad claimed the deactivation of his account was unfair because he was
“kicked off” without any explanation as to
the allegation of fraud
that was made against him. Uber said that the deactivation of the account
occurred because Mr Ahmad uploaded
a fraudulent document to his account, in
breach of its Community Guidelines. It also said that the deactivation occurred
in accordance
Fair Work (Digital Labour Platform Deactivation Code)
Instrument 2024
) which included Mr Ahmad having been
provided with deactivation warning and a preliminary deactivation notice
referring to the reason
it was contemplating deactivating his
Mr Ahmad’s application was filed outside the time
limit: should additional time be allowed?
further period of time can be allowed for an unfair deactivation application to
be made, but only if the Commission is satisfied
there are exceptional
circumstances, taking into account several matters. My consideration of each of
these factors is set out below.
The Commission’s approach to this question
is similar to the approach taken in respect to time limit considerations
to applications made under Parts 3-1 and 3-2 of the
and thus establishes a
“high hurdle” for an application for an
considering the reason provided for the
, the Commission will usually
focus its enquiry on whether the reason for the delay is “adequate”,
or “credible”
or “acceptable”, and the absence of an
explanation for any part of the delay will usually weigh against an applicant
the assessment of whether there are exceptional
circumstances
. The reason for the
delay need not necessarily be one that “justifies” the delay, but
the allowance of further time is
discretionary, taking into account whether
exceptional circumstances exist, and it is in this context that the assessment
not consider Mr Ahmad’s reason for the lengthy delay in filing his
application weighs in favour of a finding there are
exceptional circumstances in
this matter. Mr Ahmad’s frustration, depression or confusion are not
exceptional matters, nor
is any difficulty he faced obtaining advice until he
ultimately spoke to someone from the Commission.
Ahmad did not become aware of the deactivation after it took effect and thus had
the full period of 21 days to file his
application
Ahmad’s submissions as to what he did to contest the
deactivation
were minimal and did
not describe circumstances which are exceptional.
Ahmad submitted there is no prejudice to Uber if an extension is granted –
Uber said there is prejudice in that if an extension
is granted in that it will
incur further time, effort and monetary cost defending the
Application
. I do not consider the
prejudice to Uber if an extension is granted weighs against a finding there are
exceptional circumstances
in this matter.
is well established that the Commission will not ordinarily embark on a detailed
consideration of the merits of the substantive
case when considering whether to
grant an extension of time
submits that the manner in which the deactivation occurred was consistent with
the Code, was based on a valid reason and was
fair. However, Mr Ahmad submits
that the basis for the deactivation is unfair. With this contest in mind, I do
not consider the merits
of this matter, based on the material before me at this
time, weigh for or against a finding that exceptional circumstances
terms of fairness between Mr Ahmad and persons in a similar
, Uber submits that this
is a neutral consideration in this matter. Mr Ahmad’s submission in
relation to this issue related
to the fairness of his own deactivation rather
than being a comparative submission as to his circumstances and persons in
positions. On the basis of these submissions, I consider this to be a
neutral factor in my consideration of whether exceptional circumstances
such that Mr Ahmad should be granted additional time for his application to be
mentioned, Uber submits that it complied with the process specified Code in
making the decision to deactivate Mr Ahmad’s
. It does appear that Mr
Ahmad was provided with a warning, and a preliminary deactivation notice, and it
is asserted that Mr Ahmad
was provided with an opportunity to speak to a
representative of Uber about the preliminary deactivation notice. Mr Ahmad did
address these matters in his submissions. I was not in a position to
undertake a detailed consideration as to whether Uber complied
with processes
specified in the Code in relation to this matter. I consider this factor weighs
neutrally in my consideration.
considered each of the factors set out in s 536LU(4) of the Act I have not
reached a state of satisfaction as to the existence
of exceptional circumstances
in this matter. This is particularly because I consider Mr Ahmad has not been
able to provide a reason
for the considerable delay in filing his application
that supports such a conclusion.
other factors I am required to consider do not outweigh the absence of a reason
for the delay. None weigh sufficiently to overcome
Mr Ahmad’s failure to
file him unfair dismissal claim within the three weeks afforded to him by the
Consideration
must be satisfied there are exceptional circumstances to extend the time for Mr
Ahmad’s application. I am not so satisfied.
It is therefore not necessary
for me to determine whether Mr Ahmad had performed work on a regular basis for a
period of at least
6 months, because his application must be dismissed. I will
issue an Order
COMMISSIONER
Gopal Bandameeda v Amazon
Commercial Services Pty Ltd
Kuncho Kurtev v KCB
Australia Pty Ltd, Toni
Abu Murad v Command51 Services Pty
Periklis Stogiannidis v Victorian Frozen Foods
Distributors Pty Ltd t/as Richmond Oysters
Stogiannidis
Fair Work Act 2009
536LU(4)(a)
Stogiannidis
Fair Work Act 2009
536LU(4)(b)
Fair Work Act 2009
536LU(4)(c)
Fair Work Act 2009
536LU(4)(d)
Ms Shiralee Dollar v RG
Group Holdings Pty Ltd
Fair Work Act 2009
536LU(4)(e)
Fair Work Act 2009
536LU(4)(f)
Fair Work Act 2009
536LU(4)(G)
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government
RTF format (550 KB)
Signed PDF/A format