Asurco Contracting Pty Ltd v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union [2012] FWAFB 9711 (15 November 2012)
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Act 2009
- Appeal of decisions
Asurco Contracting Pty Ltd
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(C2012/4999)
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT ACTON
DEPUTY PRESIDENT SAMS
COMMISSIONER HAMPTON
MELBOURNE, 15 NOVEMBER 2012
Appeal against decision
[2012] FWA 6512
of Deputy President Bartel at Adelaide on 1 August 2012 in matter number C2012/391.
Introduction
Asurco Contracting Pty Ltd (Asurco) has appealed a decision of Deputy President Bartel of 1 August 2012.
The Deputy President’s decision concerned the
Asurco Contracting Pty Ltd Collective Bargaining Agreement 2010-2013
(the Agreement),
which was approved by Fair Work Australia (FWA) on 18 January 2011. The Deputy President’s decision settled a dispute “arising
out of the implementation or operation of the provisions of [the] ... Agreement.”
The Agreement provides for daily hire, part-time and casual employment. The subject matter of the dispute was summarised at paragraph
5 of the Deputy President’s decision. The submissions by Asurco and the other party to the dispute, the Construction, Forestry,
Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU), and the manner in which the Deputy President dealt with the dispute in her decision indicate that
the dispute concerned whether the employees to whom the Agreement applies:
(a) accrue flexi-time under clause 5.2 of the Agreement when they are absent on a public holiday; or
(b) are entitled to eight hours ordinary pay or 7.2 or 7.6 hours ordinary pay under clause 6.8 of the Agreement when they are absent
on a public holiday.
Grievance/Disputes Procedure
The “Grievance/Disputes Procedure” in the Agreement is set out in its clause 2.3. Clause 2.3 of the Agreement relevantly
provides as follows:
“2.3.1 Any grievance or dispute arising out of the implementation or operation of the provisions of this Agreement or the National
Employment Standards will in the first instance be referred by the employee(s) concerned or by a duly nominated representative of
the employee(s) concerned, to the appropriate supervisor/manager who will endeavour to resolve the issue by consultation and co-operation.
2.3.2 Either party has the right to request another person to act on behalf of the party in relation to resolving the matter at the
workplace level.
2.3.3 Work will continue without interruption whilst the employee(s) or the employee(s) representative discusses the dispute with
the Company and/or the company's agent and both parties will attempt to reach agreement as quickly as possible.
2.3.4 In the event the matter remains unsolved, the parties may agree to seek the assistance of an independent arbitrator who will
mediate between disputing parties with the objective of reaching a mutually acceptable settlement.
2.3.5 Work will continue without interruption from industrial stoppages, bans and/or limitations.
2.3.6 Failing a satisfactory settlement being achieved following the discussions outlined above, the dispute will be referred to Fair
Work Australia for conciliation and/or arbitration. It is an overriding condition of this Agreement that any mediated/conciliated/arbitrated
outcome in settlement of a dispute by the tribunal will be consistent with the National Code of Practice for the Construction Industry
and Implementation Guidelines.
2.3.7 Nothing in this Agreement will limit in any way employees' rights under the common law contract of employment and the
Occupational Health, Safety and Welfare Act 1986
to decline work in unsafe conditions.”
In her decision, the Deputy President says she is satisfied the dispute between the parties comes within the scope of clause 2.3,
that the steps for resolving the dispute have been followed and that FWA has jurisdiction to arbitrate the dispute.
Before us, no party took objection to the Deputy President’s findings in this regard.
Relevant clauses in the Agreement and the National Employment Standards
The clauses in the Agreement relevant to the dispute before the Deputy President for settlement are clauses 5 and 6. Also relevant
to the dispute is the public holiday provision in the National Employment Standards (NES) in the
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) (FW Act). These clauses and the NES, in so far as they are relevant, are set out below.
Hours of work
Clause 5.1 of the Agreement sets out the ordinary hours for the employees covered by the Agreement. Clause 5.1 is as follows:
5.1 ORDINARY HOURS OF WORK, MONDAY TO FRIDAY
5.1.1 Employees may elect to work on the basis of an average of 38 ordinary hours per week or an average of 36 ordinary hours per
week. Once the election has been made, an employee may change their election once in each twelve month period.
Ordinary hours of work may be worked 8 hours per day Monday to Friday, inclusive, between the hours of 6.00 a.m. and 6.00 p.m. During
the summer months the ordinary hours of work may be worked between 5.00 a.m. and 6.00 p.m.
Throughout this agreement where there is a numerical reference followed by a reference in brackets, the first reference relates to
employees working on a 38 ordinary hour basis, while the reference in brackets relates to employees working on a 36 ordinary hour
5.1.2 Where agreement is reached between the Company and its employees the normal daily hours may be worked in an alternative arrangement.
In any agreed arrangement, the ordinary hours of work will not exceed 10 hours on any day.
Late Coming/Absenteeism
5.1.3.1 Where an employee reports for work on any day Monday to Friday after the normal starting time for that day or is absent during
the day other than on paid leave or approved inclement weather, the employee shall make up the lost time to ensure payment of the
employee's normal ordinary working hours on that day.
5.1.3.2 Where an employee is late for work or absent during the day as set out in Clause 5.1.3.1, the employee will be required to
work at least the ordinary hours prescribed for that day before any payment for overtime worked in accordance with Clause 5.6.1 is
applicable.”
Clause 5.6.1, which is referred to in clause 5.1.3.2 above, is as follows:
“5.6.1 Where an employee works at least the prescribed ordinary hours of work (inclusive of time worked for accrual purposes)
on any day Monday to Friday, inclusive, such employee for all time worked in excess of such prescribed hours or before the employee's
normal starting time for that day will be paid for at the rate of time and a half for the first two hours and at double time thereafter.”
- clause 5.2
Flexi-time for the employees covered by the Agreement is set out in clause 5.2 of the Agreement. Clause 5.2 states:
5.2 FLEXI-TIME
5.2.1 Banking Of Time Accrued With The Agreement Of The Company
The Company will bank two (four) ordinary hours per week per 40 hours of ordinary time worked. In addition, an employee may elect
to bank up to four hours of overtime worked. The banked hours may be used for the purpose of:-
taking a flexi-day off; or
taking a day off in conjunction with a period of annual leave; or
using the time in lieu of taking personal (sick) leave; or
being paid up to sixteen hours of the time accrued for a Saturday that the employee is not required to work
5.2.2 Pay Out Of Banked Time
An employee may in lieu of using the banked time as set out in 5.2.1 elect to be paid all or part of the banked hours accrued.
5.2.3 Scheduling Of Work - Public Holiday Weekends
The company where possible and with due regard to the company's contractual obligations will try to avoid scheduling work on the Saturday
where such day forms part of the Australia Day, Easter, Anzac day, Queens Birthday and Labour day weekends. On these weekends the
company will also try to avoid scheduling work on either the day before and or the day after the long weekend.
5.2.4 The rate of pay for flexi time accumulated in accordance with subclause 5.2 will be the rate applying to the employee immediately
prior to taking the accumulated flexi time.
5.2.5 On termination an employee will be paid at the employee's then current wage rate for any untaken flexi time then credited to
the employee.
5.2.6 Additional flexi-Day
Daily hire or full-time employees who are employed by the Company on the first Monday of December each year are entitled to an additional
flexi-day off which may be taken on that day, or on another day as agreed between the Company and the employee concerned. An employee
may also request, with the permission of the Company, to have this day paid out.”
Public holidays - clause 6.8
The public holidays clause in the Agreement is set out in clause 6.8. Clause 6.8.1 of the Agreement is as follows:
6.8.1 Prescribed Holidays
An employee, other than a casual employee, is entitled to the following public holidays without loss of ordinary pay:
New Year's Day
Australia Day
Good Friday
Easter Monday
Adelaide Cup Day
Queens Birthday
Christmas Day
Proclamation Day
or such other day proclaimed by the State Holidays Act or State Proclamation in substitution for any of the above days in which case
the substituted day will be deemed to be the holiday for the purposes of this Agreement.”
NES concerning public holidays
The NES concerning public holidays relevantly provide as follows:
114 Entitlement to be absent from employment on public holiday
(1) An employee is entitled to be absent from his or her employment on a day or part-day that is a public holiday in the place where
the employee is based for work purposes…
116 Payment for absence on public holiday
If, in accordance with this Division, an employee is absent from his or her employment on a day or part-day that is a public holiday,
the employer must pay the employee at the employee’s base rate of pay for the employee’s ordinary hours of work on the
day or part-day.
Note: If the employee does not have ordinary hours of work on the public holiday, the employee is not entitled to payment under this
section. For example, the employee is not entitled to payment if the employee is a casual employee who is not rostered on for the
public holiday, or is a part-time employee whose part-time hours do not include the day of the week on which the public holiday occurs.”
The interaction between the NES and an enterprise agreement is dealt with in ss.55 and 56 of the FW Act. Section 55 of the FW Act
relevantly provides that:
55 Interaction between the National Employment Standards and a modern award or enterprise agreement
National Employment Standards must not be excluded
(1) A modern award or enterprise agreement must not exclude the National Employment Standards or any provision of the National Employment
Ancillary and supplementary terms may be included
(4) A modern award or enterprise agreement may also include the following kinds of terms:
(a) terms that are ancillary or incidental to the operation of an entitlement of an employee under the National Employment Standards;
(b) terms that supplement the National Employment Standards;
but only to the extent that the effect of those terms is not detrimental to an employee in any respect, when compared to the National
Employment Standards.
Note 1: Ancillary or incidental terms permitted by paragraph (a) include (for example) terms:
(a) under which, instead of taking paid annual leave at the rate of pay required by section 90, an employee may take twice as much
leave at half that rate of pay; or
(b) that specify when payment under section 90 for paid annual leave must be made.
Note 2: Supplementary terms permitted by paragraph (b) include (for example) terms:
(a) that increase the amount of paid annual leave to which an employee is entitled beyond the number of weeks that applies under section
(b) that provide for an employee to be paid for taking a period of paid annual leave or paid/personal carer’s leave at a rate
of pay that is higher than the employee’s base rate of pay (which is the rate required by sections 90 and 99).
Note 3: Terms that would not be permitted by paragraph (a) or (b) include (for example) terms requiring an employee to give more notice
of the taking of unpaid parental leave than is required by section 74.
Enterprise agreements may include terms that have the same effect as provisions of the National Employment Standards
(5) An enterprise agreement may include terms that have the same (or substantially the same) effect as provisions of the National
Employment Standards, whether or not ancillary or supplementary terms are included as referred to in subsection (4)…
Terms permitted by subsection (4) or (5) do not contravene subsection (1)
(7) To the extent that a term of a modern award or enterprise agreement is permitted by subsection (4) or (5), the term does not contravene
subsection (1).
Note: A term of a modern award has no effect to the extent that it contravenes this section (see section 56). An enterprise agreement
that includes a term that contravenes this section must not be approved (see section 186) and a term of an enterprise agreement has
no effect to the extent that it contravenes this section (see section 56).”
Section 56 of the FW Act provides that a “term of a modern award or enterprise agreement has no effect to the extent that it
contravenes section 55.”
Deputy President’s decision
In her decision, the Deputy President illustrates the dispute between the parties. She says:
The issue in dispute between the parties is illustrated by the example of an employee who works 8 hours on 19 days and has a paid
day off on the 20th day, reflecting a typical Rostered Day Off (RDO) arrangement. It is agreed that such an employee banks 0.4 of
an hour on each of the 19 days on which 8 hours are worked, so that a total of 7.6 hours are banked and taken on the 20th day as
a paid day off. For each 8 hour day worked, the employee receives 7.6 hours of pay and 0.4 hour accrued flexi-time. Flexi-time is
Under the employer’s current practice, if a public holiday falls on one of the 8 hour days and the employee is not required
to work, he or she still receives 7.6 hours pay but no flexi-time is accrued. As a result, on the 20th day of the cycle the employee
receives only 7.2 hours of pay.”
The Deputy President then refers to the contentions of the CFMEU and Asurco in respect of the dispute. In this regard, amongst other
things, she says:
Mr Borg, for the CFMEU, contends that employees should not receive a reduction in their ordinary pay because a public holiday falls
in the relevant pay period. He maintained that, on a proper construction of the Agreement, employees are entitled to receive 7.6
hours pay plus 0.4 hours accrued flexi-time for a public holiday falling within the roster cycle. Mr Borg submitted that the employer’s
practice is inconsistent with the terms of the public holiday clause that specifies that the entitlement to a public holiday is ‘without
loss of ordinary pay’ and is inconsistent with the entitlement of part-time employees to payment for the ordinary hours that
he or she would have worked if the day was not a public holiday.
It was also argued that the employer’s approach is inconsistent with the National Employment Standard (NES) for public holidays”.
[Endnote omitted]
Further, the Deputy President says:
Mr Earls, of the Master Builders Association, appeared on behalf the employer. He argued that employees receive the same pay for
the public holiday that they would have received had the day been an ordinary working day. He contended that the 0.4 hours of flexi-time
hours worked on each 8 hour day are not ordinary hours but reflect a different category of hours under the Agreement. It was submitted
that this must be the case, because the ability to cash out accrued flexi-time would otherwise put the employer in breach of the
maximum weekly hours provision of the NES in s.62(1)(a) of the Act and the average weekly ordinary hours provision of the Agreement.”
In dealing with these contentions, the Deputy President states:
I have made no finding on whether Mr Roberts raised accrual of flexi-time on public holidays in the negotiation meetings leading
to the Agreement. Mr Roberts’ evidence on this topic was somewhat vague. Mr Pawelski’s notes of the negotiation meetings
in November and December 2011 refer to ‘changes to the 36/38 [hour] accrual process’ and to flexi-time accrual on ‘leave’,
respectively. There is no specific mention of accrual of flexi-time on public holidays. It is possible that Mr Pawelski interpreted
the term ‘leave’ to include public holidays, but his notes are also consistent with Mr Roberts’ evidence that only
annual leave and sick leave flexi-time accruals were raised by him. As such, I find that Mr Pawelski’s notes are inconclusive...
The public holiday provision of the Agreement provides that employees are entitled to a public holiday ‘without loss of pay’.
If the day was not a public holiday, the employee would work 8 hours and receive 8 hours pay, of which 0.4 paid hour would be banked
and expended at a later time in accordance with the flexi-time provision of the Agreement.
Under the interpretation applied by the employer, an employee who is rostered over 19 days in a 20 day roster cycle which includes
a public holiday receives only 151.6 hours of pay. Had no public holiday occurred in the roster cycle the employee would receive
152 hours of pay. This establishes that the employee has lost pay as a result of the public holiday, which is inconsistent with the
terms of the public holiday provision.
I agree with Mr Earls submission that, where employees request cash payment for the flexi-time accrued (rather than taking paid time
off), the employees may potentially be in a position where they are working in excess of an average of 38 ordinary hours per week.
The interpretation of the hours of work provision would be considered in the context of other relevant provisions of the Agreement,
including clause 5.2.1, and it should not automatically be assumed that working in excess of an average of 38 hours per week in the
circumstances referred to by Mr Earls is a breach of the Agreement. However, for the purposes of the present dispute it is not necessary
to reach a concluded view on this issue.
I am unable to agree with Mr Earls’ submission that if flexi-time hours are treated as ordinary hours then the employer contravenes
the NES in relation to employees who elect to be paid out the value of the accrued flexi-time hours…
Section 62 [of the FW Act] does not prohibit employees from voluntarily working additional hours beyond 38 in a week, nor from cashing
out additional hours in the manner provided for in the Agreement. Section 62 prohibits an employer from requiring or requesting an
employee to work unreasonable additional hours. Whether additional hours are reasonable is to be judged against the range of factors
set out in s.62(3) of the Act, and which includes consideration of whether the additional hours are in accordance with averaging
terms included in a modern award or enterprise agreement that applies to the employee.”
In respect of the NES concerning public holidays, the Deputy President states:
The NES have effect subject to the terms of the Agreement. However, the Agreement can only include terms that are ancillary or incidental
to the operation of the NES or that supplement the NES. The terms of the Agreement cannot be detrimental to an employee in any respect
when compared to the NES. The minimum standards reflected in the NES cannot be displaced by the Agreement.
Section 116 of the Act requires that, if an employee is absent on a public holiday, the employer must pay the employee for the ordinary
hours of work on the public holiday. Under a ‘19 day month’ pattern of work, this requires that the employee receives
8 hours pay, when 8 hours would have been worked if the day were not a public holiday. The interpretation of the Agreement adopted
by the employer results in the employees receiving a lesser benefit than they are entitled to under the NES.
Subject to the terms of a particular enterprise agreement, it would be consistent with the NES to make payment for the 8 hours by
accounting for it as 7.6 hours paid and 0.4 paid hours accrued to the employee. Having regard to the terms of clause 5.2.1 of the
Agreement, the accrual of 0.4 hours flexi-time for the public holiday is not allowed. In these circumstances the employees are entitled
to receive 8 ordinary hours of pay (with no flexi-time accrual) for the public holiday.”
[Endnotes omitted]
The Deputy President concludes as follows:
My conclusion on the entitlement of employees where a public holiday falls on a working day reconciles clause 5.2.1 with the public
holiday provision that allows an employee to have the day off without loss of pay, it is consistent with the average 38 hour week
provision for full time employees and ensures compliance with s.116 of the Act. It is also consistent with the entitlement of part-time
employees to payment for public holidays and with the practice adopted by the employer under the inclement weather provisions of
the Agreement.
This decision deals with the operation and application of the provisions of the Agreement in accordance with the issues in dispute
as agreed between the parties. The public holiday entitlement of employees under previous agreements would require consideration
of the specific terms of those agreements as well as the different legislative context in which they were approved.
In accordance with the terms of the dispute application filed by the CFMEU, the relief being sought is payment of the correct entitlements
to employees under the Agreement. The parties should now enter into discussions on giving effect to this decision. Liberty is granted
to the parties to have the matter relisted if necessary.
[Endnotes omitted]
Grounds of appeal
Asurco submits the Deputy President erred in her decision:
(a) in her calculation of employee entitlements under the Agreement;
(b) by failing to make findings in relation to the intention of the parties to the Agreement or to take those findings into consideration
when interpreting the Agreement; and
(c) in exceeding FWA’s jurisdiction by requiring Asurco to provide previous entitlements to the employees and challenging FWA’s
approval of the Agreement.
We will deal with the first two of these grounds together before turning to the third ground.
Employee entitlements and intention of the parties
With respect to employee entitlements under the Agreement, as we have earlier set out, the Deputy President decides in resolution
of the dispute that:
Subject to the terms of a particular enterprise agreement, it would be consistent with the NES to make payment for the 8 hours by
accounting for it as 7.6 hours paid and 0.4 paid hours accrued to the employee. Having regard to the terms of clause 5.2.1 of the
Agreement, the accrual of 0.4 hours flexi-time for the public holiday is not allowed. In these circumstances the employees are entitled
to receive 8 ordinary hours of pay (with no flexi-time accrual) for the public holiday.”
The Deputy President’s finding that the accrual of 0.4 hours flexi-time for a public holiday is not allowed under the terms
of the Agreement is consistent with the submission of Asurco before the Deputy President about the accrual of flexi-time on a public
holiday. Asurco should have no complaint about that finding of the Deputy President.
The Deputy President’s other finding that employees are entitled to receive eight ordinary hours of pay for a public holiday
is, in our view, consistent with the terms of the Agreement and the NES concerning public holidays.
In this regard, clause 6.8.1 of the Agreement provides that an employee, other than a casual, is entitled to a public holiday without
loss of “ordinary pay”. The term “ordinary pay” is not specifically defined in the Agreement.
However, clause 5.1 of the Agreement provides for an employee’s ordinary hours of work per week to be an average of 36 or 38
and that the ordinary hours of work per day are eight from Monday to Friday, and up to 10 hours by agreement. There was no evidence
that other than eight ordinary hours per day is generally worked from Monday to Friday. Eight is, in effect, the usual number of
ordinary hours of work per day from Monday to Friday. In that circumstance it was appropriate for the Deputy President to couch
her decision on that basis.
Clause 5.2 of the Agreement concerning flexi-time does not change the ordinary hours of work per day specified in clause 5.1, being
generally eight hours from Monday to Friday. Rather, clause 5.2 provides for the banking of some of those ordinary hours of work
per week and the paying out of the ordinary hours of work which have been banked. This is confirmed by the overtime clause in the
Agreement which recognises that time worked for accrual purposes is part of ordinary hours of work. In this regard, as we earlier
set out, clause 5.6 of the Agreement concerning overtime relevantly provides that:
“5.6.1 Where an employee works at least the prescribed
ordinary hours of work (inclusive of time worked for accrual purposes
) on any day Monday to Friday, inclusive, such employee for all time worked in excess of such prescribed hours or before the employee's
normal starting time for that day will be paid for at the rate of time and a half for the first two hours and at double time thereafter.”
[Underlining added]
Clause 5.2 sets out the means by which employees whose ordinary hours of work per day are eight from Monday to Friday can achieve
of 36 or 38 ordinary hours of work per week and an
of 7.2 or 7.6 ordinary hours pay per day from Monday to Friday. The payslip for the week ending 17 June 2012 that was tendered in
the proceedings before the Deputy President simply reflects the application of clause 5.2 of the Agreement. It records eight hours
of single time as having been worked per day from the Wednesday to the Friday, an administrative deduction on the Sunday of 2.4 hours
of single time from the single time worked from the Wednesday to the Friday for the purposes of rostered day off accrual and 7.2
hours of single time for a paid rostered day off on the Tuesday. The recording on the payslip of 7.2 hours of single time for a
public holiday on the Monday falls within the area of dispute between the parties.
Clause 4 of the Agreement sets out the hourly rate of pay for ordinary hours for each of the classifications covered by the Agreement.
It follows from these clauses that for a relevant employee the “ordinary pay” referred to in clause 6.8.1 of the Agreement
is the eight ordinary hours of work per day referred to in clause 5.1 multiplied by their hourly rate of pay for ordinary hours as
referred to in clause 4. It is the equivalent of eight ordinary hours pay for the employee. Clause 6.8.1 of the Agreement does
not refer to “average ordinary pay”, being that which arises from the application of the flexi-time provisions in clause
5.2 of the Agreement and results in an average of 7.2 or 7.6 ordinary hours pay per day from Monday to Friday.
Therefore, under clause 6.8.1 an employee, other than a casual employee, is entitled to a public holiday without loss of eight ordinary
hours pay. The Deputy President’s finding that employees are entitled to receive eight hours of pay for a public holiday is
to the same effect.
We recognise that clause 5.1.2 of the Agreement allows for normal daily hours to be worked in an alternative arrangement by agreement,
provided that in any agreed arrangement the ordinary hours of work do not exceed 10 hours on any day. However, that does not undermine
the above. Where an employee’s ordinary hours of work per day are other than eight pursuant to an agreement made under clause
5.1.2 of the Agreement, the number eight is simply replaced by the number of ordinary hours the employee would have worked but for
the public holiday.
The above interpretation of clause 6.8.1 of the Agreement is consistent with clause 3.3.4 of the Agreement concerning the payment
to a part-time employee for a public holiday. Clause 3.3.4 provides that:
“Where a part-time employee usually works on a day of the week on which a public holiday occurs and the employee is not required
to work on that day
will be made
for the ordinary hours
the employee would have
usually worked
on that day.” [Underlining added]
Further, such an interpretation is consistent with the NES concerning payment to an employee who is absent from his or her employment
on a public holiday, which NES would, in any instance, prevail over clause 6.8.1 to the extent that clause 6.8.1 is to an employee’s
detriment compared to the NES or not substantially the same as the NES.
The NES concerning public holidays provides that an employer must pay an employee who is absent from his or her employment on a day
or part-day that is a public holiday for the employee’s ordinary hours of work on the day or part-day. The “ordinary
hours of work” mean the ordinary hours the employee would have worked but for the day or part-day he or she was absent from
his or her employment on a public holiday. As much is confirmed by the terms of the note to s.116 of the FW Act concerning payment
for absence on a public holiday and the Explanatory Memorandum to the
Fair Work Bill 2009
. The Explanatory Memorandum in respect of then clause 116 stated:
Clause 116 - Payment for absence on public holiday
460. Clause 116 entitles an employee to payment when absent from work on a public holiday. Where an employee is absent on a day or
part-day that is a public holiday under this Division, the employer is liable to pay the employee at his or her base rate of pay
for ordinary hours of work.
461. An employee is not entitled to any payment for absence on a public holiday if they would not ordinarily have worked on that day.
Illustrative example
Erika usually works overtime in addition to her ordinary hours of work on Tuesdays, receiving penalty rates for the overtime hours
under a modern award. Erika is absent on the public holiday on Tuesday, 26 January 2010. Erika is entitled to her base rate of pay
for her ordinary hours. She is not entitled to payment for the overtime hours she would have worked had it not been a public holiday.
Erika's colleague Toby is a part-time employee who is rostered to work Wednesday to Friday only. As Toby's ordinary hours of work
do not include Tuesdays, Toby is not entitled to payment for the public holiday on 26 January 2010.
Another employee, Holger is on unpaid parental leave for the first half of 2010. Holger would not be entitled to payment for the
public holiday on 26 January 2010.”
Under the NES and the FW Act, therefore, Asurco is required to pay employees to whom the Agreement applies who work eight ordinary
hours of work per day from Monday to Friday and who are absent on a day that is a public holiday for, at least, the eight ordinary
hours the employee would have worked but for the public holiday. The Deputy President observes that it would be consistent with
the NES to make payment for that eight hours by accounting for it as 7.6 hours paid and 0.4 hours accrued to the employee. We do
not see any error in this observation.
With respect to the intention of the parties to the Agreement, Asurco submits the Deputy President erred by failing to make findings
in relation to whether rostered day off accruals or the accrual of flexi-time on public holidays and annual and personal leave were
raised in the negotiations for the Agreement. Also with respect to the intention of the parties to the Agreement, Asurco submits
the Deputy President erred by failing to take into account the custom and practice of Asurco regarding rostered day off or flexi-time
accruals and by failing to find there was no intention for the Agreement to change that custom and practice. We are not persuaded
the way in which the Deputy President dealt with the intention of the parties with respect to rostered day off or flexi-time accruals
constitutes appealable error.
As we have indicated, the Deputy President found that the accrual of 0.4 hours flexi-time for a public holiday is not allowed under
the terms of the Agreement. That finding is consistent with the submission of Asurco to the Deputy President about the intention
of the parties to the Agreement about rostered day off accruals or the accrual of flexi-time on public holidays.
As to the other finding of the Deputy President about the ordinary pay due to employees for a public holiday, Asurco’s submissions
a public holiday. Those submissions of Asurco were consistent with the evidence of the witnesses they called. That witness evidence
was to the effect that it was the common intention of the parties that only time actually worked could be banked as a rostered day
off or flexi-time accrual under the Agreement, so the flexi-time accrual provisions of the Agreement did not apply in respect of
public holidays. However, we note that the evidence did not extend to maintaining that it was the common intention of the parties
that the employees would not be paid for all, or would be paid for only part, of the ordinary hours they would have worked on a day
but for it being a public holiday. In those circumstances, the Deputy President cannot be criticised for the manner in which she
dealt with the submissions and evidence on the intention of the parties concerning rostered day off or flexi-time accruals in respect
of her finding that the employees are entitled to receive eight ordinary hours of pay for a public holiday.
Further, neither the intention of the parties concerning rostered day off or flexi-time accruals, nor the Deputy President’s
finding that the accrual of flexi-time hours on a public holiday is not allowed under the Agreement, precluded a finding that the
relevant employees under the Agreement are entitled to a public holiday without loss of eight ordinary hours pay. Nor do the accrual
and/or taking of annual leave and personal leave under the Agreement on the basis of ordinary working days of 7.2 or 7.6 hours preclude
a finding that the relevant employees under the Agreement are entitled to a public holiday without loss of eight ordinary hours pay.
As a result, in our view Asurco’s submission that the Deputy President erred by failing to make the findings sought by Asurco
in relation to the intention of the parties to the Agreement or to take those findings into consideration when interpreting the Agreement
is without merit.
In addition, for the above reasons, in our view Asurco’s submission that the Deputy President erred in her calculation of employee
entitlements under the Agreement is also without merit.
We recognise that the application of clause 5.2 of the Agreement may result in an employee failing to achieve an average of 36 or
38 ordinary hours of work per week but that need not offend the NES concerning maximum weekly hours of work.
As the Deputy President pointed out in her decision, the NES allow for reasonable additional hours beyond 38 hours of work a week
to be requested or required by an employer if the additional hours of work are reasonable. Further, the NES do not prohibit an employee
from volunteering to work additional hours.
Exceeded jurisdiction
As to Asurco’s submission that the Deputy President exceeded FWA’s jurisdiction, the High Court pointed out in
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v The Australian Industrial Relations Commission and Another
“There is, however, a significant difference between agreed and arbitrated dispute settlement procedures. As already indicated,
the Commission cannot, by arbitrated award, require the parties to submit to binding procedures for the determination of legal rights
and liabilities under an award because Ch III of the
Constitution
commits power to make determinations of that kind exclusively to the courts. However, different considerations apply if the parties
have agreed to submit disputes as to their legal rights and liabilities for resolution by a particular person or body and to accept
the decision of that person as binding on them.
Where parties agree to submit their differences for decision by a third party, the decision maker does not exercise judicial power,
but a power of private arbitration. Of its nature, judicial power is a power that is exercised independently of the consent of the
person against whom the proceedings are brought and results in a judgment or order that is binding of its own force. In the case
of private arbitration, however, the arbitrator's powers depend on the agreement of the parties, usually embodied in a contract,
and the arbitrator's award is not binding of its own force. Rather, its effect, if any, depends on the law which operates with respect
To the extent that s.170MH of the IR Act operates in conjunction with an agreed dispute resolution procedure to authorise the Commission
to make decisions as to the legal rights and liabilities of the parties to the Agreement, it merely authorises the Commission to
exercise a power of private arbitration. And procedures for the resolution of disputes over the application of an agreement made
by parties to an industrial situation to prevent that situation from developing into an industrial dispute are clearly procedures
for maintaining that agreement. Parliament may legislate to authorise the Commission to participate in procedures of that kind. Accordingly,
s.170MH of the IR Act is valid.”
The Deputy President settles the dispute before her at paragraph 37 of her decision. In so settling the dispute the Deputy President
exercises the power of private arbitration given to FWA by the “Grievance/Disputes Procedure” in the Agreement. Further,
contrary to the submission of Asurco, the decision is not inconsistent with the approval of the Agreement.
At paragraphs 38 to 40 of the decision, the Deputy President simply makes observations about her settlement of the dispute, previous
enterprise agreements and the relief sought by the CFMEU and urges the parties to have discussions on giving effect to her decision,
while reserving liberty to the parties to have the matter relisted before FWA if necessary. Such observations, urging and reservation
do not constitute the Deputy President exceeding FWA’s jurisdiction.
Asurco’s submission that the Deputy President exceeded FWA’s jurisdiction in her decision is, therefore, also without
For the foregoing reasons, we are not persuaded the Deputy President’s decision is affected by appealable error. Nor are we
satisfied it is in the public interest for us to grant permission to appeal. Contrary to the submissions of Asurco, the Deputy President’s
decision does not manifest an injustice, concern issues of general importance or application regarding bargaining representatives
or genuine agreement by employees to an enterprise agreement, raise novel issues about the NES or involve jurisdictional error.
We, therefore, refuse Asurco permission to appeal. An order
to that effect is being issued at the same time as this decision.
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
for Asurco Contracting Pty Ltd.
for the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union.
Hearing details:
October 10.
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Asurco Contracting Pty Ltd
[2012] FWA 6512
at clause 2.3.1.
Appeal book at p.5, Outline of submissions of the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union in C2012/391 dated 6 June 2012,
and Outline of submissions of Asurco Contracting Pty Ltd in C2012/391 dated 20 June 2012.
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Asurco Contracting Pty Ltd
[2012] FWA 6512
at paragraph
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Asurco Contracting Pty Ltd
[2012] FWA 6512
Appeal book at p.154.
Fair Work Act 2009
[2001] HCA 16
[2000] 203 CLR 645.
Ibid at 657-658.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR531369>
No downloadable files available