Mao v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs [2025] FCAFC 153 (7 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Mao v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] FCAFC 153
Appeal from:
Mao v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2025] FCA 289
File number:
VID 489 of 2025
Judgment of:
MOSHINSKY, ANDERSON AND DOWLING JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– appeal – where
applicant’s visa was cancelled under
(Cth) – where the applicant sought revocation of the
cancellation decision – where a delegate of the Minister decided
revoke the cancellation – where the Tribunal affirmed the delegate’s
decision – where primary judge dismissed
application for judicial review
of Tribunal’s decision – whether primary judge erred in
consideration of judicial review
grounds relating to Tribunal’s treatment
of the risk of reoffending – appeal dismissed
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
Federal Court Rules 2011
Crimes Act 1958
Cases cited:
Assistant Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v Splendido
[2019] FCAFC 132
271 FCR 595
CKT20 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCAFC 124
294 FCR 318
De Silva v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services
and Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCA 831
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
HZCP v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
HZCP v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] FCAFC
273 FCR 121
Malec v JC Hutton Pty Ltd
[1990] HCA 20
169 CLR 638
Maxwell v The Queen
[1996] HCA 46
; 184 CLR 501
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Guo
[1997] HCA 22
Murphy v Minister for Home Affairs
[2018] FCA 1924
Plaintiff M1/2021 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 17
Re Refugee Review Tribunal; Ex parte H
[2001] HCA 28
179 ALR 425
RJE v Secretary to Department of Justice
[2008] VSCA 265
YKSB v Minister for Home Affairs
[2020] FCA 476
General Division
National Practice Area:
Administrative and Constitutional Law and Human Rights
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Mr JA Barrington
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Australian Government Solicitor
Solicitor for the Second Respondent:
The second respondent filed a submitting notice, save as to costs
VID 489 of 2025
SHANSHAN MAO
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP AND
MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS
First Respondent
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
Second Respondent
MOSHINSKY, ANDERSON AND DOWLING JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appellant’s informal application for the Court to receive further evidence
on appeal be dismissed.
appeal be dismissed.
appellant pay the first respondent’s costs of the appeal, such costs to be
determined on a lump sum basis.
21 days, the parties file any agreed proposed minute of orders fixing a lump sum
in relation to the first respondent’s
the absence of any agreement:
(a) within a further 14 days, the first respondent file and serve an affidavit
constituting a Costs Summary in accordance with paragraphs
4.10 to 4.12 of the
Costs Practice Note
(b) within a further 14 days, the appellant file and serve any Costs Response in
accordance with paragraphs 4.13 to 4.14 of the
Costs Practice Note
(c) in the absence of any agreement having been reached within a further 14
days, the matter of an appropriate lump sum figure for
respondent’s costs be referred to a Registrar for determination.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
appellant, Ms Shanshan Mao, who was born in China and is a citizen of
Court, dismissing an
application for judicial review of a decision of what was then the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (the
background to the appeal may be briefly outlined as follows. In January 2014,
the appellant and her family migrated from New
Zealand to Australia. While in
Australia, the appellant held a Special Category (Class TY) (Subclass 444) visa
2015, the appellant (who was working as a loan manager with the Australia and
)), her husband
(Mr Shaojing Niu) and a co-offender (Mr Tuo Dong) commenced a criminal
enterprise involving the lodging of multiple
bank loan applications to secure
funding for property investment and development projects. False claims were
made about Mr Niu’s
employment, assets and liabilities. A corporate
entity was established through which some property transactions passed.
fraud was discovered by a bank investigator, following which the
appellant’s employment with the ANZ Bank was terminated.
July 2021, the appellant pleaded guilty in the County Court of Victoria to eight
counts of obtaining a financial advantage by deception.
In March 2022, the
appellant was convicted of those offences. The County Court found that the
total financial advantage obtained
was around $9 million, which was derived
by “using outright lies, deliberate omissions and fraudulent
documents”. The
appellant was sentenced to three years’
imprisonment.
18 July 2022, the appellant’s visa was cancelled under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth). The appellant sought revocation of the
cancellation decision.
17 July 2023, a delegate of the first respondent (the
decided not to revoke the cancellation decision (the
non-revocation
) and provided a statement of reasons for the non-revocation
appellant applied to the Tribunal for review of the non-revocation
11 September 2023, the appellant was released on parole and taken into
immigration detention. She has since been deported to New
Zealand, where she
currently resides.
26 and 27 September 2023, a hearing before the Tribunal took place. The
appellant was not legally represented at that hearing.
9 October 2023, the Tribunal decided to affirm the non-revocation
appellant applied to this Court for judicial review of the Tribunal’s
1 April 2025, the primary judge dismissed the application for judicial
Mao v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2025] FCA 289.
appellant appeals to the Full Court from the judgment of the primary judge. In
her notice of appeal, the appellant relies on
four grounds, some of which
comprise several paragraphs raising discrete points. Although the matters
raised on appeal broadly correspond
with those raised before the primary judge,
the numbering of the grounds and the order in which they appear are different
grounds relied on at first instance. Broadly, the grounds relate to
the Tribunal’s treatment of the appellant’s risk
of reoffending and
the evidence relating to that issue.
part of her appeal grounds, the appellant challenges the primary judge’s
rejection of the tender of two documents, namely:
(a) an email from the appellant’s New Zealand probation officer dated
10 September 2024 (Supplementary Appeal Book (
) pp 61-63)
Probation Officer Email
(b) the Parole Manual published by the Adult Parole Board of Victoria in March
2017 (SAB pp 64-102) (the
2017 Parole Manual
the hearing of the appeal, the appellant made an informal application for the
Court to receive further evidence on appeal, namely
the Parole Manual published
by the Adult Parole Board of Victoria in June 2020 (SAB pp 103-147) (the
2020 Parole Manual
). No objection was taken to the application being
made informally rather than in accordance with r 36.57 of the
Court Rules 2011
. We heard submissions on that application and indicated
that we would make a decision on the application in our judgment.
the reasons that follow, we have concluded that:
(a) no error is shown in the primary judge’s refusal to admit the
Probation Officer Email and the 2017 Parole Manual;
(b) the application for the Court to receive further evidence on appeal should
be dismissed; and
(c) the appeal should be dismissed.
The Tribunal’s reasons
Tribunal set out the background facts at [10]-[21] of its reasons.
Tribunal identified the issue to be determined at [30] of its reasons. The
issue was whether there was “another reason”
to revoke the
cancellation decision: see
s 501CA(4)(b)(ii)
Migration Act
At [31] of its reasons, the Tribunal set out a passage from the judgment of
Kiefel CJ, Keane, Gordon and Steward JJ in
Plaintiff M1/2021 v
Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 17
275 CLR 582
). At [32]-[38], the Tribunal outlined Direction 99, being
a ministerial direction made under
of the Act.
[39]-[84], the Tribunal described and discussed the evidence in the proceeding
before it. The appellant gave evidence during the
hearing. Her evidence
included that the other co-offender (Mr Dong) gave Mr Niu the idea for the
criminal enterprise (at [51]).
The appellant also submitted that she was
“in denial and trapped in the situation ...
I thought I’d
sign and let him [Mr Niu] do what he wants” (at [51]). She referred
to certain stressful events in her
life in 2015 and cultural pressure to assist
Mr Niu without question. The Tribunal stated at [52]-[53]:
Applicant agreed she was represented by senior counsel at her criminal
proceeding and by another barrister when appealing her
sentence but claimed she
did not raise cultural issues and pressures because she and Mr Niu were
represented by the same barrister.
Applicant said the narrative she presented to the Tribunal at this proceeding is
true and correct, even if it appears contradictory to
earlier claims
of the witnesses called by the appellant was Dr Marietta Martinovic, an
Associate Professor in the School of Global, Urban and
Social Studies at RMIT
University (
Dr Martinovic
A/Prof Martinovic
documentary evidence included two letters from Dr Martinovic, dated
28 August 2023 and 21 September 2023. The Tribunal referred
evidence of Dr Martinovic at [80]-[82] of its reasons:
Professor (“
”) Martinovic adopted her two letters as
true and correct. She stated that her correspondence with the Applicant is in an
capacity on behalf of RMIT and relates to the ‘
’ she runs at DPFC [the Dame Phyllis Frost Centre]. This
consists of fortnightly sessions of two hours each, which is the predominant
context for her engagement with the Applicant between February 2023 and when she
left prison in September 2023. Recently the Applicant
asked A/Prof Martinovic
for a supportive statement and assistance to locate a psychologist for
offence-specific rehabilitation. A/Prof
Martinovic said she did both and
psychologist Ms Wallis ‘
volunteered to take on
’. She said the Applicant was unable to do offence-specific
rehabilitation in custody because ‘
there is no financial specific
counselling – full stop – it just doesn’t exist
A/Prof Martinovic said she works with organisations to provide this support
for people ‘
engaged in white collar crime
A/Prof Martinovic
said the Applicant provided her with a copy of the Minister’s submissions,
so she is aware of the crimes committed.
In response to questions from
Ms Roeger [the lawyer representing the Minister], A/Prof Martinovic
agreed she has no qualifications
in psychology or psychiatry. She also confirmed
that she has no experience on the Adult Parole Board and had not seen any of the
documents relevant to the Board’s decision regarding the Applicant.
A/Prof Martinovic stated the Adult Parole Board undertakes
complex risk assessment process
’ and while she was not
privy to the
[Applicant’s]
risk assessment
she consulted the Parole Board website which ‘
lays out the
considerations
’. A/Prof Martinovic opined: ‘
If they are
of the belief they’ll reoffend, there’s absolutely no way they would
release a person like that
’. When challenged by Ms Roeger that
some risk can be managed with parole conditions, A/Prof Martinovic insisted
there’s a significantly low risk
’ because the
Parole Board does not make risky decisions...they don’t just
dish it out
was put to A/Prof Martinovic by Ms Roeger that given her limited
risk assessment.
A/Prof Martinovic said she had ‘
done a lot of work in this
’ and claimed that ‘
the nature of
Applicant’s]
offending is not a high-risk category
done some work in corrections and believes ‘
you don’t need to
[a psychologist or psychiatrist]
to predict reoffending
relation to the Applicant having offended despite being in a stable, high-paying
job with other protective factors, A/Prof
Martinovic opined: ‘
often happens – it’s not an anomaly to the norm from a
criminological point of view
’. When asked if she appeared in this
proceeding as an expert or a lay witness advocating for the Applicant,
A/Prof Martinovic
said she did not know how to answer that question but
relies on her expertise and referred to appearances in other proceedings as
(Footnote omitted.)
Tribunal considered the
primary considerations
referred to in
Direction 99 (the
) at [85]-[160]. These considerations
(a) protection of the Australian community from criminal or other serious
conduct (considered by the Tribunal at [85]-[119]);
(b) family violence committed by the non-citizen (which the Tribunal stated was
not enlivened);
(c) the strength, nature and duration of ties to Australia (considered by the
Tribunal at [121]-[135]);
(d) the best interests of minor children in Australia (considered by the
Tribunal at [136]-[153]); and
(e) the expectations of the Australian community (considered by the Tribunal at
[154]-[160]).
the section of the Tribunal’s reasons dealing with (a) above, under a
subheading dealing with the nature and seriousness
of the offending, the
Tribunal stated at [94]:
Applicant claimed in oral evidence she had not previously disclosed all the
contextual circumstances relevant to her offending,
despite being represented by
senior counsel in her criminal proceeding, another barrister on appeal, and a
solicitor in the present
matter until late August 2023. The Tribunal places
little weight on the new narrative advanced because a plea of guilty constitutes
admission to and acceptance of all elements of the charges a person is convicted
Maxwell v R
(1996) 184 CLR 501, [19]]. This includes that she
knew the representations made to obtain financial advantage were false or
false, and she intended these to be acted upon. Even if the Applicant
chose to look away or ignore the fraudulent nature of the documents
presented because of cultural mores or stressors, this does not diminish her
culpability. Nor do her purportedly repeated objections
to Mr Niu. If this
occurred, it evinces the Applicant’s understanding of the illegal nature
of their activities, which was
nevertheless followed by continuing
participation.
(Some footnotes omitted.)
Tribunal also dealt with the risk to the Australian community should the
appellant commit further offences or engage in other
serious conduct. The
Tribunal stated at [98] that the Direction required the Tribunal to assess the
risk posed to the Australian
community if the appellant reoffended, taking into
consideration the nature of any harm and its probability. The Tribunal referred
to case law on this issue, including the judgment of Mortimer J (as her
Honour then was) in
Murphy v Minister for Home Affairs
[2018] FCA 1924
. The Tribunal stated at [99] that the appellant’s criminal history
in Australia related exclusively to dishonesty offences,
and that any repeat of
her past conduct would expose the Australian community to a risk of financial
harm and/or damage the integrity
of Australia’s banking system.
[101], the Tribunal noted that, in her most recent statement, the appellant had
raised pressure from Mr Niu and cultural factors.
In that paragraph, the
Tribunal set out an extract from the appellant’s evidence in which she had
raised those matters. Further
evidence about this was referred to at
Tribunal referred at [104] to some of the evidence relating to
rehabilitation:
terms of rehabilitation, the Court [i.e. the sentencing court] concluded that
the Applicant has ‘
very good prospects of rehabilitation
Her previous lawyer referred to her ‘
progress in
self-rehabilitation
’ and that any ‘
future reoffending is
highly unlikely
’. In response to the Respondent’s claim that she
has not undertaken offence-specific rehabilitation, the Applicant agrees,
there are none
’. She refers to recent assistance
from A/Prof Martinovic by putting her in touch with clinical psychologist
Ms Amanda Wallis,
with whom she intends holding ‘
’ if released. On 21 September 2023, proximate to the
commencement of the hearing, the Applicant lodged a letter from Ms Wallis,
addressed ‘
To Whom it May Concern
’. Ms Wallis states she
happy to work with this client in the future
’. The letter
does not disclose what this ‘
’ may entail or for what
(Footnotes omitted.)
[106], the Tribunal stated that, in terms of recidivism risk, “there is no
expert evidence from a suitably qualified person
such as a psychologist or
psychiatrist”. The Tribunal referred to the appellant’s contention
that her risk of offending
is “so low as to be negligible” and could
be “safely disregarded”. The Tribunal noted that support for this
was drawn from counsellors at WestCASA and Mortgage Stress Victoria,
Dr Martinovic, a kitchen supervisor at the Dame Phyllis Frost
), and an employee from the Department of Justice who wrote a
supportive reference. This was a reference to a letter from Linda Moore,
Disability and Complex Needs Practitioner at the Department of Justice and
Community Safety, dated 21 August 2023 (Appeal Book
) pp 538-539)
). The Tribunal referred to a submission by the appellant
that the Minister had overlooked “cultural, familial and gender
of her offending, past “psychological trigger
points” and incorrectly assumed that greed motivated her crimes.
Tribunal’s reasoning at [107]-[109] is relevant to several appeal
Applicant invokes several protective factors including the interests of her
children and employment in Mr Dirani’s café
/ bakery. In reply
submissions dated 21 September 2023 she also refers to parole supervision
until January 2025 and having an awareness
that any future offending
would almost certainly
... [lead to her] ...
returning to jail and
deportation thereafter
’. Most protective factors invoked, however, are
comparable to those of the past when the Applicant had stable accommodation
employment, was in a healthy financial situation, and responsible for four
children. Her crimes also commenced when she was a
relatively new arrival to
Australia, and it is inconceivable she was unaware that committing crimes risked
her visa status. Her offending
persisted for over two years despite awareness
that her conduct was criminal.
Applicant’s personal circumstances point to considerable pressures if
released in Australia. This includes because Mr Niu
has been deported and
extensive assets from the criminal enterprise have been recovered by
authorities. The nature of her offending
likely precludes employment in
financial institutions. Her desire to become a baker or pastry chef are
aspirational and Mr Dirani
only offers a trial.
Tribunal rejects the Applicant’s re-casting of her involvement in the
criminal enterprise and prefers the Court [i.e. the
sentencing court] findings.
She was legally represented by counsel in her criminal matter, appeal, and by a
solicitor in this proceeding
until quite recently. Only now, years after her
offending, does she raise a defence bordering on coercion despite pleading
It is impermissible for the Tribunal to impugn convictions on their
essential factual basis [fn: ...
HZCP v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2018] FCA 1803
, [102] (Bromberg J)]. Aspects of the
Applicant’s evidence came across as blame-shifting and diminish the
persuasiveness of
her claims about insight, acceptance of responsibility, and
rehabilitation.
(Some footnotes omitted.)
the Tribunal’s reasons at [112]-[119] are relevant to several grounds of
Applicant did not adduce expert evidence about her recidivism risk, which would
have been relevant
Assistant Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v Splendido
[2019] FCAFC 132
(2019) 271 FCR 595
, [72] (Mortimer J)]. Most of
the courses undertaken while imprisoned are vocational in nature and centre on
employment prospects
rather than offence-specific rehabilitation. The Tribunal
accepts the Applicant was constrained in her ability to access offence-specific
rehabilitation in custodial settings because of availability. Even though
Ms Wallis does not refer to what will be addressed in any
counselling relationship, it is accepted these sessions may assist the Applicant
in addressing her insight and unmet rehabilitative
needs. Ms Wallis is yet
to even meet the Applicant, however, so any beneficial effect is aspirational.
Moreover, decisions should
not be delayed for rehabilitation to be
undertaken.
Tribunal does not accept the Applicant’s contention that a counsellor from
WestCASA, or social worker from Mortgage Stress
Victoria, or kitchen supervisor
at DPFC, or A/Prof Martinovic, or a Department of Justice employee are
experienced professional witnesses
’ qualified to assess
recidivism risk. For example, Ms Rachel Tobias of Mortgage Stress Victoria
stated in a letter dated 19
July 2023: ‘
It is my professional
opinion that Shanshan is at low risk of recidivism
’. Ms Tobias is
a social worker and does not appear to hold any qualifications relevant to
making an expert opinion about risk.
Ms Tobias refers to the Applicant as
’ and much of what is submitted constitutes
advocacy. The Tribunal places little weight on Ms Tobias’ opinion
recidivism risk.
Martinovic is a lecturer in Global Studies at RMIT’s school of Global,
Urban and Social Studies. Her correspondence states
I write this letter in my capacity as an Associate Professor at RMIT
University in Melbourne...In this letter I am explaining the
decision-making
process of the Adult Parole Board and offence-specific rehabilitation and
treatment which has been arranged for Ms
Mao if she is paroled.
The Victorian Parole Board assess a prisoner’s suitability for release
on parole. The Parole Suitability Assessment is comprehensive
and covers a wide
range of issues including the prisoner’s risk to the community, employment
background, family and social
life, drug and alcohol use history, prison
behaviour, proposed accommodation if released on parole, and more.
board carefully considers risk of reoffending as a major element in its
assessment of offends
. Since Shanshan has been granted
parole at the earliest opportunity,
this means that the Parole Board must
have concluded that she does not pose a risk to the community
In addition, I have assisted Ms Mao in securing a well-known and
reputable psychologist, Ms Amanda Wallis – letter attached
who has agreed to provide Ms Mao with offence specific rehabilitation and
treatment if she is released on parole’.
(Emphasis added.)
A/Prof Martinovic
stated she feels qualified to provide a risk assessment and does not need to be
a psychologist or psychiatrist to
do so. The Tribunal respectfully disagrees.
There is no persuasive evidence that the work undertaken by a criminologist
them to make risk assessments
. Psychologists and psychiatrists on
the other hand are trained to apply clinical judgement and actuarial instruments
in making such
assessments. A/Prof Martinovic’s contact with the
Applicant is limited and her opinion is expressed without regard for almost
the evidence tendered. Moreover, her comments about how the Adult Parole Board
assesses recidivism risk is pitched at a high
level of generality and without
access to the documents considered in the Applicant’s parole case. Her
opinion seems founded
exclusively on inferences from the Board’s website.
It is also noteworthy that the risk assessment undertaken by the Tribunal
context of determining ‘
another reason
’ for revocation, is
different, contextually, to the Adult Parole Board’s task.
Notwithstanding
A/Prof Martinovic’s claim that she appears at this hearing as an
expert witness, her evidence did not conform
with the Tribunal Guideline for
Expert and Opinion Evidence. This includes having an overriding duty to provide
impartial assistance
to the Tribunal on relevant expert knowledge or experience,
not being an advocate for a party to a proceeding, and satisfying certain
requirements. On balance, little weight is placed on the predictive validity of
A/Prof Martinovic’s risk assessment.
the absence of relevant expert evidence, the Tribunal does not accept the
Applicant’s uncorroborated claims about ‘
cultural, familial and
gender contexts
’ or historical ‘
psychological trigger
’ to explain her offending. It is noteworthy these and other
factors invoked at the current hearing have only been recently
advanced. The
Tribunal also does not accept the Applicant’s claim during oral evidence
that her offending would not have continued
even if the criminal enterprise had
not been detected. The persistence of her participation for over two years
conflicts with this
regard for the persistence of the Applicant’s past offending, the
conditions under which it occurred, the revisionist
nature of aspects of her
evidence, and her unmet rehabilitation needs, she constitutes a real risk of
reoffending that is more than
minimal or negligible. This is so despite the
protective factors invoked.
the Applicant’s serious offending is coupled with a real risk of
recidivism, this primary consideration weighs substantially
revocation.
(Some footnotes omitted; emphasis added other than in quotation in [114].)
is not necessary to refer to the Tribunal’s consideration of the other
primary considerations.
its consideration of these primary considerations, the Tribunal addressed
other considerations
at [161]-[190]. It is unnecessary for present
purposes to focus on that part of the Tribunal’s reasons.
Tribunal expressed its conclusion at [191]-[199]. The Tribunal concluded at
[199] that it was not satisfied that there was “another
revoke the cancellation decision.
The primary judge’s reasons
primary judge set out the facts at [4]-[24] of his judgment. This included an
extract from the transcript of A/Prof Martinovic’s
evidence during
the Tribunal hearing (at [20]).
primary judge summarised the key aspects of the Tribunal’s reasons at
[25]-[29] of his judgment. The primary judge set
out a number of extracts from
the Tribunal’s reasons.
primary judge considered the appellant’s grounds of appeal at [30] and
following of his judgment. His Honour noted that
the appellant’s amended
originating application contained extensive particulars. His Honour set out the
eight grounds of review
without the particulars at [31] of his judgment.
Honour then dealt with each of the grounds of review, grouping some grounds
together, as had been done in the appellant’s
submissions (see the primary
judge’s judgment at [23]). We will refer to the primary judge’s
reasons in the course of
considering the appellant’s grounds of
Evidentiary issues
is convenient to start by considering the evidentiary issues raised by the
notice of appeal and the informal application for the
Court to receive further
evidence on appeal.
noted above, the appellant’s appeal grounds include a challenge to the
primary judge’s rejection of the tender of two
(a) the Probation Officer Email (dated 10 September 2024); and
(b) the 2017 Parole Manual.
Probation Officer Email refers to a rehabilitation programme for women run by
the New Zealand Department of Corrections. The
email states that the
appellant’s referral to this programme was deferred and deemed unsuitable
“as it was decided by
programme facilitators that you do not have
necessary rehabilitation needs to do the programme”. The primary judge
the tender of the document (described as a letter from the
appellant’s parole officer) on the basis that the email was not
Tribunal: see the primary judge’s reasons at [40]. Ground 4 of the
notice of appeal (which concerns the Tribunal’s
finding that the appellant
had an “unmet rehabilitative need”) includes the contention that, if
a lack of materiality
is alleged, the primary judge erred by failing to permit
the tender of the Probation Office Email. In our view, no error is shown
primary judge’s rejection of the tender of this document. In
circumstances where the document was not before the Tribunal,
it is difficult to
see how (at least in the circumstances of this case) the document could be of
assistance in demonstrating that
the Tribunal fell into jurisdictional error,
including as to materiality.
appellant’s application to tender the 2017 Parole Manual was dealt with by
the primary judge at [39] of his reasons. The
primary judge rejected the tender
on the basis that the 2017 Parole Manual was not before the Tribunal. Ground
1(b) of the notice
of appeal (which challenges the Tribunal’s assumption
that actuarial instruments were used by the Parole Board) includes the
contention that, if a lack of materiality is alleged, the primary judge erred by
failing to permit the tender of the 2017 Parole
Manual. In our view, no error
is shown in the primary judge’s rejection of this document. Again, in
circumstances where the
document was not before the Tribunal, it is difficult to
see how (at least in the circumstances of this case) the document could
assistance in demonstrating that the Tribunal fell into jurisdictional error,
including as to materiality.
turn now to consider the appellant’s application for the Court to receive
further evidence on appeal, namely the 2020 Parole
Manual. The relevant
principles were set out in
CKT20 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,
Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCAFC 124
294 FCR 318
, Charlesworth and Burley JJ) at [32]-[34]. The 2020 Parole
Manual was not before the Tribunal and there was no application to rely
the proceeding at first instance. The appellant seeks to rely on the document
in support of ground 1(b), which challenges
the Tribunal’s assumption
that actuarial instruments were used by the Parole Board. As with the 2017
Parole Manual, in circumstances
where the document was not before the Tribunal,
it is difficult to see how (at least in the circumstances of this case) the
could be of assistance in demonstrating that the Tribunal fell into
consider it appropriate to receive this evidence on appeal.
Consideration of appeal grounds
will now consider the grounds of appeal, other than the evidentiary aspects
which have already been considered. Consistently with
the structure of the
appellant’s written submissions, we will consider paragraphs (a), (b) and
(c) within ground 1 as separate
Ground 1(a)
this ground, the appellant contends that the primary judge erred in failing to
find that the Tribunal erred in law and in fact
in finding that
Dr Martinovic was unable to express an opinion as to the appellant’s
risk of reoffending by reason of Dr Martinovic
not being a qualified
psychologist or psychiatrist, and thereby giving little or no weight to that
expert opinion in purported application
Assistant Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection v Splendido
[2019] FCAFC 132
271 FCR 595
her written submissions, the appellant submits (in summary) that: the
Tribunal’s focus on formal qualifications led it to
err in finding that
Dr Martinovic could not express an opinion on the appellant’s risk of
reoffending because she was not a
qualified psychologist or psychiatrist and had
not used actuarial instruments (Tribunal reasons, [115]); the Tribunal further
in giving little or no weight to her evidence (at [112]) on the purported
application of
at [72]; the primary judge erred in failing to
find that this constituted jurisdictional error (primary judge’s reasons
at [47]-[48],
[61], [66], [72]).
oral submissions, the appellant submitted that the Tribunal (particularly at
[112]-[113]) read
at [72] (quoting from
RJE v Secretary to
Department of Justice
[2008] VSCA 265
; 21 VR 526) as
requiring a certain kind of evidence, namely expert psychological or psychiatric
evidence, to assess the risk of reoffending.
The appellant submits that, in
this respect, the Tribunal asked itself the wrong question and wrongly rejected
the evidence of Dr
Martinovic and the DoJ Letter.
her written and oral submissions, the appellant placed emphasis on the following
passage of Dr Martinovic’s oral evidence,
which the appellant’s
counsel described as her “independent claim” (AB
Number two, I have done a lot of work in this area and I know that the nature of
her offending is not a high risk reoffending category.
So people who engage in
property offences — this is all documented in literature — property
offences, in particular,
drug [a]ffected offending. That is the highest risk of
reoffending. The kind of offending that Ms Mao has engaged in is not the
risk of offending. So, you know, if we have a look at, you know, all
kinds of expertise evidence, I feel that I can actually make
that claim.
assume that the expression “independent claim” was used by counsel
to indicate that this was Dr Martinovic’s
own opinion
the risk of the appellant reoffending, as distinct from an opinion formed by
reference to the decision of the Parole Board
(as set out in her letter dated
21 September 2023). The appellant submits that the Tribunal did not engage
with Dr Martinovic’s
oral evidence, and that its finding that
Dr Martinovic could not express an opinion on the risk of reoffending
because she was not
a psychologist or psychiatrist infected the Tribunal’s
treatment of her evidence as a whole.
oral submissions on this ground, the appellant referred to the DoJ Letter. The
letter includes a statement that the appellant
“is classified as a
minimum-security prisoner and has been assessed at a low risk of
recidivism”. The appellant submits
that the Tribunal failed to have
regard to this evidence.
appellant’s submissions on ground 1(a) also include submissions about
apprehended bias
, based on the way in which the Tribunal questioned
Dr Martinovic during the hearing. Although apprehended bias is not
referred to in ground 1(a) (or any of the other grounds), the Minister
did not object to the point being raised. The appellant referred
submissions to the test for apprehended bias in
Ebner v Official Trustee in
[2000] HCA 63
205 CLR 337
per Gleeson CJ, McHugh,
Gummow and Hayne JJ. The appellant also referred to
Review Tribunal; Ex parte H
[2001] HCA 28
179 ALR 425
per Gleeson CJ, Gaudron and Gummow JJ. The appellant
submits that: a fair reading of the transcript reveals that the Tribunal’s
questioning was repetitive and framed to elicit a pre-determined answer,
particularly when the Tribunal pressed Dr Martinovic on
whether she could
identify the actuarial instrument used by the Parole Board in the
appellant’s case; when she offered to identify
it immediately, she was cut
is convenient to address first the appellant’s apprehended bias
submission. The primary judge dealt with this aspect of
the appellant’s
case below at [60]-[67] of his reasons. His Honour stated that he had carefully
read the whole of the transcript
of Dr Martinovic’s oral evidence
before the Tribunal: at [61]. His Honour concluded that the manner in which the
conducted the questioning of Dr Martinovic was appropriate and
would not convey to a reasonable lay observer an apprehension of bias:
appeal, the key passage of the questioning of Dr Martinovic relied on by
the appellant in support of the apprehended bias contention
was at AB pp
762-764. In that passage, the Tribunal questioned Dr Martinovic as to
whether she was appearing as an expert witness
or as a lay witness and advocate
on the appellant’s behalf. The Tribunal also raised with
Dr Martinovic that she did not have
any qualifications as a psychologist or
psychiatrist and that, as the Tribunal understood the position, recidivist risk
assessments
are undertaken by psychologists or psychiatrists, usually through an
application of their clinical opinion coupled with actuarial
instruments. The
Tribunal asked Dr Martinovic what actuarial instrument was applied by the
Parole Board in the appellant’s
case. Dr Martinovic said she could
look that up now and let the Tribunal know in the next minute, but the Tribunal
In other words, it did not permit her to do so. The
Tribunal also said to Dr Martinovic that, as the Tribunal understood her
she had no knowledge of what the Parole Board considered in the
specific circumstances of the appellant’s case. The Tribunal
asked if it
had correctly understood the evidence and she confirmed that it had.
reviewed that passage, and having regard to the principles stated in the cases
relied on by the appellant, we do not consider
that the Tribunal overstepped the
limits of appropriate questioning so as to give rise to an apprehension of bias.
It was appropriate
for the Tribunal to raise with Dr Martinovic the
concerns that it had as to whether her expertise enabled her to express an
on the risk of reoffending. It was also appropriate for it to confirm
its understanding of the limitations of her evidence regarding
the decision of
the Parole Board. It was not incumbent on the Tribunal to permit
Dr Martinovic to obtain a document to supplement
her answer to a question
asked by the Tribunal. For these reasons, no error is shown in the primary
judge’s conclusion on
the apprehended bias contention.
next consider the appellant’s principal contention on this ground, namely
that the Tribunal fell into jurisdictional error
by finding that
Dr Martinovic lacked expertise to express an opinion as to the
appellant’s risk of reoffending. The primary
judge dealt with a
corresponding contention at [33]-[49] of his reasons for judgment. His Honour
relied on the principles stated
Plaintiff M1/2021
at [24] per
Kiefel CJ, Keane, Gordon and Steward JJ and
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2022] FCA 831
per Abraham J. His Honour stated that,
here, the Tribunal gave cogent and justifiable reasons for affording
Dr Martinovic’s
evidence “little weight”, and that there
was nothing in the Tribunal’s reasons that took the Tribunal outside the
bounds of rationality and reasonableness: at [44]. His Honour also relied on
YKSB v Minister for Home Affairs
[2020] FCA 476
Mortimer J. The primary judge considered that the same matters applied in
the present case. The primary judge also adopted
certain paragraphs of the
Minister’s submissions (at [48]).
see no error in his Honour’s consideration of this issue. We consider
that it was for the Tribunal to give the weight that
it considered appropriate
to the evidence of Dr Martinovic. We note that the Tribunal did not
entirely reject her evidence, but
rather gave “little weight” to the
“predictive validity of [her] risk assessment” (at [116]). This is
unsurprising
in the circumstances of this case. Dr Martinovic’s
documentary evidence comprised only the letters dated 28 August 2023 and
21 September 2023. The first letter did not express an opinion on the risk
of the appellant reoffending and the opinion expressed
in the second letter was
based wholly on the decision of the Parole Board rather than on her own
assessment. Further, it emerged
during cross-examination that
Dr Martinovic had not had access to any of the materials before the Parole
Board in relation to the
appellant. Insofar as Dr Martinovic made the
so-called “independent claim” in her evidence, it was open to the
to conclude that her basis for expressing this opinion was limited. In
the circumstances of this case, we are not satisfied that
the Tribunal fell into
adopting the wrong approach to its
the Tribunal cited
at [72] (in the first sentence of [112] of
the Tribunal’s reasons), the way in which the Tribunal relied on that
paragraph is
not entirely clear. Reading the Tribunal’s reasons as a
whole, we consider that there were multiple reasons why the Tribunal
afforded little weight to Dr Martinovic’s evidence and the evidence
in the DoJ Letter. We are not satisfied that
the Tribunal adopted a wrong
approach by (for example) forming the view that it could only consider evidence
from a psychiatrist
or a psychologist and that any other evidence should be
disregarded. Rather, we consider that the Tribunal did have regard to the
evidence of Dr Martinovic and in the DoJ Letter, but ultimately considered
that it should be given little weight.
these reasons, ground 1(a) is not made out.
Ground 1(b)
this ground, the appellant contends that the primary judge erred in failing to
find that the Tribunal erred in law and fact in
the manner in which it relied on
the alleged actuarial instruments used by the Parole Board to assess
Dr Martinovic’s evidence
(referring to [70]-[72] of the primary
judge’s reasons).
is apparent, both from the appellant’s written submissions and from the
paragraphs in the primary judge’s reasons that
are referred to in this
ground, that ground 1(b) is concerned with the Tribunal’s assumption, in
its questioning of Dr Martinovic
during the hearing and in its reasons,
actuarial instruments
are used by the Parole Board and by
psychologists and psychiatrists in conducting risk assessments. The relevant
passage of questioning
is at AB p 763, where the Tribunal referred to
its understanding that recidivist risk assessments are undertaken by
psychologists
or psychiatrists, “usually through an application of their
clinical opinion, coupled with actuarial instruments”. The
Tribunal also
asked Dr Martinovic: “Which actuarial instrument was applied in
Ms Mao’s case by the adult parole board?”
Dr Martinovic offered to look that up and let the Tribunal know in the next
minute, the Tribunal said “No”. The
appellant also relies on [115]
of the Tribunal’s reasons, in which the Tribunal stated that psychologists
and psychiatrists
are “trained to apply clinical judgment and actuarial
instruments” in making risk assessments.
appellant submits that the Tribunal’s questioning and its reasons (at
[115]) show that it proceeded by asking itself the
wrong question on the
“unfounded evidential assumption that a statistical tool was required to
give an evaluative assessment
of the appellant’s risk of reoffending and
the use of that tool required professional qualifications”.
primary judge dealt with a comparable contention at [68]-[72] of his reasons.
The primary judge adopted the Minister’s
submissions that: it was not a
breach of procedural fairness to decline an offer by a witness, in the course of
oral evidence, to
look up the answer to a question that they do not know; the
witness’s role was to answer questions and, if she did not know
answer, that was a relevant matter that bore on her level of knowledge or
experience or expertise.
her submissions in relation to ground 1(b), the appellant seeks to rely on the
2017 Parole Manual but, for the reasons given above,
we reject the challenge to
the primary judge’s rejection of the tender of the manual. Further, to
the extent that the appellant
seeks to rely on the 2020 Parole Manual, for the
reasons given above we reject the application for the Court to receive further
are not satisfied that any error is shown in the primary judge’s
conclusion on this issue. In its questioning of Dr Martinovic,
Tribunal was merely expressing its
understanding
that actuarial
instruments were used in making risk assessments. Dr Martinovic had the
opportunity to say that that understanding
was incorrect. However, rather than
stating that the understanding was incorrect, Dr Martinovic’s
evidence tended to confirm
the Tribunal’s understanding that actuarial
instruments were used. In her answer, she said that she used to work for
Corrections
Victoria and that she was making risk assessment decisions
“based on an actuarial assessment tool, exactly like you’re
actuarial instrument was applied by the
Parole Board in the appellant’s
case, Dr Martinovic said: “Look, I don’t –
I can look that up now, exactly
the one that they use, and let you know in
the next one minute”. Far from suggesting that the Parole Board did not
actuarial instrument, Dr Martinovic’s response tended to
confirm the assumption that it did.
light of the evidence described above, we are not satisfied that the Tribunal
made a factual error as alleged. Further, even if
the Tribunal made an
incorrect factual assumption as alleged, we are not satisfied that any such
error was jurisdictional.
these reasons, ground 1(b) is not made out.
Ground 1(c)
ground 1(c), the appellant contends that the primary judge erred in failing to
find that the Tribunal erred in law and fact in
finding that Dr Martinovic
lacked impartiality in giving evidence (referring to [74]-[75] of the primary
judge’s reasons).
primary judge dealt with a comparable contention at [73]-[76] of his reasons.
The primary judge adopted the Minister’s
submissions that: if the Tribunal
did find that Dr Martinovic lacked impartiality, that finding was open;
when one reads Dr Martinovic’s
letters, they are written in a way
that looks like advocacy. The primary judge stated that that characterisation
of Dr Martinovic’s
letters was accurate, and there was nothing
irrational or unreasonable in the Tribunal’s finding that her evidence
lacked impartiality.
our view, no error is shown in the primary judge’s conclusion on this
issue. It is not clear whether the Tribunal did in
fact make a finding (at
[116]) that Dr Martinovic lacked impartiality. The Tribunal stated that
her evidence did not conform to
the Tribunal Guideline on Persons Giving Expert
and Opinion Evidence, and outlined what those guidelines required, including
overriding duty to provide impartial assistance to the
Tribunal”. If and to the extent that the Tribunal found that
Dr Martinovic’s
evidence lacked impartiality, it was open to the
Tribunal to form this view on the basis given by the primary judge, namely the
characterisation
of her letters.
these reasons, ground 1(c) is not made out.
this ground, the appellant contends that the primary judge erred in law and in
fact in finding that:
(a) the Tribunal correctly assessed the appellant’s current circumstances
of being in a poorer financial position and being
unlikely to secure stable
employment in a financial institution or bakery (see the primary judge’s
reasons at [85]-[86], [95],
[98]-[100]);
(b) [107]-[108] of the Tribunal’s reasons were not erroneous in that they
properly considered all of the appellant’s
changed circumstances and
properly distinguished the situation at the time of offending from that at the
time of the Tribunal’s
assessment, such that the appellant’s
circumstances were “[s]elf-evidently ... considered and rejected –
not ignored”
(see the primary judge’s reasons at [53]);
(c) it was rational for the Tribunal to decide that it would not accept
uncorroborated claims regarding the appellant’s past
familial trigger
points and to reject them without expert evidence (see the primary judge’s
reasons at [57]-[59]); and
(d) the Tribunal did not err in the manner in which it considered the risk of
recidivism (see the primary judge’s reasons at
[99]-[101]).
is unnecessary to set out the detailed particulars under ground 2, as the points
are covered in the appellant’s submissions.
appellant’s overarching submission in support of this ground is that, in
its assessment of the appellant’s risk of
reoffending, the Tribunal failed
to assess the changes in the appellant’s circumstances between the time of
the Tribunal’s
decision and the time of the offending. This alleged
failure to assess the change in the appellant’s circumstances is said
be inconsistent with the principles recognised in
appellant criticises the Tribunal’s reasoning at [108] (set out at [28]
above). The appellant submits that the Tribunal’s
inferences are not
logically supportive of an increased risk of reoffending and they fail to take
into account other factors, such
as the presence of the appellant’s
husband at the time of the offending compared with his deportation to New
Zealand at the
time of the hearing.
appellant submits that the Tribunal’s reliance at [118]-[119] (set out at
[29] above) on “revisionist” aspects
of the appellant’s
evidence was flawed. Further, the appellant submits that the Tribunal’s
reliance on the appellant’s
“unmet rehabilitation needs” was
misplaced as it rested solely on the appellant’s offer to undertake future
rehabilitation
with the clinical psychologist, Ms Amanda Wallis.
appellant submits that the Tribunal failed to engage in a meaningful assessment
of the conditions under which the offending occurred
and how any changes in
those conditions bore on the likelihood or risk of future offending, in
particular, the fact that:
(a) the appellant’s husband, Mr Niu, and a co-accused were engaged
daily in property development activities (eg performing
building and
construction, hiring trades and real estate agents) intended for profit in a
joint criminal enterprise; the appellant
did not participate in those types of
activities;
(b) the appellant used insider banking knowledge to prepare the loan
applications in a way that would secure finance to fund these
developments;
(c) the appellant’s evidence was that she was earning significantly more
than her husband, who was unemployed, and that she
faced cultural and familial
(d) the appellant’s motive at the time was said to be improving the
family’s financial position and future; and
(e) Mr Niu and the co-accused had since been deported from Australia,
removing their capacity to facilitate further property developments
or familial
appellant submits that at the time of the Tribunal decision, the appellant
proposed to work in a bakery and there was no evidence
that she could obtain
loans to fund property developments in the future.
appellant submits that she gave evidence that the cultural, familial and
financial pressures present at the time of the offending
had long ceased. She
submits that the Tribunal wrongly treated her lay description of these
psychological triggers as necessitating
expert evidence and that she was not
identifying psychological conditions requiring expert diagnosis, but rather
describing life
circumstances in lay terms.
appellant relies on
at [72] and [78]. The appellant also
Malec v JC Hutton Pty Ltd
[1990] HCA 20
169 CLR 638
639-640 and 643 and
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Guo
[1997] HCA 22
; 191 CLR 559 at 574-575.
primary judge dealt with similar contentions at [55]-[59], [81]-[86] and
[99]-[101] of his reasons.
are not satisfied that any error is shown in the primary judge’s
conclusions in relation to the similar contentions at first
as the appellant contends that the Tribunal failed to properly assess the
changed circumstances that applied to the appellant
at the time of the Tribunal
decision compared with those that applied at the time of the offending, we do
not accept that submission.
The Tribunal’s reasons at [107]-[108]
demonstrate that the Tribunal did undertake that kind of comparison. Many of
the appellant’s
submissions involve a challenge to the
the comparison; they fail to demonstrate that the Tribunal adopted an incorrect
approach or otherwise fell into jurisdictional
as the appellant relies on
in support of this ground, the facts
and circumstances of that case were materially different. In that case, the
Assistant Minister’s
finding that there was a likelihood that the
respondent would reoffend was essentially based on a bare recitation of his past
at [16] (setting out the key part of the
Assistant Minister’s decision), [41] (setting out an extract from the
reasons of the
primary judge in that case), [71], [81], [82]. However, in the
present case, there was evidence about the nature and circumstances
of the past
offending as well as facts and matters that affected the risk of reoffending,
and these were referred to and taken into
account by the Tribunal. In any
event, we are satisfied that the Tribunal’s consideration of the
appellant’s changed
circumstances was consistent with the analytical
process contemplated in
(at [72], [78]).
as the appellant challenges the Tribunal’s non-acceptance of the
appellant’s claims about “cultural, familial
contexts” or historical “psychological trigger points” to
explain her offending (at [117]), it was open
to the Tribunal not to accept that
evidence, including on the basis that it had only recently been advanced
(notwithstanding the
appellant’s explanation as to why it had not been
stated earlier).
as the appellant challenges the Tribunal’s reliance on the
appellant’s “current rehabilitation needs”
(at [118]), it was
open to the Tribunal to rely on this, notwithstanding that the basis for this
finding appears to have been the
appellant’s expressed willingness to
undertake offence-specific rehabilitation.
these reasons, ground 2 is not made out.
ground 3, the appellant contends that the primary judge erred in finding that
the Tribunal was entitled to place the weight it
considered appropriate on the
appellant’s motives based on [94] and [109] of the Tribunal’s
set out above, at [39]-[84] of its reasons, the Tribunal described and discussed
the evidence in the proceeding. The appellant’s
evidence included that
she was “in denial and trapped in the situation ... I thought I’d
sign and let him [Mr Niu] do
what he wants” (at [51]). She referred
to certain stressful events in her life in 2015 and cultural pressure to assist
Niu without question. At [53], the Tribunal stated that the appellant
“said the narrative she presented to the Tribunal at
this proceeding is
true and correct, even if it appears contradictory to
earlier claims
’” (emphasis in original).
[94] (set out above), the Tribunal stated that it placed little weight on the
appellant’s “new narrative ... because
a plea of guilty constitutes
admission to and acceptance of all elements of the charges a person is convicted
of”, citing
Maxwell v The Queen
[1996] HCA 46
; 184 CLR 501
[109] (set out above), the Tribunal stated that it was “impermissible for
the Tribunal to impugn convictions on their essential
factual basis”,
citing several cases including the judgment of Bromberg J in
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] FCA 1803
Although the Tribunal cited [102] of
that judgment, that paragraph reference appears to be incorrect. It appears
that the relevant
paragraph in
is [89], where
Bromberg J stated: “[T]he Tribunal was entitled to review the
circumstances of the conviction for a purpose other
than impugning the
conviction itself. The Tribunal was not entitled to review the essential facts
upon which the applicant’s
conviction or his sentence were based”
appellant submits that
does no more than establish that a plea of
guilty constitutes acceptance of the legal elements of the offence and contends
is not an element of an offence unless expressly stated.
Here, motive was not an element of the offences under
appellant relies on the judgment of the Full Court in
HZCP v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] FCAFC 202
273 FCR 121
), being the appeal from
The appellant submits that each of the members of the majority in the Full Court
(McKerracher J and Colvin J) expressed differing
views. The appellant
submits that, given that the Tribunal did not refer to the appeal judgment, it
appears that it was not aware
of the qualifications made in the appeal
judgments. The appellant refers to [191] of the judgment of Colvin J.
primary judge dealt with a comparable contention at [92]-[94]. In summary, the
primary judge held that the Tribunal was entitled
to place whatever weight it
considered appropriate on the appellant’s new claims about her motivations
and the other contextual
factors of the offending.
are not satisfied that any error has been shown in the primary judge’s
conclusion on this issue. The Tribunal relied on
a number of bases to reject
the appellant’s “re-casting of her involvement in the criminal
enterprise” (at [109]).
The first and principal basis was that, although
the appellant had been legally represented in her criminal matter and appeal
until recently, in the Tribunal proceeding, she had only recently raised
the new matters. It was principally on this basis that
the Tribunal said that
it preferred the findings of the sentencing court (at [109]). It was open to
the Tribunal to rely on these
matters in deciding to prefer the findings of the
sentencing court.
as the Tribunal relied (at [94]) on
, we are not satisfied that
the Tribunal fell into error. There were aspects of the appellant’s
evidence before the Tribunal
(eg, that she was in denial and thought she would
sign and let Mr Niu do what he wants, or that she acted under pressure)
be seen to put into question whether she had acted dishonestly (being
an element of the offence under
therefore open to the Tribunal to rely on
in the way that it
as the Tribunal relied (at [109]) on
, we are not
satisfied that the Tribunal fell into error. For present purposes, we do not
consider there to be a material difference
between the principle stated by
Bromberg J in
at [89] and those stated by the
majority in
McKerracher J held at [68] that “[t]o permit under the rubric of
‘another reason’, evidence contrary to essential
facts which must
underlie this conclusion [i.e. as to conviction or sentence] cannot have been
the legislative intention”.
His Honour also said that “where the
foundation for the jurisdiction is predicated on satisfaction of a test which
the conviction or sentence, relying on evidence contrary to the
essential conviction or sentencing facts would in itself be an error”:
[68]. See also at [77], [78]. Colvin J agreed with the reasons of
McKerracher J in relation to the relevant ground (ground 1):
[179]. Although Colvin J elaborated on the issue in his reasons, that
discussion did not affect his agreement with McKerracher
J’s reasons.
The observations of Colvin J at [191] (relied on by the appellant in the
present case) concerned a different kind
of case, where the conviction or
sentence was not the foundation for the exercise of power: see the last sentence
of [191]. Here,
there were aspects of the appellant’s evidence (eg, that
she was in denial and thought she would sign and let Mr Niu do what
wants, or that she acted under pressure) that could be seen to put into question
whether she acted dishonestly (being an essential
fact upon which the
convictions and sentence were based). It was therefore open to the Tribunal to
in the way that it did.
these reasons, ground 3 is not made out.
this ground, the appellant contends that the primary judge erred in finding that
the appellant’s offer to engage in targeted
rehabilitation, specifically
related to offences involving obtaining financial advantage by deception,
through the psychologist Ms
Wallis, constituted evidence of an “unmet
rehabilitative need” that weighed against the appellant, referring to
of the primary judge’s reasons.
appellant submits that the Tribunal’s finding that the appellant had an
“unmet rehabilitative need” by reason
of engaging Ms Wallis was
made contrary to the submissions of both parties and in the absence of an
evidentiary basis; it was an
erroneous finding of fact that the Tribunal used as
a factor on which to base its finding of a risk of recidivism (at [118]); the
primary judge erred in failing to so find (at [101]).
accept that the appellant submitted to the Tribunal that, after receiving the
Minister’s submissions, which suggested that
the appellant’s
rehabilitation efforts lacked offence-specific education, she contacted
Dr Martinovic to identify a rehabilitation
professional with
offence-specific experience, and this led to the proposed sessions with
Ms Wallis. In these circumstances, we
can understand the appellant’s
sense of grievance that this proposal was, in effect, used against her as the
basis for a finding
that she had an “unmet rehabilitative need”.
However, we are not satisfied that the Tribunal fell into jurisdictional
by finding that the appellant had an “unmet rehabilitative need”.
Despite the way in which this evidence came
Tribunal included a proposal that the appellant undertake rehabilitation
sessions with Ms Wallis,
and the appellant had not yet undertaken those
sessions. There was, therefore, a basis for the Tribunal’s finding. We
not consider the finding to be irrational or otherwise legally
unreasonable.
completeness, we note the appellant’s submission that the lawyer
representing the Minister at the Tribunal hearing accepted
the appellant’s
explanation as to why Ms Wallis had been approached and, indeed, submitted to
the Tribunal that the purpose
of this approach was “to make some kind of
point as part of this proceeding as opposed to addressing some kind of need that
[the appellant] herself feels needs to be addressed”. However, despite
that acceptance and submission, for the reasons already
Tribunal’s conclusion was not irrational or legally unreasonable.
these reasons, ground 4 is not made out.
follows that the appeal is to be dismissed. There is no apparent reason why
costs should not follow the event. We also consider
it appropriate for the
costs to be fixed as a lump sum, with the lump sum amount to be determined by a
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
one (101) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Justices Moshinsky, Anderson and
Dated: 7 November 2025
RTF format (510 KB)
Signed PDF/A format