P v Insurer [2010] PrivCmrA 19 (24 December 2010)
Case Citation:
P v Insurer
[2010] PrivCmrA 19
Subject Heading:
Accuracy and correction of personal information
National Privacy Principle 3 and 6.5 in Schedule 3 of the
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner prior to 1
November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the powers of the Privacy
Commissioner under the
were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
The complainant discovered that her individual insurance file contained nine
insurance claims relating to a policy she was not aware
of. The policy had been
taken out by the complainant’s former partner. The claims spanned a period
of ten years.
The complainant contacted the insurer and asked that it remove her name from
the insurance policy and remove the listings from her
insurance file. The
complainant was unsuccessful and consequently complained to the Commissioner.
National Privacy Principle 3 provides that an organisation must take
reasonable steps to make sure that the personal information it
collects, uses or
discloses is accurate, complete and up-to-date.
NPP 6.5 provides that if an organisation holds personal information about an
individual and that individual is able to establish that
the information is not
accurate, complete and up-to-date, the organisation must take reasonable steps
to correct the information
so that it is accurate, complete and up-to-date.
‘Information Sheet 4 – Access and Correction’ (available at
www.privacy.gov.au/materials/types/infosheets/view/6563)
says: ‘Where an
organisation has checked the individual's file and can find no obvious
inconsistency or error, it might then
be appropriate for the organisation to ask
for further material to support the individual's claim that there is an
inaccuracy.’
The Commissioner investigated the matter under
In response to the investigation, the insurer advised that it had considered
that the complainant was insured on the relevant policy.
In such cases, the
insurer’s normal practice was to list the claims on both insured’s
individual insurance files. However,
as a result of the investigation it
from them over
ten years ago but they had not removed the complainant from the
insurance policy.
Consequently, the Insurer removed the complainant from the policy and removed
the claims from their individual insurance file to comply
with its obligations
under NPP 6.5. The complainant was satisfied with this action and asked that the
Commissioner close the matter.
Satisfied that the matter had been adequately dealt with, the Commissioner
closed the matter under
section 41(2)(a)
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
RTF format (127 KB)
Signed PDF/A format