C v Insurer [2004] IOSPCC 2 (1 December 2004)
Ombudsman Service Limited
Complaint Determination No. 2 of 2004
Cite as C v Insurer
[2004] IOSPCC 2
1. Made under the
General Insurance Information Privacy Code
(the Code), clause 3.42.
2. This determination relates to a complaint by the Complainant registered by
Insurance Ombudsman Service Limited under clause 3.13
of the Code.
3. The Respondent to the complaint is a signatory
to the Code. It is alleged that certain acts of the Respondent interfered with
the Complainant’s privacy.
4. The Insurance Ombudsman Service Limited Privacy Complaints Committee (the
Committee) decided to seek to resolve the complaint pursuant
to clause 3.15 of
Background, allegations and remedies sought
5. The essential elements of the complaint (as alleged by the
complainant) are:
6. The Respondent had issued a motor vehicle insurance
policy to the Complainant. The Complainant was involved in an accident, made
claim and the Respondent wrote-off the Complainant’s vehicle. The
Respondent advised the Complainant that as her vehicle
was less than one year
old at the time of the accident she was entitled to a new replacement vehicle.
7. Several weeks after receiving that advice, the Complainant was
had engaged to
purchase replacement vehicles on the Respondent’s behalf. H asked the
Complainant to contact C at a motor dealership
to select the colour of her car,
which she did. The Complainant says V, a Respondent of the Respondent’s
staff, informed her
that her replacement vehicle would be supplied fully
registered as per the terms of the policy. The Complainant also says that she
can recall a conversation with V in which V stated that the Complainant would be
required to pay for the vehicle registration at
some stage but she would be
reimbursed once she had collected any residual proceeds from the registration
and compulsory third-party
on the written-off vehicle and forwarded them to the
Respondent.
8. The new replacement vehicle was delivered to the
Complainant at her workplace by a tow truck operator and she was not asked by
or by the Respondent for any payment. Several weeks later she was contacted by
C who advised that he had forgotten to collect
the cost of registration from
her. The Complainant told C she would contact the Respondent and await their
response before committing
to making any payment to C. She then contacted the
Respondent and awaited their response but received none.
9. Over the
following weeks she received numerous calls, including calls at weekends, from C
and/or H. Messages were left for her
at work, at home and on her mobile phone.
She did not return these as she was still waiting for a response from the
Respondent.
However she subsequently spoke to H when H called her at home and
obtained an e-mail address for V. She emailed V but did not get
a reply until a
week later when V sent her a reply.
10. B, the Complainant’s
daughter-in-law has provided a statement to the effect that:
• On 17 September 2002 she took a telephone call from H in the
Complainant’s house where she was living. H asked to
speak to the
Complainant. B said that the Complainant was not yet home from work and asked
if she could take a message.
• H asked B if she knew anything about the Complainant’s car to
which B replied she did not and again offered to take
• H told B she was going to repossess the Complainant’s car. H was
talking loudly and sounded very angry. H told B
to ask the Complainant how she
would like to walk out of work and not be able to find the car and to tell the
Complainant to pay
or they would come and take the car. B told H that she did
not think H should be telling her all this. B told the Complainant about
conversation with H when the Complainant got home shortly after the phone
11. The Complainant said that B was very distressed
when she told the Complainant about the telephone conversation with H. She
immediately
called H and told her that she had not yet heard anything from the
Respondent. She claims H became abusive during the conversation
and when asked
whether she had disclosed details of the Complainant’s business H’s
reply was "yes, so sue me baby, sue
12. On the following day
the Complainant telephoned BC, a senior officer of the Respondent and told him
of her concerns. BC immediately
arranged payment of the registration costs to
C. The Complainant states that BC agreed that H had breached her privacy and
take up with her and C the privacy issue and the other issues of
harassment.
13. The Complainant originally complained to the Privacy
Commissioner NSW. On advice from the Privacy Commissioner NSW, the Complainant
referred her complaint to the Office of the Federal Privacy Commissioner (OFPC)
on 9 October 2002. In none of the complaints made
to the three Privacy agencies
did the Complainant seek any particular remedy.
The Respondent’s case
14. On 15 May 2003 the OFPC wrote to the Respondent advising that it had
decided to conduct an investigation and asking a number of
questions, including
questions as to:
• Whether the Respondent had in place written instructions to its
agents/employees on privacy issues in dealing with a third
party regarding a
customer’s insurance enquiry or claim and if so what is the nature and
content of those instructions?
• Does the Respondent acknowledge that its agent disclosed the
Complainant’s personal information to the Complainant’s
daughter-in-law?
• If the answer to the first question is ‘Yes’, what is the
basis for the disclosure of information to the daughter-in-law
under NPP2 and
what remedial steps does it propose to take to deal with the issues of the
15. The Respondent replied to the OFPC on 12 June
2003 advising that it was a signatory to the ICA General Insurance Information
Code and that the privacy issue the subject of the complaint had not
been notified to it prior to the OFPC’s letter of 15 May
2003. However
the Respondent provided detailed answers to the OFPC’s
16. In relation to the first question the Respondent advised
that it had signed agreements with preferred suppliers for various goods
services. The Respondent also advised that all its claims staff have undertaken
a comprehensive privacy training module and
all have successfully completed
their training and further that the Respondent has developed comprehensive
its Privacy Policy framework for Privacy Access
Requests and Privacy Complaints.
17. In relation to the second question
the Respondent stated that it was unable to determine if its former agent
disclosed personal
information relating to the Complainant as alleged and
attached a statement it had obtained from H. In that statement H said:
"I refer to the purchase for (the Complainant) and confirm the message was left
for (the Complainant) at her home number requesting
she call me urgently
regarding her motor vehicle.
When (the Complainant) returned the call we discussed the situation with the
vehicle and is supplying dealer and she then raise the
issued of privacy. We
discussed this and it was my understanding that the matter was resolved as she
was unable to indicate how
her privacy has been breached.
At the time I was confident I had acted in accordance with (T’s) privacy
policy and I was not aware of revealing any confidential
or personal information
during the conversation with the woman who answered the phone.
Unfortunately due to the passage of time between the incident and the present
time, I am unable to recall the exact words of each
conversation, only the
substance from my perspective.
At all times, (the Complainant) was provided with a high level of service which
was sensitive to her requirements."
18. In relation to the
third question which focused on the basis for the disclosure of information to
the daughter-in-law under NPP2,
the Respondent stated the following:
"The attempted contact with (the Complainant) by (T) was on the basis of their
informal, ‘trial’ basis of providing new
vehicle procurement
services to (the Respondent). As such, we accept that (T) was acting as (the
Respondent’s) ‘agent’
in that role and it follows that the
information relating to the purchase of the new vehicle on behalf of (the
Complainant) was validly
provided to (T) as part of the claims settlement
process and indeed was provided for the mutual benefit of (the Complainant) and
(the Respondent).
(The Respondent) has addressed the complaint by contacting (T), determining its
response to the allegations and has discussed any
such future scenarios that T
may face with (H) to assist (T) to avoid future similar allegations being made
in respect of their business
activities.
In view of the fact that (the Respondent) no longer has any business dealings
with (T), we believe our actions are reasonable in
19. The Respondent also raised the following matters
in its reply of 12 June 2003:
• If T is found to have breached the Complainant’s privacy, the
Respondent regrets that such breach occurred and would
wish to have his regret
passed on to her.
• With respect to the outstanding charges that were pursued for payment by
the Complainant, these were statutory charges which
were not covered under the
insurance policy and the complainant had been informed of her responsibility to
pay these charges when
taking delivery of the vehicle. These charges have been
paid by the Respondent.
• The Respondent always endeavours to protect the privacy of its clients
and has appropriate policies and procedures in place
to ensure that personal and
sensitive information is handled correctly. In this instance, the normal
contractual arrangements with
a service provider had not been entered into
because of the trial basis of the arrangement with
20. The General Insurance Information Privacy Principles (IPPs) in Part 2 of
the Code outline standards for handling personal information
that legally bind
organisations that have adopted the Code which was formally approved by the
Federal Privacy Commissioner on 17
April 2002. The Code Principles replace the
National Privacy Principles in the
, and the Insurance Ombudsman
Service Limited Privacy Compliance Committee (The Committee) is the Code
Adjudicator under the Act.
21. Personal information is defined in Appendix 1 of the Code as follows:
"information or an opinion (including information or an opinion forming part of
a database), whether true or not, and whether recorded
in a material form or
not, about an individual whose identity is apparent, or can reasonably be
ascertained, from the information
or opinion."
22. The question
in this complaint is whether personal information held by the Respondent was
improperly disclosed to the Complainant’s
daughter-in-law, in breach of
23. IPP2 deals with the use and disclosure of information. IPP2
commences with the following:
2 Use and disclosure
We will only use or disclose information about you for the purpose that you
gave us the information or where a lawful exception applies
2.1 An organisation must only use or disclose personal information for the
primary purpose for which it was collected. Exceptions
to this rule are as
Use or disclosure for a related purpose
An organisation may use or disclose personal information for a
secondary purpose if the secondary purpose is related to the primary
purpose for
which it was collected and the individual would reasonably expect the
information to be used or disclosed for that secondary
In the case of sensitive personal information, use or disclosure for a secondary
purpose may only occur if the secondary purpose
is directly related to the
primary purpose for which the information was collected and the individual would
reasonably expect the
information to be used or disclosed for the secondary
Use or disclosure with consent
An organisation may use or disclose personal information for a
secondary purpose if the individual consents to the use or
disclosure."
The remaining provisions of IIP2.1 deal with
various other exceptions, none of which are relevant to this complaint.
Investigation process
24 As indicated above, both parties outlined their principal positions in
this matter when the OFPC commenced an investigation in
2002. When the
complaint was referred to Insurance Ombudsman Service Limited, both the
Complainant and the Respondent continued
to rely on the material they had
submitted to the OFPC. Accordingly it was not necessary for the Committee to
duplicate the partly
completed investigation made by the OFPC. Each party has
had the opportunity to add to the material and submissions provided to
In essence the parties’ principal cases have not altered since the OFPC
ceased investigating the complaint made to
that Office.
25. On 15 September 2004 the Committee wrote separately to both parties.
Each party was given advice to the effect that:
• The Committee takes the view that the Respondent cannot avoid
responsibility for the actions of T on the basis that the arrangement
informal and on a trial basis. It was the responsibility of the Respondent to
ensure that its authorised agent (T) had
an adequate understanding of its
obligations, on the Respondent’s behalf, under the
, or in this
case, the Privacy Code. The Respondent does not appear to have taken adequate
steps to ensure that adequate training
was undertaken by T.
• There is no evidence that the actions of H, the employee of T, were
beyond the scope of her authority, and the Respondent
must therefore accept
responsibility for those actions. It seems likely on the evidence presented
that H did make an inappropriate
disclosure of the Complainant’s personal
information to her daughter-in-law.
• The actions taken by the Respondent, both in waiving the registration
fee in October 2002 and in asking the OFPC in June
2003 to pass on their regret
to the Complainant, were a reasonable response to the matter. It is unfortunate
that because of the
not passed on to the Complainant.
• There appears to have been a failure in the Respondent’s internal
procedures in that BC, the senior employee approached
by the Complainant failed
to refer the matter to the Respondent’s internal privacy complaint
handling procedure, believing
that he adequately resolved the matter with the
waiver of fees.
• In the Committee’s view the expression of regret and the waiver of
statutory fees in October 2002 constitute a reasonable
response to the
complaint, on the understanding also that the Respondent has taken steps to
ensure that its contractual arrangements
and internal processes have been
modified to avoid any repetition of the problems encountered in this case.
• On that basis, the Committee would take the view under Clause 3.39(e) of
the Code that the Respondent has adequately deal
with the complaint, and would
propose to discontinue the Committee’s investigation of the
26. The letter to the Complainant advised her that if
she remained dissatisfied with the Committee’s response, she could insist
on a formal determination which the Committee would make to the same effect in
which event she would have the right to seek a review
of the Committee’s
determination by the OFPC. The letter to the Respondent advised that the
Committee’s letter to the
Complainant would contain that advice and also
asked the Respondent to confirm that it accepted the Committee’s view of
matter and that it had taken the necessary steps to improve the contractual
arrangements and internal processes.
27. The Respondent has formally
advised that it accepts the Committee’s view regarding this matter and the
finding that there
was a failure in its internal procedures for referring
relationship with T since December 2002 and that its managers were re-issued
with a copy of the Respondent’s commitment
to upholding the National
Complainant has insisted on a formal determination by the Committee.
Determination
29. For the reasons detailed above, the Committee determines pursuant to
Clause 3.39(e) of the Code that the Respondent has dealt
adequately with the
complaint and accordingly does not propose to further investigate it.
Right of appeal
30. Both the Complainant and the Respondent are entitled to seek a review of
this Determination by the Federal Privacy Commissioner,
who can be contacted as
Director, Compliance
Office of the Federal Privacy Commissioner
GPO Box 5218
SYDNEY NSW 2001.
FAX: (02) 9284 9666
Telephone: 1300 363 992, or e-mail
Insurance Ombudsman Service Limited Privacy
Compliance Committee
Dated 1 December 2004
RTF format (118 KB)
Signed PDF/A format