Visa Applicant: Ms Lok In Anna Lam IRT Reference: V98/02148 #number 13394 [1999] IRTA 13394 (27 January 1999)
IMMIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS FOR DECISION
IRT REFERENCE: V98/02148 13394.doc
VISA APPLICANT: Ms Lok In (Anna) LAM
TRIBUNAL: Steve KARAS
Presiding Member
DATE: 27 January 1999
PLACE: Brisbane
DECISION: The Tribunal, pursuant to section 349(2)(a) of the Migration Act,
affirms the decision under review to refuse the grant
of a visa to the Visa
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
On 8 September 1998 Ms Lok In (Anna) Lam (the Visa Applicant) applied to this
Tribunal for review of a decision made by a delegate
of the Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (the Minister) at the Department of
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
(the Department) on 21 April 1998 to
refuse the grant of a Temporary Business Entry (Class UC) Subclass 457
(Business (Long Stay))
visa to enable her to remain in Australia. That
decision was affirmed by the Migration Internal Review Office (MIRO) on 13
The Visa Applicant was born in China on 14 July 1955 and is a citizen of
Portuguese, Macau. She is separated from her husband who
resides in Macau.
The Visa Applicant arrived in Australia on 20 October 1995 on a visitor
Subclass 676 visa. On arrival she was granted permission
to remain in
Australia for 3 months until 20 January 1996. She was granted an
extension to her visitor visa allowing her to remain
in Australia until 20
October 1996.
On 17 October 1996 she lodged a completed
"Application for a long-stay
temporary business visa (for a stay of between 3 months and 4 years)"
1066, with the Department by which she sought to remain in Australia. She had
applied for a Subclass 457 Business (Long Stay)
Temporary visa indicating in
Form 1066 that she was applying for the visa
"as a person sponsored by an
Australian business"
. No period of proposed stay was indicated in the
application form, indeed question 13 in the form was left blank. The Visa
noted in the application form that she signed on 16 October 1996 that
and was a citizen of
. In the form it
was indicated that her employer was Miliconcept Catering Pty Ltd whose address
was in Little Bourke Street,
Melbourne. Her employment history on the form at question 23 was indicated as
"03/90 - 02/93 Federal Restaurant Manager
11/93 - 09/95 Boutique Monroe Owner/Manager
11/93 - 09/95 Property & Land Sales (Self Employed)"
A summary of her experience and knowledge in the area of management from May
1990 to September 1995 was included with her application.
From the copy of her passport submitted with her application the Tribunal notes
her Subclass 676 visitor visa was issued in Hong
Kong on 10 August 1995 and
included condition
"8101 No work"
. The Visa Applicant travelled to
Australia on 20 October 1995 with that visa. On 11 January 1996 she was
granted a Subclass 686
visitor visa in Melbourne which again contained
"8101 No work"
. As well, a further Subclass 686 visitor visa
was granted to the Visa Applicant on 27 June 1996 valid until 20 October 1996
the condition
"8101 No work"
Miliconcept Catering Pty Ltd had lodged application Form 1068 with the
Department seeking to nominate the Visa Applicant for the
job position of
"Managing Director"
with it offering an annual salary of
. It was indicated in Form 1068 that the Visa Applicant's job
offer was for a proposed period of employment of 4 years. It was noted
Form 1068 that she was required for a
"key activity".
The Form 1068 was signed on 16 October 1996 by Alex Siu, the authorised officer
for the sponsor Miliconcept Catering Pty Ltd (Miliconcept).
In a letter dated 22 January 1997 by the Visa Applicant's legal advisers to the
Department, reference was made in part to unsuccessful
negotiations for a
restaurant site by the Visa Applicant and her business activities to source and
"wool products and food products"
to China, Hong Kong and Macau
"she has many business contacts"
. Other material was submitted to
the Department on the Visa Applicant's behalf.
It appears that Miliconcept was registered on 16 October 1996. A Form 1067 was
submitted by it to the Department on 18 October 1996
seeking approval as a
"standard business sponsor"
Further correspondence passed in this matter.
On 13 January 1998 the Visa Applicant's advisers notified the Department that
she had purchased a 20% share in the China Gourmet
Restaurant business for
$30,000 and was involved in its management,
"attending at the restaurant at
least 3 days a week"
. It was indicated in the advisers letter to the
Department that the Visa Applicant's application be considered
grounds of Independent Executive"
On 15 April 1998 the Visa Applicant was interviewed in the presence of Dr. Wong
(a friend) by two Department officers and with the
assistance of an
interpreter. A copy of the interview record is contained on the Department's
On 17 April 1998 the Visa Applicant's advisers wrote to the Department as
follows without the formal parts:
"We are instructed that Miliconcept Catering Pty Ltd wishes to withdraw its
sponsorship and nomination of Ms Lam Iok In's application.
We trust all requirements have been fulfilled. We look forward to a favourable
decision from you soon."
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
On 21 April 1998 the Department notified the Visa Applicant care of her legal
advisers that her application for a Business (Long
Stay) visa Subclass 457
was refused.
The decision maker noted in part that the Visa Applicant failed to satisfy
clauses 457.111(b) and 457.223(7) of the
Migration Regulations 1994
The Visa Applicant applied to MIRO on 25 May 1998 for a review of the decision
to refuse her application for a Subclass 457 visa.
On 13 August 1998 the primary decision to refuse the Visa Applicant's
application for a Subclass 457 visa was affirmed by MIRO.
The MIRO review officer noted in part:
"I find that the applicant is unable to satisfy the criteria of parts (2), (3),
(4), (5), (6), (7), (8) or (9) of 457.223.
As essential criteria have not been met by the applicant, no assessment against
the remaining criteria is required, the application
for a visa subclass 457 -
Business (Long Stay) cannot be granted.
I note the applicant appears to have undertaken business activity in Australia
whilst the holder of a visa subject to condition 8101
"no work", a letter from
Miliconcept Catering Pty Ltd is signed by her a Director on 15 October 1996.
Subsequent to the grant of
a bridging visa A with a 8107 condition "cannot
change employer or occupation", which at that time was non working visitor or
best Director of Miliconcept the applicant actively worked at the China
Gourmet Restaurant, I refer to statements made at interview
and a letter from
her agent dated 13 January 1998. These activities would appear to have been in
breach of visa conditions and would
need to be considered in any assessment
against regulation 457.221. I have not made any assessment against this
regulation as I
have already determined the applicant fails to meet an
essential criteria."
The Visa Applicant was notified of the decision direct by registered mail on 13
August 1998.
LEGISLATIVE REQUIREMENTS
This application is to be determined in accordance with the
Migration Act
Migration Regulations 1994
made pursuant to that Act (the
Regulations).
The prescribed criteria for a Subclass 457 (Business (Long Stay)) visa are set
out in Subclass 457 of Schedule 2 of the Regulations,
which sets out various
criteria to be satisfied at time of application and others to be satisfied at
the time of decision. So far
as they are relevant to this application, they
457.1 INTERPRETATION
(1) In this Part:
"approved business nomination" means a nomination approved under regulation
"key activity" has the same meaning as in Division 1.4A;
"person" includes an unincorporated body of persons;
"pre-qualified business sponsor" has the same meaning as in Division 1.4A;
"standard business sponsor" has the same meaning as in Division 1.4A.
(2) For the purposes of this Part, a business activity is of benefit to
Australia if:
(a) the conduct of the activity contributes to:
(i) the creation or maintenance of employment for Australian citizens or
Australian permanent residents; or
(ii) expansion of Australian trade in goods or services; or
(iii) the improvement of Australian business links with international markets;
(iv) competitiveness within sectors of the Australian economy; and
(b) the operator of the business:
(i) introduces to, or utilises or creates in, Australia new or improved
technology or business skills; or
(ii) has a satisfactory record of, or a demonstrated commitment towards,
training Australian citizens and Australian permanent residents
business in Australia.
457.21 Criteria to be satisfied at time of application
457.211 If the application is made in Australia:
(a) the applicant is the holder of:
(i) a visa of one of the following classes:
(A) Business (Temporary) (Class TB);
(B) Cultural/Social (Temporary) (Class TE);
(C) Educational (Temporary) (Class TH);
(D) Expatriate (Temporary) (Class TJ);
(E) Family Relationship (Temporary) (Class TL);
(F) Interdependency (Temporary) (Class TM);
(G) Medical Practitioner (Temporary) (Class UE);
(H) Retirement (Temporary) (Class TQ);
(I) Supported Dependent (Temporary) (Class TW);
(J) Working Holiday (Temporary) (Class TZ); or
(ii) a visa of one of the following subclasses:
(A) Subclass 303 (Emergency (Temporary Visa Applicant));
(B) Subclass 427 (Domestic Worker (Temporary) - Executive);
(C) Subclass 457; or
(b) the applicant is the holder of:
(i) a visa of one of the following classes:
(A) Border (Temporary) (Class TA);
(B) Electronic Travel Authority (Class UD);
(C) Long Stay (Visitor) (Class TN);
(D) Short Stay (Visitor) (Class TR);
(E) Student (Temporary) (Class TU); or
(ii) a Subclass 456 (Business (Short Stay)) visa; or
(c) the applicant is the holder of a Confirmatory (Temporary) (Class TD) visa
granted on the grounds that the applicant satisfied
the criteria for a visa
specified in paragraph (a) or (b); or
(d) the applicant is not the holder of a substantive visa and:
(i) the last substantive visa held by the applicant was of a kind specified in
paragraph (a) or (c); and
(ii) the applicant satisfies Schedule 3 criteria 3003, 3004 and 3005; or
(e) the applicant is not the holder of a substantive visa and:
(i) the last substantive visa held by the applicant was of a kind specified in
paragraph (b); and
(ii) the applicant satisfies Schedule 3 criteria 3002, 3003, 3004 and 3005.
457.22 Criteria to be satisfied at time of decision
457.221 If the application is made in Australia, the applicant has complied
substantially with the conditions to which the visa (if
any) held, or last
held, by the applicant is, or was, subject.
(1) If the application is made in Australia and at the time of application the
applicant was the holder of a Student (Temporary)
(Class TU) visa:
(a) the applicant has successfully completed a course in Australia at Associate
Diploma level or above; and
(b) if the applicant is a private subsidised student - the Minister is
satisfied that it would not be detrimental to Australia's
policies in respect
of overseas students to grant the visa; and
(c) if the applicant is a student under a scholarship scheme or training
program approved by AusAID - the applicant has the support
in writing of
AusAID for the grant of the visa.
(2) Subclause (1) does not apply to an applicant who meets the requirements of
subclause 457.223 (3).
457.223 (1) The applicant meets the requirements of subclause (2), (3), (4),
(5), (6), (7), (8) or (9).
Labour agreements
(2) The applicant meets the requirements of this subclause if:
(a) the activity specified in the application is the subject of a labour
agreement; and
(b) that activity is the subject of an approved business nomination by a party
to the labour agreement; and
(c) the applicant is nominated by a party to the labour agreement; and
(d) the Minister is satisfied that:
(i) the skills and experience of the applicant are suitable for the
performance of the activity; and
(ii) the requirements of the labour agreement have been met in relation to the
application.
RHQ agreements
(3) The applicant meets the requirements of this subclause if:
(a) the activity specified in the application is the subject of an RHQ
agreement; and
(b) the applicant has lodged with the application a statement that:
(i) identifies the applicant as a person who is to be employed in the regional
headquarters of a business in Australia; and
(ii) identifies the RHQ agreement by the number given to the agreement.
Sponsorship by Australian businesses: key activities
(4) The applicant meets the requirements of this subclause if:
(a) the activity in which the applicant proposes to be employed in Australia by
a person (in this subclause called "the employer")
is a key activity; and
(b) that activity is the subject of an approved business nomination by the
employer; and
(c) the employer is:
(i) a pre-qualified business sponsor; or
(ii) a standard business sponsor; and
(d) the applicant is nominated in relation to the activity by the employer;
(i) the employer is a standard business sponsor; and
(ii) the application is made for a stay in Australia of more than 12
the applicant demonstrates (if so required by the Minister) that the applicant
has the skills necessary to perform the activity.
Sponsorship by Australian businesses: non-key activities
(5) The applicant meets the requirements of this subclause if:
(a) the activity in which the applicant proposes to be employed in Australia by
a person (in this subclause called "the employer")
is not a key activity;
(b) that activity is the subject of an approved business nomination by the
employer; and
(c) the employer is:
(i) a pre-qualified business sponsor; or
(ii) a standard business sponsor; and
(d) the applicant is nominated in relation to the activity by the employer;
(e) where the application is made for a stay in Australia for more than 12
months, the applicant demonstrates that he or she has
the skills necessary to
perform the activity; and
(f) where the employer is a standard business sponsor, the Minister is
satisfied that the position to be filled by the applicant
has not been created
only for the purposes of securing the entry of the applicant to Australia.
Sponsorship by overseas businesses
(6) The applicant meets the requirements of this subclause if:
(a) the applicant proposes to be employed in Australia by a person (in this
subclause called "the employer") who does not operate
a business activity in
Australia; and
(b) that activity is the subject of an approved business nomination by the
employer; and
(c) the employer:
(i) has given undertakings in accordance with approved form 1067; and
(ii) is a person whom the Minister is satisfied (apart from not operating a
business in Australia) would, on application, be likely
to be approved as a
standard business sponsor; and
(i) the activity is a key activity; and
(ii) the application is made for a stay in Australia of more than 12
the applicant demonstrates (if so required by the Minister) that the applicant
has the skills necessary to perform the activity;
(e) where the activity is not a key activity:
(i) the Minister is satisfied that the position to be filled by the applicant
has not been created only for the purposes of securing
the entry of the
applicant to Australia; and
(ii) in the case of an application for a stay in Australia of more than 12
months - the applicant demonstrates that he or she has
the skills necessary to
perform the activity; and
(f) the Minister is satisfied that the applicant has a genuine and realistic
commitment to:
(i) establish, or assist in establishing, on behalf of the employer, a
business activity in Australia with overseas connections;
(ii) fulfil, or assist in fulfilling, contractual obligations of the
that will be of benefit to Australia.
Independent executives
(7) The applicant meets the requirements of this subclause if the Minister is
satisfied that:
(a) the applicant proposes to develop in Australia a business activity that
(i) conducted by the applicant as a principal; and
(ii) of benefit to Australia; and
(b) the applicant has a genuine and realistic commitment:
(i) to maintain or obtain an ownership interest in a business in Australia;
(ii) to maintain a direct and continuous involvement in the management of the
business; and
(iii) to make decisions that affect the overall direction and performance of
the business from day to day; and
(c) nothing adverse is known to Immigration about the applicant's business
background; and
(d) the applicant has net assets of:
(i) not less than AUD250,000; or
(ii) a lesser amount that the Minister considers to be adequate;
to conduct or establish the business.
Service sellers
(8) The applicant meets the requirements of this subclause if:
(a) the applicant:
(i) is a representative of a supplier of services who is located outside
Australia; and
(ii) proposes to represent the supplier in Australia; and
(b) the representation involves negotiating, or entering into agreements, for
the sale of services but does not involve the actual
supply, or direct sale,
of the services; and
(c) the Minister is satisfied that the proposal has not been made only for the
purposes of securing the entry of the applicant to
Persons accorded certain privileges and immunities
(9) The applicant meets the requirements of this subclause if:
(a) the applicant is a person to whom privileges and immunities will be
accorded under the
International Organisations (Privileges and Immunities) Act
Overseas Missions (Privileges and Immunities) Act 1995
(b) the Foreign Minister has recommended in writing to the Minister that the
applicant should be granted the visa.
457.224 The applicant satisfies:
(a) public interest criteria 4001, 4002, 4003, 4004, 4010, 4013 and 4014;
(b) except where the applicant meets the requirements of subclause 457.223 (9)
- satisfies public interest criterion 4006A.
457.225 If:
(a) the application is made outside Australia; and
(b) the applicant has previously been in Australia;
the applicant satisfies special return criteria 5001 and 5002.
Item 1223A of Schedule 1 of the Regulations sets out the requirements in part
for a Temporary Business Entry (Class UC) visa. That
regulation identifies the
application forms to be used for the 2 Subclasses of visa viz. Subclass 456 and
Subclass 457 contained
in that visa class. For the Subclass 456 visa for a
period of stay in Australia of 3 months or less the stipulated form is 1034,
while for the Subclass 457 visa for a stay of 3 months to 4 years, the form is
1066. The Visa Applicant had submitted a Form 1066.
"Key Activity"
is defined in regulation 1.20B as follows:
"in relation to a person (in this definition called 'the employer') who
proposes to provide employment in Australia to an individual,
means an activity
(a) is essential to the business operations of the employer; and
(b) requires:
(i) specialist or professional skills; or
(ii) specialised knowledge of the business operations of the employer;"
Regulations 1.20D, 1.20G and 1.20H provide as follows:
Regulation 1.20D
Approval as business sponsors
(1) Subject to this regulation, the Minister may, by instrument in writing,
approve or reject an application for approval as a pre-qualified
sponsor or as a standard business sponsor.
(2) The Minister must approve an application for approval as a pre-qualified
business sponsor, or as a standard business sponsor,
made in accordance with
regulation 1.20C if:
(a) the Minister is satisfied that the applicant for approval is lawfully
operating in Australia a business in which the employment
of the holder of a
Subclass 457 (Business (Long Stay)) visa would contribute to:
(i) the creation or maintenance of employment for Australian citizens or
Australian permanent residents; or
(ii) expansion of Australian trade in goods or services; or
(iii) the improvement of Australian business links with international markets;
(iv) competitiveness within sectors of the Australian economy; and
(b) in respect of each visa applicant who seeks to satisfy the primary criteria
for a Subclass 457 visa to be granted on the basis
(i) the applicant for approval is the employer referred to in subclause
457.223 (4) or (5) of Schedule 2 in relation to the visa
application; and
(ii) the visa applicant satisfies the requirements of that subclause;
the Minister is satisfied that:
(iii) the applicant for approval proposes to be the direct employer in
Australia of the visa applicant as the holder of the visa
subregulation called 'the visa holder'); or
(iv) if the applicant for approval is a body corporate - the applicant for
approval is, under section 50 of the Corporations Law,
related to the body
corporate that proposes to be the direct employer in Australia of the visa
holder; and
(c) the Minister is satisfied that the applicant for approval:
(i) will introduce to, or utilise or create in, Australia new or improved
technology or business skills; or
(ii) has a satisfactory record of, or a demonstrated commitment towards,
training Australian citizens and Australian permanent residents
in the business
operations of the applicant in Australia; and
(d) the Minister is satisfied that nothing adverse is known to Immigration
(e) the Minister is satisfied that where relevant, the applicant for approval
has a satisfactory record of compliance with the immigration
Australia; and
(f) the Minister is satisfied that while there is in effect a Subclass 457 visa
granted on the basis that:
(i) the applicant for approval is the employer referred to in subclause
457.223 (4) or (5) of Schedule 2 in relation to a visa application;
(ii) the visa holder satisfies the requirements of that subclause;
the applicant for approval is able, in relation to each visa holder, to
comply with the undertakings given by the applicant in accordance
(3) An instrument approving a person as a standard business sponsor must
specify the maximum number of nominations of business activities,
number not exceeding the number proposed in the application for approval, that
may be approved under regulation 1.20H in
relation to the standard business
sponsor while the approval is in effect.
(4) As soon as practicable after deciding an application for approval as a
pre-qualified business sponsor, or as a standard business
sponsor, the Minister
must provide the applicant with:
(a) a copy of the instrument approving or rejecting the application; and
(b) if the application is rejected, a statement of the reasons why the
application was not approved.
(5) Unless renewed under regulation 1.20E, approval of a person as a
pre-qualified business sponsor ceases to have effect:
(a) at the end of the period of 24 months commencing on the day on which the
approval is given; or
(b) on revocation of the approval under regulation 1.20F;
whichever happens first.
(6) Approval of a person as a standard business sponsor ceases to have
(a) when the number of Subclass 457 visas granted, since the giving of the
approval, on the basis that:
(i) the applicant satisfies the primary criteria; and
(ii) the standard business sponsor is the employer (within the meaning of
subclause 457.223 (4) or (5) of Schedule 2;
is equal to the number of nominations of business activities determined under
subregulation (3) in relation to that approval of
that standard business
sponsor; or
(b) at the end of the period of 12 months commencing on the day on which the
approval is given; or
(c) on revocation of the approval under regulation 1.20F;
whichever happens first.
Regulation 1.20G. Nomination of business activities
(1) A person who:
(a) is a party to a labour agreement; or
(b) is a pre-qualified business sponsor; or
(c) is a standard business sponsor; or
(d) does not operate a business in Australia but:
(i) has given undertakings in accordance with approved form 1067; and
(ii) is a person whom the Minister is satisfied (apart from not operating a
business in Australia) would, on application, be likely
to be approved as a
standard business sponsor;
may nominate to the Minister an activity in which an individual is proposed
to be employed by the person in Australia.
(2) A nomination must be made in accordance with approved form 1068.
(3) A nomination, except a nomination by a party to a labour agreement or a
pre-qualified business sponsor, must be accompanied by
a fee of $210.
(4) If a person (except a party to a labour agreement) who nominates an
activity that is not a key activity proposes to employ a
visa applicant in a
position to perform the activity, the nomination must be accompanied:
(a) in the case of proposed employment for a period of more than 3, but not
more than 12, months - by the results of labour market
testing in relation to
the position, where so required by the Minister; and
(b) in the case of proposed employment for a period of more than 12 months - by
the results of labour market testing in relation
to the position.
Regulation 1.20H. Approval of nominations of business activities
(1) Subject to this regulation, the Minister may, by instrument in writing,
approve, or refuse to approve, the nomination of an activity
in which an
individual is proposed to be employed in Australia.
(2) Subject to subregulation (3), the Minister must approve the nomination of
an activity made in accordance with regulation 1.20G.
(3) The Minister must not approve the nomination of an activity that is
accompanied by the results of labour market testing unless
the Minister is
satisfied that those results indicate that a suitably qualified Australian
citizen or Australian permanent resident
is not readily available to fill the
position to which the nominated activity relates.
(4) As soon as practicable after making a decision to approve, or to refuse to
approve, the nomination of an activity, the Minister
must provide the person
who nominated the activity with:
(a) a copy of the instrument approving, or refusing to approve, the nomination
of the activity; and
(b) if the nomination is not approved, a statement of the reasons why the
nomination was not approved.
(5) The nomination of an activity ceases to have effect:
(a) at the end of the period of 12 months commencing on the day on which the
nomination of the activity is approved; or
(b) when the position in which the nominated activity is to be performed by the
holder of a Subclass 457 visa is filled; or
(c) in the case of an activity nominated by a person who is a party to a labour
agreement - when that agreement ceases to have effect;
(d) in the case of an activity nominated by a person who is approved as a pre-
qualified business sponsor or a standard business
sponsor - when the approval
ceases to have effect; or
(e) in the case of an activity nominated by a person to whom paragraph 1.20G
(1) (d) refers - either:
(i) upon the Minister becoming satisfied that the person is not able to comply
with undertakings given by the person in accordance
with approved form 1067;
(ii) upon the Minister ceasing to be satisfied that the person (apart from not
operating a business in Australia) would, on application,
be likely to be
approved as a standard business sponsor;
whichever happens first.
The Departments files in this matter have been made available to the Tribunal.
They contain, in part, the Visa Applicant's application
and other supporting
material. A hearing of this matter was held in Melbourne on 5 January 1999.
The Visa Applicant and Dr Wong
attended and gave sworn evidence to the
Tribunal. An interpreter was present to assist the parties.
The Visa Applicant stated that she came to Australia in October 1995 with a
tourist visa and liked it here. With the help of her
friends she started to do
business here. At first she was not familiar with the situation in Australia
and wanted to learn about
the restaurant business here as she had not been
involved in restaurants before. (This appears contrary to her employment
referred to in her application form where she noted she managed the
Federal Restaurant for 3 years). Overseas she had been involved
property and fashion business she stated. She had worked in a bank before
starting a boutique in Macau from 1992-1993. As
her relatives had land and
property she also involved herself in the property business in Hong Kong as
Reference was made to her family makeup including her adopted parents and
siblings in Canada. She stated she is divorced as she
separated from her
husband who lives in Macau in 1995. Her daughter is presently in Hong Kong.
She has no family in Australia.
Reference was made to her business activities in Australia and how the Visa
Applicant has lost and spent a lot of money here. Indeed
she stated she had
over $200,000 transferred to Australia and has spent over $100,000 on her
credit cards here. She had purchased
a share in the China Gourmet Restaurant.
The business was unsuccessful. The restaurant closed in April/May last year
and she lost
her money. She had been investigating
"shark medicine"
products from here to export overseas and contacts have been established in
The Visa Applicant referred to her substantial assets overseas and how she
would transfer assets to Australia if the visa is granted
to carry on with her
business activities here. The Visa Applicant indicated she still had an
involvement with Miliconcept and would
use that company as a vehicle for the
exports from Australia. This is the only company she is involved with in
Australia although
at the moment she is
"not dealing with her partner"
in Miliconcept. Later on she may invest in a computer business as well.
The Visa Applicant stated she has no tax file number and has not earned or been
paid any wage or salary in Australia. She does not
employ any Australian
permanent residents or citizens. Her company does not employ anyone she
stated. The Visa Applicant supports
herself from her own assets and again
referred to the money she has spent and lost here.
The Visa Applicant stated she is still negotiating business in the shark
medicine and computer areas. She wishes to contribute to
Australia and if her
visa application is granted she will transfer further funds here. She hopes to
stay in Australia permanently
she stated.
Reference was made to her interview at the Department on 15 April 1998. She
had spent money on
"a physical examination"
she stated. She had
authorised others to look after her business interests overseas. The Visa
Applicant has not left Australia
since coming here except for a short trip to
except with
Miliconcept and seemed surprised when informed it had withdrawn its
sponsorship or nomination of her. Reference was made to the
condition 8101 of her visa. She had not been paid for any work or business she
has been involved with here and she has spent and
lost money in Australia.
Dr. Wong, a friend who has known the Visa Applicant for some 2½ years
referred to her situation and business activities here.
The Visa Applicant has sizable assets overseas Dr. Wong stated and he has seen
evidence of this. He referred to her losing money
in the China Gourmet
Restaurant. The Visa Applicant has good contacts in Hong Kong for the shark
medicine business and to supply
goods there. Dr. Wong has assisted the Visa
Applicant to draft letters to potential suppliers in Australia and given the
period, not many responses have been received and the like. He was
unaware of her involvement with Miliconcept but knew of her loss
restaurant that closed last year.
He submitted the Visa Applicant should be
"given a go"
trial period"
for some time to see proof of her proposals. She should be
"given a chance to see the concrete results"
he submitted. Dr. Wong
stated the Visa Applicant had not worked in Australia as she had not been
Further material was submitted by the Visa Applicant to the Tribunal at the
hearing including copies of bank letters and statements
and accounts, copies of
letters to pharmaceutical companies and some responses and other letters in
As indicated above, in order to succeed in an application for a visa under the
Migration Regulations
, it is necessary for the Visa Applicant to satisfy all of
the criteria for the grant of the visa.
At the time of the application in October 1996 the Tribunal notes that the Visa
Applicant was the holder of a Class TN Subclass 686
visitor visa. This class
of visa is listed as one of the specified classes of visa in clause 457.211 of
the Regulations. Therefore
the Visa Applicant satisfies that criteria.
Given the evidence and material before it the Tribunal finds that the Visa
Applicant is unable to satisfy subclauses 457.223(2),
(3), (5), (6), (8) and
(9) of the Regulations.
The Tribunal notes that the Visa Applicant was nominated by Miliconcept for a
"key activity"
with that Australian company that was registered the day
before her application for the Subclass 457 visa. Miliconcept has withdrawn
its nomination and sponsorship of the Visa Applicant as noted in the letter to
the Department in April 1998. As well the Tribunal
notes that there is no
approved business nomination by the Department for Miliconcept. Consequently
the Visa Applicant is unable
to satisfy sub clause 457.223(4) of the
Regulations.
The Tribunal found the Visa Applicant to be quite vague in her evidence,
particularly involving her intentions or plans for future
business activities.
It notes that her activities proposed have changed over time from the initial
sponsorship by Miliconcept to
an involvement in a failed restaurant to
suggestions of an export business in
"shark medicine"
activities in the computing area. Contacts have been made with some
pharmaceutical companies here.
The Tribunal notes that the Visa Applicant does not employ any Australian
permanent residents or citizens nor does Miliconcept, the
company vehicle she
stated she is using. The suggestion by Dr. Wong that she be
and be allowed a
"trial period"
so to speak is not plausible and
is contrary to the legislation. As well the Tribunal finds from the evidence
and material before
it that the Visa Applicant on balance does not have
genuine and realistic commitment to maintain or obtain an ownership interest in
a business in Australia".
Indeed since arriving here she has lost and
spent money. Furthermore the Tribunal finds on balance that the proposals of
Applicant in the business area are not of benefit to Australia as
defined in the Regulations. The Visa Applicant has no employees.
No contracts
or the like were produced to the Department or the Tribunal to indicate any
certainty in her business proposals or
outcomes that would enhance Australian
trade or the like. Consequently she is unable to satisfy sub clause 457.223(7)
of the Regulations.
The Tribunal notes that
is defined as follows in
means an activity that, in Australia, normally attracts remuneration;
The Visa Applicant was the holder of a visitor visa at the time of the
application with the condition
"8101 - no work"
. Clause 8101 of
Schedule 8 of the Regulations provides as follows:
8101. The holder must not engage in work in Australia.
Evidence and material before the Tribunal indicates on balance that the Visa
Applicant has worked in Australia contrary to condition
8101 endorsed on her
visa. Although it was submitted that she was never paid for her activities,
that she lost rather than received
money here and that she does not have a tax
file number the Tribunal finds that she has worked in Australia in breach of
condition 8101. Consequently she is unable to satisfy clause 457.221
of the Regulations.
Given the material and evidence before it the Tribunal finds on balance that
the Visa Applicant is unable to satisfy clause 457.223
of the Regulations and
requirements for the visa applied for. It may be that the application fails
for other reasons, however, given
the above findings it is not necessary to
consider this matter further.
As an applicant has to satisfy all of the prescribed criteria for the visa
applied for failure to meet any of the prescribed criteria
application fails for a Subclass 457 visa.
After considering all of the evidence and material before it the Tribunal finds
on balance that the Visa Applicant is also not entitled
to a Subclass 456 visa,
the other Subclass of visa referred to in the Regulations regarding a Class UC
The Visa Applicant is not entitled to the grant of a (Class UC) Subclass 457 or
Subclass 456 visa. The application before the Tribunal
therefore fails.
The Tribunal, pursuant to
section 349(2)(a)
Migration Act
, affirms the
decision to refuse the grant of a visa to the Visa Applicant.
I certify that this and the 18 preceeding pages are a true copy of the Decision
and Reasons for Decision of Steve Karas.
Tribunal Officer
Date: 28 January 1999
RTF format (111 KB)
Signed PDF/A format