Ritchie & Feakes [2013] FMCAfam 299 (28 March 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[2013] FMCAfam 299
FAMILY LAW – Parenting – special needs
child – supervision – what type of supervision needed and for how
Family Law Act 1975
Goode & Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346
(2006) FLC 93-286
Respondent:
File Number:
SYC 5143 of 2008
Judgment of:
Altobelli FM
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Applicant in Person
Counsel for the Respondent:
Respondent in Person
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Kathryn Renshall
THE COURT ORDERS PENDING FURTHER ORDER
(1) All existing orders for the child X born (omitted) 2006 to spend time with
her Father be discharged.
(2) The Father is to spend time with the child as follows:
(a) Commencing
on either Wednesday 3 April 2013 or Thursday 4 April 2013 as the Father may
nominate, and continuing each fortnight
thereafter for 2 hours as nominated by
the Independent Children’s Lawyer having regard to the availability of a
and the child’s sleep routine (if any);
(b) From the
first contact visit in May 2013, and subject to the availability of a
supervisor, the time shall increase to 3 hours
each fortnight;
Father’s time with the child pursuant to these Orders permit, the Father
is to collect the child from her school
accompanied by the supervisor, and
either return her to the said school or to the Mother’s home on conclusion
of his time,
depending on whether school would have ended by that time;
Father returns the child to her Mother’s home, he is not to approach the
Mother’s front door but to request
that the supervisor facilitate the
child’s return;
(e) The Father
is entitled to bring with him any other person during his time with the
(f) The Father
is to ensure that all activities he engages in with the child are appropriate
both having regard to her age, her developmental
stage, and her medical
condition as well, and he is to abide at all times with requests by the
supervisor; and
Independent Children’s Lawyer is requested to nominate a person who is
“special needs trained’ who the Father
may then engage at his own
expense as supervisor for the purposes of these Orders. The Independent
Children’s Lawyer has leave
to provide such information as she considers
appropriate to enable that person to discharge her role as supervisor. The
Independent
Children’s Lawyer must advise and keep the Mother advised in
relation to the supervisor.
THE COURT FURTHER ORDERS
(3) The matter be set down for 2 day Final Hearing on 19 and 20 February 2014 at
(4) Pursuant to
section 62G(2)
Family Law Act
parties and the child of the relationship attend upon a family consultant
nominated by the Dispute Resolution Coordinator of
this Court on a date and at
times to be advised for the purposes of the preparation of a Family Report
addressing the issues identified
of the Act.
(5) The parties send copies of all of their court documents to the family report
writer within 3 days of being requested to do so
by the family report writer.
(6) The Family Reporter have regard to affidavits filed in the matter at the
date of preparing the report.
the legal representatives for both parties or the
parties themselves to confirm with the report writer no later than ten (10) days
prior to the scheduled interviews that the interviews will proceed on the dates
(8) I DIRECT
the Independent Children’s Lawyer to notify the Family
Reporter of the hearing date and request the Family Reporter be available,
required by the parties, on the first morning of the hearing.
(9) The matter be adjourned to
possible Interim Hearing. If the Family Report is available, both parties are to
attend with their legal representatives (if any).
(10) Leave be granted to the Independent Children’s Lawyer to relist the
matter on 7 days’ notice.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment under the
Ritchie & Feakes
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYC 5143 of 2008
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
provide the following oral reasons for judgment in the matter of Ritchie &
Feakes. This case is about X who was born on (omitted)
2006. X is seven years
old. Her father is the applicant, her mother the respondent. On the
1 April 2010 the parents entered into
consent orders that provided for
equal shared parental responsibility, for X to live with her mother and for
there to be contact
with her father. I will incorporate into these, my oral
reasons, the orders for contact that were made, namely orders (8), orders
and also order (12).
orders were no doubt influenced by a family report which was prepared by a
family consultant, Ms R dated 12 February 2010.
X suffers from an atypical
autism spectrum disorder, a neuro-developmental disability that affects
communication, social perception,
interaction and some aspects of sensation,
cognition and functioning. Amongst other things, this means in practical terms
has a special diet and a routine. X has special needs. Her condition
and its management and the impact of this on both parents
is a major complexity
in this case.
case has been in my docket since late 2012. The father’s application
originally dealt with schooling and resumption of
since June that year due to AVO proceedings. The matter has been back before me
several times since
November 2012 and on almost every occasion I have had to
make interim orders of some sort. Both parents have been either represented
unrepresented at times – the father, mostly unrepresented; the mother
mostly represented but currently unrepresented and
X, of course, has her own
issue that came before me last Friday, 2 March, was how contact was to be
progressed, at least pending the preparation of a family
report. Both the
father and the Independent Children’s Lawyer proposed unsupervised time,
one hour per week increasing to
two and subsequently three hours per week, with
the father to have another person present but not in a formal supervisory
The father, in fact, conceded that his preference was for one
unsupervised contact each fortnight.
mother proposed a one-hour visit per calendar month supervised either by her or
her partner until such time as the father is prepared
to pay for independent
supervision by someone who is “special needs trained”.
is some common ground in this case and there are also some strong impressions
that can be formed from the evidence. Firstly,
the mother and father cannot
communicate. They have a deep distrust for each other and their capacity to
cooperate is probably zero.
the father said to me on the last occasion that he was close to simply giving
up. Nextly, the mother is so overwhelmingly
concerned and preoccupied about
X’s special needs that her approach to this case has been extremely
conservative and might
even be mistaken as uncooperative but, she says, she
finds it hard to ignore what she perceives to be the consistent advice of
treating experts who urge great caution about unsupervised time with
the father.
it would seem, indeed a strong impression formed from the objective evidence, is
that the mother has had fallings out with
at least the last supervisor. Nextly,
it is possible, I recognise, that nothing in fact, can be done to address the
concerns other than, perhaps, to ignore them. Ms E, counsel for
the Independent Children’s Lawyer has described the mother
anxious than is necessary”. This is important because the mother’s
case is that contact should remain
supervised until the family report is
obtained but the risk is that even then she would not accept the family
consultant’s
recommendations if they are contrary to her own belief
systems. Lastly, by any objective of measure the recent history of supervised
applicable law is, of course, contained in
Family Law Act
will incorporate into these my oral reasons, some of the relevant provisions.
The Full Court’s decision in
Goode & Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346
(2006) FLC 93-286
provides a template to approach these cases, as well as a discussion of the
applicable law. I have or will make an order for a family
report and this will
be available in August and I note that it is likely that there will be a further
interim hearing after this.
After that there will be a final hearing in
February 2014.
E, on behalf of X, emphasises the father’s positive track record of
the recent positive current
history of supervised contact. She submits progression to unsupervised is
called for, is in X’s
best interests, and that if the father has another
person present this is good but only because it reassures the mother and not
there is any need. Ms E submits that supervision is contraindicated
because it is unnecessary on the evidence, it is very hard to
arrange and, in
any event, it is expensive.
short, however, she submits there is no risk to X. She points out that the
regime of contact is very conservative, namely starting
at one and then
progressing to two and three hours in accordance with her proposal. The father
agrees with this but his further
concern is that the mother is incapable of
fostering X’s relationship with him as is manifested by her arbitrary
decision to
change X’s school and her disapproval of two previous
supervisors. His contention is that so far as the mother is concerned,
is good enough to care for X but herself.
mother says that, in effect, the risk of unsupervised contact is too high. She
says this is based on the consistent medical evidence
that she has obtained.
Moreover, she contends that the concerns expressed by family consultant Ms R in
the first family report have
not been addressed, especially the concerns about
the father’s parenting capacity. The mother concedes that there has been
supervised contact that appears to have gone well but submits that these very
limited contacts are only a snapshot within which to
assess the risk to X. The
mother contends that X remains a very vulnerable little girl and that
supervision should continue until
the family report is available.
the Court understands the mother’s feelings and perceptions, especially
that she feels that she cannot ignore the advice
that she is getting from
X’s doctors about the need for supervised contact when they are with her,
the Court can place little
weight on this. It is unreliable evidence,
especially in the manner in which it is presented. The Court, for example, is
of the history given to the doctors about the issue that is presently
before the Court. The mother can hardly be considered to be
an objective
historian of these events. The case cannot be decided by reference to what may
well be partisan medical evidence which,
in any event, is quite inconsistent
with the more recent history of uneventful, unproblematic supervised time.
the mother’s reliance on the existing family report, even though it is
three years old, does require much deeper consideration.
One must, for example,
look very carefully at paragraphs 60 to 80 of that family report and I will
incorporate those paragraphs
into these, my oral reasons. The single most
prominent thing of these paragraphs can be summarised in one word –
vulnerability.
It is not just X’s vulnerability that is apparent from the
family report but the mother’s own vulnerability as well.
dependence between mother and child that is, of necessity, much greater due to
X’s special needs. As the family
consultant said, X is not a normal child
so that which would be normal in terms of contact for any other seven year old
simply does
not apply here. It should be recognised, of course, that this is
reflected in the very conservative proposals that have been advanced
father and the Independent Children’s Lawyer.
Court’s biggest concern in this regard is that the making of an order that
the mother cannot emotionally accept and cope
with, threatens her ability to
meet the special needs that X has. The Court accepts, of course, that there is
a risk that pandering
to the mother’s concerns, if they are subjective
without an objective basis, is hardly in X’s best interests. The Court
accepts that there is a possibility that what the father contends is correct and
that is that there is nothing that will ever satisfy
her. But on balance, the
Court at present feels that both the father and the Independent Children’s
Lawyer may not be fully
appreciating X’s vulnerability which is, in
itself, inextricably linked to the mother’s vulnerabilities. The need for
caution and conservatism must therefore continue in this period until the family
report is obtained.
is sobering to note the closing paragraph of exhibit ICL1 from 22 March.
This is the final supervisor’s report from (omitted)
and it is a report on
the supervised contact that occurred on 6 March. There are some wise words here
– and I will read it
onto the record.
(omitted) can report is that the session was uncomplicated and that there did
not appear to be any concerns in the actual interaction
between father and X
while she was being supervised and while the grandmother was present. Decisions
regarding X’s safety
and the appropriateness of father/child interactions
when unsupervised and out of this occasion of service rests with the Court and
requires far more detailed assessment, observation and
decision-making.
the availability of the family report, the Court will order that contact
continue to be supervised but it will be for increasingly
longer periods. The
father requests that it be fortnightly. So be it. The father requests that it
be on either Wednesday or Thursday.
So be it. The mother will have no say on
who is to be the supervisor. The Independent Children’s Lawyer will have
control in this regard. The only prerequisite will be that which the
mother told the Court, that is the supervisor must be “special
trained” and therefore, I infer, not necessarily an occupational
will ask the Independent Children’s Lawyer who is clearly one of the most
experienced Independent Children’s Lawyers
in New South Wales, to
proactively seek out potential supervisors who are special needs trained and who
are affordable to the father.
asked the Independent Children’s Lawyer not to rule out investigating
whether there is someone who is special needs trained
available at a supervised
organisation. I rule out the mother’s
supervising contact or even being
present in the vicinity and this is due to the toxic nature of the parental
relationship. If the
father would like someone else to be present, that is his
I make orders, I would like to make some comments directed to the mother and the
father. To the father, I say, do not give
up. Hang in there at least until the
family report is released in a few month’s time. To the mother I say
that, in all likelihood,
the biggest problem that you will face at a final
hearing is the father’s contention that despite what you say you are not
committed to encouraging X’s relationship with him. If you want to manage
this issue, you must cooperate, not just with the
letter but with the spirit of
the orders.
am going to order a family report. I will set this matter down for final
will vacate all existing orders for X to spend time with her father and I will
make the following orders for the father to spend
time with X.
I certify that the preceding twenty-two (22) paragraphs are a
true copy of the reasons for judgment of Altobelli FM
Date: 8 April 2013
RTF format (117 KB)
Signed PDF/A format