Yugunga-Nya Native Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Max Pedri and Others [2025] NNTTA 15 (18 June 2025)
NATIONAL NATIVE TITLE TRIBUNAL
Yugunga-Nya Native Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Max Pedri and
[2025] NNTTA 15
(18 June 2025)
Application No:
WO2024/0505
IN THE MATTER of an inquiry into an expedited procedure objection
application
Yugunga-Nya Native Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC (WCD2021/008)
(native title party/YN PBC)
Max Pedri and Raymond Pedri
(grantee parties)
State of Western Australia
DECISION TO DISMISS AN OBJECTION APPLICATION
Member Lisa Eaton
Catchwords:
Native title – future acts – proposed grant of exploration
licence – proposed grant of prospecting licence –
procedure objection application – failure to comply with directions
– objection application dismissed
Legislation:
Title Act 1993
(Cth) ss 29, 31(1), 32(4), 109(1), 148(b)
David Stock & Others on behalf of the Nyiyaparli People/Western
Australia/Giralia Resources NL
David Stock v Giralia
Gilla on behalf of the Yugunga-Nya People v State of Western Australia
Yugunga-Nya Part A determination
Michael Daniel Teelow/Michael Page/Northern Territory
(2001) 166 FLR 266 (Teelow
Representative of the native title party:
Anja Gambie-Becker, Yugunga-Nya Native Title Aboriginal Corporation
Representative of the grantee parties:
Representative of the Government party:
Andrea Wyles, Department of Energy, Mines, Industry Regulation and
REASONS FOR DISMISSAL
is a decision made under s 148(b) of the Act, which empowers the National Native
to dismiss an objection application at any stage of the
inquiry in circumstances where the applicant fails within a reasonable time
proceed with the application or comply with a direction of the Tribunal.
[2] The State
gave public notification of the proposed grant of a special prospecting licence
to the grantee parties,
included a statement that it considers the grant attracts the expedited
The effect of giving
such a notice is that unless a native title party lodges an objection, the act
may be done without first requiring
all parties to negotiate in good
[3] The proposed
special prospecting licence falls wholly on land subject to a determination of
native title made by the Federal Court
of Australia in the
Yugunga-Nya
Part A determination
. As set out in the determination the YN PBC holds
native title on trust for the Yugunga-Nya people. As the relevant native title
party in relation to land and waters that will be affected by the grant, YN PBC
lodged an objection to the State’s inclusion
of the expedited procedure
statement in respect of the special prospecting licence application. As a
result, unless the application
is withdrawn or dismissed, the Tribunal is
required to determine whether the grant of the proposed licence is an act
attracting the
expedited procedure.
[4] In February
2025, initial directions were made requiring all parties to provide their
contentions and evidence. On 2 April 2025,
these directions were amended, at the
request of YN PBC’s representative, to allow the native title party
further time to provide
its contentions and evidence. In accordance with the
amended directions, YN PBC’s contentions and evidence were due on or
22 April 2025.
[5] On 28 April
2025, the Tribunal emailed all parties noting that the native title party had
failed to comply and that the objections
were now at risk of dismissal under s
148(b) of the Act. On 13 May 2025, YN PBC’s representative responded
requesting the directions
be amended again to give the native title party a
further two-week extension. On 14 May 2025, the directions were amended in
with this request, resulting in YN PBC’s contentions and
evidence being due on or before 27 May 2025.
[6] On 3 June
2025, the Tribunal was informed that YN PBC would now be represented by an
in-house employee in this matter. The new
representative informed the Tribunal
that they would consult with the Board about this matter and that the objection
application
would likely be withdrawn.
[7] On 9 June
2025, the new representative for YN PBC informed the Tribunal, via telephone
call, that the objection application would
not be withdrawn and that they were
aware that meant the matter would proceed to dismissal as no contentions or
evidence were to
Consideration of dismissal
considering this dismissal, I have had regard to the applicable principles set
Teelow v Page.
required to proceed as expeditiously as possible when conducting an inquiry into
an expedited procedure objection. Once an objection
application is made it is
incumbent on the objector to progress the application and to communicate with
the Tribunal and all parties.
Tribunal must also ‘pursue the objective of carrying out its functions in
a fair, just, economical, informal and prompt
[9] Under s
148(b) the Tribunal may dismiss an objection application at any stage of the
inquiry in circumstances where the applicant
fails within a reasonable time to
proceed with the objection application or to comply with a direction of the
Tribunal. While the
Tribunal has broad discretion to dismiss an objection
application, it is not an action to be taken lightly.
[10] In this
matter, YN PBC have failed to progress the objection application within a
reasonable period despite being afforded sufficient
opportunity. They have
failed to comply with directions set by the Tribunal. Further, their
representative has confirmed they do
not intend on complying in the future.
[11] Having
regard to all of the facts and circumstances, I am satisfied that the objection
application should be dismissed.
expedited procedure objection application in relation to P 52/1671-S is
dismissed pursuant to s 148(b) of the Act.
Ms Lisa Eaton
Teelow v Page
Stock v Giralia,
The Act s 109(1).
RTF format (213 KB)
Signed PDF/A format