McLaughlin v Commonwealth [2000] HREOCA 43 (25 October 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION ACT 1992
Matter No. H98/35
ALEXA McLAUGHLIN
Complainant
THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
REASONS FOR DECISION OF INQUIRY COMMISSIONER
HON WILLIAM CARTER QC
Date of Decision: 25 October 2000
Dates of Hearing: 17, 18, & 31 May 1999, 20,
21, 22, 23, 26, 27 July 1999, and 12 August 1999
Location of Hearing: Canberra
Appearances: The complainant appeared for herself except on 17, 18 &
31 May 1999 when she was represented by Dr Bell of The Welfare
Rights and Legal
Centre Limited. The respondent was represented by Sarah Court of the Australian
Government Solicitor’s Office.
1. INTRODUCTION
The complainant, Ms McLaughlin, was until her resignation on 5 November 1993
a member of the Australian Public Service. During the
course of her employment,
and even after her resignation, her relationship with the respondent and with a
variety of its agencies
was from time to time contentious and this is evidenced
by a voluminous body of documentation much of which is argumentative and
contains assertion and counter assertion in relation to an ever-widening range
of issues. The complaint to the Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission
(“the Commission”) is only one of those issues.
At the source of this contentious relationship with the respondent was the
state of health of the complainant. This itself became
the subject of numerous
medical reports from a variety of medical practitioners possessed of a variety
of specialist expertise. In
a statement of the complainant dated 22 September
1998 she refers to her several medical conditions including obesity, chronic
syndrome, multiple chemical sensitivities, sleep apnoea, breast cancer,
anxiety, depression and hypertension. She asserts that the
effect of these
various medical conditions or one or other of them was the cause of cognitive,
emotional and physical disabilities
which severely impacted on her lifestyle and
consequentially on her employment.
In the pre-hearing period relating to her complaint to the Commission, a
question emerged as to whether any of these conditions and
if so which one(s)
was or were relevant to the acts of discrimination which she alleged against
several Commonwealth agencies including
the Department of Social Security
(“DSS”). As will emerge the subject matter of her complaint was, as
a result of the
statutory processes provided for by the
Discrimination Act
(Cth) (“the Act”), narrowed
significantly both in terms of time and subject matter but at the outset a
potentially complex
issue arose as to the medical condition(s) which was or were
relevant to the specific period of time within which the complaint was
and had to be determined. This was the period March 1993 to November 1993. The
identity of the relevant medical condition(s)
and the question whether that or
those condition(s) was or were comprehended by the definition of
“disability” in the
Act at first loomed as a major issue. However,
the respondent prior to the hearing conceded that for purposes of the inquiry
Ms McLaughlin’s complaint, she suffered an illness or medical
condition during the relevant period which was a “disability”
the meaning of the Act.
It is necessary to dwell for a moment, by way of introduction only, on some
general matters in order to better expose not only the
contentious background to
the complaint itself but also the difficulties which emerged in the course of
the inquiry by the Commission
and in the hearing.
As will be seen the need for the hearing arose as the result of an
interlocutory decision by Sir Ronald Wilson, the delegate of the
President of
the Commission. It will be convenient to refer to it as “the Wilson
decision”. Whilst the complainant would
submit that there is some
difficulty in identifying with precision the content of the issues left for
inquiry by Sir Ronald, the
fact is that detailed inquiry and an examination of
the mass of documents soon made clear enough the relevant issues. As will be
seen, the parties over a period of years prior to 1998 had engaged in a series
of other contentious and litigious processes (not
involving the Commission) and
those closely involved in them, including the complainant, were well versed in
the complex matrix of
fact arising out of the complainant’s employment by
the Commonwealth and her resignation from that employment. For anyone
approaching
the matter for the first time it was a somewhat daunting task made
somewhat more difficult by the complainant’s insistence
that the relevant
issues within the scope of the Commission’s inquiry could only be
understood by a comprehensive reference
to the minutiae of almost every event,
letter or document which had emerged in contentious circumstances at least since
was therefore out of an abundance of caution that I was liberal in the
general ruling which I made to the effect that Ms McLaughlin
could canvass in
her evidence a range of factual issues which went far beyond the relevant facts
which occurred in the relevant period.
I will refer to this and related matters
I turn to the complaint and in doing so it is essential that it be placed in
the context of a much wider range of issues which had
arisen out of the
complainant’s employment and her resignation from the Australian Public
Service. Before doing that I should
add that the respondent was originally
identified by the Disability Discrimination Commissioner as the Department of
Social Security
(DSS) or Centrelink but by agreement the Commonwealth was
substituted as the respondent.
COMPLAINT AND THE COMPLAINANT’S EMPLOYMENT HISTORY
McLaughlin joined the Australian Public Service in 1989 as an Actuarial Officer
in the office of the Government Actuary in the
Insurance and Superannuation
Commission. She had previously been employed in the life insurance industry for
ten years in the Victorian
Public Service as an actuarial officer involved in
life insurance and superannuation. She had also served for four and a half years
as a personnel officer, resource manager and actuarial officer. One can observe
that she presents as a woman of maturity, highly
intelligent and resourceful
with University based qualifications to support her professional expertise in
actuarial and related disciplines.
Although she vigourously asserted the
contrary she presented as one with a comprehensive memory and an almost
encyclopaedic knowledge
of the dates, facts and documents which in her view were
relevant to her complaint. Perhaps her longstanding familiarity with matters
relevant to her complaint and the other litigious processes relating to her
employment by the respondent more readily explain her
apparent good memory.
In August 1991 she was promoted to a position in the Tax and Distribution
Analysis Section of the Social Policy Division in DSS. She
worked there until
August 1992 and her tasks included computer modelling, the evaluation of
research literature and policy analysis.
In her initial period of employment at
DSS (August 1991 - August 1992) serious concerns about her health emerged as a
result of the
incidence of breast cancer. In March 1992 she had been referred
for specialist attention and was hospitalised for a week. After her
work a breast biopsy on 18 May 1992 revealed a malignancy and she was
hospitalised for the necessary surgery for the removal
of the lump. She returned
to work in June 1992. In this period her supervisor had been a Mr Gallagher and
she remained employed in
this section of the Social Policy Division of DSS until
August 1992. Ms McLaughlin gave extensive oral evidence of events during
period of her employment and of the somewhat stormy relationship which, in her
view, had characterised her working relationship
with Mr Gallagher. She
vigorously alleged an adverse view of Mr Gallagher and detailed her negative
assessment of his attitude towards
her, as she saw it.
It is unnecessary to decide whether there was any justification for this.
Certainly the contemporaneous documentation does not support
it. In August 1992
Mr Gallagher had recommended that the complainant’s work performance was
satisfactory for the purposes of
determining her entitlement to a pay increment
(Exhibit 11). The qualification written on the face of the document -
for illness” - cannot reasonably be considered as other
than realistic. The body of the document evidences what appears to
be a balanced
view of her work performance in the light of her then recent illness. It was
very shortly after this that she was transferred,
as will shortly appear. Later
reports were also written by Mr Gallagher dated 25 January 1993 (Exhibit’
) concerning her employment both in DSS and in Treasury where she again
came under Mr Gallagher’s supervision. These reports
were written for the
benefit of the Commonwealth Medical Officer (“CMO”), Dr Heathershaw,
who in late January 1993 was
engaged to provide a medical assessment of the
complainant. Again these reports of Mr Gallagher appear to reflect a balanced
of her then working style and capacities and appear inconsistent with
the quite severe criticism which the complainant levelled at
Mr Gallagher.
In August 1992 Ms McLaughlin was seconded to the Retirement Incomes Modelling
Taskforce (“the RIM taskforce”) in the Department
of the Treasury.
Whilst working under his supervision prior to August 1992 she alleged that Mr
Gallagher had failed to “accommodate”
her condition of chronic
fatigue syndrome (CFS). Upon accepting the secondment to the RIM taskforce in
Treasury where she was to
work under the supervision of Mr Colin Brown, she and
Mr Brown at the outset met for lunch and discussed mutually acceptable working
arrangements. She stated that her relationship with Mr Brown later deteriorated
for reasons unconnected with her health. In December
1992 her previous
supervisor at DSS, Mr Gallagher, was himself appointed to the RIM taskforce and
again assumed the role of Ms McLaughlin’s
supervisor in January 1993.
During her previous period of employment under Mr Gallagher’s supervision
she had on or about 21
July 1992 consulted Ms Johanna Stevens, a staff
counsellor in the Work Environment Unit at DSS. Upon Mr Gallagher’s
at the RIM taskforce she again sought out Ms Stevens for counselling in
January 1993. Ms McLaughlin’s major concern was her
state of health and
the likely impact upon that of again being placed in a work environment under
the supervision of Mr Gallagher.
Ms Stevens in the course of their meeting(s) presented to Ms McLaughlin the
option that she might undertake part time employment and
in association with
that that she later apply for a partial invalidity pension (PIP). The
superannuation scheme of which she was
a member made provisions for such an
entitlement and for that purpose she was referred to a CMO, Dr Heathershaw,
whose report dated
22 February 1993 refers to her examination of the complainant
on 28 January 1993. The report of Dr Heathershaw recommended that the
complainant should “reduce to permanent part time work”, that her
hours should be “flexible” and that the
hours worked “should
average no less than 20 hours a week”. Her report concluded with the
suggestion that the Retirement
Benefits Office (“the RBO”) which
administered the superannuation scheme “be approached to obtain a partial
The processes within DSS consequential upon her application for permanent
part time employment and the report of Dr Heathershaw, along
with other matters,
became, from the point of view of the complainant, matters of serious contention
and remained so until her resignation
from the Australian Public Service on 5
November 1993.
Permanent partial disability (“PPD”) was granted to her as from
13 January 1993 when permanent part time work (“PPTW”)
She remained at the RIM taskforce on part time employment between January
– March 1993. Although she remained seconded
to the RIM taskforce for the
period August 1992 – March 1993 all personnel and human resource
management issues remained with
DSS. Such matters were managed by the Divisional
Support Unit (“DSU”) of which in the relevant period Mr Peter
was the manager. As will appear Mr Thornton is the
“manager” or “personnel manager” referred to in the
paragraphs of the Wilson decision. He is, for the most part, the focus
of Ms McLaughlin’s complaint.
It was agreed after negotiations that Ms McLaughlin would transfer out of the
RIM taskforce and return to DSS where she would take
up a position under the
supervision of Mr Roger Brown in the Income and Assets Test Review in the Social
Policy Division. This was
agreed in February/March 1993. In March 1993 Ms
McLaughlin fell ill; she left work and remained off work except for a few weeks
her resignation in November 1993. On 2 May 1993 she applied for workers
compensation to Comcare, the relevant Commonwealth agency.
This application was
granted on 27 July 1993 effective from the time she had ceased work in March.
Accordingly, she had by this time
sought PPD from the RBO, workers compensation
from Comcare and, as will be seen, in this context her sick leave entitlements
a significant issue.
On 23 June 1993 she attempted to resume work at the Income and Assets Test
Review at DSS but remained there only until 13 July 1993
when she again left
work and Comcare resumed compensation payments from that date. By this time she
was also the recipient of a PIP
which had been approved by the RBO. She did not
on 5 November 1993. Therefore, from the time of the coming into operation of the
provisions of
of the Act on 1 March 1993 (at about which time Ms McLaughlin
had ceased work at the RIM Taskforce) and until her resignation in
November 1993 she had worked for a few weeks only (23 June 1993 – 13 July
1993) at the Income and Assets Test Review
It is necessary to go back a little in time. On or about 11 May 1993 Ms
McLaughlin resorted to the grievance procedure available within
the Australian
Public Service by which an employee can seek relief or redress in respect of the
actions of departmental personnel.
The source of this grievance was her
perception that she had been disadvantaged by the actions of Mr Thornton in his
handling of
her pay entitlements from about mid-March 1993. At that time Ms
McLaughlin had been granted a permanent partial invalidity pension
and had been in receipt of sick leave. As pointed out she had later sought
workers compensation from Comcare. The question
of sick leave became contentious
(the details will be dealt with below) and in her grievance Ms McLaughlin
focussed on the perceived
failures of Mr Thornton in his management of the
personnel issues arising by reason of her ill health and its impact on her
and income. The grievance was resolved on or about 10 August 1993
(the date of a letter from Ms Kerry Blackburn, Assistant Secretary
Relations and Personnel,) although not to the entire satisfaction of the
complainant.
Mr Parkes, who had investigated the grievance, had reported on the matter on
25 June 1993.
This process has been referred to as the first grievance.
From the time of her ceasing work on 13 July 1993 at which time compensation
payments again became payable (the decision to grant
compensation was made on or
designed to ensure the complainant’s
ultimate return to work. For that
purpose a rehabilitation provider, Health Access Pty Ltd, was engaged to provide
the rehabilitation
services in respect of the complainant. Health Access Pty Ltd
was a private organisation. Dr Scott, a specialist in rehabilitative
was the person primarily concerned in establishing and maintaining the program
which was designed to achieve, if possible,
Ms McLaughlin’s return to her
employment.
It suffices to say here that from the time Health Access Pty Ltd and Dr Scott
became involved in the possible rehabilitation of the
complainant from shortly
after the acceptance by Comcare of liability on or about 27 July 1993, and until
5 November 1993 the date
of her resignation, Ms McLaughlin remained dissatisfied
with the execution of the rehabilitation process particularly insofar as
operated in January - March 1993 (at the RIM Taskforce)
and in the period 23
June – 13 July 1993 (at DSS). Again it will be necessary to return to this
In November 1993 at about the time of her resignation Comcare ceased the
payment of compensation benefits. The basis of this decision
was the belief that
at the time of her resignation, at which time the rehabilitation program
remained in place, Ms McLaughlin was
capable of part time work. This and related
issues later became the subject of further review and proceedings in the
Administrative
Appeals Tribunal. On 5 May 1994 about 6 months after her
resignation Ms McLaughlin then applied for reinstatement as a member of
Australian Public Service. This was refused on 22 June 1994 and on 20 October
1994 she submitted a further grievance –
the second grievance. A review of
the documents submitted shows that they range over many issues including some or
most of those
already referred to. Her application for reemployment and the
consequential grievance was supported by the Community and Public Sector
This process is also evidenced by a voluminous exchange of correspondence
between the investigating officer and Ms McLaughlin
and others and there is
other related documentation as well.
On 19 December 1994 Ms McLaughlin was advised by letter that the grievance
application in respect of her application for reemployment
had been rejected and
this was accompanied by the 17 page grievance officer’s report dated 16
December 1994.
On 11 January 1995 this grievance application and the grievance
officer’s decision was referred on behalf of Ms McLaughlin to
Protection Review Agency (“MPRA”). The MPRA’s investigation is
detailed in its investigating officer’s
report dated 26 July 1995 which
rejected the grievance and found that it was appropriate in all of the
circumstances for DSS to accept
Ms McLaughlin’s resignation.
The above outline of some only of the facts relevant to her employment at DSS
is not intended to be exhaustive. The purpose only is
to set the context so that
the details of the complaint to the Commission under the Act and the Wilson
decision will become more
intelligible.
3. THE COMPLAINT TO THE COMMISSION
3.1 Outline of complaint
By letter dated 16 September 1994, the complainant lodged with the Disability
Discrimination Commissioner a complaint of discrimination
pursuant to the Act
against DSS, Comcare and Health Access Pty Ltd, the rehabilitation provider, on
the basis that each agency had
discriminated against her unlawfully because of
her disability. On 23 August 1995 the complainant added the MPRA as a fourth
to her complaint. It will have been noted that the MPRA had rejected
her second grievance on 26 July 1995. Her complaint against
the MPRA was that in
its investigation of her grievance arising out of the department’s failure
to reinstate her in employment
at DSS the MPRA had also discriminated against
her on the ground of her disability.
Subsequent to the lodgement of her complaint dated 16 September 1994 the
complainant, under cover of a letter dated 14 December 1994,
lodged with the
Commission a schedule of documents and 90 pages of detail being excerpts from
the 342 documents referred to. Some
other matters of detail in relation to the
history of the complaint are set out in Exhibit 3.
The complaint against DSS alleged that the Department between March 1993 when
she was approved for part time employment (the Act became
operative from 1 March
1993) and until her resignation in November 1993 discriminated against her on
account of her disability by
failing to address the conflict which she alleged
had developed between herself and Mr Thornton. This conflict is alleged to have
arisen by reason of the fact that staff made mistakes in administering her pay
and entitlements during this period, and in the manner
of the administration of
her pay and entitlements that Mr Thornton failed to “accommodate her
disabilities and to deal adequately
with her concerns”.
The complaint also alleged that she had been discriminated against by DSS
when she tendered her resignation in October/November 1993
because she had not
been offered an immediate transfer or alternate placement which she claimed
could have resolved the difficulties
with her then current workplace, and have
provided her with an alternative to resignation. In respect of her application
for reinstatement,
she complained that she had been discriminated against by DSS
in its not accepting this application.
The complainant further alleged that the rehabilitation provider, Health
Access Pty Ltd, had discriminated against her in the development
implementation of her rehabilitation plan. This complaint contained the
additional allegation that Health Access Pty Ltd had
imputed to her a
psychiatric disability which affected the development of the rehabilitation plan
by the rehabilitation provider.
The complaint also alleged that Comcare had discriminated against her on the
grounds of her disability by ceasing compensation payments
in November 1993
because they assessed her as fit for part time duties in accordance with the
report of Dr Heathershaw dated 28 February
After the MPRA had in July 1995 rejected the review of her grievance in
relation to DSS’ refusal to reinstate her after resignation
in November
1993, the complainant added a further complaint that MPRA had discriminated
against her on the grounds of her disability
in its investigation of her
grievance lodged in respect of DSS’ refusal to reinstate her after
resignation.
It is necessary to add that after ceasing compensation payments to her in
November 1993 Comcare later in 1994 reviewed that decision
and it was overturned
later. Comcare undertook a further review of Ms McLaughlin’s entitlement
to compensation and ultimately
ceased payments of compensation. This was again
the subject of another request for further reconsideration but the decision was
and compensation payments ceased. This decision was later the subject
of appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
On 7 February 1997 the Disability Discrimination Commissioner advised the
complainant that she was declining to inquire further into
complainant’s complaint and detailed her reasons for so declining. The
Disability Discrimination Commissioner considered
that some aspects of the
complaint were lacking in substance and in respect of others that other remedies
had been sought in relation
to the subject matter of complaint. Furthermore, in
respect of other parts of the complaint the Commissioner took the view that the
subject matter had been adequately dealt with by another statutory body.
3.2 The Wilson Decision
In deciding not to inquire further into the complaint the Disability
Discrimination Commissioner acted pursuant to s.71(2) of the
Act. That section
“71 Inquiries by Commissioner
The Commissioner may decide not to inquire into an act, or, if the Commissioner
has commenced to inquire into an act, decide
not to continue to inquire into the
(a) the Commissioner is satisfied that the act is not unlawful under a
provision of
(b) the Commissioner thinks the person aggrieved by the act does not desire,
or no other person aggrieved by the act desires, that
the inquiry be made or
continued; or
(c) in a case where a complaint has been made to the Commission in relation
to the act (other than an act to which Division 4 of
period of more than 12 months has elapsed since the act was done and the
complaint was made to the Commission; or
(d) in a case where a complaint has been made to the Commission in relation
to the act—the Commissioner thinks that the complaint
was trivial,
vexatious, misconceived or lacking in substance; or
(e) in a case where some other remedy has been sought in relation to the
subject matter of the complaint—the Commissioner thinks
that the subject
matter of the complaint has been adequately dealt with; or
(f) the Commissioner thinks that some other more appropriate remedy in
relation to the subject matter of the complaint is reasonably
available to the
person aggrieved by the act; or
(g) in a case where the subject matter of the complaint has already been
dealt with by the Commission or by another statutory authority—the
Commissioner thinks that the subject matter of the complaint has been adequately
dealt with; or
(h) the Commissioner thinks that the subject matter of the complaint could
be more effectively or conveniently dealt with by another
authority.”
Section 71(3) of the Act provides:
“(3) If the Commissioner decides not to inquire into, or not to
continue to inquire into, an act in respect of which a complaint
was made to the
Commission, the Commissioner must give notice in writing to the complainant or
each of the complainants of that decision,
of the reasons for that decision and
of the rights of the complainant or each of the complainants under subsection
Section 71(5) of the Act provides:
“(5) If the Commissioner has given a complainant a notice under
subsection (3), the complainant may, within 21 days after
receipt of the notice,
by notice in writing served on the Commissioner, require the Commissioner to
refer the complaint to the President.”
On 3 March 1997 the complainant sought a review by the President of the
Disability Discrimination Commissioner’s decision. Section
71(6) of the
Act provides:
“(6) On receipt of a notice under subsection (5), the Commissioner
must refer the complaint to the President together with
a report relating to any
inquiries made by the Commissioner into the complaint.”
Pursuant to this section the Disability Discrimination Commissioner referred
the complaint to the President of the Commission on or
complainant had asked that the Presidential Review of the Disability
Discrimination Commissioner’s
decision be delayed pending her
consideration of whether she wished to file a further submission. Nothing
further was forthcoming
from the complainant until on 20 October 1997 she
advised that she proposed to make a further submission. On 23 October 1997 the
Commission requested that the further submission be filed by 13 November 1997.
On 14 November 1997 the complainant asked for an extension
of time until 12
December 1997. By letter dated 20 November 1997 Sir Ronald Wilson agreed to Ms
McLaughlin’s request for an
extension of time to file additional material
until 12 December 1997. On 19 December 1997 Sir Ronald Wilson, in accordance
with s.101(1)(a),
(c) and (e) of the Act, having reviewed the
Commissioner’s decision dismissed those parts of the complaint referred to
in paragraphs
5.3, 5.4, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, and 5.9 of the Wilson decision.
On 12 December 1997 the complainant provided to Sir Ronald further details
concerning her complaint against Comcare and included a
document headed
“Statement of Facts and Contentions” which was relevant to the
complainant’s appeal against Comcare
in the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal. The matters in the AAT were settled by agreement on 9 December 1997.
In respect of her complaint against DSS the Wilson decision states in
paragraphs 5.1 and 5.2:
“5.1 In relation to Ms McLaughlin’s allegation that she was
treated less favourably by the Department of Social Security
DSS”), on the ground of her disability, or an imputed disability in the
administration of pay and personnel decisions
and the failure of the DSS to
resolve the conflict between her and the personnel supervisor, I find that there
may be sufficient
evidence of discrimination against the complainant on the
ground of her disabilities in the period March 1993 to November 1993 only.
Although the problems which the complainant experienced as a consequence of the
administration of her pay and leave may have arisen
by virtue of the fact that
the complainant required a complex pay calculation because her pay was regularly
a combination of pension,
sick leave, recreation leave, and flex leave, I am
satisfied that there may be sufficient evidence that the manner in which the
complainant
was treated after the rectification of the pay and leave
difficulties may amount to discrimination.
5.2 In relation to Ms McLaughlin’s allegation that she was treated less
favourably by the DSS due to her disability, or an imputed
disability, by
failing to address her conflict with her manager it is my view that there may be
sufficient evidence that the complainant
was treated less favourably than a
person without a disability would have been treated.”
Paragraph 5.5 provides:
“5.5 However, in my view the issues of whether or not the DSS could
have, or would have, but for the complainant’s disabilities,
transfer or placement, as opposed to arranging redeployment, prior to her
resignation, needs further investigation.”
As will appear the effect of the Wilson decision was that it was only those
matters set out in 5.1, 5.2 and 5.5 which remained for
inquiry by the Commission
under the Act.
As regards that part of the complaint which alleged discrimination against
both DSS and Health Access Pty Ltd in relation to the rehabilitation
process Sir
Ronald Wilson held as follows:
“5.3 I find that there is no sufficient evidence that the DSS
discriminated against the complainant in relation to the rehabilitation
I note also from the decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (“the
AAT”) dated 10 December 1997 that
the complainant is to be compensated by
Comcare in relation to the aggravation to her disabilities of depression and
anxiety which
the AAT found were “contributed to in a material degree by
her employment with the Department.” I consider that this
aspect of the
complaint has already been dealt with by another statutory authority.”
Paragraph 5.7 of the Wilson decision also provides:
“5.7 In relation to Ms McLaughlin’s allegation that she was treated
less favourably by Health Access because of her disability
I find that there is
no evidence that the complainant was treated less favourably because of her
disability by her rehabilitation
regards to that part of the complaint which alleged discrimination against
Comcare in discontinuing her compensation benefits in
November 1993 Sir Ronald
Wilson held as follows:
“5.8 In relation to Ms McLaughlin’s allegation that Comcare
discriminated against her on the ground of a disability imputed
discontinuing benefits for incapacity in November 1993 (on the basis of Dr
Scott’s assessment that she was fit for
part time work, but was not
participating in the return to work program), and in relation to the
rehabilitation services which it
offered the complainant, I find that the
complainant’s allegations against Comcare have been adequately dealt with
by the AAT.
Concerning her complaint against DSS
that she had been discriminated against on the grounds of her disability in
relation to her resignation
Sir Ronald Wilson held as follows:
“5.4 In relation to Ms McLaughlin’s allegation that she had no
choice but to resign because of her disabilities I find
that she was counselled
to delay resignation, pending further consideration of her circumstances in the
that she was offered, but refused, redeployment. I
find that there is no, or no sufficient, evidence that the complainant was
discriminated
against on the basis of her disabilities, or an imputed
disability, by the DSS acceptance of her resignation. I also find that there
no sufficient evidence that DSS discriminated against the complainant on the
basis of her disability in refusing to reinstate
her. I am of the view that this
aspect of the complaint has already been dealt with by the Merit Protection
Review Agency.
Concerning her complaint against the
MPRA Sir Ronald Wilson held as follows:
“5.9 In relation to Ms McLaughlin’s allegation that the MPRA
discriminated against her on the grounds of disability in
the investigation of
her grievance by ignoring her representations, failing to provide her with clear
information about how they
supported their conclusions and by ignoring the
requirements of proper process I note that the complainant has withdrawn her
against the MPRA.”
decision concludes:
“Therefore, in accordance with sections 101(1)(a), (c) and (e) of the
Act, having reviewed the Commissioner’s decision
I now dismiss those parts
of the complaint referred to in paragraph 5.3, 5.4, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8 and 5.9.
And in accordance with s.101(2) of the Act having reviewed the
Commissioner’s decision I refer to the Commissioner those parts
complaint referred to in paragraphs 5.1, 5.2 and 5.5 for her to continue to
inquire into the acts contained
3.3 The complaint – further
procedural aspects – the hearing
Between December 1997 and March 1998 the Commission was in communication with
the parties concerning any further inquiry that may
be necessary. The acting
Senior Conciliation Officer sought the views of the parties as to whether the
matter should be referred
to hearing. Both parties responded that their wish was
that the matter be referred to the Commission for hearing and on 21 April
the matter was referred. On 14 August 1998 an officer of the legal section of
the Commission wrote to the parties advising that
the matter had been referred
for hearing and advised the parties of the date. Meanwhile a timetable had been
set for the filing of
the relevant material. The hearing was scheduled for the 9
– 13 November 1998.
By a letter dated 16 September 1998 the complainant sought leave to be
legally represented and furnished an outline of her witness
statement together
with three tables of documents alleging direct discrimination, indirect
discrimination and harassment. The letter
indicated that the complainant sought
the following remedies:
“1. Acknowledgement that I have not been at fault in this situation,
that rather I have been grossly mistreated.
Acknowledgement
that I have made exhaustive efforts to resolve these questions as efficiently
and effectively as possible.
Acknowledgement
that I have considerable talents and integrity that I offer for the service of
the community.
from each of the parties for their incorrect behaviour and the harm it has
Reinstatement
of Comcare benefits for incapacity.
Reinstatement
to the Australian Public Service.
Reinstatement
of Partial Invalidity Pension from the date of resignation.
Redeployment
to a suitable position in which my contributions are valued and the working
environment is not obstructive.
Rehabilitation
to identify appropriate working conditions and any training required.
compensation for other financial losses.
compensation for distress, loss of face, humiliation and harm to my reputation
and career.
Development
and dissemination of guidelines in both DSS and Comcare of how concerns about
disagreements are to be processed including
expected time frames, dispute
resolution procedures and how persons with disabilities can have effective
access to these procedures.”
By letter dated 7 October 1998
the solicitor for the respondent, having referred to some aspects of the various
disputes between the
parties, which is briefly dealt with above, raised a number
of other issues:
clarification of the complainant’s disability by reference to the relevant
period defined in the Wilson decision;
the lack of
particularity in the material submitted by the complainant on 16 September 1998
with reference to the matters left for
inquiry by the Wilson decision;
a critique of
the issues alleged by the complainant to constitute direct and indirect
discrimination;
the question
whether the Commission should now deal immediately with the complaint under
s.100 of the Act on the ground that it is
“trivial, unsubstantiated and
unsustainable”; and
the question of
a directions hearing for the purpose of clarifying the issues to be dealt with
at the proposed hearing set to commence
on 9 November 1998.
October 1998 I convened a directions hearing by means of a teleconference with
the parties in which the various issues were
discussed at considerable length. A
direction was made that the complainant redefine more precisely the issues of
fact relevant to
her complaint which were comprehended by the Wilson decision
and at the same time identify the medical evidence and related issues
to be relied upon at the hearing. The dates already fixed for the hearing were
preserved namely 9-13 November 1998.
In the ensuing correspondence the complainant provided “comments on the
medical evidence” and filed a list of over 200
medical documents which she
claimed to be relevant to the proposed inquiry.
By letter dated 4 November 1998 the complainant requested an adjournment on
medical grounds. The adjournment having been granted,
the respondent’s
solicitor by letter dated 24 November 1998 again wrote to the Commission and
again emphasised the respondent’s
earlier concerns that the complainant
had persistently failed to provide to the Commission and the respondent a clear
of the matters upon which she was intending to rely in alleging
discrimination against the respondent on the ground of her disability.
letter also raised concerns in relation to the medical evidence. The thrust of
the respondent’s concern is encapsulated
in this statement from the
“...it is unreasonable for the complainant to simply refer the respondent
to excessive numbers of documents filed in different
proceedings without
indicating on what basis she intends to rely on them and how they are relevant
to these proceedings.”
Again the respondent
submitted that the complaint be dismissed pursuant to s.100 of the Act and that
the respondent’s application
to that effect be considered “a
standing application” to the Commission.
Immediately subsequent to the adjournment of the hearing fixed for 9 November
1998 and because of the apparent complexity of the matter,
and more importantly
because of the unsatisfactory state of things partly reflected in the concerns
expressed on behalf of the respondent,
a further directions conference was
arranged by the Commission which I chaired in Canberra on Wednesday, 3 February
1999. The parties
had been advised that this date had been set aside to attempt
to resolve the state of contention between the parties and to clarify
minds of all the legal and factual issues which were to be appropriately dealt
with at a hearing consequential upon the Wilson
decision of 19 December 1997.
At this further directions conference on 3 February 1999 the complainant was
represented by Dr Bell, solicitor engaged by the Welfare
Rights and Legal Centre
Limited, an ACT community legal service. Dr Bell, on behalf of the complainant,
acknowledged at the conference
the need to define for the purposes of an inquiry
the matters to be relied upon by the complainant and undertook to confer with Ms
Court, then the principle legal officer of the Australian Government
Solicitor’s office in Canberra, to have the outstanding
issues clarified.
No directions were therefore necessary and the expectation was that in the
immediate future the complainant would
have sufficiently defined to the
satisfaction of the respondent and the Commission the matters on which the
complainant would rely
on at the hearing. Dr Bell indicated his view that two
days should be sufficient to complete the matter. Accordingly, I fixed 17
May 1999 in Canberra for the inquiry.
Regrettably the expectations raised at the directions conference on 3
February 1999 were not to be realised. The complainant’s
response was not
received by the Commission and the respondent until 3 May 1999 – two weeks
prior to the hearing date. The
relevant document is described in Dr Bell’s
letter as a “Statement of the Applicant’s Issues, Facts and
Contentions.”
The letter added:
“There is documentary evidence to be filed in support of the issues of
fact. The documents and a list of those documents will
be forwarded to HREOC and
the respondent on Monday 10 May 1999.”
“documentary evidence” when it was received was constituted by
approximately 2000 pages of documents which became
Notwithstanding the late delivery of the “Applicant’s Issues,
Facts and Contentions” and the accompanying voluminous
documentation, the
hearing commenced on 17 May 1999 as earlier determined. Dr Bell appeared for the
complainant and Ms Court for
the respondent. At the outset of the hearing Ms
Court renewed her application for the Commission to dispose of the matter under
of the Act and at the same time objected to the Commission dealing with
those aspects of the alleged complaint which in the Applicant’s
Facts and Contentions identified several officers of the respondent (other than
Mr Thornton) who had not been referred to
either in the original complaint or in
the Wilson decision. The submission was that at the hearing it was seemingly the
of the complainant to raise fresh complaints of discrimination which
had never been considered by the Disability Discrimination Commissioner.
The decision was thereupon taken to defer consideration of this application
in favour of commencing to hear the case for the applicant,
in particular, the
evidence of Ms McLaughlin. This decision was taken after a consideration of the
following matters:
the fact that I
then had a less than comprehensive understanding both of the details and of the
complex history of the matter and
of the voluminous documentation;
the fact that
the complaint to the Commission was a part only of that history and I then had
an imperfect understanding both of the
historical context and of any relevant
relationship between the complaint and the matrix of contentious facts and
circumstances surrounding
Ms McLaughlin’s employment with DSS; and
the expectation
that the core of the complainant’s case would quickly emerge given that
she now had a legal representative who
had apparently been engaged in better
defining the issues for inquiry (I refer to Dr Bell’s involvement in the
directions conference
in Canberra in 3 February 1999 and the preparation and
dispatch of the Statement of the Applicant’s Issues, Facts and Contentions
to the Commission and the respondent under cover of his letter dated 3 May
Accordingly, the decision was taken to hear the evidence of
the complainant. It soon became apparent that Ms McLaughlin herself was
in control of her case and its manner of presentation. The presence of Dr Bell
at the bar table in this process became almost
superfluous. Ms McLaughlin was
apparently insistent upon dealing in detailed chronological order from the time
she commenced her
employment with every fact, issue or document which she
perceived to be relevant and important to a hearing of her complaint. She
intent on conducting a wide ranging inquiry into every aspect of her employment.
The usual dialogue which is an essential
feature of presenting evidence-in-chief
was absent and the matter proceeded with Ms McLaughlin apparently drawing upon
her detailed
preparation of the matter and her comprehensive knowledge of the
voluminous documentation and the content of numerous documents within
of lever arch files, which she was quickly able to identify, but with her
counsel in the apparent role of a bystander. Several
appeals to Ms McLaughlin to
ensure relevance, to be more expeditious and/or to rely on the services of her
counsel were either not
heard or ignored. In the result the two days fixed for
the hearing expired with the complainant still in
“evidence-in-chief”
and at a point in the chronology in which the
relevant period (March 1993 – November 1993) had not even been reached nor
there been so far any significant reference to the officer of the
respondent, Mr Thornton, against whom the substantial complaint
It is understandable when one has to focus on and to make findings arising
out of facts occurring within a specified time span that
it may be necessary to
have regard to facts which have occurred outside that period because to do so
may assist the better understanding
of what occurred within the period. It was
for that reason and to ensure that Ms McLaughlin’s concerns were fully
appreciated
that she was afforded the opportunity to provide a sweeping body of
evidence some of which dealt with pure matters of fact but most
of which was a
mixture of comment and submission and went far beyond what would normally be
regarded as acceptable evidence in a
hearing of this kind.
At the end of the hearing on the second day (18 May 1999) it was necessary to
adjourn the further hearing to Monday, 31 May 1999.
On the Friday preceding
Monday 31 May 1999 the Commission was advised that the complainant would be
unable to resume for health reasons
and would not be attending. She required
that the matter be adjourned. The decision in respect of an application for the
adjournment
which was made on Monday 31 May appears in the transcript. The
further hearing was adjourned to 20 July 1999. A further six days
was allowed
for the hearing.
Upon resumption on 20 July 1999 Dr Bell did not appear and Ms McLaughlin
informed the Commission that she would conduct her own case.
“evidence-in-chief” continued until the morning of Friday 23 July by
which time she had been in the witness box for
almost five and a half days. On
the afternoon of day 5 (22 July 1999), by which time she had apparently
canvassed the relevant issues
up to and including the circumstances of her
resignation in 1993, I inquired of the complainant as to how long she intended
in “evidence-in-chief”. In particular I sought information
concerning any other documentation beyond November 1993 upon
which she intended
to rely. I pause to add that much of the documentation in the case had been
generated by the complainant herself
and was in the form of letters and other
documents which she had herself composed. In answer to my query her indecisive
suggested an intention by her to deal with relatively few additional
documents. Because of my concern as to the time taken so far
and to ensure as
far as possible that only probative material was to be used I requested the
complainant to give to the Commission’s
legal officer immediately the
remaining documents on which she proposed to rely and tender, so that on the
night of that day I could
consider the relevance of each. I was surprised to
receive two bundles of documents containing in total another 110 documents. I
examined each document in turn and on the morning of Friday, 23 July 1999 I
ruled in respect of each of them. My ruling will appear
in the transcript.
Later, on the morning of the same day, Ms Court commenced to cross-examine
the complainant with specific reference to the issues alleged
Applicant’s Issues, Facts and Contentions document already referred to. On
the morning of Tuesday, 27 July Mr Thornton,
the only witness for the respondent
gave evidence which was relatively brief. He was cross-examined by Ms McLaughlin
until the hearing
concluded at the end of that sitting day. Arrangements were
then made for the parties to make written submissions and the decision
On the next day 28 July 1999 by which time I had returned to Brisbane and the
Commission’s legal officer to Sydney, Ms McLaughlin
wrote to the
Commission advising her desire to further cross-examine Mr Thornton. I dealt
with this application and gave to each
party a written decision in favour of the
complainant, subject to certain conditions. The matter ultimately resumed and
with the further cross-examination of Mr Thornton in Canberra by the
complainant on 12 August 1999.
Finally, the complainant at the conclusion of cross-examination by Ms Court
sought to exercise the right to “re-examine myself”.
She indicated
her preference to do this in writing. As can be seen in the documents this
“re-examination” really constituted
a further series of comments and
submissions. Again it should be recorded that in the course of cross-examination
by Ms Court the
complainant had insisted on handwriting the question asked and
then her answer. When it was suggested to her that this was an unnecessarily
time consuming task and that she might with advantage concentrate more on the
questioning process rather than on attempting to reproduce
the process in
handwritten form, she appealed to her poor memory as justification for this
unorthodox course. She might easily have
sought the assistance of friends who
were supporting her generally throughout the hearing.
The unnecessarily lengthy hearing which has several unorthodox features
presented the opportunity to better assess the complainant
and the many issues
which are involved in her complaint whether express or to be implied.
There can be no doubt that Ms McLaughlin has an intense and deep seated
concern not only that she has been unjustly and unlawfully
dealt with by the
various agencies of the Commonwealth with which she had been concerned in the
course of her employment, but also
that she had been the victim of unlawful
discrimination by Mr Thornton. At the same time she was intent on variously
labelling Mr
Thornton as dictatorial, unyielding, high handed and arbitrary.
These intensely subjective assessments by Ms McLaughlin will need
scrutinised. It is worthy of mention however that in the course of her
employment she demonstrated, I am sure, a persistent
and at times an
unnecessarily aggressive attitude towards several personnel in the employment of
the respondent. Ms McLaughlin no
doubt submits that her several lengthy
approaches to Commonwealth personnel, which she saw as necessary, were a product
of her frustration
and her apparent inability to obtain what she perceived as a
proper outcome in a particular case because of a total failure on a
others to “accommodate” her illness(es) and disability. At various
times in the chronology of events she described
“disintegrating”. Whilst there is no doubt and it is agreed that one
or other of her several illnesses in
the relevant period impacted heavily on her
lifestyle and in her mind constituted grave risks for her wellbeing, it is my
this understandably idiosyncratic or egocentric view failed frequently
to do justice to the responsible and reasonable efforts of
many others in the
employment of the Commonwealth including Mr Thornton. The considerable efforts
of others can be compendiously
described as having been done in good faith and
they were concerned not only to do what was seen to be best for the complainant
the circumstances at the particular time but which were also consistent with
and in some cases required by the legal and administrative
procedures laid down
by the Commonwealth.
Again a clear view emerged that in any case where the complainant perceived
herself as not having achieved the outcome she desired
she hastened unduly to a
conclusion that she was being dealt with unfairly – indeed that she was
being discriminated against
unlawfully in breach of the Act. A not dissimilar
scenario emerged from time to time in the course of the hearing.
I have dealt with the hearing and my assessment of the complainant in some
detail in an attempt to capture a broadly based picture
of the complainant over
a long period, her frequent want of objectivity in her assessment of others, her
apparent inability to recognise
in Mr Thornton a person who was appropriately
sympathetic to her concerns but who at the same time was charged with the very
task of meeting Ms McLaughlin’s expectations. One can genuinely
sympathise with the complainant, a talented woman, who has
much to offer but who
has been very much constrained by the unfortunate illnesses which have beset her
from time to time. The case
however, requires a dispassionate and objective
assessment of all of the relevant issues because in the ultimate result the
fundamental
task for the Commission in this inquiry must be to determine whether
the respondent by its employee, Mr Thornton, acted unlawfully
– a serious
finding which can only be made if properly supported by the facts of the case
and the proper application of the
statutory provisions. It was readily apparent
that frequently the complainant had lost sight of the main thrust of the
Commission’s
inquiry. For Ms McLaughlin it became merely the opportunity
and provided the forum for her to air any complaint which she may have
a long period of time in respect of the whole of her employment by the
Commonwealth.
It is essential in such a process to try to separate out of this confusing
mass of contentious dialogue after some six years the relevant
circumstances which are properly comprehended by paragraphs 5.1, 5.2 and 5.5 of
the Wilson decision. This process can be
assisted by an examination of the
contemporaneous documentation but only insofar as it assists a better
understanding of the relevant
factual scenario to which reference can relevantly
be made. I have already noted that much of the documentation is self generated
by the complainant and whilst it is clear that the complainant would give to her
letters or submissions a certain value these need
to be evaluated in the same
process which is referred to above.
Needless to say the complainant had over a long period communicated with the
legal section of the Commission either by telephone,
facsimile or email. Any
decision or response to inquiry by the Commission either before or during the
period of the inquiry seemed
only to provide the occasion for generating further
documentation. I mention this in the context of my attempting to obtain written
submissions which the complainant had indicated was her preferred methodology
for putting any submission of law or of fact to the
Commission. Any deadline set
for this became incapable of being met. The evidence had finally concluded on 12
August 1999 and by
late October 1999 the Commission still awaited a response.
Since to me it seemed almost impossible to obtain finality a decision
taken which is reflected in the letter which I directed should be written to the
parties on 27 October 1999. By this time
I had for a long period deferred any
consideration of the voluminous material until I had received, in particular, Ms
McLaughlin’s
submissions. In my view she had in the course of her evidence
engaged largely in advancing matters of comment and argument and whilst
questioned in my own mind whether further submissions would assist me, out of an
abundance of caution I decided to await the receipt
of further material the
content of which was, I am certain, fairly predictable. When it seemed
increasingly impossible for deadlines
to be met I took the decision to conclude
the matter and to enter upon a consideration of the issues. The ensuing holiday
and other commitments has unfortunately delayed my finalising this
determination.
4. EVIDENCE AND FINDINGS
4.1 The Wilson decision and
the complainant’s statement of issues
In this determination under the earlier heading “The Complaint to the
Commission” and “The Wilson decision”
one can examine and
catalogue the matters in respect of which complaint was made to the Commission
under the Act. The decision of
the Disability Discrimination Commissioner not to
inquire was reviewed by Sir Ronald Wilson, delegate of the President of the
Commission,
and his decision on review thereupon determined which of those
matters should become the subject of inquiry. These are set out in
decision in paragraphs 5.1, 5.2 and 5.5.
As pointed out above the evidence of the complainant extends far beyond the
factual issues dealt with in those paragraphs and the
complainant frequently
asserted that the Wilson decision was confusing and unclear. It is therefore
necessary to deal with it because
it was a persistent theme in the course of her
evidence and comments that she proposed to deal with the contents of the Wilson
in her submissions. As will be seen the decision as to the matters to
be left for inquiry is clear and easily intelligible in the
light of the whole
body of material. The respondent’s counsel when she ultimately
cross-examined the complainant did so specifically
with reference to it and to
the Statement of Issues, Facts and Contentions which had been prepared by or on
behalf of the complainant
and delivered to the Commission shortly prior to the
date fixed for hearing on 17 May 1998.
Paragraphs 5.1, 5.2 and 5.5 contain the matters identified by Sir Ronald
Wilson which in his view should be referred back to the Disability
Discrimination Commissioner so that she continue to inquire into them. It is
these matters which are referred for further inquiry
by the Commission.
Paragraph 5.1
This paragraph refers to the complainant’s allegation that on the
ground of her disability she was treated less favourably by
administration of pay and personnel decisions; and
on account of
the failure of DSS to resolve the conflict between her and her personnel
supervisor.
The “personnel supervisor” was Mr Thornton
to whom reference has already been made.
The Wilson decision involves a finding that “in the period March 1993
to November 1993 only” there may have been discrimination
administration of her pay and leave entitlements. Sir Ronald Wilson notes that
the problems experienced by her in relation
to such matters may have arisen
because of the complexity of the issue “because her pay was regularly a
combination of pension,
sick leave, recreation leave and flex leave” and
not because of discrimination. However, he concludes that “there may
sufficient evidence that the manner in which the complainant was treated
the rectification of the pay and leave difficulties may amount to
discrimination” (the underlining is mine).
Therefore it is clear from paragraph 5.1 that, in Sir Ronald’s view,
the first of the two issues referred to at the commencement
of the paragraph,
namely, the “administration of pay and personnel decisions” may have
been a source of discriminatory
conduct towards her in the period “after
the rectification of the pay and leave difficulties”. It is that matter
in Sir Ronald’s view required further inquiry.
Paragraph 5.2
This paragraph addresses the second of the two issues referred to in the
opening sentence of paragraph 5.1 namely “the failure
of the DSS to
resolve the conflict between her and the personnel supervisor”. Paragraph
5.2 simply repeats that part of paragraph
5.1. In Sir Ronald’s view
“by failing to address her conflict with her manager...” there may
be sufficient evidence
that the complainant was treated less favourably than a
person without a disability would have been treated.
Paragraph 5.5
This paragraph speaks for itself. Sir Ronald was of the view that the issue
whether or not DSS could have or would have but for the
complainant’s
disabilities provided a transfer or placement (as opposed to arranging
re-deployment) prior to her resignation
required further investigation.
In summary therefore the matters left for further inquiry by the Wilson
decision were these:
whether, in the
period March 1993 to November 1993, the complainant was discriminated against in
the manner in which she was treated
after the rectification of pay and leave
difficulties;
whether, in
failing to address her conflict with Mr Thornton, the complainant was
discriminated against on the basis that she was
treated less favourably than a
person without a disability would have been treated; and
whether the DSS
could have or would have but for the complainant’s disability provided her
with a transfer or placement (as
distinct from re-deployment) prior to her
resignation.
The Statement of the Applicant’s
Issues, Facts and Contentions dated 3 May 1999 seems to assume acceptance by the
complainant
of the limited inquiry required as a consequence of Sir Ronald
Wilson’s review of the Disability Discrimination Commissioner’s
decision not to inquire at all. As the transcript of her evidence will show that
assumption proved to be false and the complainant
was intent upon ranging over a
much wider matrix of fact than that envisaged by the Wilson decision. Before
proceeding it may be
August 1991-August 1992
Ms McLaughlin was employed in Social Policy Division of DSS. (During this
period she was treated for a breast malignancy)
August 1992
Seconded to the RIM taskforce, Department of Treasury
January 1993
Sought counselling from Ms Johanna Stephens. (The latter proposed the option
that the complainant undertake part time employment and
that she apply for a
partial invalidity pension.)
Dr Heathershaw’s report – that the complainant undertake reduced
permanent part time work. (Permanent Partial Disability
was granted as from 13
January 1993)
January 1993 – March 1993
Part time employment at the RIM Taskforce.
The complainant fell ill and left work.
The complainant applied for Workers Compensation.
The complainant returned to work at DSS
The complainant left work – compensation payments resumed.
The complainant resigned from Australian Public Service.
This chronology points only to the major factual events around each of which
there has grown a sizeable body of documentation which
itself has generated a
gloss of allegation and accusation, assertion and counter assertion and also in
my view, substantial misconceptions
and/or misunderstandings. The chronology
also encompasses the period of inquiry covered by the Wilson decision. It is
perhaps coincidental
that the more significant sections of the Act including
those which are of particular significance for this case were proclaimed
commence on 1 March 1993.
It is in my view appropriate therefore to examine the factual issues by
reference to:
administration of pay and personnel decisions;
the alleged
failure of DSS to resolve the conflict between her and Mr Thornton; and
the question
whether she was discriminated against by the alleged failure of DSS to provide
for her a transfer or placement (as opposed
to re-deployment) prior to her
resignation.
4.2 Paragraph 5.1 of the Wilson decision - the
administration of pay and personnel decisions
In her statement the complainant alleges that in the period March – 23
June 1993 she had “continuing problems with Mr
Thornton” over his
“timely and appropriate resolution of problems affecting
of sick leave,
of partial invalidity pension back pay,
of approved salary,
to anticipated sick leave entitlements and advanced salary payments,
implementation
of permanent part time arrangements, and
implementation
of the flexible work hours recommended by the CMO”.
of DSS to resolve what the complainant alleges
was a consequential
“conflict” between herself and Mr Thornton which allegedly arose as
a consequence of the pay and
personnel decisions referred to. As will be seen it
is a significant part of the case for the respondent that whilst difficulties
arose in the management of these matters by the DSU and in particular Mr
Thornton and others, the difficulties were a consequence
of the complexity which
attended her employment and related issues on account of her persistent ill
health. The respondent’s
case is that in spite of this complexity and the
fact that Ms McLaughlin at times presented to the relevant staff in an
aggressively
persistent and demanding manner every conceivable effort was made
to relieve her concerns and that Mr Thornton, a competent and caring
did all that could be reasonably expected of him. The notion that Mr Thornton
acted towards or dealt with Ms McLaughlin
in the relevant period in a
discriminatory and unlawful manner is rejected. She was one of several employees
whose employment gave
rise to pay and personnel matters which required the
attention of Mr Thornton and/or his staff. Mr Thornton would say that whilst
hers was a difficult case, perhaps at the time the most difficult case which he
and his staff had to contend with, every effort was
made to deal sympathetically
with the complainant’s concerns and to ensure their resolution within the
legal and official framework
which was in place in the Public Service. The
submission that because of her disability she was discriminated against is
by the respondent. I will address each of the six matters listed. It
will be convenient to deal with each in the order which is set
4.2.1 Issues relating to the payment of approved salary
In relation to this and the other issues the focus for the
complainant’s complaint is Mr Thornton. The only persons she dealt
relation to all of the listed items were Mr Thornton, Ms Yates and Ms Morley. In
respect of Ms Yates the only evidence of
the complainant which focuses on her
was in relation to the matter to be dealt with later and which is covered in the
paragraph 5.5 of the Wilson decision concerning her resignation from
the Public Service in November 1993. In respect of Ms Morley
the complaint
insists only on lack of communication on her part.
In the period January – March 1993 the complainant was employed in the
RIM Taskforce. On 28 January 1993 she was examined by
Dr Heathershaw whose
report is dated 22 February 1993. This examination was organised by Mr Thornton
and is referred to in his letter
dated 19 January 1993 (page 13 Exhibit 30).
In her letter which is undated but which it is agreed was written on or about
31 March 1993, Ms McLaughlin referred to the questions
which she needed to
resolve as being “the outstanding salary repayment and my sick leave
Errors had been made in payment of salary. During the relevant period the
complainant had been on sick leave from time to time and
because sick leave
forms and like formalities had been presented and dealt with irregularly errors
were made in payments of salary
to the complainant. It was said that “9
out of 10” payments contained an error and had resulted in an overpayment
her for a variety of reasons.
However, the contemporaneous documentation makes it clear that rather than be
a cause for complaint by Ms McLaughlin, the manner in
which the Department dealt
with the overpayment issues was both timely and efficient. In Exhibit 32 the
complainant refers to a difficulty
being resolved “in a couple of hours of
goodwill”. However, the same document refers to DSU personnel adopting an
position” and this conceivably relates also to the
resolution of the overpayment of salary issue. In her letter to Mr Thornton
(page 33 Exhibit 30) dated 3 May 1993 the issue of sick leave and overpayment of
salary is summarised and the gross overpayment is
estimated at the sum of
$2,600.00. The overpayment and the complainant’s liability to repay it
were a matter of concern to
her and she sought advice from Care – a credit
and debit counselling service. On 2 April 1993 a counsellor wrote to Mr Thornton
and offered, on behalf of the complainant, to repay the debt at the rate of
$10.00 per fortnight with a review in 12 months time.
The same letter raised
another matter to be dealt with later, that is, that the complainant on 15 April
1993 be allowed to anticipate
sick leave credits which would not fall due until
15 April 1994. The letter dated 2 April 1993 (page 18 of Exhibit 30) was noted
with the following – “Peter Thornton has agreed to $10.00 recovery
on overpayment”. That is the offer to repay
at the rate of $10.00 per
fortnight the overpayment of $2,600.00 was accepted. This rate of repayment
would extend the repayment
period to approximately 10 years. This generous
response by Mr Thornton could not be described as “unhelpful”. There
is little doubt that each matter in issue, including this one, caused the
complainant some degree of stress. On the other hand all
the other material
points to a concerned response by DSU staff to the complainant’s concerns.
In his letter dated 5 July 1993
(page 66 Exhibit 30) Mr Thornton was addressing
the flexible working hours issue in a letter to the complainant (this issue will
also be dealt with below) and there he pointed out that the “salary
problems” had arisen because of technical problems
in the computer system
but that staff had rectified problems as soon as possible. I am satisfied that
this was so.
Concerning this aspect of the complaint one cannot find any evidence of the
complainant being treated less favourably by Mr Thornton
or by any other person
in DSU in respect of this issue. On the contrary it is clear enough that the
complainant presented frequently
as one who was anxious and concerned and who on
account of her poor health persistently saw Mr Thornton as the source of her
and concern. This perception did not coincide with the reality which was
objectively demonstrated by Mr Thornton in seeking to respond
to each concern in
a way which would relieve Ms McLaughlin of her persistent anxiety. Whilst I am
satisfied that Mr Thornton did
all he reasonably could in this respect to ensure
that administrative matters relating to Ms McLaughlin’s employment were
with in a timely and proper manner, it was never likely that in all
respects he would be able to meet the complainant’s expectations.
certainly no basis for a finding in relation to this issue that he unlawfully
discriminated against her on account of her
health. Rather his main concern was
to ensure that any issue which arose because of her health was dealt with
properly and sympathetically.
4.2.2 Access to anticipated sick leave entitlements and advanced salary
Again in respect of this matter it is alleged that the complainant had
“continuing problems” with Mr Thornton concerning
his “timely
and appropriate resolution” of the matter.
In the letter from Care dated 2 April 1993 (page 18 Exhibit 30) which offered
terms in respect of the repayment of the overpayment
of salary, the counsellor
had raised this issue with Mr Thornton. At the same time, perhaps a few days
earlier, the complainant had
raised this issue as one of the questions requiring
resolution. The amount of sick leave available to her at any one time had in
past been of concern to the complainant. In April 1992 she had anticipated sick
leave credits due in April 1993. Now in April
1993 she saw the need to
anticipate her sick leave credits which would normally not have become due until
April 1994. The final paragraph
of her letter, written probably on 31 March
1993, requested Mr Thornton to “anticipate the sick leave credits due at
1994 at the 1993 anniversary date”. That date was 15 April 1993.
There was a strict rule which bound Mr Thornton that the credits
could not be
made available prior to the 12
month anniversary date.
According to Mr Thornton (his letter dated 3 June 1993, Exhibit 36, in response
to the grievance lodged by
the complainant) the request was agreed to
immediately it was received but as pointed out it could not become effective
anniversary dated 15 April 1993. In fact the credits were advanced on
15 April 1993.
In spite of this some controversy ensued which in my view was at worst a
misunderstanding. It was Ms McLaughlin’s expectation
that on the date the
credits were advanced there would be immediate payment on that day. Mr Thornton,
it seems, expected that now
that further sick leave entitlement was available to
Ms McLaughlin the funds would be paid in the normal pay day cycle. She had
spoken to Ms Morley about the matter and she was
“certain” that Ms Morley understood the complainant’s
expectation
that payment would be made on 15 April 1993. In fact the payment was
not made on 15 April 1993 but on the following day or within
the next few days.
Ms McLaughlin described Mr Thornton’s failure to pay the monies on 15
April 1993 as a decision which was
“high-handed”
“arbitrary” and “nasty”.
It seemingly had been Mr Thornton’s intention that, once the credits
became available one year earlier than would otherwise
have been the case and
bearing in mind that the entitlement was a yearly entitlement, the first payment
would be made on the next
fortnightly payday. When the funds did not appear as
anticipated by her she made representations to Mr Thornton based on her
impecuniosity.
He apparently accepted her representations and on the next day
made arrangements for the money to be paid. They were in fact paid
immediately
after the matter had been processed.
This issue was one which really involved Ms Morley and the complainant. The
latter gave evidence of what she understood to be Ms Morley’s
understanding of her (the complainant’s) expectations concerning the
payment. Having heard Mr Thornton’s comments generally,
it is apparent
that the pejorative terms which she applied to him in respect of this matter
have to be rejected. Whilst she could
not remember this matter of detail I am
satisfied that the delay which would have normally attended the actual receipt
of the funds
was nothing other than an assumption that once the decision was
properly made to allow the anticipated credit that the payments would
the normal course. When the funds were not credited to her bank account on 15
April 1993 prompt action was taken and on
the next day or within the next few
days the necessary administrative action was taken and the funds were credited
to her account.
The notion that in respect of this matter the complainant was
dealt with in an unlawful and discriminatory fashion has to be rejected.
4.2.3 The implementation of part time work arrangements
This issue has its genesis in January 1993 when the complainant was working
in the RIM Taskforce. In December 1992 her previous supervisor
Gallagher, had also been appointed to the RIM Taskforce and this was a matter of
concern to the complainant. So much so
that she sought counselling from Ms
Stevens again. Her health was poor and the question of her working part time
hours was canvassed.
She also explored with the RBO the prospects of her
obtaining PIP in accordance with the relevant superannuation scheme. The
seemingly involved the notion that if she could obtain PIP from the RBO
she could also work part time hours. Thus the income from
these two sources
would provide for her support. In a letter dated 12 January 1993 (page 12
Exhibit 30) she wrote to Mr Gallagher,
then her recently appointed supervisor,
and discussed the issue. The letter raised the need for an assessment by the CMO
suggested, on Ms Stevens’ advice, the idea of an examination by Dr
Heathershaw. On 19 January 1993 Mr Thornton advised Mr Gallagher
appointment had been made for the complainant with Dr Heathershaw for 28 January
1993. Meanwhile, Ms McLaughlin had obtained
a medical certificate as from 14
January 1993. It will be recalled that previously reference was made to two
letters written by Mr
Gallagher to the CMO dated 25 January 1993 (Exhibits 16
and 17) in the context of his assessment of her then working capacity.
In a detailed letter dated 28 January 1993 (Exhibit 19) the complainant
explained to Dr Heathershaw her state of health and its relationship
employment. On 28 January 1993 the latter’s brief interim report stated
that the complainant “is fit for duty
as an AO6 working flexible part time
hours to average no less than 20 hours a week”. Her more detailed report
(Exhibit 29)
is dated 22 February 1993. It identifies a longstanding condition
of chronic fatigue syndrome and recommended that:
Ms McLaughlin
should reduce to permanent part time work and her hours should be flexible to
accommodate her fluctuating medical condition
but should average not less than
20 hours per week; and
approached to obtain a partial invalidity benefit.
On 10 March 1993
(page 14, Exhibit 30) the complainant wrote a memorandum which evidenced a
proposal that she transfer from the RIM
Taskforce to the Social Policy Division
of DSS at the beginning of May 1993 and noted the proposal that she engage in
part time work.
The memorandum also noted the need for her to occupy a disabled
car parking space, the need for an efficient air-conditioning facility,
not be required to use a photocopying machine and that she be located away from
traffic corridors and passers-by who may
be wearing perfume. She expressed the
“hope” that her immediate colleagues would “forego the use of
perfumes and
pot-plants”.
On 1 April 1993 the complainant made application for permanent part time work
(PPTW) see page 15 Exhibit 30. The application was transmitted
Thornton’s office on that day by facsimile when the complainant was en
route to Melbourne. She had about one hour earlier
phoned the office and had
requested that the application form be transmitted to her which it was. This was
on the Thursday before
the traditional Easter holiday period. By 8 April 1993
all of the required formalities were completed and PPTW was approved. The
and timely matter in which this matter was dealt with is obvious on the face of
the relevant documents.
On 13 April 1993 Mr Thornton wrote to the complainant (page 22 Exhibit 30)
and advised that approval had been given “on the
basis of an agreed
attendance pattern of 20 hours a week”. The letter went on to state that
any variation of the agreed hours
required formal approval and that any request
for variation had to be requested “through your Branch Head”. The
attaching to PPTW were explained in the letter.
As will be seen the implementation of the PPTW arrangements became extremely
contentious for the complainant. For Mr Thornton the
matter of PPTW was settled
and all that awaited final conformation was for him to be advised of the
“agreed attendance pattern”.
As he explained the only matter which
ultimately remained outstanding in his dealings with Ms McLaughlin was in his
view for her
to settle this outstanding issue and advise him. No finality it
seems was ever reached.
The implementation of the PPTW arrangements and the need for agreed work
hours was an ongoing issue and remained outstanding at the
time of her
resignation in November 1993. It is necessary to consider this issue in
association with that which concerned the crediting
of sick leave and the
payment of PIP. These latter two matters which can be conveniently dealt with
together are the first two of
the six issues identified in the
complainant’s Statement of Issues, Facts and Contentions.
This somewhat complex issue needs to be examined in this context. The CMO, Dr
Heathershaw, had recommended a “flexible”
working arrangement of not
less than 20 hours per week. Mr Thornton and other staff in DSU, in particular
Ms Yates, were working
on the basis that the work arrangements would be flexible
and of 20 hours duration and that any hours worked less than 20 would be
as sick leave or leave without pay depending upon the available entitlements.
Further, it was understood that the PIP payable
by the RBO was based on her
working 20 hours at DSS.
On 16 April 1993 (page 24 Exhibit 30) Ms Morely wrote to the RBO advising
the complainant
had worked no more than 20 hours per week since 11 January 1993;
her fortnightly
salary since 13 January 1993 had been reduced by “sick leave half pay
which has now been exhausted”; and
as from 7 April
1993 Ms McLaughlin had been on sick leave without pay.
response dated 22 April 1993 became for Ms McLaughlin a source of considerable
tension. That letter advised DSS that PIP had
been approved and it had been
determined that the complainant had an entitlement to PIP “with effect
from 13 January 1993”.
The letter further advised that –
“...this date has been determined based on the premise that the half pay
sick leave used by Ms McLaughlin during the period
13 January 1993 to 7 April
1993 will be recovered. If recovery does not occur the calculation set out below
(in the same letter)
will be incorrect and it will be necessary for you to refer
the matter back to this office
you commence paying the
On the next day 23 April 1993 Mr
Thornton advised the RBO that as Ms McLaughlin was a full time officer from 13
January 1993 to 7
April 1993 (part time work was not approved until 13 April
1993) it was not possible to re-credit her sick leave for that period.
letter requested a recalculation.
Immediately following these determinations the issue became contentious. Ms
McLaughlin on 28 April 1993 (page 28 Exhibit 30) expressed
her disagreement with
what had been said and asserted – “...I do not understand how the
sick leave from January to cover
the reduced hours cannot be re-credited”.
It is unnecessary to refer to each item of correspondence nor to the detail of
several telephone conversations. Finally, Ms Morley on 29 April 1993 (it is
likely Mr Thornton was on leave at this time) asked Ms
Hollis to reply. The
latter’s letter in response is dated 6 May 1993 in which Ms Hollis advised
that in providing the advice
she had consulted with the Department of Industrial
Relations and the Public Service Commission – (see pages 36/7 Exhibit 30).
On 7 May 1993 (pages 39/40 Exhibit 30) Mr Thornton advised the complainant
concerning the advice given by Ms Hollis the content of
which is contained in
the letter. He concluded with the advice that the RBO was engaged upon a
recalculation of the PIP as from 13
January 1993 on the basis that it was not
possible “to re-credit your half pay sick leave”. That recalculation
was advised
by the RBO in a letter dated 10 May 1993 (page 48 Exhibit 30). Ms
Morley’s letter dated 13 May 1993 advised the result of the
recalculation.
The letter was hand delivered to the complainant on the evening of 12 May
1993. Although Ms McLaughlin vehemently complained that
she was kept poorly
informed (particularly by Ms Morley) in relation to dealings between the RBO and
the DSU there is no sound basis
for such a conclusion. The whole issue had
arisen because of her 1 April 1993 application for PPTW and her seeking PIP from
This had produced contentious and competing views between various
government agencies in the course of which the complainant remained
asserting her own views. The DSU had sought expert industrial opinion in
relation to the issue. Not only did Ms McLaughlin
freely express her dissent,
she later pursued the issue further by seeking to reopen it. Her letter to Mr
Thornton (received in DSU
in June 1993) sought to have the issue
“re-considered” (pages 54/5 Exhibit 30). Mr Thornton’s prompt
response of
the same day (page 56 Exhibit 30) restated the official Departmental
Meanwhile Ms Morley had sought advice about the implementation of the PPTW
arrangements and by letter dated 29 June 1993 it was made
clear that the
complainant “in consultation with her supervisor and the PPTW committee
must specify her weekly hours of attendance”.
On 30 June 1993 Mr Thornton
advised the complainant accordingly in anticipation of her advice concerning
“your hours per day”.
I will return to this shortly.
On 11 July 1993 (page 73 Exhibit 30) Ms McLaughlin withdrew “my request
to re-credit sick leave” although she remained
convinced “that my
interpretation of the intentions and possibilities of recent legislation is that
sick leave should be re-credited
for partial invalidity benefit”. This
issue had been enlivened by her application for PPTW on 1 April 1993 and the RBO
determination
to grant PIP on 22 April 1993. In the context of the RBO and the
DSU resolving issues as a result of the complainant’s proposed
arrangements, which itself produced differing views, the DSU remained intent on
ensuring that its view was sound and in accordance
with relevant legislation and
departmental rules. Ms McLaughlin’s dissent and her persistent refusal
until 11 July 1993 to
accept the advice was in the interim the occasion for her
to believe that the DSU and Mr Thornton in particular were intent only
frustrating her. The truth is that he and Ms Morley did all that they could to
ensure that the complainant received that to which
she was justly entitled. Her
dissatisfaction has now been elevated to the point of claiming that in this and
related respects she
was unlawfully discriminated against.
There is no sound factual basis for such an allegation. It has to be
It is significant that in her letter dated 11 July 1993 referred to above she
again referred to “flexible working arrangements”.
This needs to be
seen in the context of Ms Morley’s memorandum to the Director, Personnel
Services, dated 24 June 1993 (page
50 Exhibit 30) in which she notes, concerning
the complainant, that the original recommendation was for “flexible”
but that since the approval of PPTW no set hours were agreed. He sought
advice on the matter. Upon receipt of advice on 29 June 1993
that there was a
requirement for Ms McLaughlin in consultation with others to specify her weekly
hours of attendance, Mr Thornton
on the next day, 30 June 1993 (page 60 Exhibit
30), wrote to the complainant and requested her to advise and at the same time
that a meeting of the PPTW committee would be arranged upon receipt of
her advice. Finally, on 5 July 1993 Mr Thornton again wrote
to the complainant
in response to her letter of the same date in which he sought to achieve some
satisfactory outcome concerning
this outstanding matter. He repeated that in
respect of the issue relating to the re-crediting of sick leave “there is
way of handling your situation”. He went on to request that,
having discussed the matter of “the working hours”
supervisor” – “I would appreciate knowing the standard hours
agreed between you by Friday 9 July
1993”. His letter concludes:
“the only outstanding matter deals with your hours that will be deemed as
your standard part time hours and I am hoping with
your assistance that this
matter will be resolved by the end of this
Ms McLaughlin finished work on 13 July
1993 after having been at work since only 23 June 1993 and she did not
subsequently return
to employment. She was insistent that by 13 July 1993 she
and Mr Roger Brown, her supervisor, had reached an agreement on flexible
and that this had been advised to Mr Thornton. I cannot accept this evidence
because it is wholly inconsistent with the documentary
evidence subsequent to Mr
Thornton’s letter of 5 July 1993 referred to above.
Ms Yates replied to Ms McLaughlin’s letter dated 11 July 1993 (page 73
Exhibit 30) on 13 July 1993 (page 74 Exhibit 30). Further
information had
recently been received in the Department from the Department of Industrial
Relations (page 67 Exhibit 30). A copy
of this advice was given to Ms
McLaughlin. Ms Yates was concerned to ascertain whether the new directive from
the Department of Industrial
Relation would impact on Ms McLaughlin’s
pension payable by the RBO. On the same day, 13 July 1993, Ms Morely wrote to
RBO (Exhibit 48). The complainant wrongly perceived this to mean that her
right to flexible working hours was being put in issue.
However, on 5 August
1993 Ms McLaughlin spoke to Ms Morely who noted that the complainant was now
fully appraised of the matter raised
by the Department of Industrial
Relations’ circular and noted – “she (Ms McLaughlin) does
understand now the reason
for our request for specific daily hours and this
should not now cause any further problems.”
Clearly the longstanding issue for Ms McLaughlin which required her and her
supervisor to agree on “specific daily hours”
had remained
outstanding. On the same day Mr Thornton noted that the complainant had informed
him that her hours would be Monday
to Friday, 9.30 am to 1.30 pm. This was
acceptable to Mr Thornton “so long as we get the arrangements down on
Clearly if the hours had been agreed upon the process was yet to
be finalised. Mr Thornton’s further letter to the complainant
August 1993 (page 84 Exhibit 30) again dealt with the question of flexible hours
in the light of the advice from the RBO.
At this time Ms McLaughlin was off work
and she was again requested to finalise the agreement concerning hours with Mr
Roger Brown.
On 7 October 1993 Ms McLaughlin met with Dr Scott and Ms Vanessa Marsh. Dr
Scott was engaged by the rehabilitation provider Health
Access Pty Ltd which
itself had been engaged by the Department to provide rehabilitation services for
Ms McLaughlin. She had made
an application for workers compensation to Comcare;
she had been off work since 13 July 1993 and the focus had by October turned
more towards her rehabilitation and her return to work as part of the
rehabilitation process. It was that issue which probably brought
rehabilitation service provider Dr Scott and Ms Marsh, the liaison person, into
Mr Thornton and Ms McLaughlin spoke
on the telephone (page 100 Exhibit 30). In that conversation Mr Thornton read to
her his notes
of his meeting on 7 October 1993 with Dr Scott and Ms Marsh. Mr
Thornton noted that the complainant said that she would be pursuing
of the “20 hours per week”. She expressed her view that the RBO was
in error (probably a reference to the
RBO letter dated 19 August 1993 –
page 93 Exhibit 30). She indicated that she proposed to address the issue
further with Dr
Scott. I am satisfied that as between Mr Thornton and Ms
McLaughlin the issue was for all practical purposes concluded by August
formal written agreement in respect of hours was outstanding but Mr Thornton
expected he would receive it. Thereafter when
the issue was raised by the DSU
with the RBO the latter had replied and Mr Thornton, having passed on the letter
from the RBO, regarded
the issue henceforth as one between the complainant and
the RBO. Henceforth in October 1993 it was clear that the complainant proposed
to pursue the issue of the RBO involvement with Dr Scott who had by now assumed
the role of rehabilitation service provider. He was
an independent person in all
of this and whilst the person engaged to provide rehabilitation services, he was
not a Departmental
person as such.
The above does not attempt to address each item of evidence relevant under
this heading but rather with reference to the contemporaneous
documents it
presents the factual position in broad outline. The issue of flexible hours
consumed the attention of the parties, particularly
the complainant, along with
other related issues between January 1993 and October 1993. It had involved
interaction with other agencies
such as the Department of Industrial Relations
and the RBO. So far as Mr Thornton is concerned, the documents and his evidence
I accept, persuade me that the DSU personnel were at all relevant times
responsive to the needs of the complainant to have flexible
working hours
implemented and sought to accommodate her needs within departmental and public
service requirements. At the same time
they were solicitous for her well being
knowing of the relationship between the RBO and the grant of PIP and her
requirement for
In my view there is no basis for a finding that in any respect concerning
this issue Mr Thornton acted in any discriminatory way towards
the complainant.
Rather, it is apparent that he approached the matter in a professional and
appropriate manner, at the same time
intent on accommodating Ms
McLaughlin’s medical condition and the restrictions which that imposed on
her working life. He was
necessarily intent on ensuring compliance with
governmental regulations and policies. In this environment the complainant often
stressed and she was no doubt vulnerable in the face of what she
perceived to be decisions which she again perceived to be adverse,
all because
of the fragile state of her health. It should also be noted however that the
somewhat volatile relationship between herself
and DSU personnel also impacted
significantly on the latter who had to cope with her persistent and marginally
aggressive correspondence
and lengthy phone calls and at the same time seek to
satisfy the needs of many other employees who were reliant upon the DSU for
their personnel requirements.
4.3 Paragraph 5.2 of the Wilson decision –– the alleged
failure of DSS to address conflict between the complainant and
There needs to be written into the chronology of events as set out above from
March 1993 the fact that on 2 May 1993 the complainant
made a claim to Comcare
for compensation and on 9 May 1993 she lodged a grievance against Mr Thornton in
accordance with Public Service
procedures. Her claim for compensation (Exhibit
32) and the grievance (Exhibit 33) emerged in the context of the pay and the
personnel issues which have been dealt with above. It is significant that
in her grievance document dated 9 May 1993 she states:
“I believe that Mr Thornton has made wrong decisions, that he has failed
to give me information that I needed and requested,
that he has ignored my
request to reconsider his decisions. I assume he did all this in good faith but
Among other outcomes sought by her was
the following:
“G – a mediated outcome between myself and Mr Thornton so that he
understands why I have formed my views and taken the
actions that I have. I hope
that such understanding will prevent any further difficulties between he and
The report on the grievance by Mr
Parkes dated 25 June 1993 is in the documents presented to the Commission (pages
492-494). That
document speaks for itself. One of the recommendations was that
“a mediated discussion take place with Mr Thornton as requested
mediator to the satisfaction to Ms McLaughlin.”
Accordingly, as at 25 June 1993 the complainant in the course of pursuing the
grievance had requested a mediation and that process
was to involve a mediation
by a person of Ms McLaughlin’s choice. Mr Thornton had agreed to
participate in the process although
he did not believe that, from his point of
view, there was any issue which required mediation. By this time many issues had
raised and addressed. Ms McLaughlin, at least since March 1993, had
actively pursued her several concerns with Mr Thornton and other
DSS staff and
Mr Thornton believed that by the end of June 1993 he and his officers had to the
best of the their ability addressed
the several concerns and whilst in every
respect it was clear that all of Ms McLaughlin’s expectations may not have
he and his staff had sought to resolve the issues in accordance with
legislative and other government requirements by which they
were bound. By June
1993 so far as Mr Thornton was concerned all that remained was for Ms McLaughlin
to submit in writing the agreed
hours referrable to her PPTW arrangements and
for her to arrange a mediator to her satisfaction. Meanwhile Mr Thornton
to pursue his commitments within the DSU. It is clear that in respect
of the outcome of the grievance it was the complainant who
was to arrange for a
mediator (see Exhibits 60 and 62). Both of these documents are dated 10 August
1993. So that by that date the
mediation had not yet occurred and awaited the
complainant’s selection of a mediator. She had originally considered a
person but later chose to rely on Dr Scott who was to become involved
as the rehabilitation provider.
The complainant met with Dr Scott and Ms Marsh, the liaison officer, on 29
September 1993. It was agreed that both of the latter,
Dr Scott and Ms Marsh,
should have a meeting with Mr Thornton. This was the meeting that took place on
7 October 1993 and is referred
to at pages 98/99 of Exhibit 30 and again on page
100 Exhibit 30.
Mr Thornton had made a diary note as a result of his meeting with Dr Scott/Ms
Marsh in which he noted his belief that by October 1993
the same two issues
remained outstanding; firstly, the “20 hours per week” question and
secondly, the “mediated
meeting” between Mr Thornton and the
complainant both of which he noted are “waiting on action from Ms
McLaughlin”.
Ms Marsh’s note of the same meeting (Exhibit 71) notes
her understanding as to how the issue might be resolved. Ms McLaughlin’s
What might have been seen as a satisfactory outcome seems to have changed
quickly because of a telephone conversation between Mr Thornton
McLaughlin on 14 October 1993 in which an issue arose about a pay increment but
more importantly because of the fact that
it was suggested by Mr Thornton that
Ms McLaughlin should be re-examined by the CMO prior to her returning to work.
Ms McLaughlin’s
response to this was in my view unnecessarily contentious
and negative. It is clear from her evidence in cross-examination that she
adopted a view of Mr Thornton on account of this suggestion which is
demonstrably quite false and by which she was intent on attributing
motives which had no substance. I am satisfied that Mr Thornton saw the
examination as desirable, if not necessary, because
by October 14 1993 Ms
McLaughlin had been absent from work for most of the period of the previous
seven months and in view of her
anticipated return to work on 20 October 1993 Mr
Thornton thought it proper that having regard to her lengthy absence she should
be examined by the CMO prior to her return. One cannot avoid the conclusion that
Ms McLaughlin had by this time developed a negative
mindset concerning Mr
Thornton. Having observed the latter and listened carefully to his evidence it
is clear that by October 1993
Mr Thornton had become non-plussed in the face of
the varying nature of the contentious submissions which Ms McLaughlin had
to put before the DSU. The suggestion of an examination by the CMO is
a good example of the point. Mr Thornton’s intentions
were, I am sure,
honourable. He was doing what he believed to be right yet Ms McLaughlin seemed
incapable of recognising that and
was more intent on attributing to him
questionable motives for his suggestion. She had from the time of her contact
with Dr Scott
seemingly lost sight of Mr Thornton’s willingness to engage
in the suggested mediation to resolve whatever concerns she may
have had. That
matter had been put in her hands from August 1993 but she seemingly had done
little if anything about it. Rather,
the engagement of Dr Scott and the
prospects of a rehabilitation process seemed to have from that time been
dominating her mind and,
of course, the ever contentious issue of working hours
and “flexibility” remained. It is unnecessary to repeat that there
were departmental requirements in respect of this issue which were apparently
not negotiable and within which the flexibility question
had to be addressed. It
seems to me that Ms McLaughlin was never comfortable with nor accepting of such
constraints and was intent
on pursuing the matter as if it were at large.
Furthermore, the finality sought by Mr Thornton from her in relation to the
question never materialised.
On 18 October 1993 Ms Yates had a conversation with Ms McLaughlin (pages
104/5 Exhibit 30). It was initiated by Ms Yates who had phoned
McLaughlin the details of the car park which she had requested and which had
been allocated to her in view of her anticipated
1993. Ms McLaughlin’s response was that she had been to see her doctor (Dr
Yuille) and would not
be returning “for another two weeks”. Ms Yates
noted that she would have to advise “compensation” of that,
because it had been expected that she would return to PPTW on 20 October 1993
– two days hence. Significantly, Ms
McLaughlin went on to raise three
other matters. Firstly, she queried “why is she being sent to the
CMO?”; secondly,
the payment of the increment and finally, she stated that
“she still had a problem with dealing with Peter Thornton”
doubted that she could return to work “with him still working in the same
area”. Involved in this were newly perceived
concerns which had only
recently arisen – the increment and the proposed visit to the CMO. Mr
Thornton had discussed these
issues with her on 14 October 1993 and had
attempted to explain. One week later when advising her intention not to return
on 20 October 1993 it was these matters which were uppermost in her
mind. Certainly they were matters of recent origin and, finally,
she still had a
“problem” with Mr Thornton to the point that she doubted her ability
to return to employment with him
working in the same area. The
“problem” is noted by Ms Yates as “he didn’t understand
the financial problem”.
Nothing could have been further from the truth. It
was and is demonstrable that in the course of his evidence Mr Thornton was
financial position; he had, in a timely way responded to her concerns
attempted to relieve any financial concerns for her; he had for example, dealt
with the repayment question very generously and
he had responded immediately to
her concerns in respect of the anticipated sick leave in April 1993. He had also
dealt expeditiously
with her application for PPTW in early April. Her
expressions of concern about Mr Thornton to Ms Yates on 20 October 1993 had
left Mr Thornton in a hopeless position. His every move seems to have
been the occasion for another contentious response. One is
left with the
definite view that Mr Thornton could only have been seen to be right had he done
the very thing which Ms McLaughlin
had requested on every occasion. However, as
he frequently said in evidence, he had done his best within the restrictions to
he was subject.
In my view there is no sound basis for a finding that departmental personnel
failed to address “her conflict with her manager”.
One can seriously
question whether on the evidence put before the Commission a true
“conflict” existed which required
mediation. Mr Thornton simply did
not see himself as being in conflict with Ms McLaughlin. Rather, he saw it as
part of his responsibilities
to address as best he could her concerns relating
to her employment which were referrable to the chronic poor state of her health.
He was aware of his seeming inability to satisfy all of Ms McLaughlin’s
concerns to her satisfaction but realistically he had
to address them within a
framework set by others. That no doubt made the complainant dissatisfied and
generated for her what she
perceived as a “conflict”. In fact there
was no true conflict. Rather, there was on the one side a perception of conflict
which was largely self generated and on the other side, one who was attempting
to meet all of the other, at times, unreasonable expectations
unsuccessfully but
who was nevertheless intent on fulfilling the legal and moral obligations to
this employee which his position
Other senior departmental personnel became involved from time to time but
they were more on the periphery and there is no sound basis
for criticising them
or Mr Thornton.
The allegation that she was discriminated against because of her state of
health in respect of this matter has also to be rejected.
4.4 Paragraph 5.5 of the Wilson decision – the resignation issue
– re-deployment, transfer or placement
The events leading immediately to the complainant’s resignation really
commenced with the conversation between the complainant
and Mr Thornton on 14
October 1993 (pages 100-101 Exhibit 30) referred to above. As she told Ms Yates
on 18 October 1993 she had
been to see her doctor, Dr Yuille, and then she told
Ms Yates that she would not be returning to work on 20 October 1993. Dr Yuille
was to advise the rehabilitation provider, Dr Scott, that Ms McLaughlin believed
that she could no longer work with Mr Thornton.
It will be noted that the
complainant was to work in the Social Policy Division. Mr Thornton’s role
was in personnel management
in the DSU. As she said in evidence “it
wasn’t him being around that was the problem, it was his direct role in my
That “role” was by reason of his position in DSU as a
resource manager. He was not involved, nor did he have any “role”
the work Ms McLaughlin would do as part of her employment in the Social Policy
It will have been noted that paragraph 5.5 of the Wilson decision draws a
distinction between “a transfer or placement”
“re-deployment”. The question which needed investigation in Sir
Ronald Wilson’s mind was whether the failure
of DSS to offer the
complainant a transfer or placement as distinct from re-deployment might have
been discriminatory conduct on
the part of DSS personnel and in breach of the
Act. As will be seen, the complainant, at some time in 1994, after she had
became aware of paragraph 4.4 of Exhibit 80 – a policy document
which addressed the question of “resignations”.
Paragraph 4.3 of the
document dealt with the need for counselling the officer in question as
“an integral part of the resignation
process” in the course of which
the counsellor should “ensure that the person has made a considered
decision and is aware
of other options or entitlements available”. These
options are stated in paragraph 4.4 of the document and include “transfer
to a new work area”. In the course of the evidence various terms were used
by the complainant – Re-deployment with a
“capital R”,
re-deployment with a “small r”, placement and “a quick
transfer”. There is a process
called re-deployment in the Public Service
whereby a person can be re-deployed to work elsewhere in the Service. It is said
a lengthy process and attended with some measure of formality. Ms
McLaughlin would call that process Re-deployment with a “capital
A placement or transfer or what Ms McLaughlin would call “re-deployment
with a “small r” is a less formal
process and seems to be considered
more temporary in nature and it is said, could have been more easily arranged
than formal Re-deployment
with a “capital R”. The policy document
(Exhibit 80) uses the more generic phraseology “transfer to a new work
The issue identified for investigation by Sir Ronald Wilson was whether DSS
had been unlawfully discriminatory in respect of Ms McLaughlin
because of her
disability by its failure to offer her a placement or a quick transfer rather
than the more formal re-deployment.
This issue seems to have been first raised
in the course of the second grievance which she had lodged after her 1994
application
for re-employment had been rejected. Her evidence was that in the
course of that process in 1994 she first became aware of the policy
document and
in particular of paragraph 4.4 of that document. The investigation pursuant to
the grievance had upheld the propriety
of the decision of DSS in respect of the
resignation and re-application. Thereupon an appeal was lodged by the
complainant to the
MPRA which was dismissed. This had led to the amendment of
the complaint in July 1995 to include an allegation of discrimination
the MPRA which had been dismissed by Sir Ronald in his decision (see paragraph
5.9 of the Wilson decision.).
In the course of the hearing this issue focussed on whether Ms McLaughlin had
been discriminated against because, at the time of DSS
accepting her resignation
the exit counsellor or any other employee of DSS concerned in her resignation,
such as Ms Briggs, a senior
officer of DSS, had not suggested that she might as
an alternative consider a quick transfer or placement to other employment rather
than engage in the more formal and cumbersome process of re-deployment.
Returning to the matrix of fact embedded in this issue it seems clear that
her intention to resign emerged at some time in the period
between 7 October
1993 and, at the latest, 14 October 1993. The earlier date had been the date of
the meeting between Mr Thornton,
Dr Scott and Ms Marsh; the later date had been
the date of the telephone conversation between Ms McLaughlin and Mr Thornton
concerning,
inter alia, the meeting of 7 October 1993, the question of the pay
increment and perhaps most importantly the suggested re-examination
complainant by the CMO. After this conversation the complainant visited Dr
Yuille, her GP, and expressed concern about Mr
Thornton and his alleged
inability to deal appropriately with the “flexibility problem”. It
was suggested that Dr Yuille
speak to Dr Scott to explore the issue. It will be
recalled that it had been the expectation of the latter that the complainant
October 1993 Ms McLaughlin had advised that she would not
be returning for a
further two weeks. She had been off work since 23 July 1993. On 26 October 1993
the complainant had spoken to
Ms Marsh (Exhibit 72). Their conversation seems to
have addressed the issues which the complainant had discussed with Dr Scott and
in the course of it I am satisfied that Ms McLaughlin made statements which were
consistent with Ms Marsh’s note “needs
to go somewhere else”.
One can, from the contemporaneous document, identify the matters which were
operating in the mind of the complainant. Firstly, there
had been her
troublesome conversation with Mr Thornton on 14 October 1993. It needs to be
recalled that this occurred in the context
of the rehabilitation plan which was
being overseen by Dr Scott assisted by Ms Marsh. This had envisaged her return
to work on 20
October 1993. Secondly, on or about 15 October 1993 Ms McLaughlin
had spoken to Dr Yuille who was to speak to Dr Scott. Thirdly,
on 18 October
1993 the complainant had spoken to Ms Yates about the increment problem, why she
is being sent to the CMO; and finally,
that she still had a problem with
“Peter Thornton...she didn’t know how she could return to Social
Policy with him still
working in the same area”. And finally on 26 October
1993 (Exhibit 72) she had expressed these concerns in a conversation with
Marsh (the “Rosie” referred to in the diary note is a reference to
Dr Yuille).
On 27 October 1993 (Exhibit 73) Ms McLaughlin wrote her letter of
resignation. The letter speaks for itself. Some features of it can
her statement
that she, the complainant, “had organised (her) thoughts”;
it contains a
logical and measured presentation of the state of her health and the matters
relevant to her employment which were affecting
addressed plans for her proposed rehabilitation and advanced a proposal for
“my new working life”.
Finally, she expressed her
belief that “I will never again fit into the bureaucracy of the APS. I
need to seek a fruitful working
life”. Mr Thornton is again identified as
the source of her apparent inability to remain employed in the Australian Public
Service. She expressed unequivocally her intention to resign for the reasons
which she advanced.
While the complainant in the hearing referred to her resignation letter as a
“cry for help” one can be reasonably confident
that the letter was
her considered response to a state of affairs which she believed was adverse and
unsympathetic to her but which
on the basis of any objective assessment was not
nor had it been. She was clearly disillusioned with her employment and had
plans for an alternative working life which would be more consistent
with her fragile state of health.
It is important to recognise the response of the various government agencies
to her stated intention to resign. Before doing that
however, it is important to
note her evidence at the hearing that the “trigger” for her letter
of resignation was advice
from Dr Scott that he was again considering a meeting
with Mr Thornton. This fact is not referred to in the resignation letter. It
reasonably clear that the prior events referred to above present the context
within which the resignation letter was written.
Even had Dr Scott intended a
further meeting with Mr Thornton one can be confident that both would have
appropriately addressed any
issue concerning Ms McLaughlin which needed to be
raised. That proposal for a meeting could hardly provide the justification by
for resignation. On the same date, 27 October 1993, Ms McLaughlin wrote
to Mr Thornton a shorter more formal letter of resignation
expressing her
intention to resign “with effect from Friday 5 November 1993” (page
112, Exhibit 30). Arrangements were
made for the exit interview with the
complainant which was a departmental requirement. It was conducted by Ms Yates
on 3 November
1993. I will return to it shortly.
On the next day, 28 October 1993, Mr Conlon of the Work Environment Section
wrote to Ms McLaughlin (page 113, Exhibit 30). This was
the immediate response
to her letter to Ms Marsh dated 27 October 1993 in which she advised her
intention to resign. Mr Conlon’s
letter speaks for itself. In spite of the
complainant’s unequivocal statement of intention to resign Mr Conlon
provided a sympathetic
response. In particular he urged the complainant to
continue with the Return to Work Plan which was being overseen by Dr Scott (and
Dr Yuille) and Ms Marsh.
On the following day, 29 October 1993, Ms McLaughlin spoke again to Ms Marsh
(Exhibit 78). In the course of this conversation the
complainant advised that
she was waiting for the exit interview and indicated that she may still withdraw
her resignation depending
on the situation next week. Clearly Ms
McLaughlin’s mind was well organised.
On 3 November 1993 Ms Marsh met with Mr Conlon and with Mr Segrot and Ms
Sephton of Comcare and Dr Scott (Exhibit 81). They continued
discussions
relating to the existing rehabilitation proposal for the complainant and it was
agreed that Ms McLaughlin be advised
of the need for her to pursue “the
CMP” (the Case Management Plan) designed by Dr Scott, an integral feature
was to be her return to work. On the same day Mr Segrot wrote to the
complainant and, inter alia, urged her “as a matter of
urgency” to return to work as originally planned.
Meanwhile, Ms Yates was preparing for the exit interview which was to be held
on 3 November 1993. She had on 2 November 1993 sought
advice from Personnel
Services as to what options should be offered to the complainant. As page 114 of
Exhibit 30 shows, one such
option to be offered was re-deployment. It is not
clear as to what precisely this was meant to convey. Ms McLaughlin insisted that
it was Re-deployment with a “capital R”. Whether that was so or
whether the term used was a more generic proposal or
option is really beside the
point. It is not inconsistent with a proposal to “transfer to a new work
area” envisaged
by paragraph 4.4 of Exhibit 80. In any event it is clear
that employment elsewhere for Ms McLaughlin was canvassed both prior to
interview and in the course of the exit interview and was to be put to her for
her consideration at the interview. It is
also important to note that on the
same day, 2 November 1993, Ms McLaughlin spoke to Ms Yates (page 115 Exhibit
30). The contact
was initiated by the complainant who inquired:
“she needed to do”; and
as to a letter
confirming her resignation.
Significantly, the complainant advised
Ms Yates that she, Ms McLaughlin, had contacted DIR (the Department of
Industrial Relations)
and that they had spoken to her about “other
options” which she had available to her “besides resignation”.
These were, inter alia, a “different job”. Ms McLaughlin went on to
advise Ms Yates that she “had given a great
deal of consideration to all
of these options” but that “none would be suitable to her
circumstance”.
So that by the date fixed for the exit interview:
Ms McLaughlin
had written her detailed letter to Ms Marsh on 27 October 1993;
Ms McLaughlin
had discussed the issue with Ms Marsh on the previous day;
Mr Conlon had on
28 October 1993 written to Ms McLaughlin and had urged her to return to the
rehabilitation plan which involved her
Mr Segrot on 3
November 1993 had likewise urged Ms McLaughlin to adhere to the rehabilitation
proposal; and
Ms McLaughlin,
herself, had on 2 November 1993 sought advice from DIR who had advised her of
the other options alternative to resignation
and one of these had been to seek a
“different job” but that after consideration of these other options
she had concluded
that none were suitable.
On 3 November 1993 Ms
Yates in the interview addressed the various options including re-deployment. Ms
McLaughlin apparently rejected
the proposal “because of time
delays”. Ms McLaughlin again insisted that her understanding was that the
formal process
of re-deployment was what was being addressed rather than the
less formal process of placement or a quick transfer.
The issue here has to be considered in the relevant context. In my view Ms
McLaughlin in her letters to Ms Marsh and Mr Thornton on
indicating her intention to resign had a firm mind on what she proposed and the
reasons for it. She is a patently
intelligent and resourceful person. Whilst not
diminishing in any way the impact upon her of her state of health the fact
that she was well aware of the various options available to her. I am
satisfied that other employment was discussed as an option.
Whether that was
addressed in purely formal or less formal terms it was not seen by her at the
time as an option which she was disposed
to embrace. Others had urged her to
Relations personnel and
clearly by the time she came to the exit interview her
mind was made up. She wished to put the past behind her, to concentrate on
improving her health and lifestyle and then planned to engage her considerable
talents in an employment situation or working environment
in which she would
feel comfortable. I am left with the firm view that assuming that she had been
offered the “immediate transfer”
or placement option it is more
probable than not that she would have rejected it. In the exit interview Ms
Yates noted her as saying
that any delay in respect of any other employment
option meant that she could not seriously consider it. Clearly for her, time was
of the essence and her dominant intention was to resign from the APS on 5
November 1993 so that she could, without distraction, address
concerns and then in the future move into what she perceived would be for her a
more attractive working environment. It
cannot be assumed, in my view, that the
quicker option of transfer or placement would have made any difference
whatsoever. That process
itself would have taken time. It was late in the year;
there would be the need for consultation with other departmental heads; a
suitable job would have had to be identified which satisfied her considerable
skills; such a position would have had to be available
on a part time basis
requiring no more than 20 hours per week because of her disability. One cannot
be satisfied that such a position
could have been found in such circumstances as
would have been likely to have had Ms McLaughlin abandon her already reasoned
positively stated intention to resign. It is more probable than not that any
delay, and some delay was probably inevitable, would
have been unacceptable to
Ms McLaughlin whose mind was already firm in its intentions.
Whether or not Ms Yates in the exit interview explored in detail all of the
relevant options, I am satisfied that at this time in
November 1993 any
suggestion of re-employment elsewhere in the Australian Public Service, be it a
placement or transfer either within
DSS or elsewhere or formal re-deployment,
would not have led her to resile from her intention to resign. If the facts be
Yates overlooked or for whatever reason failed to canvass the temporary
option with Ms McLaughlin that in my view was in no way decisive
nor would it
have been, had it been mentioned, a significant turning point. Ms McLaughlin
stated in evidence that she regarded Ms
Yates as “always very
ethical”. DSS personnel in my view addressed the issue with the required
degree of professionalism
and in a manner which reflected their concern for this
employee. They were, however, dealing with a very determined person who would
not nor could she have been distracted from her firm purpose. In no sense could
it be said in my view that their manner of dealing
with this difficult issue was
in any respect unlawful and discriminatory.
As mentioned above, this question only became relevant for the complainant in
the course of pursuing her later grievance in relation
to her resignation and
application for reinstatement. For the purposes of this part of the complaint it
became very much an afterthought.
The important question however is whether she was the victim of direct or
indirect discrimination by DSS personnel in relation to
their handling of her
plans for resignation. Nothing emerges which could sensibly lead one to a
conclusion that in the events which
happened she was unlawfully discriminated
against in her employment.
Ms McLaughlin had developed a longstanding antipathy towards Mr Gallagher who
had been her supervisor in 1992 and who in January 1993
was himself transferred
to the RIM Taskforce. Ms Briggs was a senior officer in DSS. Any assessment of
Ms McLaughlin’s evidence
in relation to this issue needs to take into
account her unsupported and unsupportable view that, in spite of the urgings of
and Mr Segrot that she consider return to her rehabilitation return to
work plan, Ms Briggs and Mr Gallagher were in some undisclosed
way instrumental
in ensuring that she was not invited to consider this so-called re-deployment
with a “small r”. This
suggestion is fanciful and cannot be
accepted. When pressed on the point of whether she was alleging that Ms Yates
had been directly
influenced by her superiors to withhold the suggestion for a
“quick transfer” Ms McLaughlin replied: “I think it’s
possible but it’s not an allegation I can accurately make”. The
question of her resignation and her application for re-employment,
out earlier, only became contentious in the course of the second grievance, the
investigation of it and a final appeal
to the MPRA. Considerable documentation
was generated in the course of that, some of which was referred to in the
evidence. In inquiring
into the issue identified in the Wilson decision in
paragraph 5.5 I have focussed more closely on the events which occurred in the
period October – November 1993 rather than on the various statements
recorded in the documents in the course of the investigation
of the grievance.
At the same time the events in that period cannot be sensibly separated from
those which had occurred in the earlier
months of 1993. If it is necessary it
should be said again that the Wilson decision was intent on having the
Commission address the
facts which occurred in the period March – November
1993 in order for it to determine whether in the relevant respects there
basis for founding supportable allegations of unlawful discrimination on the
ground of the complainant’s disability.
5. CONCLUSION
I have concluded that in all respects the complaint is unsubstantiated and
therefore it must be dismissed.
I certify that this and the preceding fifty-three
pages is a true copy of the Reasons for
Decision of the Hon
William Carter QC
Hearing Commissioner.
Hearing Solictor:
Date: 25 October, 2000
RTF format (208 KB)
Signed PDF/A format