Benson & Jeffreys (No 2) [2025] FedCFamC1F 537 (13 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Benson & Jeffreys (No 2)
FedCFamC1F 537
File number(s):
MLC 15240 of 2023
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– Subpoenas – protected confidence – where subpoena objected
to on the basis of protected
confidence – consideration of
children’s best interests – mandatory consideration of other
specified matters -
whether harm outweighs desirability of production –
application objecting to subpoena dismissed.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Melbourne (via MS Teams)
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Bramham Lawyers (Ms Goodrich)
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Mayek Legal
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Southern Family Law (Ms Toth)
MLC 15240 of 2023
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
MR JEFFREYS
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Notice of Objection filed on behalf of by Ms N of M Psychology on 17 July 2025
be and is hereby dismissed, as is the application
for the documents to be
considered protected confidences pursuant to s102BA for the purpose of not
permitting inspection.
to paragraph 3 of this Order, the documents in issue that were produced to the
Court on 1 July 2025 by Ms N of M Psychology
pursuant to the subpoena issued by
the Independent Children’s Lawyer be released for inspection to the
practitioners for the
to subsection 102BD(1) the father be restrained from inspecting, other than in
the presence of a legal practitioner retained
in these proceedings, those
documents produced to the Court by Ms N of M Psychology in response to the
subpoena issued by the Independent
Children’s Lawyer on 17 June 2025 which
are in addition to the documents already produced to the Court by Ms N in
to the earlier subpoena issued by the Independent Children’s
Lawyer on 7 May 2024 and previously released to the father.
father be restrained from taking any copies of the material produced to the
Court by Ms N of M Psychology in response to the subpoena
issued by the
Independent Children’s Lawyer on 17 June 2025.
reserve my reasons for decision.
AND THE COURT NOTES
any proceedings there are allegations of family violence and the provisions of
section 102NA
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) apply (see attached Family
Violence Information Sheet), any unrepresented party will not be permitted to
personally cross-examine
the other party/parties.
unrepresented parties may apply to the Commonwealth Family Violence and
Cross-Examination of Parties Scheme (“the Scheme”)
representation but any such application must be made at least 12 weeks prior to
the final hearing.
information about the legislation and the Scheme can be found at
attached Family Violence Information Sheet.
applies and a party becomes unrepresented after trial directions have
been made, that party is required to promptly advise the Court.
Section 114Q
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) provides that it is an offence
punishable by imprisonment for up to one year to communicate to the public any
account of family
law proceedings which identifies the parties, witnesses or
other people concerned with the proceedings, unless specifically authorised
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
mother’s treating psychologist, Ms N, objects to documents produced by her
pursuant to a subpoena
duces tecum
being released to, or inspected by,
the father pursuant to the protected confidences provisions in the recent
amendments to the
Family Law Act 1975
(“the Act”) which came
into operation on 10 June 2025. I pronounced my Order which determined this
dispute on 23 July
2025 and said that I would deliver my reasons subsequently.
These are those reasons.
substantive proceedings before the Court concern parenting arrangements for Y
(aged 9 years) and X (aged 11 years). Pursuant to
interim orders made by Senior
Judicial Registrar Conlan on 19 August 2024, the children reside in the care of
their father who has
sole parental decision making responsibility and the mother
has three hours of supervised time per week. I understand that the need
supervision is to protect the children against ongoing parental conflict,
particularly the alleged attempts by the mother to
vilify the father to the
children and undermine their relationship with him. Senior Judicial Registrar
Conlan, who ordered the supervision
arrangement, noted in her reasons
[81] On the untested evidence before me, I am concerned there is a risk the
Mother may be engaging in coercive control, primarily
through systems abuse. I
am concerned the Mother may be seeking to undermine and impede the
Father’s relationship with the
children and to otherwise characterise him
as a pariah within the children’s community, including their school. I am
she is motivated not by a fear of him as a risk to her safety, but
with the aim of both controlling him through inhibiting his capacity
to access the children and also through causing him such professional
embarrassment and personal distress that she may
succeed in driving him away
altogether.
mother and father separated in 2015. At the time of separation X was two years
old and the mother was pregnant with Y. The first
set of parenting proceedings
were instituted by the father in 2016 following the mother having unilateral
removed the children to
Adelaide. Those proceedings were resolved by a final
order sought and made with the consent of the parents on 20 August 2019. The
order was not supported or opposed by the Independent Children’s Lawyer.
That Order provided that the children live week about
with the parents. Of that
arrangement the mother deposed in her affidavit made on 18 May 2025:
20 August 2019, Final Parenting Orders were made by consent that provided, inter
alia, for a week about arrangement for the children
commencing on 30 August
2019, and equal shared school holiday time.
the Orders being made by consent, I was concerned that an equal shared time
arrangement was not in the best interests of
the children. Unfortunately, I felt
that I had no other option at the time but to consent to those Orders in
circumstances where
I had a change of barrister at the last minute and I was not
satisfied with the representation. I felt pressured and coerced into
Orders that I did not genuinely feel were in the best interests of the children.
I was physically and emotionally exhausted,
and financially depleted after
approximately three and a half years of protracted litigation.
N has been the mother’s treating psychologist since 2017 and was her
treating psychologist when the first final parenting
order was made on 20 August
O of Southern Family Law has been the Independent Children’s Lawyer
throughout the parenting dispute. She was appointed in
the first parenting
proceedings on 30 May 2017 and in these second parenting proceedings on 8
February 2024.
second set of proceedings was commenced by the mother on 22 December 2023, by
which time the week about arrangement previously
ordered had broken down.
Initially the mother sought that the father undertake parenting courses, that
the children live with her
and spend alternate weekends with the father. The
father sought initially sought a return to the week about arrangement. Each
has since amended their position. Now the father seeks
sole responsibility for making long-term decisions for the children,
and, if the Court finds that the mother poses an unacceptable
risk to the
children, that the girls’ time with the mother be restricted to telephone
time of 15 minutes twice a week and on
special occasions, and 3 hours supervised
face to face time each week, with a review of time after 12 months. If the Court
the mother does not pose an unacceptable risk, the father seeks that the
children have telephone time with the mother for 15 minutes
once per week and
spend time with the mother on a gradually increasing basis beginning with one
weekend night a fortnight and moving
to three nights a fortnight over the
weekend in 2027 with half school holidays. The mother seeks,
sole decision-making responsibility, that the children live with her and spend
alternate weekends and half of school holidays with
the father.
matter was placed in my docket on 4 February 2025 and is set down for final
hearing before me commencing 15 September 2025 (estimated
to take 8 days).
matter has attracted a number of court events, the dates of which are as
In previous proceedings MLC11343/2016 Mr Jeffreys & Ms Benson:
(1) First mention (duty list) before Judge Wilson (as his Honour then was) on 8
February 2017;
(2) Directions hearing before Judge Wilson on 12 April 2017;
(3) Interim defended hearing before Judge Wilson on 18 May 2017 with judgment
delivered on 30 May 2017;
(4) A further directions hearing before Judge Wilson on 26 September 2017 and
transfer to the Family Court of Australia (as this
Court then was)
(5) A first return date before Registrar Lethbridge on 11 December 2017;
(6) A subpoena hearing before Senior Judicial Registrar Sudholz on 5 September
(7) A duty list hearing before Senior Registrar Fitzgibbon on 6 December
(8) A case management hearing before Justice MacMillan on 1 March 2019; and
(9) Two days of a final defended hearing before Justice MacMillan on 19 and 20
August 2019.
In the current proceedings:
(1) An interim defended hearing before Senior Judicial Registrar Conlan on 8
February 2024;
(2) A further interim defended hearing before Senior Judicial Registrar Conlan
on 19 March 2024;
(3) A mention before Senior Judicial Registrar Conlan on 2 April 2024;
(4) A second return date before Judicial Registrar Dixon on 5 June 2024;
(5) A third further interim defended hearing before Senior Judicial Registrar
Conlan on 5 June 2024;
(6) A further mention date before Judicial Registrar Dixon on 18 July 2024;
(7) A mention before Justice Smith on 11 September 2024;
(8) A Review hearing before Justice Smith on 25 September 2024;
(9) A Directions hearing before Judicial Registrar McGee on 25 October 2024;
(10) A fourth further interim defended hearing before Senior Judicial Registrar
Conlan on 10 December 2024;
(11) A Compliance and Readiness hearing before Chief Justice Alstergren on 4
February 2025;
(12) A Case Management Hearing before myself on 24 February 2025;
(13) A mention before myself on 21 July 2025; and
(14) This subpoena hearing on 23 July 2025.
is not necessary for the purpose of today’s proceedings to describe the
controversies which required judicial intervention
on the above dates. It is
enough to record, for the purpose of providing context, that there has been an
extraordinary number of
court events which have had real potential to have
distracted the parents, and through them the children, from day-to-day life and
the responsibilities of parenting. The family, particularly the children,
require some finality.
this second tranche of parenting proceedings, there have already been the
following changes in parenting orders;
(1) On 8 February 2024 it was ordered by Senior Judicial Registrar Conlan that
the children live with the mother and spend time and
communicate with the father
each Saturday from 9.30am to 7.30pm, each Wednesday from after school until
7.30pm and other times as
(2) On 19 March 2024 it was ordered by Senior Judicial Registrar Conlan that the
children spend alternate weekends with the father
from the end of school on
Friday to the commencement of school on Monday commencing 22 March 2024 and each
alternate Thursday evening,
with the father at liberty to directly communicate
with the children via SMS and email.
(3) On 2 April 2024 Senior Judicial Registrar Conlan varied the Order of 19
March 2024 to extend time to 9.00am Tuesday where Monday
was a non-school day.
(4) On 8 August 2024, Senior Judicial Registrar Conlan ordered that the mother
be restrained from discussing parenting proposals
with the children or from
removing the children from the State of Victoria. Senior Judicial Registrar
Conlan also ordered that the
children attend school every day unless
specifically contraindicated by a medical professional and that the father be
from attending the children’s school. Senior Judicial Registrar
Conlan ordered the children be delivered to the playroom at
the Melbourne
Registry on 19 August 2024 to coincide with her interim Judgment delivery.
(5) On 19 August 2024, Senior Judicial Registrar Conlan ordered by that the
father have sole parental responsibility on an interim
basis. It was ordered
that the children live with the father and time spent with the mother be
supervised.
(6) On a Review of Senior Judicial Registrar Conlan’s Order of 19 August
2024, on 1 October 2024 Judge Smith confirmed Senior
Judicial Registrar
Conlan’s Order.
dispute which brought the matter before me on 21 July 2025 was a Notice of
Objection filed by the mother’s psychologist,
Ms N, to the release and
inspection by or on behalf of the father of the documents produced by Ms N
pursuant to a subpoena issued
on 17 June 2025 at the behest of Independent
Children’s Lawyer.
21 July 2025, the mother was represented by Ms P, solicitor, funded pursuant to
s102NA of the Act. The father was represented by
Mr Howe of Counsel, also funded
pursuant to the s102NA scheme. Ms O, solicitor, appeared for the Independent
Children’s Lawyer.
opposition, on 21 July 2025, I ordered that the documents produced by the
mother’s psychologist be released for inspection
by the mother and her
legal practitioners and by Independent Children’s Lawyer (but not by the
father) pending further order
of the Court.
issue of whether the documents produced by Ms N are to be released to the father
and/or his legal practitioners in these proceedings
was adjourned to today so I
could take submissions and hear argument from or for Ms N. Having seen the
documents, the Independent
Children’s Lawyer and the legal practitioners
for the mother were also in a position to address me on the nature of the
and whether, in their view, the documents (or some of them) should be
released for inspection by the father’s legal practitioners
father. Of course, I heard submissions on behalf of the father as well.
23 July 2025, the mother was represented by Ms Goodrich, the father again by Mr
Howe of Counsel and the Independent Children’s
Lawyer by Ms Toth. Ms N
appeared on her own behalf. I sat in Court but the parties attended remotely on
the Courts’ electronic
the conclusion of the hearing in relation to Ms N’s documents, the
representative for the mother informed the Court that
the mother wanted
increased and unsupervised time with the children between now and the final
hearing. I did not grant leave for
the mother to make an oral application. The
mother had attempted such an application without notice before me on a previous
which was not in accordance with the Rules and was likewise not
entertained.
THE OBJECTION
preparation for the final hearing (September 2025), on 17 June 2025 the
Independent Children’s Lawyer caused a subpoena to
issue requiring that
that Ms N produce “all records, files, reports, letters, emails,
memorandums, attendance records and notes,
letters of referral, testing results,
communications and any other writings in relation to MS [BENSON] born [in] 1972
2024 [to the date of the updated subpoena, being 17 June
determine the parameters of the dispute, at the commencement of the hearing on
23 July 2025, there was the following interchange
between myself and Ms
HER HONOUR: You don’t have a lawyer. Do you represent yourself
[MS N]: Yes.
HER HONOUR: Right. Thank you. The matter is listed for the objection.
It’s a notice of objection filed, I think on your
behalf, [Ms N], and it
I object to [Mr Jeffreys] viewing the file due to the sensitive nature of the
information, him being the perpetrator of domestic violence.
Do you make an application under section 102BA of the Act?
[MS N]: I do, yes.
HER HONOUR: And on what grounds?
[MS N]: I am a clinical psychologist, and I’m bound by the MARAM
framework, which was developed in response to the Royal
Commission into Family
Violence in 2016. And part of my obligation as a clinical psychologist is to
follow the MARAM framework.
One of those guidelines expressly talks about
clinical notes that are not to be released to a perpetrator of domestic
as it could escalate or escalate control. And so that’s the
reason that I have objected, because I – that’s what
– the guidelines I’m bound by, that sensitive information such as
clinical notes are not disclosed to perpetrators
under any circumstances, and
they’re the
HER HONOUR: Yes. The difficulty is that you’ve sworn an affidavit at
the request of the mother, and the mother relies on
the affidavit, and you will
be subject to cross-examination. Now, it is commonplace and, in fact, necessary
for the cross-examiner
to be able to compare what you say in your affidavit with
implications and statements in your notes because they may be contradictory.
[MS N]: I’m asking – I’m fine for any other legal
representative or other people in the Court to be able to see
However, I’m just going by the MARAM framework that asks that those notes
are not released expressly to [Mr Jeffreys].
HER HONOUR: When you say you’re going by a framework, the next thing
I’m going to ask
[MS N]: Yes.
HER HONOUR: you to do is to show me the sorts of sensitive notes that
you say should not be shown to the father given what’s
[MS N]: The notes, no matter whether they appear to be sensitive to somebody
or not appear to be sensitive, they’re discussions
that I’ve had in
a confidential psychology session, and I would say that all of my notes are
confidential and all of my notes
are something that should be treated with
utmost privacy and respect, particularly to my client, who has been a victim
survivor of
physical domestic violence historically and ongoing coercive
HER HONOUR: Anything else you want to say?
[MS N]: No. That’s all. Thank you.
N’s reference to the MARAM framework is a reference to a framework called
Multi-Agency Risk Management Framework, used in
this state (Victoria), to guide
professionals and services in assessing and managing the risk of family violence
PROTECTED CONFIDENCES
1B of Part XI, starting at
Family Law Act 1975
provides a ground of privilege against the production and/or
release and/or inspection of documents of certain sensitive information.
Briefly, the sensitive information is called a “
” which is imparted by a person such as the mother, who is
referred to as the “
protected confider”,
to person who is
acting in a professional capacity and providing a “
professional
, who is referred to as
“the confidant”.
The Court may direct that evidence not be adduced of or about a protected
confidence if the Court is satisfied that production, part
production,
inspection or copying of documents which are or about a protected confidence
would cause harm to the protected confider
or the child to whom the proceedings
relate and that the nature and extent of the harm outweighs the desirability of
evidence of
the protected confidence being adduced.
deciding whether to make a direction in a parenting case, the Court must regard
the best interest of the child as the paramount
consideration. Otherwise, the
Court must have regard to the matters set out in s102BE(4) of the Act.
relevant legislative provisions are:
102BA Definition of
protected confidence
protected confidence
is a communication made:
(a) in the course of, or in connection with, a relationship in which one person
) is acting in a professional capacity to provide a
professional service (see section 102BB) to another person (the
(b) in circumstances in which the confidant is under an obligation not to
disclose communications made to them by, or in relation
to, the protected
confider (whether the obligation is express or inferred from the nature of the
relationship).
102BB Definition of
professional service
(1) For the purpose of this Division, a
professional service
any of the following:
(a) a health service mentioned
in subsection (3) or (4);
(b) a specialist service in relation
(i) sexual assault;
(ii) family violence
(c) any activity prescribed by the regulations for the purpose of this
(2) Despite subsection (1), an activity is not a
professional
if it is prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this
subsection.
(3) An activity performed in relation to an individual is a health service if
the activity is intended or claimed (expressly or otherwise)
by the individual
or person performing it:
(a) to assess, maintain or
improve the individual’s health; or
(b) where the individual’s health cannot be maintained or improved –
to manage the individual’s health; or
(c) to diagnose the individual’s illness, disability or injury; or
(d) to treat the individual’s illness, disability or injury or suspected
illness, disability or injury; or
(e) to record the individual’s health for the purposes of assessing,
maintaining, improving or managing the individual’s
(4) The dispensing on prescription of a drug or medicinal preparation by a
pharmacist is a
health service
(5) To avoid doubt, a reference in this section to an individual’s health
includes the individual’s physical or psychological
102BC Direction in relation to adducing evidence
(1) The court may direct that evidence not be adduced in proceedings under this
Act, if the Court finds that adducing it would disclose:
(a) a protected confidence;
(b) the contents of a document recording or relating to a protected
confidence.
(2) The court may give the direction:
(a) on its own initiative; or
(b) on application by:
confidant; or
(ii) a person who is in possession or has control of a document recording or
relating to a protected confidence; or
(iii) a litigation guardian; or
(c) if the protected confider is aged 18 or over--on application by the
protected confider; or
(d) if the protected confider is a child aged under 18--on application by:
(i) a person who has parental responsibility (within the meaning of Part VII)
for the child; or
(ii) an independent children's lawyer who represents the interests of the child
in the proceedings; or
(iii) a person who has care of the child; or
(iv) a person who proposes to have parental responsibility for the child.
(3) Evidence that is not to be adduced in proceedings because of subsection
(1) is not admissible in the proceedings.
S102BD Direction in relation to complying with disclosure requirement
(1) The court may direct that a document or part of a document not be
produced, or not be inspected, or not be copied, in proceedings
under this Act,
despite a disclosure requirement (see subsection (2)), if the Court finds that
compliance with the disclosure requirement
would disclose:
(a) a protected confidence; or
(b) the contents of a document recording or relating to a protected confidence.
(2) Each of the following is a disclosure requirement :
a) a subpoena to produce a document;
(b) a requirement under this Act or the applicable Rules of Court that a party
to proceedings produce a document or part of a document
in the proceedings.
(3) The court may give the direction:
(a) on its own initiative; or
(b) on application by:
(i) the confidant; or
(ii) a person who is in possession or has control of a document recording or
relating to a protected confidence; or
(iii) a litigation guardian; or
(c) if the protected confider is aged 18 or over--on application by the
protected confider; or
(d) if the protected confider is a child aged under 18--on application by:
(i) a person who has parental responsibility (within the meaning of Part VII)
for the child; or
(ii) an independent children's lawyer who represents the interests of the child
in the proceedings; or
(iii) a person who has care of the child; or
(iv) a person who proposes to have parental responsibility for the child.
(4) The person to whom the disclosure requirement applies is not required to
comply with it at any time while the Court is deciding
whether to give the
(5) The court may order that a document or part of a document be produced to
the Court to inspect for the purposes of deciding
whether to give the
(6) A document or part of a document to which a direction under this section
relates is not admissible in the proceedings.
102BE Grounds and considerations for directions
(1) The court may give a direction under section 102BC or 102BD in relation to
evidence, or a document or part of a document, if
the Court is satisfied that:
(a) it is likely that harm would or might be caused (directly or indirectly) to
the protected confider, or to a child to whom the
proceedings relate, if the
evidence were adduced or the document or part produced, inspected or copied;
(b) the nature and extent of the harm outweighs the desirability of adducing the
evidence or producing, inspecting or copying the
document or part.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), harm may include, but is not limited to,
the following:
(a) physical harm;
(b) psychological harm or oppression;
(c) mental distress;
(d) a detrimental effect on the other party’s capacity to care for a
(e) financial harm.
(3) If the direction is being made in proceedings under Part VII, the Court must
regard the best interests of the child as the paramount
consideration.
(4) The court must have regard to the following matters in deciding whether to
make the direction:
(a) in relation to the evidence, or the document or part:
(i) its probative value in the
proceedings; and
(ii) its importance in the proceedings; and
(iii) the availability of other evidence or documents, concerning the matters to
which the evidence, or the document or part, relates;
(b) the likely effect of adducing the evidence, or producing, inspecting or
copying the document or part, including the likelihood
of harm, and the nature
and extent of harm, that would or might be caused:
(i) to the protected confider; or
(ii) to a child to which the proceedings relate;
(c) the means available to the Court to limit the harm or extent of the harm
likely to be caused if the evidence is adduced or the
document or part produced,
inspected or copied;
(d) whether the substance of the evidence, or of the document or part, has
already been disclosed by the protected confider or any
other person;
(e) the public interest in preserving the confidentiality of protected
confidences;
(f) whether the protected confider opposes the disclosure of the protected
confidence or any part of it;
(g) whether a lawyer is representing the protected confider in relation to the
proceedings;
(h) if the protected confider is a child aged under 18—whether any of the
following oppose the disclosure of the protected
confidence or any part of it:
(i) a person who has parental responsibility (within the meaning of Part VII)
for the child;
(ii) an independent children’s lawyer who represents the interests of the
child in the proceedings.
(5) Subsection (4) does not limit the matters to which the Court may have regard
in making the direction.
(6) The court must give reasons for making, or deciding not to make, a direction
under this Division.
CLAIM OF PRIVILEGE
is uncontroversial that, in relation to Ms N’s notes the mother is a
protected confider
and that Ms N is a
. Indeed, the
Explanatory Memorandum to the amending
legislation
described explicitly
the relationship between psychologist and client/patient as follows:
purpose of new Division 1B is to provide safeguards relating to disclosing and
adducing ‘protected confidences’ evidence
in family law proceedings,
in circumstances where the likely harm to the ‘protected confider’
or a child to whom the
proceedings relate, would outweigh the desirability of
disclosing or adducing the evidence.
provisions provide a mechanism for the Courts to consider the harm likely to be
caused to the protected confider and children
to whom the proceedings relate,
when evidence of a sensitive nature is produced, inspected, copied and adduced.
This evidence will
often be generated in the context of therapeutic
relationships including doctor and patient, nurse and patient, psychologist and
client/patient, counsellor and client. Frequently, in family law proceedings,
this information will be produced in response to a
subpoena issued to a health
service or an individual
PRE-REQUISITES FOR PROTECTED CONFIDENCES
was no issue that Ms N’s notes are
protected confidences
meaning of s.102BA. Classification of documents as protected confidences means
that the following pre-conditions are met:
(1) Ms N is a confidant within the meaning of s102BA(a);
(2) Ms N was acting in a professional capacity to pride a professional service
within the meaning of s102BB(1);
(3) Ms N was bound by an obligation not to disclose the communication between
herself and the mother, specifically, the MARAM framework.
PROBITY & IMPORTANCE OF CONFIDENCES
was not controversial that Ms N’s notes are of probative value and have
importance in the proceedings within the meaning
of s102BE(4). Ms N was the
mother’s treating psychologist for the final hearing of the first
parenting proceedings, and the
mother relied on affidavit evidence by Ms N made
on 30 November 2018 and another sworn on 7 August 2019. In this second tranche
parenting proceedings, the mother relies on Ms N’s affidavit made 18
July 2025. In Ms N’s objection to the subpoena,
Ms N refers to the father
as “the perpetrator of domestic violence” suggesting a concluded
view based, presumably, on
information provided by the mother.
proceedings are less adversarial proceedings but nonetheless adversarial in
nature. Where, as here, the mother relies upon
Ms N to provide evidence in
support of her case, the other parties must be able to test the evidence upon
which the mother relies.
As was submitted by the Independent Children’s
Lawyer, the family report prepared by Child Court Ms Q dated 30 October 2024
includes the following:
[74] ... It is the writer’s assessment that [Ms Benson] would benefit
from ongoing mental health support, with a professional
who has extensive
experience working with family separation, conflict and alienation. It is hoped
with mental health support and
an opportunity for self-reflection, [Ms Benson]
may be able to recognise how her choices and behaviours have impacted both her
the children. The writer would be concerned if [Ms Benson] refused to engage
in this therapeutic support and what impact this would
have on the children
without this scaffolding. Until a demonstrated shift has occurred in [Ms
Benson’s] rigid narrative, a
supervised setting must remain to ensure
stability and security for [Y] and [X]
RECOMMENDATIONS
[78] [Ms Benson] engages in mental health support through a mental health
professional with expertise in family separation, conflict
and alienation.
Q’s most recent report, dated 11 June 2025, includes the
[69] In the interviews with [Ms Benson], the writer observed that [Ms Benson]
remained steadfast in her belief that [Mr Jeffreys]
has perpetrated family
violence and the children’s safety remains at risk whilst in his care. [Ms
Benson] did not demonstrate
any shift in her self-reflections. When asked about
her engagement in therapeutic supports which specialise in parental conflict,
resist/refuse dynamics and family separation; a recommendation of the previous
family report, it appeared [Ms Benson] had not meaningfully
engaged in these
supports. Whilst positive [Ms Benson] has completed a parenting after separation
course, it did not appear to alter
her capacity to consider alternatives, and
rather [Ms Benson] remained rigid and unwavering in her views and opinions. [Mr
narrative regarding [Ms Benson’s] continued use of
undermining and insidious comments to the children also remains a concern.
factual, this further demonstrates a lack of change in [Ms Benson’s]
perspective and understanding of the children’s
emotional wellbeing.
[70] [Ms Benson] has demonstrated an entrenched pattern of behaviours throughout
the current Court proceedings and historic proceedings.
As outlined previously,
earlier family reports and assessments by [Dr J], [Ms K] and [Ms C] highlighted
concerns regarding [Ms Benson’s]
narrative and the potential impact this
has had on the children and the relationship with [Mr Jeffreys]. If the Court
finds [Mr Jeffreys]
has not perpetrated family violence or child abuse, it is of
deep concern [Ms Benson] maintains this false narrative and the writer
concerned about the children’s emotional wellbeing and safety in her care.
accept that it is of concern to the Independent Children’s Lawyer that
there is no evidence of the mother accessing treatment
apart from Ms N. I am
satisfied that there is probative value in the notes of Ms N, for what those
notes may, or may not, contain.
note that there are allegations that the mother poses a risk to the children. In
her unpublished reasons as to interim care and
parenting arrangements, Senior
Judicial Registrar Conlan recorded the following:
[93] On the untested evidence available to me and particularly the independent
expert evidence, I am satisfied that the Mother currently
presents an
unacceptable risk to the children’s safety and wellbeing. I am satisfied
that an immediate intervention is required
to “interrupt this chronic
cycle of conflict with a view to affording the girls access to a stable,
nurturing environment that
will promote their development and wellbeing”.
I am also satisfied that the children will be at risk of resisting the support
of their Father permanently if they remain for any longer in their
Mother’s sole care.
[94] Until such a time as the Mother can demonstrate her willingness and
capacity to engage with the expert recommendations in these
proceedings in a
manner that priorities the best interests of the children, above her wish to be
rid of the Father, I am not satisfied
the Mother is a position to safely nurture
the children.
Best interests of child is paramount consideration
102BE(3) specifies that in parenting proceedings the best interests of the child
form the paramount consideration. It is contended
by both parents that
co-parenting is not an available option for this family. The mother’s
mental health and capacity for insight
with respect to parenting will be key
issues for determination at final hearing.
are no other proposed witnesses who could provide similar evidence from a
therapeutic perspective.
Harm caused by release or inspection
was no evidence provided by Ms N or the mother on the likelihood of harm or the
nature and extent of harm which would or might
be caused to the mother or the
children by the documents produced by Ms N being released to and inspected by or
on behalf of the
father. The Court’s power to make a direction under
s102BC is conditioned upon the Court being satisfied that releasing Ms
documents for inspection to the father would disclose a protected confidence.
However, when I asked Ms N to direct me to
a document produced by her which
would or might be directly or indirectly harmful to the mother or the child, she
responded that
she is bound by the MARAM framework which dictates that clinical
notes are not to be released to a perpetrator of domestic violence.
submitted that the entirety of her notes are sensitive and confidential in those
circumstances.
wording of the legislation goes to the “likely effect” and
“likelihood of harm” following disclosure to
the protected confider
(the mother) and to any children in the proceedings. I note this is a higher
standard than mere possibility
of harm. The children currently live with the
father but there is no suggestion that the release of the notes to the
solicitor poses any risk of harm to the children. The allegations
that the father has perpetrated family violence on the mother and/or
are at this stage untested.
her unpublished reasons as to interim time and parenting arrangements dated 19
August 2024, Senior Judicial Registrar Conlan notes
as follows:
[86] [...]The s 69ZW response from Department of Families Fairness and Housing
dated 8 March 2024, notes the Mother’s allegations
regarding the Father
are historical and unparticularised. While also noting the impact on the
children of being exposed to the chronic
conflict of their parents, the
Department concludes there is no evidence the children are at immediate or
significant risk of harm
in the care of either parent. There is no reference to
the children’s inadequate school attendance or deteriorating mental
in the s 69ZW Response.
the absence of evidence I am not satisfied there is any risk of harm to the
children on the release of the notes to the father’s
legal practitioner
and, under the supervision of that practitioner, to the father.
to the effect of production upon the mother, the mother’s legal
practitioner did not adduce evidence or make submissions
as to any consequences
for the mother. Interestingly, neither did Ms N.
Previous disclosure of protected confidences
terms of s 102BE(4)(d), I must consider whether the substance of the documents
produced by Ms N have already been disclosed by
the mother or any other person.
I am informed by the Independent Children’s Lawyer that, in May 2024, Ms N
was served with
a subpoena issued by the Independent Children’s Lawyer and
had produced her files which were released for inspection including
behalf of the father. The mother and father were self representing litigants at
the time. The mother, who is now represented
by Bramham Lawyers, does not take
issue with the submission by the Independent Children’s Lawyer that the
father has already
seen most of the documents in respect of which Ms N has
lodged an objection.
Public interest
terms of s 102BE(4)(e), I accept that there is public interest in preserving the
confidentiality of protected confidences. However,
to a large extent,
confidentiality has not been preserved. Confidentiality has been waived in
relation to the documents produced
by Ms N in response to the subpoena issued at
the behest of the Independent Children’s Lawyer in May 2024. I also accept
there is public interest in facilitating a parent to undergo therapy or
seek mental health treatment without being concerned that
details of the
intimate and highly personal matters about which the confiding parent feels most
vulnerable as a parent and which
are unpacked to the professional of his or her
choice, will be able to be accessed by their former partner, now their
through the Court system. It is in the public’s interest not to
disincentivise personal growth and a desire by a parent to
access mental health
treatment. However, there is also public interest in the Court making a decision
based on all relevant facts.
Steps to minimise harm
terms of s 102BE((4)(f) and (g), the mother is represented today. She does not
oppose a direction which releases all documents
produced by Ms N being inspected
by the father providing he is accompanied by his lawyer in these proceedings.
The other parties
do not oppose a direction in those terms.
material will be released to the practitioners for the father on the condition
the father not personally view the material without
a legal practitioner
present, and he is not provided with any copies of the documents produced on
subpoena by Ms N. I come to this
conclusion having regard to the interest of the
children as the paramount consideration.
family has been through an extraordinary amount of litigation. It must cease
with the upcoming hearing. For this reason, it is
in the best interests of the
children that the case of each parent be thoroughly scrutinised. On the facts of
this case, that scrutiny
includes an examination of the notes of the
mother’s psychologist. The concept of harm has simply not been articulated
me today in such a way that it outweighs the importance which may
ultimately attach to testing each parent’s case by reference
documents in question.
I certify that the preceding forty-one (41)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 13 August 2025
Benson & Jeffreys
[2024] FedCFamC2F 1158
(unpublished).
Transcript of
proceedings, 23 July 2025, p.2 line 10 to p.3 line 18.
Explanatory Memorandum,
Family Law Amendment Bill
RTF format (519 KB)
Signed PDF/A format