Lama Charab v University of New South Wales Trading AS UNSW Sydney, Brooke White [2025] FWCFB 230 (16 October 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 230
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
—Appeal of decision
University of New South Wales Trading AS UNSW
Sydney, Brooke White
(C2025/8295)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT GRAYSON COMMISSIONER CRAWFORD COMMISSIONER SLOAN
SYDNEY, 16 OCTOBER 2025
Appeal against decision
of Deputy President Roberts at Sydney on 14 August 2025 in matter
C2025/3047 – Application under
Fair Work Act 2009
alleging dismissal in contravention of
– Jurisdictional
objections on grounds that appellant was not dismissed and that application was
filed outside of 21-day statutory
time period – Permission to appeal
Introduction
Lama Charab has lodged an appeal under
Fair Work Act
) against a decision of Deputy President Roberts
on 14 August 2025. In the decision the Deputy President determined that there
no exceptional circumstances that would warrant granting an extension of
time for Ms Charab’s application under
of the Act and accordingly
held that there was no basis to extend the time for filing Ms Charab’s
application. As a result,
Ms Charab’s application was dismissed. The
appeal was listed for hearing in respect of permission to appeal only on 7
Ms Charab says that her dismissal occurred in contravention of
of the Act. Ms Charab’s employment ended on 21 January 2025. On 15 April
2025, Ms Charab filed an application under
of the Act for the Commission
to deal with a general protections dispute involving dismissal. It was
accordingly 63 days outside
of the 21-day time limit under
s 366(1)(a)
Ms Charab was employed by the University of New South Wales (the
) on a series of fixed term contracts. Prior to the end of the
last contract Ms Charab asked for ongoing employment after the expiry
contract. The University denied this request. Ms Charab raised queries with the
University regarding a part-time role at a
lower level which was advertised in
the final week of her employment and asserted that this cast doubt on the
legitimacy of the University’s
refusal to offer her further work. Ms
Charab also raised concerns regarding the University’s decision to offer a
employee a role within its IT Department.
Following the end of her employment on 21 January 2025, Ms Charab
applied for other jobs with the University and made a formal written
to the University regarding various matters. Ms Charab was advised that this
complaint had been finalised on 19 March 2025.
The University raised jurisdictional objections that the application
had been made out of time and that Ms Charab had not been
“dismissed”
for the purposes of
of the Act. It argued that
her employment had ended because she was engaged under the terms of a fixed term
contract which reached
the end of its term.
Ms Charab seeks permission to appeal and to appeal from the decision
of the Deputy President and relies on a notice of appeal dated
25 August 2025.
For the reasons that follow, permission to appeal should not be granted and the
appeal dismissed.
Permission to appeal
An appeal under
of the Act is an appeal by way of rehearing and
the Commission’s powers on appeal are only exercisable if there is error
the part of the primary decision
There is no
right to appeal, and an appeal may only be made with the permission of the
Commission.
Section 604(2)
requires the Commission to grant permission if the
Commission is satisfied that it is in the public interest to do so.
The task of assessing whether the public interest test is met is a
discretionary one involving a broad value
GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty Ltd v
Full Bench of the Commission identified some of the considerations that may
attract the public
“... the public interest might be attracted where a
matter raises issues of importance and general application, or where
is a diversity of decisions at first instance so that guidance from
an appellate court is required, or where
the decision at first
instance manifests an injustice, or the result is counter intuitive, or
that the legal principles
applied appear disharmonious when compared with
other recent decisions dealing with similar matters.”
It will rarely be appropriate to grant permission to appeal unless an
arguable case of appealable error is demonstrated. This is so
because an appeal
cannot succeed in the absence of an appealable
However, the
fact that the Member at first instance made an error is not necessarily a
sufficient basis for the grant of permission
An application for permission to appeal is not a de facto or
preliminary hearing of the appeal. In determining whether permission
should be granted, it is unnecessary and inappropriate for the Full Bench to
conduct a detailed examination of the grounds
It is well established that an appellate body will not interfere
with the factual findings of a first instance decision-maker unless
it concludes
that a finding cannot stand because it was contrary to incontrovertible facts or
uncontradicted testimony, glaringly
improbable, or contrary to compelling
inferences.
Where a finding or conclusion involves the exercise of a discretion,
where some latitude is afforded, an appellate body will also
generally not
interfere with the conclusions of the decision-maker. As stated by the High
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations
“Discretion” is a notion that “signifies a
number of different legal concepts”. In general terms, it refers
decision-making process in which “no one [consideration] and no
combination of [considerations] is necessarily determinative
result.” Rather, the decision-maker is allowed some latitude as to the
choice of the decision to be made. The latitude
may be considerable as, for
example, where the relevant considerations are confined only by the
subject-matter and object of the
legislation which confers the discretion. On
the other hand, it may be quite narrow where, for example, the decision-maker is
to make a particular decision if he or she forms a particular opinion
or value judgment.
(citations omitted)
For there to be legal error, it would need to be shown that the
Deputy President acted on a wrong principle, took into account irrelevant
matters, mistook facts, or that the outcome was unreasonable or plainly
enough that a different member or an appellate body might have reached a
different conclusion.
Decision under Appeal
The Deputy President’s decision records that Ms Charab’s
employment came to an end on 21 January 2025. As such, Ms Charab’s
application was filed 63 days outside of the 21-day statutory timeframe
prescribed by
of the Act.
The Deputy President, in his decision, then went on to consider
whether to allow a further period of time beyond the 21-day statutory
prescribed by
of the Act. In doing so he considered each of the factors
of the Act. The Deputy President considered, at length, Ms
Charab’s submissions as to the reasons for the delay, including
University’s delay in responding to her internal complaint and her
genuinely held belief that she would be reinstated,
her hopes that she would be
offered a new role given the alleged misleading conduct engaged in as part of a
post dismissal recruitment
process and her “emotional distress following
more than two years of marginalisation and discrimination”. The
Respondents’
submissions were considered before the Deputy President
reached the conclusion that Ms Charab’s reasons for the delay were
satisfactory. In reaching this conclusion he had regard to Ms Charab’s
conduct post dismissal including contact with the
Commission. He also considered
that Ms Charab did not have a credible explanation for the delay in filing her
application for 27
days after being advised that her internal complaint had been
unsuccessful and for almost two weeks after she was advised that she
been successful in obtaining a new role. He considered that the reason for the
delay did not support a finding of exceptional
circumstances.
The Deputy President considered that Ms Charab’s active steps
to dispute her dismissal weighed marginally in her favour. The
Deputy President
determined that the considerations of whether there was any prejudice to the
employer and fairness as between Ms
Charab and other persons in a like position
were both neutral factors in his assessment.
In relation to the merits of Ms Charab’s application the
Deputy President recounted Ms Charab’s submissions, paying close
her contentions as to the operative cause of her employment ending and that she
had been dismissed within the meaning of
the Act. He summarised her submissions
regarding the reason for her dismissal including that it was for discriminatory
and exclusionary
reasons and/or was down to the University’s failure to
consider her for redeployment and the appointment of others into roles
significant overlap to her duties.
The Deputy President recounted the evidence of the Respondents
including witnesses who had knowledge of the reason for the dismissal
evidence was that it was due to budgeting and resourcing reasons and not for
reasons proscribed by
of the Act, including any discriminatory reasons.
The Deputy President then made clear that it was “not appropriate for the
Commission to resolve contested issues of fact going to the ultimate merits for
the purpose of taking into account the merits of
the matter in
s.366(2)(d)
”. He then concluded that Ms Charab’s case had
“significant difficulties” including that she must succeed
argument that her employment ended as a result of a dismissal and not through
the ordinary expiration of a fixed term contract.
He considered that the merits
were a neutral factor in his assessment. Having considered the matters set out
the Deputy President dismissed Ms Charab’s application.
Appeal Grounds
Ms Charab’s Notice of Appeal raises five appeal grounds:
the Deputy President erred in finding that the contract ended by the effluxion
of time under a fixed-term contract in circumstances
where she had been
“dismissed” as the role was ongoing and materially the same position
was available for her to perform;
the Deputy President failed to take into account relevant evidence that Ms
Charab’s role had been advertised while she
was employed and that she had
been rejected for that role which was said to demonstrate that the role was
ongoing and the fixed term
contract had not ended due to the “effluxion of
Ms Charab had been denied procedural fairness as the Deputy President had
accepted the Respondents’ submissions and evidence
without giving proper
weight to Ms Charab’s submissions and evidence;
the Deputy President had erred in dealing solely with the question of whether to
accept her application out of time and not engaging
with the substance of her
the Deputy President made significant errors of fact including
determined that Ms Charab’s role was a temporary back-fill despite
evidence that it continued on beyond the end of her employment;
failed to determine that Ms Charab’s exclusion from redeployment
opportunities and casual work demonstrated an ongoing need
for her duties to be
By her appeal submissions, Ms Charab raises that the Deputy
President erred in evaluating exceptional circumstances including by:
to give proper weight to the internal complaint process, reasonable expectation
of reinstatement and Ms Charab’s distress;
to consider the allegations of adverse action raised by Ms Charab;
incorrect weight to Ms Charab’s job applications in forming an opinion
that this demonstrated proof of her capacity;
that “fairness” was a neutral factor.
As to the public interest, Ms Charab submits that:
decision risks setting a precedent that employers can avoid their obligations by
simply re-labelling or reposting ongoing roles
as different positions in order
to deny employees continuity and access to protections under the Act.
decision undermines the principle that fixed-term contracts should not be used
to disguise ongoing work, and failure to properly
scrutinise rolling fixed-term
arrangements will affect thousands of employees in the higher education sector
and beyond.
overlooking evidence that Ms Charab’s role was reposted and ongoing, the
original decision has the potential to diminish
trust in the Commission’s
ability to safeguard fairness.
granting permission, the Full Bench will be able to correct these errors,
reinforce that dismissal cannot be avoided through technical
manoeuvres and
ensure that the statutory protections of the Act are applied consistently.
is in the public interest both to correct the injustice and provide guidance for
future matters involving the use of fixed-term
contracts, in circumstances where
the Government is working to protect fixed-term employees.
matter raises important issues about pregnancy and parental leave protections,
ensuring employees are not disadvantaged by fixed-term
contract expirations
post-conversion requests.
Clarification
is needed that reliance on internal complaint processes is a valid ground for
delay, encouraging workplace dispute resolution
before external escalation.
case provides an opportunity to clarify the test for “exceptional
circumstances” under
where discrimination and psychological harm
are involved.
Consideration
Section 365
provides that, if a person has been dismissed and
alleges that the dismissal was in contravention of
, the person may
apply to the Commission to deal with the dispute. If a jurisdictional objection
is raised to the Commission’s
authority to deal with an application, the
Commission must determine that objection before dealing with the
Section 366
sets out the circumstances which the Commission must
consider when determining whether to extend the time for the filing of an
application
It provides as follows:
366 Time for application
(1) An application under
section 365
must be made:
(a) within 21 days after the dismissal took effect; or
(b) within such further period as the FWC allows under subsection (2).
(2) The FWC may allow a further period if the FWC is satisfied that there are
exceptional circumstances, taking into account:
(a) the reason for the delay; and
(b) any action taken by the person to dispute the dismissal; and
(c) prejudice to the employer (including prejudice caused by the delay); and
(d) the merits of the application; and
(e) fairness as between the person and other persons in a like position.
The time limit that applies to the exercise of a person’s
right to bring an application under
of the Act reflects
Parliament’s intention that this right be exercised promptly. However, the
Act recognises that there are
some cases where a late application should be
accepted, namely where there are exceptional circumstances.
The test of exceptional circumstances in relation to extensions of
time to lodge applications under s 366(2) of the Act establishes
hurdle’ for an applicant for an
decision to extend time under s 366(2) involves the exercise of a broad
discretion.
Appeal Grounds 1 and 2
Ms Charab submits that the Deputy President erred in finding that
the contract ended by the effluxion of time under a fixed-term contract
circumstances where she had been “dismissed” as the role was ongoing
and materially the same position was available
for her to perform.
We consider that this submission proceeds upon a misunderstanding of
the Deputy President’s decision. The Deputy President recorded
was a dispute regarding whether Ms Charab had been dismissed. When considering
the merits of Ms Charab’s application
the Deputy President acknowledged
that Ms Charab would need to overcome the argument that she had not been
dismissed in order to
succeed. The Deputy President was at pains not to resolve
the dispute about whether Ms Charab had been dismissed given the evidence
him and the interlocutory nature of the decision. This approach was correct and
orthodox given that the sole issue that he
was determining at the time was
whether to accept Ms Charab’s application out of time. That determination
was made in circumstances
where the date of the end of the employment
relationship (howsoever described) was not disputed.
Ms Charab submitted that the Deputy President failed to consider the
allegations of adverse action she had raised and relevant evidence
that her role
had been advertised while she was employed and that she had been rejected for
that role. She submitted that the latter
demonstrated that the role was ongoing
and the fixed term contract had not ended due to the “effluxion of
time”. However,
these matters are relevant to assessing the merits of Ms
Charab’s substantive application. In any event, it is clear that the
Deputy President had regard to Ms Charab’s evidence and submissions
regarding her duties and that a similar role had been advertised
while she was
employed and that she had been rejected for that role when assessing the merits
application.
As the Full Bench noted in
Johansson v Edge Early Learning
Administration Pty
“While the merits of the substantive application form a
part of the consideration of whether to grant an extension of time under
366(2)(d), the Commission does not embark on a detailed consideration of the
substantive case. There are cogent reasons why the
Commission should not receive
evidence and make factual findings on contested issues at this stage of the
proceedings: most notably
because parties should not have to present their
evidentiary case twice. This is especially important when considering the merits
of a general protections claim as the role of the Commission in dealing with
these applications is ordinarily limited to
conciliation.”
It is apparent from a plain reading of the decision that the Deputy
President understood that the issue of whether there was a dismissal
was contested. In our view, the Deputy President properly formed a view that, at
the interlocutory stage of the proceedings,
he should not determine the factual
contest between the parties on this issue, nor the merits of the application.
This approach is
correct as the Deputy President was not dealing with Ms
substantive
application. He was determining a threshold
issue, being whether to grant Ms Charab an extension of time.
Having had regard to these matters, we do not consider that an
arguable case of appealable error in the Deputy President’s approach
been identified.
Appeal Ground 3
Ms Charab submits that she has been denied procedural fairness as
the Deputy President had accepted the Respondents’ submissions
evidence without giving proper weight to Ms Charab’s submissions and
evidence. Ms Charab has not particularised what factual
findings are said to
have been affected by a denial of procedural fairness. Indeed, there was limited
factual contest in the proceedings
before the Deputy President and only limited
factual findings made. The clearest factual contest (other than whether Ms
dismissed or not) relates to the reason for the dismissal. The Deputy
President’s reasoning recounts both Ms Charab’s
and Ms White’s
evidence and submissions on this issue. However, he makes no findings as to
whose evidence he prefers. For the
reasons outlined above, this approach was
entirely appropriate.
In relation to the submission that the Deputy President did not give
proper weight to Ms Charab’s submissions, this appears
essentially be a complaint that the Deputy President preferred the submissions
of the Respondents over those of Ms Charab.
We consider that the argument
advanced by Ms Charab amounts to little more than a preference for a different
outcome. We consider
that the Deputy President’s reasoning discloses that
he carefully considered the submissions and evidence of Ms Charab and
Respondents in determining whether to grant an extension of time.
Appeal Ground 4
Ms Charab submits that the Deputy President erred in dealing solely
with the question of whether to accept her application out of
time and not
engaging with the substance of her claim. We reiterate our comments above
regarding the limitations on the role of the
Commission in considering the
merits of an application at the time that the Commission is considering whether
to accept a s 365 application
out of time. As outlined above, we consider that
the approach to considering the merits of the application was legally correct -
it would not have been appropriate for the Deputy President to determine the
merits of the application, including whether Ms Charab
had been discriminated
against, as part of the preliminary assessment of the merits to be conducted at
this stage of the proceedings.
In any event, it is clear that the Deputy
President considered the arguments advanced by Ms Charab in support of her
application
when considering the merits of her application for the purposes of s
366(2)(d). We are not persuaded that there is any arguable appealable
the approach adopted.
Appeal Ground 5
Ms Charab contends that the Deputy President made significant errors
of fact in:
determining
that Ms Charab’s role was a temporary back-fill despite evidence that it
continued on beyond the end of her employment;
to determine that Ms Charab’s exclusion from redeployment opportunities
and casual work demonstrated an ongoing need
for her duties to be performed.
Firstly, we cannot identify any factual finding to the effect of the
first of these alleged errors in the Deputy President’s
Secondly, for the reasons outlined above, we do not consider that it
was necessary or appropriate for the Deputy President to make
findings regarding
whether there was an ongoing need for Ms Charab’s duties to be performed
in circumstances where he was determining
whether to accept her application out
Further Submissions
In her written submissions Ms Charab advanced several additional
arguments including that the Deputy President erred in evaluating
exceptional
circumstances including by failing to give proper weight to the internal
complaint process, reasonable expectation of
reinstatement and her distress.
These matters are relevant to consideration of the reason for the delay. The
first of these was also
considered by the Deputy President as part of his
consideration of whether Ms Charab had taken any action to dispute her
We consider that the Deputy President properly considered the facts
of Ms Charab’s case, having recorded these matters in the
decision. The
three matters raised in the preceding paragraph were all considered by the
Deputy President when considering the reason
for Ms Charab’s delay in
filing her application. As were other matters that Ms Charab and the Respondents
had raised. Ultimately,
having considered these matters he was not satisfied
that these matters supported an overall conclusion of exceptional circumstances.
In relation to the distress and stress experienced following the dismissal and
whether this contributed to any delay in filing on
behalf of Ms Charab, whilst
we accept that she was distressed, no medical evidence was advanced at first
instance. Responses of stress
and anxiety following a dismissal are not unusual
and do not, in and of themselves, necessarily constitute exceptional
circumstances.
We consider that it was reasonable for the Deputy President to have
regard to Ms Charab’s numerous job applications in the intervening
between her dismissal and filing the application in reaching his conclusion that
he was not persuaded that ‘she was
somehow unable to file the application
on time’. We consider that the Deputy President conducted a thorough
assessment of the
statutory considerations in s 366(2), having regard to the
conclusions reached on the available evidence before determining that
no exceptional circumstances. We do not consider that an arguable case of
appealable error has been identified in the
Deputy President’s
Finally, Ms Charab submits that the Deputy President erred in
concluding that “fairness” was a neutral factor. We consider
this submission proceeds on a misapprehension. The Act requires consideration of
“fairness as between the applicant and
other persons in a like
position.” Ms Charab’s submissions appear to focus on unfairness
arising from the Deputy President’s
decision not to allow an extension of
time in circumstances where Ms Charab had first sought internal resolution of
her complaint.
We do not consider that this is relevant to the consideration
under s 366(2)(e) of the Act in the circumstances of this matter.
Conclusion, order and disposition
We consider that the Deputy President made correct relevant factual
findings. He then considered those findings as part of an overall
discretionary
assessment of whether exceptional circumstances existed so as to warrant further
time being allowed for Ms Charab to
make her application. The Deputy President
considered each of the criteria in s 366(2) of the Act, individually and
collectively,
in order to determine whether exceptional circumstances exist that
would warrant a grant of further time to file the application.
For the reasons given, we do not consider that an arguable case has
been advanced that the decision of the Deputy President was attended
appealable error. Nor are we satisfied that the appeal attracts the public
interest. The appeal does not raise any genuine issue
of law, principle or wider
application. It follows that we must refuse permission to appeal.
Permission is refused.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
L. Charab on her own behalf
M. Caile and B. Reman on behalf of the
Hearing details:
By Video using Microsoft Teams.
because on appeal the Commission has power to receive further evidence, pursuant
to s.607(2); see
Coal and Allied v AIRC
(2000) 203 CLR 194
at [17] per
Gleeson CJ, Gaudron and Hayne J.
O’Sullivan v Farrer
[1989] HCA 61
(1989) 168 CLR 210
per Mason CJ, Brennan,
Dawson and Gaudron JJ; applied in
Hogan v Hinch
(2011) 85 ALJR 398
per Gummow, Hayne, Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ;
Coal & Allied
Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler and others
(2011) 192 FCR 78, [44]-[46].
[2001] FCA 1803
(2001) 116 FCR 481
GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty Ltd v Makin
[26]-[27], 197 IR 266;
Lawrence v Coal & Allied Mining
Services Pty Ltd t/as Mt Thorley Operations/Warkworth
FWAFB 10089
[28], 202 IR 388, affirmed on judicial review in
Allied Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler
(2011) 192 FCR 78;
Association v Brett McAuliffe
; Commonwealth of Australia represented by the
Australian Taxation Office
Trustee for
The MTGI Trust v Johnston
[2016] FCAFC 140
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22
, [27]-[29].
[2000] HCA 47
203 CLR 194.
House v The
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Supply Chain Pty Ltd v Milford
[2020] FCAFC 152
(2020) 279 FCR 591
(Rares, Collier J and Charlesworth JJ).
Commonwealth of Australia as represented by the Department of Education,
Employment and Workplace Relations
, [21], cited in
Charles v Anglican Care
University of New South Wales & Brooke White
, [5], [24].
Kyvelos v Champion Socks Pty Ltd
(2000) Print T2421, [14],
v Keolis Towner t/a Yarra Trams
Fair Work Act 2009
Commonwealth of Australia as represented by the Department of Education,
Employment and Workplace Relations
[21], cited in
Charles v Anglican Care
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (1.72 MB)
Signed PDF/A format