Grigor & Crescens [2025] FedCFamC1F 559 (20 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Grigor & Crescens
[2025] FedCFamC1F
File number:
NCC 3597 of 2022
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PARENTING – Final
parenting orders – Where the parents separated in early 2022 and the
children have since lived
with the maternal grandparents – Where the
father pleaded guilty to assaulting the mother – Where the children
acts of family violence between the parents – Where the father
relocated to New Zealand in late 2022 – Where the time
spent by the
children with the father has been professionally supervised – Where the
maternal grandparents joined the proceedings
in August 2023 – Where at
final hearing the residence of the children was a contest between the maternal
grandparents and the
father – Where the mother has been beset by an
excessive use of alcohol – Where the mother acknowledged her deteriorated
parenting capacity necessitates the supervision of any time the children spend
with her for the foreseeable future – Where
the mother, the maternal
grandparents and the Independent Children’s Lawyer agree the children
should live with the maternal
grandparents – Where the children told the
family consultant they wish to retain their residence with the maternal
grandparents
– Where the father’s beliefs the children will not be
properly supported by the maternal grandparents are not probative
the maternal grandparents have the capacity to meet the children’s
physical, emotional and intellectual needs
– Ordered the children’s
residence should remain with the maternal grandparents – Where the parties
agreed conferral
of parental responsibility for the children would follow the
residence order – Ordered the children spend time with the father
school holidays – Ordered the children spend time with the mother once per
week and on special occasions to be supervised
by the maternal grandparents.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules
(Cth) r 8.15
Care of Children Act 2004
(NZ) ss 81, 82
Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child
1996 Hague Convention on Parental Responsibility and Protection of
Cases cited:
Marriage of B & B
(1993) FLC 92-357
[1993] FamCA 143
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
11, 12, 13 & 14 August 2025
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Priest Legal
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Mr Cantrall
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Nolan Lawyers
Counsel for the Second Respondents:
Solicitor for the Second Respondents:
Paul Stubbs Law Office
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Jennifer Blundell & Associates
NCC 3597 of 2022
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
MS CRESCENS
MR RALF AND MS CANAN
Second Respondent
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
former orders relating to the following children are discharged:
(a) X, born 2011;
(b) Y, born 2014; and
(c) Z, born 2015.
responsibility for the children is removed from the applicant and the first
respondent.
responsibility for the children is conferred upon the second respondents.
children shall live with the second respondents.
parties shall take all reasonable steps to ensure the children spend time with
the applicant:
(a) in the NSW Spring school holidays, from 12.00 noon on the first Saturday
until 12.00 noon on the third Saturday;
(b) in the NSW Autumn school holidays, from 12.00 noon on the first Saturday
until 12.00 noon on the third Saturday;
(c) in the NSW Summer school holidays in 2025/2026 and in alternate years
thereafter, from 12.00 noon on the first Saturday of the
holidays until 12.00
noon on the Saturday 21 days later; and
(d) in the NSW Summer school holidays in 2026/2027 and in alternate years
thereafter, from 12.00 noon on 3 January until 12.00 noon
on 24 January.
the purpose of implementing Orders 5(a) and 5(b), the second respondents and the
applicant shall cause the children to be exchanged
at the McDonalds Restaurant,
Suburb B , NSW.
the purpose of implementing Orders 5(c) and 5(d), the second respondents and the
applicant shall cause the children to be exchanged
at the Sydney International
second respondents shall forthwith procure and keep current Australian passports
for the children, which they and the applicant
shall exchange in conjunction
with the children whenever the applicant gives 14 days’ notice in writing
of his intention to
take the children to New Zealand.
the children are living with the second respondents, they shall take all
reasonable steps to ensure the children communicate
electronically with the
applicant each Sunday at 5.00 pm.
the children are spending time with the applicant, he shall take all reasonable
steps to ensure the children communicate
electronically with the second
respondents (and the first respondent if she wishes to simultaneously
participate) each Sunday at
the children are living with the second respondents and not spending time with
the applicant, the second respondents shall
take all reasonable steps to ensure
the children spend time with the first respondent, under the supervision of
either of the second
respondents:
(a) each Wednesday from the completion of school (or 3.00 pm if not a school
day) until 8.00 pm;
(b) on Christmas Day from 2.00 pm until 6.00 pm;
(c) on Mother’s Day from 2.00 pm until 6.00 pm; and
(d) any other occasion agreed between the second respondents and the first
respondent.
party is restrained from denigrating any other party in the presence or hearing
of the children and from permitting the children
to remain in the presence or
hearing of another person denigrating the other parties.
second respondents shall notify the applicant and first respondent of any
medical emergency, illness or injury suffered by the
children warranting
treatment by a third party and shall authorise any treating health professionals
to communicate with the applicant
and first respondent about the condition and
treatment of the children.
second respondents shall authorise and request the principal of any school
attended by the children to provide to the applicant
and first respondent, at
their own expense, copies of all school reports and school photograph order
forms relating to the children.
party shall forthwith inform the others, and keep the others informed, in
writing of their respective current residential address,
mobile telephone number
and email address.
to s 65DA(2) and
Family Law Act
, particulars of the
obligations that these orders create, particulars of the consequences that may
follow contravention of these
orders, and details of assistance to comply with
these orders are set out in the attached Fact Sheet, which forms part of these
Independent Children’s Lawyer is discharged upon the latter of the
determination of any appeal or the expiration of the
applicable appeal
the purpose of enabling the parties to register these orders in New Zealand
pursuant to the provisions of the
Care of Children Act 2004
registrar is directed to prepare and furnish to the parties a certificate
formally confirming that these orders are enforceable
in Australia.
are reserved for 28 days.
and all other outstanding applications are
children are habitually resident in Australia, in the State of New South
virtue of these orders, the second respondents have “rights of
custody” in respect of the children within the meaning
Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child
of the children by the applicant in a country other than Australia without the
written consent of the second respondents
will constitute a wrongful retention
of the children within the meaning of the
Convention on the
Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Grigor & Crescens
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
proceedings concern the need for parenting orders in respect of three children,
contested by the father, the mother, and the
maternal grandparents.
the time of trial, the dispute was essentially a bilateral contest for the
children’s residence between the maternal grandparents,
with whom the
children have lived for the last three years, and the father, who lives in New
reasons explain why orders will now provide for the children to live with the
maternal grandparents, for their conferral with
exclusive parental
responsibility, and for the children to maintain their connections with the
children were born in 2011, 2014 and 2015. The eldest is now nearly 14 years of
age and the youngest is 9 years of age.
mother and father separated in February 2022 after a violent incident between
them, following which the father was arrested, charged
with offences, and a
family violence order was made against him for the protection of the mother. The
father later pleaded guilty
to assaulting the
for which he was penalised
but not formally convicted.
father requested the mother allow the children to spend time with him but,
consistently with the terms of the interim family violence
order made in
February 2022, which order indirectly covered the children and maternal
grandparents because they all lived together,
the mother was reluctant to allow
them to do so other than under
supervision.
father abided that situation until November 2022, when he commenced these
proceedings contemporaneously with his permanent relocation
from where he has since
conducted the litigation remotely. The mother, maternal grandparents and
children continue to live in NSW.
January 2023, interim orders were made for the children to communicate with the
father twice each week. In August 2023, the mother
conceded she had contravened
those orders on numerous occasions, but with reasonable excuse, and so orders
were consensually made
for the children to have some extra communication with
the father over ensuing months. Otherwise, the regime of twice-weekly
communication
was confirmed.
maternal grandparents were joined as parties to the proceedings in August 2023.
That followed the release of the first family
report in July 2023, in which the
court child expert commented how the children were living predominantly with and
were reliant upon
the care of the maternal
grandparents.
It later became clear
the children have lived with the maternal grandparents since February
from the time the parents
December 2023, more interim orders were made with the parties’ consent,
providing for the maternal grandparents to have parental
responsibility for the
children’s health, for the children to live with them, and for the
children to spend time with the parents.
Their visits with the mother were
within the discretion of the maternal grandparents and their visits with the
father were to be
professionally supervised on three consecutive days in January
2024. Orders for the children’s electronic communication with
were continued.
April 2024 and June 2024, more interim orders were made for the children to
spend professionally supervised time with the father
on four consecutive days in
April 2024, July 2024 and subsequent school holiday periods. The father was
unable to see the children
in the September 2024 holidays, but did see them
under the same supervised conditions in the January 2025, April 2025 and July
parties were offered trial dates in March 2025, but could not accept them
because they had not complied with procedural orders
made in February 2024
directing them to obtain an updated family
The updated report was
obtained in May 2025 and so the trial proceeded in August 2025.
father sought the orders in his Amended Initiating Application filed on 5
February 2024. He proposed that the children now live
with him in New Zealand
and he have sole parental responsibility for them, they spend time with the
maternal grandparents and the
mother in school holiday periods in Australia
(with the parties sharing the cost), and that they communicate electronically
the maternal grandparents and the mother twice each week.
mother began the trial seeking the orders in her Third Amended Response filed on
6 August 2025. She acceded to the children living
with the maternal grandparents
and to them having parental responsibility for the children. She also acceded to
the children only
spending time with her each Wednesday afternoon/evening and on
special occasions, supervised by the maternal grandparents, though
she envisaged
the dispensation of supervision subject to her proving her sobriety. She wanted
the children’s visits with the
father confined to professional supervision
at a contact centre in Australia on “no less than” three occasions
She was content for them to communicate with him regularly.
final submissions, the mother confirmed her proposal was for the maternal
grandparents to have parental responsibility for the
children, not just
decision-making authority. She altered her proposal in so far as it concerns the
children spending time with the
father, assuming the children are to remain
living with the maternal
grandparents.
She abandoned her
proposal for the children’s supervision when with the father and acceded
to them spending time with him in
school holiday periods.
the children are ordered to live with the father, the mother proposed an
alternate suite of
The maternal grandparents
maternal grandparents began the trial seeking the orders in their Amended
Response filed on 5 February 2024. They wanted the children
to remain living
with them and for them to have parental responsibility. They proposed the
children only periodically spend professionally
supervised time with the father
in NSW, though they could communicate electronically with him twice weekly. They
proposed controlling
and supervising any time the children spend with the
revised primary proposal was contained in a Minute of
They still wanted the
children to live with them and still want to be conferred with parental
responsibility – not just decision-making
authority, as was mistakenly
stated in the suite of orders. They agree the children should spend time with
the father, without supervision,
in school holiday periods. They propose the
children spend time with the mother at their discretion, but always under
supervision.
This primary proposal was virtually the father’s proposal in
the maternal grandparents’ primary proposal fails and the children instead
live with the father, they had a fall-back proposal
as to how the children would
spend time with them.
The Independent Children’s Lawyer
Independent Children’s Lawyer (“the ICL”) abandoned the Minute
of Orders tendered at the beginning of the
electing to instead
support the suite of orders primarily sought by the maternal
grandparents.
and exhibits to affidavits did not form part of the body of evidence unless
separately tendered (r 8.15(3)(e) of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
father relied upon his affidavit filed on 29 July 2025 and the affidavit of his
partner, Ms C, filed on 28 April 2025.
mother relied upon her affidavit filed on 23 July 2025 and, with the consent of
the other parties and the ICL, another affidavit
she affirmed on the first day
maternal grandparents relied upon their two affidavits filed on 23 July 2025.
Without objection, the maternal grandmother also
relied upon a supplementary
the truth and
accuracy of which she adopted in evidence.
parties and the ICL relied upon two family reports, respectively dated 10 July
2023 and 26 May 2025, annexed to affidavits affirmed
by the family
consultant.
exhibits were tendered.
LEGAL PRINCIPLES
in respect of children are made under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”), where the meaning of a “parenting
order” is defined (s 64B). The Court may make such parenting
orders as it
thinks proper (s 65D), within the context of the objects of the legislation (s
making parenting orders, the Court is mandated to regard the child’s best
interests as the paramount consideration (s 60CA
and s 65AA) and the Act
specifies the criteria which must be considered when determining the form of
orders which meets and promotes
the child’s best interests (s 60CC).
responsibility for children is vested in their parents (s 61C(1)), regardless of
whether they live together or are separated
(s 61C(2)), but that situation only
applies whilst ever no order is made to change it (s 61C(3) and s 61D). Parental
responsibility
is defined to encompass all duties, powers, responsibilities and
authority conferred by law upon parents (s 61B).
an order is made allocating parental responsibility for a child or children in
relation to “major long-term issues”
to more than one person, the
order may prescribe whether those persons have joint or sole decision-making
authority in relation to
all or only specified issues (s 61D(3)). The Act
defines “major long-term issues” to include those such as the
education, religion, culture, health, name, and changed living
arrangements (s 4(1)) and defines what “joint decision-making”
requires in respect of decisions about such issues (s 61DAA). One person
allocated with parental responsibility for a child need
not be consulted by
another person allocated with parental responsibility in respect of minor
decisions made for the child which
fall outside “major long-term
issues” (s 61DAB).
amendments were made to the Act, operable as from 6 May 2024, parental
responsibility orders no longer have any bearing upon
determinations made about
with whom a child should live or spend time.
CHILDREN’S BEST INTERESTS
Sections 60CC(1)(b) and 60CC(3)
children are not “Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander” children, in
which event these provisions are not relevant.
Sections 60CC(2)(a) and 60CC(2A)
provisions direct attention to the need for children and their carers to be kept
safe from either subjection or exposure to
family violence, abuse or
perpetration of family violence between the parents was undoubtedly a feature of
their relationship, which ended with a violent
confrontation in February 2022,
regrettably witnessed by the
The police had to be
summoned by the mother’s teenage son and the maternal
grandparents.
The children
observed the mother being taken away in an ambulance and the father being
arrested, handcuffed and taken away by police.
The father later admitted and was
found guilty of assaulting the mother, though no conviction was formally
past family violence committed between the parents remained a focal point of
their attention at trial, but needlessly so, as it
is unnecessary to determine
whether the father’s violent and coercive conduct was as bad as the mother
or only as bad as he
It is enough to
recognise the children were frightened by the father’s violent conduct
which they witnessed and genuinely fearful
for the mother’s
The eldest child said she
still experiences “flashbacks” of the father’s violence
directed towards the mother,
which frightening experiences of family violence might well account for her
diagnosed condition of PTSD,
the maternal grandparents submitted. No other trauma in her life was advanced as
a rational explanation for her suffering PTSD.
discussing the issue of past family violence with the family consultant, the
father attempted to shift blame to the mother and
to cast himself as a
consultant was understandably sceptical and critical of his apparent lack of
father’s evidence at trial was no different. His exculpatory version of
the violent incident in February 2022 is difficult
given he later willingly
pleaded guilty to assaulting the mother. The evidence of his perceived need to
escape the mother’s
violence and for why he participated in a behaviour
correction program some years ago in 2020 reveals his likely distorted
He deposed the program
convenors told him it was the mother, not he, who was the violent
perpetrator.
He told the police
in late 2020, not long after he completed the program, that he undertook the
program because of the mother’s
abusive behaviour, not to correct his own
Such evidence,
assuming it is subjectively honest, is rejected as being objectively improbable
and inaccurate.
parents kept in intermittent personal contact with one another during
but it was apparently
uneventful. After their separation in February 2022, the children only once
spent time with the father in November
2022, while the mother was
Since then, the parents
have had nothing to do with one another – not even for the purpose of
exchanging the children. The
children have lived with the maternal grandparents
and have only occasionally seen the father under professional supervision at a
whether the children continue to live with the maternal
grandparents or move to
live with the father, the complete absence of interaction between the parents
will probably continue. Consequently,
as has been the situation for the past
three years, the children will not likely be exposed to any more family violence
between their
is necessary to address the father’s contention that three alleged
episodes of disharmony establish the children’s
safety in the milieu of
the maternal family is now compromised.
the mother was charged with assaulting her teenage son and his girlfriend in
late 2024, which charges she is defending on account
of her alleged self-defence
against their forcible trespass of her
Without more evidence of
the surrounding circumstances, that is not enough to suggest the children are at
risk of physical harm perpetrated
by the mother. By that time, the teenage son
had become recalcitrant and his behaviour
unmanageable.
In any event, the
incident does not reflect upon the maternal grandparents in any way.
the mother and her teenage son elected to vacate the maternal
grandparents’ home in February 2024. The grandparents
would not permit the
teenage son to share a bed with his girlfriend, both then aged 15 years, about
which refusal the teenage son
became belligerent. Any sexual congress between
them would have been illegal and the maternal grandparents sensibly baulked at
or condoning a criminal offence committed in their home. The fact
there was an argument over the issue was unexceptional, regardless
incident being raised afterwards by the children with their school counsellors.
Despite heightened emotions at the time, the
father’s counsel conceded
there was no evidence to establish family violence was committed by either
maternal grandparent or
the mother on that occasion.
the family consultant reported “the children” informed teachers at
their school in late 2023 that the mother
pointed a gun at the maternal
grandfather and threatened to kill him, though their accounts of the incident
were supposedly different.
Significantly, their accounts differed as to whether a gun was used, only a hand
gesture was used, or neither a gun nor a hand gesture
was used. School
counselling notes contain the reports made by the two eldest children at the
The police acted on
information passed on by the school and investigated, but without consequence.
The police record notes “no
offence disclosed or
children’s counselling reports were probably motivated by some argument
within the household, but the probative value of
their hearsay accounts is
discounted by the inexplicable discrepancies. Significantly, the mother and the
maternal grandfather both
denied any such violent incident ever
They staunchly adhered
to such denials in cross-examination, as did the maternal grandmother when she
was asked, and their direct
evidence seemed reliable. The maternal grandfather
credibly said of the alleged incident:
I don’t understand this gun business because it just did not happen.
father’s counsel responsibly conceded in final submissions that no finding
could be made on the balance of probabilities
that the mother assaulted the
maternal grandfather in the way the children alleged. At most, there was an
argument. The evidence
does not establish the commission of family violence by
either maternal grandparent or the mother.
father’s insinuation the children will likely be exposed to family
violence committed by either the maternal grandfather
or the mother is rejected,
which conclusion is not precluded by the maternal grandfather having
occasionally resorted to physical
discipline in the
from those findings, the father’s submissions about the children’s
safety being threatened while living with the
maternal grandparents do not
spring from him enjoying a position of superiority. Given the historical family
violence which the father
admits – but minimises – he can ill afford
to criticise others for like conduct. While there is no tangible risk of him
perpetrating family violence upon the mother in the future for reasons already
explained, that conclusion is not the same thing as
him having the propensity to
act violently towards others in the children’s presence if angered. The
father admitted he once
pushed the maternal grandfather during an argument,
which incident he curiously described as a “verbal trespass”. As
aphorism goes, he cannot responsibly throw stones when living in a glass
is not alleged the children have been physically abused by any of the parties,
or that they are at risk of abuse in the future.
is not alleged the children have been neglected by any of the parties, or that
they are at risk of neglect in the future.
Section 60CC(2)(b)
children have been interviewed twice by the family consultant – initially
in June 2023 and then again in April 2025. On
both occasions, they were living
with the maternal grandparents, which household they uniformly regarded as their
stable base.
April 2023, the eldest child was a vocal advocate for the father. She missed him
and wanted to spend time with
though she did not want to
live with him.
She told her
school counsellor the same thing in June
and again in January
She repeated those views
when interviewed the second time by the family consultant in April
April 2023, the middle child wanted to visit the
but nor did she want to
live with him.
Her views in 2025
were unchanged.
April 2023, the youngest child expressed the desire to visit the father, but did
not wish to live with him.
had not changed her views by April
father contended little weight should be reposed in the children’s views
because they are susceptible to influence by the
maternal family, but his mere
suspicion of such influence lacks a solid evidentiary foundation. Objectively,
the children are clearly
not influenced against the father because of the
eagerness of their interaction with him.
cross-examination, the family consultant did agree with the father’s
somewhat different proposition that it could be inferred
the children may not
feel free to express their real feelings about with whom they want to live
because they do not feel free to
report and discuss events which occur within
the maternal grandparents’ household, though that was bare speculation. It
a guess, not a valid inference, because it is entirely inconsistent with the
evidence of the children feeling able to speak frequently
and freely to their
counsellors.
inference is more easily drawn of the genuineness of the children’s
expressed desire to retain their residence with the maternal
grandparents. Their
views are mutually held, long-standing, and expressed to the family consultant
independently of the maternal
grandparents. The eldest child is now verging on
14 years of age and her views should attract considerable respect. She
steadfastly
resists moving to live with the father in New Zealand, with which
view the younger children concur.
Section 60CC(2)(c)
was not disputed that the children’s developmental, physical and
educational needs could be satisfactorily met by either
the maternal
grandparents or the father, though the father works full-time and would require
the help of Ms C to raise the children.
dispute really centred on their respective capacities to cater to the
children’s emotional needs, the most critical of which
are to have
dependable, loving relationships with important adults in their lives and the
sense of a secure home.
family consultant was satisfied from observations made in April 2023 and 2025,
and from reading supervision reports, that the
children are bonded to the
children are also bonded to the mother, though they are concerned about
children also “share a close bond” with the maternal
grandparents,
particularly the
eldest child with the maternal
grandmother.
lived with the maternal grandparents in Australia since February 2022, moving to
live with the father in New Zealand would
entail a significant change for the
children. It might be even harder for them to adjust to the change when they
report having “mixed
feelings” about the
He admitted as
The family consultant
feared the change of residence would be a “significant barrier” to
the children’s retention
of relationships with members of the maternal
By comparison, the
children’s residence with the maternal grandparents has obviously proven
not to be a significant barrier
to them retaining their loving relationships
with the father.
family consultant said in cross-examination that the children, particularly the
eldest child, would likely react adversely to
orders requiring them to live with
the father in New Zealand. She agreed the change would likely be
“traumatic” for the
children. Such evidence is accepted. It would be
very difficult for the father and his partner to manage three oppositional
Section 60CC(2)(d)
respective capacities of the maternal grandparents and the father to provide for
the children’s emotional needs were in
father’s rather nebulous allegation about the maternal grandparents’
inability to meet the children’s needs
was expressed this way:
...the [m]aternal [g]randparents’ home has increased risk factors to the
developmental, psychological, and emotional needs
of the children. There is
considerable risk of rejection, there is the considerable risk of lack of
flexibility and atunement (sic)
to their needs...
(Father’s Outline of Case document filed on 8 August 2025 at p.6)
submissions are ethereal and imagined. The evidence does not reasonably support
any finding of a tangible risk the maternal grandparents
will reject the
children, they will be inflexible about meeting the children’s needs, or
they will be inadequately attuned
to the children’s needs.
alleged risk of the maternal grandparents’ rejection of the children
supposedly arises from them having ejected the mother’s
teenage son from
their home in February 2024 due to his failure to comply with their house rules,
but the alleged risk is specious.
He was not evicted from the maternal
grandparents’ home. They invited him to stay, but on condition he not
sleep in the same
bed as his girlfriend, he tidy his room, and he refrain from
the use of profanity. He elected to leave rather than comply with those
reasonable conditions. If the children thereby learned a lesson that they have
boundaries, that is not a bad thing, but it cannot
be contended they are
objectively at risk of being rejected by the maternal grandparents or even that
the children apprehend the
potentiality.
maternal grandfather agreed he values discipline, punctuality, and order, but
that is no bad thing either. No child’s emotional
development could or
should be compromised by being instilled with the knowledge every household has
rules by which the members must
live. That imbues values of independence, common
responsibility and an ability to co-operate. The characterisation of spartan
inflexibility
within the maternal grandparents’ home is rejected.
criticism of the maternal grandparents for not being “attuned” to
the children’s needs is also rejected. The
children are loved and
cherished by the maternal grandparents, who sacrificed much to ensure the
provision of a stable and safe home
for them when, first, the mother lacked the
capacity to do so, and secondly, the father chose not to do so by voluntarily
himself to another country.
is readily apparent the maternal family members and the father harbour
antipathetic feelings towards one another due to their past
adverse experiences.
The father is just as ill-disposed to the maternal family as they are to
The children are seemingly
aware of the tension, but mutual antipathy is a quite different thing from the
maternal grandparents actively
damaging or passively failing to support the
children’s relationships with the father.
expect litigants to disregard their genuine feelings is to demand a standard of
perfection instead of allowing for human fallibility.
Children can be perceptive
remarks are sometimes
uttered. The evidence of the maternal grandparents making
negative comments about the father, regrettable though it is, must be seen
context and not given disproportionate
By comparison, the
father’s evidence was unreasonably critical of the maternal grandparents
and he was moved to admit he has
a dim view of them. He denied he would
communicate his dim view of them to the children, but there is some evidence of
negative comments to the children about the maternal
grandmother.
Nor should that be
given disproportionate attention.
father eagerly promoted the family consultant’s evidence about the
children being bonded with him, which opinion evidence
is indeed accepted.
However, the corollary of the acceptance of such evidence is the removal of the
foundation for his contention
that the maternal family is not supportive of the
children’s relationships with him. It is quite inconceivable the children
could still enjoy such warm and loving relationships with him if the maternal
family were overtly or covertly intent on damaging
those relationships. The
father was impelled to admit that obvious proposition in cross-examination. The
maternal grandparents understand
the need for the children to maintain their
important relationships with the father, notwithstanding their misgivings about
conduct towards the mother.
maternal grandparents did not directly criticise the father’s parenting
capacity but instead sought to fairly emphasise
some of his decisions which
imply his tendency to elevate his own needs above those of the children.
it must have been clear to the father after separation in early 2022 that the
mother was unable to care for the children on her
own, rather than staying in
the area and providing them with a home, he chose to move to New Zealand in late
2022. He did so despite
deposing at the trial that he had intended to remain
close to the children after their separation, saying this in his affidavit:
goal was to secure a caravan and eventually a home, remain close to the
children, and ensure they had a parent they could rely
cross-examination, the father denied he was satisfied the children were safe in
the maternal grandparents’ care when he left
for New Zealand, but conceded
he departed anyway. He was impelled to admit the children may have felt
abandoned by him. It must follow
from his evidence that he prioritised his
desire to move away over ensuring the children’s safety and emotional
now, knowing the children would prefer to remain living in Australia and that he
see much more of him, the father
chooses to remain living in New Zealand. Obviously, the father is free to make
that choice, but
he must be prepared to live with the consequences of his
decision. The reasons he has for staying in New Zealand are evidently more
important to him than the children’s wishes.
mother acknowledged her deteriorated parenting capacity necessitates, at least
for the foreseeable future, the supervision of
any time the children spend with
her. The evidence vindicates her acknowledgement and, as the facts are
uncontroversial, it is unnecessary
to refer to the relevant evidence at
at least the past few years, the mother has been beset by an excessive use of
alcohol. She has been admitted to hospital for
detoxification and related
medical conditions on several
She also experiences
unstable mental health.
lacks the necessary capacity for
employment.
She was unable to
provide basic necessities for the children without the maternal
grandmother’s support.
to her afflictions, the maternal grandparents and the children both perceive the
mother to be somewhat detached from the
Section 60CC(2)(e)
parties accept the children would and should benefit from retaining
relationships with each of them.
Section 60CC(2)(f)
other issue was advanced by the parties or the ICL as being relevant.
DISPOSITION
the first family report, the family consultant obviously lamented the maternal
grandparents were not parties to the proceedings.
She therefore recommended that
the children remain living with the mother, but on condition she and the
children live with the maternal
grandparents, as they were then doing. The
family consultant envisaged the children might graduate to spending unsupervised
with the father, but she did not envisage them living with
the maternal grandparents did join the proceedings as parties and the children
continued to live with them, even when the mother
vacated the home to live
separately in her own home in February 2024. The maternal grandparents ensured
the children spent time with
the father as required by the interim orders made
in December 2023, April 2024 and June 2024.
the second family report, following consultations in 2025, the family consultant
summarised the advantages and disadvantages of
the children living alternatively
with the maternal grandparents in Australia or with the father in New Zealand,
but without expressly
recommending either
issue of the children’s residence was raised with the family consultant in
cross-examination, but her oral evidence was
unhelpfully platitudinous and
internally inconsistent. She readily agreed with contradictory propositions
posited by counsel. For
example, in answer to questions posed by the maternal
grandparents’ counsel, she agreed it would be traumatic for the children
to be removed from the maternal grandparents’ residential care and the
current arrangement should be retained if their willingness
to support the
children’s relationships with the father was demonstrated (as it is).
Then, in answer to questions posed by
the father’s counsel immediately
afterwards, she agreed there was less risk of harm to the children if they
instead live with
the father than if they remain living with the maternal
grandparents. Her evidence cannot be satisfactorily reconciled.
asked to explain the change of complexion of the recommendations made in the two
family reports, the family consultant gave two
reasons: first, the maternal
grandparents were not parties to the proceedings at the time of the first
report; and secondly, the
occurrence of certain events in the interregnum.
to the first reason, the prospective joinder of the maternal grandparents was
perceived by the family consultant to be an advantage,
not a disadvantage, which
would therefore logically imply the recommendation within the first report about
the children living in
the maternal grandparents’ household should have
consolidated, not waned, in the second report. This reason could not account
the difference.
to the second reason, the only events the family consultant discussed which
could account for her apparently waning support for
the maternal grandparents
were: the children’s report of the mother threatening the maternal
grandfather with a gun in November
2023; the departure of the mother and her
teenage son from the maternal grandparents’ home in February 2024; the
lack of knowledge about the teenage son’s whereabouts
once he voluntarily ceased living with the mother in October 2024; and
children’s alleged expectation they could not talk freely about events
which occur in the maternal grandparents’
objective analysis of the evidence concerning those issues does not justify the
family consultant’s ultimately ambiguous
assent to the idea of the
reversal of the children’s residence.
mother’s alleged threat to kill the maternal grandfather while brandishing
a gun in November 2023 is not proven on the balance
of probabilities but, even
allowing for some form of confrontation occurring, it was admittedly not family
violence perpetrated by
the maternal grandparents and was no worse than the many
incidents of family violence the father admitted perpetrating in the
mother and her teenage son vacated the maternal grandparents’ home in
February 2024, following an argument. The grandparents
would not permit the
teenage son to share a bed with his girlfriend. That the mother might have
tolerated such an arrangement is
an adverse reflection upon her parenting
capacity, not that of the maternal grandparents. It is unsurprising the maternal
grandfather
reacted to the mother’s teenage son’s behaviour when he
insulted the maternal grandmother in a deeply profane
disagreement which later arose between the mother and her teenage son in October
2024 had nothing to do with the maternal grandparents.
They had no control over
the teenage son’s decisions, especially when he was no longer a member of
their household after February
2024. The children’s lack of knowledge
mother’s home
in October 2024 cannot be critically attributed to the
maternal grandparents if they knew little or nothing about him either, as
correctly assert. The mother’s teenage son apparently did not want the
grandparents to know where he
The maternal grandmother
said he refused to accept their telephone calls. Once he did re-establish
welcomed his re-integration with the
assertion or assumption the children felt they could not talk freely about
events which occur in the maternal grandparents’
reasons already discussed under the rubric of s 60CC(2)(b) of the Act.
children should remain living with the maternal grandparents. The considerations
which militate in favour of that outcome are,
in summary:
(a) the children have lived with the maternal grandparents since February 2022
and no sufficient reason was offered by the father
to change that satisfactory
arrangement;
(b) the father was content to leave the children in the maternal
grandparents’ residential care when he voluntarily moved back
Zealand in November 2022, implying his satisfaction with the maternal
grandparents’ capacity to care for the children;
(c) the children have uniformly and independently expressed their wish to remain
living with the maternal grandparents, which wishes
are not shown to be
disingenuous;
(d) it is uncontroversial the maternal grandparents are satisfactorily meeting
the children’s physical and intellectual needs;
(e) the controversy over the maternal grandparents’ capacity to meet the
children’s emotional needs, which capacity the
father challenged by reason
of their alleged failure to support the children’s relationships with him,
is not vindicated by
the evidence – the maternal grandparents do have that
(f) moving the children to live with the father in New Zealand would dislocate
their settlement with the maternal grandparents, academic
and extra-curricular
pursuits, and peer social groups, unnecessarily causing them significant
emotional upheaval;
(g) the children’s loving relationships with the father can be
satisfactorily maintained by orders which provide for them to
spend time with
him in school holiday periods, as the implementation of the interim parenting
orders has ably demonstrated;
(h) although the maternal grandfather is aging, the maternal grandmother, to
whom the children are more closely bonded, is younger
and healthy and can
probably capably acquit the task of continuing to care for the children; and
(i) while the father might be able to offer the children cramped physical
accommodation in his current home with Ms C and their child,
he conceded the
them all, meaning the children might
be displaced again if the father decided
moving to a larger home was preferable to renovating the existing home while
reasons advanced by the father in evidence for why the children should live with
him were essentially these: he does not believe
the children will be
“properly supported” by the maternal grandparents because of their
age and ailments;
and he has no
confidence the maternal grandparents will continue to support the
children’s relationships with
However, the father’s
bare beliefs are not probative and his concerns are not objectively borne out by
the evidence.
the father expressed some dissatisfaction with the implementation of his
electronic communication with the
his counsel confirmed
that was not a factual issue which influenced the decision about with whom the
children should live.
parties agreed the conferral of parental responsibility for the children would
follow the residence order. Since the children
will live with the second
respondents, they shall have parental responsibility.
orders should provide for the children to spend unsupervised time with the
father in three of the four annual school holiday periods,
as the maternal
grandparents proposed,
the father’s reciprocal proposal for the children to spend time with the
maternal grandparents if they live with
The parties agreed the
children would not be exchanged during the mid-year school holidays. The
children will spend virtually the
whole of the Spring and Autumn school holidays
with the father and will evenly divide the Summer school holidays between the
and the maternal grandparents. The parties agreed the finer details were
orders make provision for the children to be exchanged close to their home in
NSW for the purpose of them spending the Spring
and Autumn holidays with the
father, as the maternal grandparents proposed. However, the orders required the
children to be exchanged
at the Sydney airport terminal in the Summer holidays
as it is likely the father will want to take them to New Zealand and that will
make the process easier for him, but not unduly burdensome for the maternal
grandparents. The father will bear the cost of airfares
for himself and the
children, which is not unreasonable when he does not pay child support for the
orders make reciprocal provision for the children to communicate weekly with the
father when they are living with the maternal
grandparents and weekly with the
maternal grandparents (and the mother if she wishes to simultaneously
participate) when they are
spending time with the father.
the children are not otherwise spending time with the father, the orders provide
for the children to spend time with the mother,
though supervised by at least
one of the maternal grandparents. The timing of the visits is similar to the
current regime,
identical with the mother’s
If for some reason
neither maternal grandparent is available for an occasional visit, the children
and the mother will have to miss
it. No orders are made for alternate
professional supervision, as the mother
mother’s idea for the dispensation of supervision upon her providing
sobriety test results is
The evidence of her
insobriety and unstable mental health is too serious and too recent to implement
such a strategy. It is well
known that long-term supervision is undesirable, but
that is in the context of the supervision being professionally provided.
the maternal grandparents will provide the supervision in this
instance, so the mother’s supervision will occur in a family
Aligned family members are usually unsuited as supervisors (
Marriage of B
[1993] FamCA 143
(1993) FLC 92-357
at 79,780–79,781), but the maternal
grandparents are dependable. They have tried to sensitively manage the safety
and interests
of both the children and the mother, which has not been
The father is satisfied
with them as supervisors.
and when the mother is satisfied of her durable sobriety and stable mental
health, she may move the Court for varied orders, suspending
supervision and
potentially expanding the time the children spend with her (s 65D(2) and s
65DAAA of the Act). That onus rests with
maternal grandparents are ordered to procure and keep current Australian
passports for the children, which they must make available
to the father and the
children if they are due to spend time with him in New Zealand.
orders may be registered and enforced in New Zealand (s 81 and s 82 of the
Care of Children Act 2004
(NZ)). The orders direct the registrar to
certify the enforceability of these orders in Australia, which will facilitate
registration
of the orders in New Zealand.
Zealand is not a signatory to the
1996 Hague Convention on Parental
Responsibility and Protection of Children
, but is a signatory to the
Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child
. As an added measure to protect against the children being
wrongfully retained in New Zealand, the notations to the orders will state
relevant to any future proceedings which may become necessary under the 1980
Convention.
of the other orders could be the subject of reasonable
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
five (105) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
the Honourable
Dated: 20 August 2025
Father’s affidavit at
[207]–[211]; Mother’s affidavit at [52.3]; First family report at
[28]–[29], [57]
Father’s affidavit at
[228]–[230], [233]–[237] and [240]; Mother’s affidavit at
First family
report at [30]; Second family report at [31]; Father’s affidavit at [11]
and [241]–[242]
family report at [25], [42], [44], [45], [64], [112],
Second family report at
[4]; Father’s affidavit at [13]; Mother’s affidavit at [13], [44],
[45], [107]; Maternal grandmother’s
affidavit at
Father’s affidavit
at [329]–[333], [337] and [345]; Mother’s affidavit at
Notation A made
First family report at
[27]; Exhibit M9
grandmother’s affidavit at [32]; First family report at
First family report at
[48]–[55], [106]; Mother’s affidavit at
First family
report at [56], [105], [106]; Father’s affidavit at [175]–[182];
First family
report at [27], [51], [56], [60],
Second family report
Second family report
First family report
at [57]–[59], [105]; Father’s affidavit at [96]–[110],
[126]–[166]
family report at [106]
Father’s affidavit at
[196]–[206]
Father’s affidavit at [175]–[196]; Exhibits M4,
Father’s affidavit
at [186]–[188]
First Family Report at
affidavit at [56]
family report at [52], [54]; Mother’s affidavit at
grandfather’s affidavit at
Second family report at
Mother’s affidavit
at [109]; Maternal grandfather’s affidavit at
Second family report at
[58]; Maternal grandfather’s affidavit at
First family report at
[10], [13], [86]
family report at [115]
Second family report at
First family report at
First family report at
Second family report
First Family Report
at [24], [115]
Second family
report at [29]
ICL2, M7, M8, M9, F6, F7, F8, F13, F14, F15, F16, F17, F18, F19,
First family report at
[94], [97], [115]; Second family report at [65],
Second family report at
First family report at
[112]; Second family report at [29],
Second family report at
Second family report at
[84], [95], [102], [107]
First family report at [82]; Father’s affidavit at
First family report at
First family report at
[38]; Second family report at
Second family report at
[46], [100], [104]
grandmother’s affidavit at
First family report at
[66]–[72]; Second family report at [69]–[72]; Mother’s
affidavit at [72]–[77]
First family report at [76]–[77]; Second family report at [75]–[78];
Mother’s affidavit at [80]–[81]; Exhibit
Second family
report at [6]
First family
report at [64], [69], [112]; Second family report at [41], [44], [53],
First family report at
[45], [89]; Second family report at [22],
First family report at
[117]–[122]
family report at [95], [102]–[107],
[111]–[115]
grandfather’s affidavit at
Second family report at
affidavit at [367], [375]
Father’s affidavit at
affidavit at
[349]–[354]
MGP1 at Order 4
Response filed on 5/2/24 at Order
Second family report at
Exhibit M14 at Order
Exhibit M14 at Order
Exhibit M14 at Orders 5,
Second family report
Amended Application
filed on 5/2/24 at Order 4
RTF format (591 KB)
Signed PDF/A format