Wild v Queensland Rail Limited [2012] FWAFB 9827 (20 November 2012)
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Act 2009
- Appeal of decisions
Mr Michael Wild
Queensland Rail Limited
(C2012/4615)
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
SENIOR DEPURT PRESIDENT RICHARDS
COMMISSIONER BOOTH
SYDNEY, 20 NOVEMBER 2012
Appeal against decision
[2012] FWA 3908
of Commissioner Cribb at Melbourne on 7 June 2012 and Appeal against further decision
[2012] FWA 5440
of Commissioner Cribb at Melbourne on 27 June 2012 in matter number U2010/14189.
This decision concerns an appeal against a decision of Commissioner Cribb relating to an application for an unfair dismissal remedy.
The Commissioner found that Queensland Rail (the respondent or QR) had a valid reason to dismiss the appellant, Mr Wild. She also
found that the dismissal was harsh. She decided reinstatement would not be appropriate and ordered that compensation should be paid.
The grounds of appeal challenge only the Commissioner’s decision to “award compensation rather than order reinstatement”.
The Commissioner issued two decisions. In the first
she made each of the findings referred to above. In the second
she dealt with the amount of compensation to be ordered. Although the notice of appeal refers to both decisions it is to the first
which the grounds of appeal and submissions before us were directed.
The appellant was represented by Mr Christie and QR was represented by Mr Matley. The appeal is made under
Fair Work Act 2009
(the Act). Such an appeal requires permission to be granted and, as the decision being appealed is one which was made under
of the Act, it is also subject to the requirements of
This section introduces “more stringent” requirements in relation to appeals concerning applications alleging unfair
Section 400
is in these terms:
“400 Appeal rights
(1) Despite
subsection 604(2)
, FWA must not grant permission to appeal from a decision made by FWA under this Part unless FWA considers that it is in the public
interest to do so.
(2) Despite
subsection 604(1)
, an appeal from a decision made by FWA in relation to a matter arising under this Part can only, to the extent that it is an appeal
on a question of fact, be made on the ground that the decision involved a significant error of fact.”
The Commissioner’s decision
For the purposes of this decision the following extract from the Commissioner’s decision provides a summary of QR’s reason
for the appellant’s dismissal. She said:
[174] Mr Wild was dismissed due to his “
repeated and persistent inappropriate behaviour
” which were serious breaches of Queensland Rail’s Code of Conduct and Values and Behaviours. The letter of termination
stated that full consideration had been given to the information and evidence available which included “
the serious and ongoing nature of your inappropriate and unsafe behaviour, your service with Queensland Rail, and your responses throughout
the disciplinary process....
As we have earlier noted, the Commissioner found that the appellant had been unfairly dismissed, consequently
of the Act required her to consider the appropriate remedy to be ordered. About this consideration she made the following comments:
Section 390(3)
states that Fair Work Australia must not order the payment of compensation unless two conditions have been met. The first condition
is that Fair Work Australia is satisfied that reinstatement is inappropriate
(s.390(3)(a)).
Mr Wild seeks reinstatement as the only just remedy. On his behalf, Mr Watters argued that this was a case where reinstatement was
[249] For its part, QR submitted that reinstatement of the applicant was wholly inappropriate as it has no confidence in his ability
to comply with specific directions. This was said to be particularly so, given Mr Wild's evidence, that he did not believe that he
had done anything wrong.
[250] Despite Mr Wild's desire to be reinstated, it is my view that reinstatement would not be appropriate in this case, in all of
the circumstances. In reaching this conclusion, I am mindful of the findings that have been made regarding Mr Wild's attitude and
approach. On the other hand, I have also taken into account Mr Watters' submissions that reinstatement is the only just remedy in
this case.”
The findings the Commissioner had made which related to the appellant’s “attitude and approach” included the following:
(a) his interpretation of a train crew notice that it gave him an unfettered discretion in respect of when the guard’s door
was to remain closed where in fact the discretion was only to be exercised “where practical”
(b) his disrespectful and inappropriate behaviour
(c) his swearing “fuck off” knowing it was likely his supervisor would hear it and that it was directed to that supervisor
(d) his comments that “ old habits die hard” in response to attempts by QR to have him change his practice concerning
keeping the cabin door closed and also that he did not have to talk to anyone if he did not wish to do so. Any commitment the appellant
was prepared to give to QR would be followed by a “but”
(e) the previous warnings given to him
(f) his insistence there was a conspiracy within QR to get rid of him about which the Commissioner found there was no evidence
(g) a summary of the above findings which the Commissioner repeated when weighing up whether there was a valid reason to dismiss the
(h) his recent employment history was inconsistent with him being prepared to undertake his employment in an unqualified manner in
accordance with QR’s policies and directives
The grounds of appeal
In effect there is one ground of appeal. It is that the Commissioner erred in the exercise of her discretion to “award compensation
rather than order reinstatement.” The particulars of this ground are as follows:
“(a) there was a failure to provide reasons for the exercise of the discretion;
(b) there was a failure to properly deal with construction of Traincrew Notices which may have allowed extraneous or irrelevant matters
to affect the decision;
(c) there was a failure to recognise the size and capacity of QR as employer with approximately 6,500 full time equivalency employees
to provide Michael Wild with alternative work opportunities pursuant to
section 391(1)(b)
Fair Work Act 2009
(d) there was a failure to give sufficient weight to the presumptive nature of the remedy of reinstatement”. (sic)
Although there is a second ground contained in the notice of appeal it refers to the first ground and pleads that the particulars
of that first ground also constitute significant errors of fact in terms of
of the Act.
We turn to each of the particulars of the errors we have referred to above. The first is that the Commissioner failed to provide
reasons for the exercise of her discretion. That is clearly incorrect; reasons were given. We assume this is intended to be a complaint
that the reasons given were inadequate. Although the parties referred to different cases to describe the nature and scope of the
duty to give reasons there is little difference between them as to the duty to give reasons in an unfair dismissal remedy application.
The obligation is to give adequate reasons and the extent to which reasoning for the conclusions reached will depend on the nature
of the issues for determination and the function to be served by the giving of reasons. To be sufficient, the reasons do not need
to be lengthy or elaborate but it is necessary that the essential ground or grounds upon which the decision rests should be articulated
and material questions of fact and law are addressed in a manner which discloses the steps which lead to a particular result
In the arbitration the appellant said very little in support of an order for reinstatement being made. Two written submissions were
filed by the appellant. The first was prior to the arbitration commencing and the second after the evidence was concluded and in
accordance with directions the Commissioner gave for the filing of final submissions. We note that there were no final submissions
made orally. Both of the written submissions filed contained a heading “Other relevant matters” which listed a number
of considerations. This paragraph was in that part of the appellant’s submissions which covered the question whether the dismissal
was harsh, unjust or unreasonable. These matters were the applicants age, his limited qualifications, his 38 years of service with
the respondent, that he was the holder of a Royal Humane Society Award for bravery and QR Commendation for Courage and Community
Spirit and that he “firmly believes” he had been targeted by the respondent because of his recalcitrant attitude towards
management in respect of a particular identified incident.
Also both the first and final submissions contained the heading "Reinstatement" and the following was said:
"87. The only just remedy for the Applicant is for him to be reinstated. The provision of that remedy will give a fair go all
round. This is a case where reinstatement is justified. The Applicant was employed by the Respondent for a period of 38 years. The
Applicant wants to be reinstated".
The submission then quoted from an Industrial Relations Court of Australia judgement which considered the approach to be taken in
the then legislation as to whether reinstatement was "impracticable". It was submitted that that reasoning remained relevant
to the consideration of whether a remedy of reinstatement is "appropriate". There was no other submission concerning reinstatement.
The final submissions were made after all of the witness evidence had been completed. There was no identification of any evidence
that had been given which concerned reinstatement. On appeal we were taken to no evidence be it oral or written before the Commissioner
which addressed any alternative position to which the appellant may have been reinstated.
Against the above background we are of the opinion that the Commissioner’s reasons for decision were adequate. She made it
clear in paragraph [250] of her decision that she took account of the various findings she had earlier made in deciding if reinstatement
was appropriate. She did not need to restate them all again.
We now turn to the second particular which concerns the manner in which the Commissioner interpreted the train crew notices. We are
not persuaded there is any merit in this complaint. Contrary to the appellant’s submissions the Commissioner did not construe
the terms of the notices by reference to the various opinions given about those notices by the witnesses. It is clear she considered
the interpretation that should properly be given to the contents of the notices herself.
The Commissioner made findings about those notices at paragraphs [190] to [194] of her decision. She concluded that the second notice
had provided "an element of discretion as to when it is not practicable for the Guards door to remain closed”. She did
not accept the appellant’s interpretation that the notice provided a guard with "unfettered discretion". It was only
a discretion which was open "where practicable". No error is apparent in the construction the Commissioner placed on the
Despite the appellant criticising the Commissioner for allowing what he called irrelevant and “unqualified opinion evidence”,
the appellant conceded that there was no objection taken by his solicitor at any time during the proceedings before the Commissioner.
It is not appropriate we should entertain this consideration now on appeal. In any event we think the submission of QR is correct,
that despite raising this ground and asserting an error in the Commissioner's construction of the train crew notices, the appellant
puts forward no alternative construction which is more compelling. This particular of the ground of appeal reflects no appellable
We turn to the third particular. The appellant asserts error in the Commissioner’s failure to take into account the size and
capacity of QR to have provided him with alternative work. This submission relates to
s.391(1)(b)
of the Act which allows reinstatement to a position other than that which was held at the time of dismissal.
The appellant had two opportunities to make submissions to the Commissioner. We have referred to this earlier when dealing with the
first particular. Nowhere in those submissions did the appellant raise the possibility of an order for reinstatement being made under
s.391(1)(b)
of the Act. No submission was made about the relevance of the respondent’s size and/or capacity. It was not addressed in the
witness evidence. In those circumstances it is not surprising the Commissioner gave no reasons referable to
s.391(1)(b)
of the Act.
Finally, despite now having raised this consideration on appeal for the first time no application is made to lead fresh evidence
nor is any submission made as to what the alternative positions may be. This particular of the ground of appeal does not establish
any relevant error.
The fourth particular is that the Commissioner failed to recognise the “presumptive” nature of the reinstatement remedy.
The appellant has adopted a term used by Commissioner Bissett in her decision in
Richards v Regional Express Holdings Ltd T/A REX Airlines
. The appellant submitted that “the decision and principle” was approved on appeal.
When dealing with a challenge against the use by Commissioner Bissett of the word “presumptive” the Full Bench on appeal
said the following:
“[23] It is clear from the terms of
s.390(3)(a)
that, in circumstances where a remedy is appropriate, compensation must not be ordered unless the tribunal is satisfied that reinstatement
is inappropriate. Seen in the proper context the Commissioner's statement that reinstatement is the presumptive remedy is not indicative
of any error in the decision. The section provides that compensation must not be ordered unless reinstatement has been found to be
inappropriate. There is no basis for concluding that the Commissioner interpreted the section differently. REX's first submission
on remedy must fail.
[24] In relation to remedy, therefore, the first question is whether reinstatement is appropriate.”
In this appeal the Commissioner’s reasons record that she referred to and applied the provisions of
of the Act. Having found the appellant was unfairly dismissed she first considered reinstatement and found it would not be appropriate.
She then considered compensation. The manner in which the Commissioner dealt with remedy reflects no appellable error.
The grounds of appeal have not identified any appellable error. We are not persuaded it is in the public interest to grant permission
to appeal. The appeal is dismissed.
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
Mr A Christie
of counsel for Mr M Wild
Mr D Matley
for Queensland Rail Limited
Hearing details:
13 September
Wild v Queensland Rail Limited
[2012] FWA 3908
(7 June 2012)
Wild v Queensland Rail Limited
[2012] FWA 5440
(27 June 2012)
Coal & Allied Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler
[2011] FCAFC 54
Paragraphs [193] and [194]
Paragraph [199]
Paragrph [205] and [206]
Paragraphs [208] to [213]
Paragraph [214] to [217]
Paragrph [218] to [220]
Paragraph [221]
Paragraph [244]
Drew v Makita (Australia) P/L
[2009] QCA 66
, Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
, Transport Workers’ Union of Australia v WA Freightlines Pty Ltd
[2011] FWAFB 3863
, Housing Commission of NSW v Tatmar Pastoral
53 LGRA 325
, Commonwealth of Australia v Black
[2011] FWAFB 3038
[2010] FWA 4230
[2010] FWAFB 8753
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR531520>
No downloadable files available