In the matter of an application by Martin Otto Waterhouse for leave to issue or file [2025] HCASJ 25 (14 August 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION BY MARTIN OTTO WATERHOUSE FOR LEAVE
TO ISSUE OR FILE
[2025] HCASJ 25
Date of Judgment: 14 August
S86 of 2025
application of 20 June 2025 for leave to issue or file a proposed writ of
summons is dismissed.
Representation
The applicant is unrepresented
By an ex parte application filed on 20 June 2025, the applicant
(Mr Waterhouse) seeks leave, pursuant to r 6.07.3 of the
(Cth) (the "
"), to issue or file a proposed writ of
applicant is self-represented.
Previous proceedings
applicant has previously brought several unsuccessful claims in this Court. To
the extent that those previous claims are relevant
to the present application,
they may be summarised as follows.
applicant previously lodged in this Court a proposed application for a
constitutional or other writ dated 21 December 2023 (the
"Previous Proposed
Application"). On 4 January 2024, Beech-Jones J directed the
Registrar, pursuant to r 6.07.2 of the
, to refuse to issue or
file the Previous Proposed Application without the leave of a justice of this
Court first had and obtained.
applicant applied (in proceeding S21/2024) for the leave of the Court to
issue or file the Previous Proposed Application. On 22
February 2024,
Jagot J dismissed that ex parte
application.
applicant applied (in proceeding S36/2024) for leave to appeal from the
whole of the judgment of Jagot J. On 9 May 2024, Gordon
jointly refused leave to
present application and proposed writ
plaintiff subsequently lodged in this Court the proposed writ of summons, dated
26 May 2025, with which I am now concerned (the
"Proposed Writ"). On
28 May 2025, Gleeson J directed the Registrar pursuant to
r 6.07.2 of the
, to refuse to issue or file the Proposed Writ
without the leave of a justice of this Court first had and obtained.
20 June 2025, the applicant filed the present application for leave to
issue or file the Proposed Writ. He relies, in support
of that application, on
an affidavit which he also affirmed and filed on 20 June 2025 (the
"Supporting Affidavit").
Consideration
discretion to grant or refuse leave (pursuant to r 6.07.3 of the
) to issue or file a document falls to be exercised with regard to
the same criteria which inform the action of the Registrar under
Put another way, leave to issue or file a document will ordinarily be refused
where the document appears "on its face"
to be an abuse of the process of the
Court, to be frivolous or vexatious, or to fall outside the jurisdiction of the
It is open to this
Court to determine such applications without an oral
Proposed Writ is an abuse of process
applicant's Proposed Writ purports to name as defendants the "Federal Attorney
General" (who is described therein as the "Nominee
for the High Court of
Australia"), along with Gageler CJ, Gordon, Jagot, Beech-Jones JJ and
myself. The Proposed Writ seeks 18 orders
– which, in effect,
primarily seek to relitigate this Court's determinations against the applicant
(in the previous proceedings
summarised at [
] above). In short, that relief sought is
premised on various vague, scandalous and unsubstantiated allegations of "fraud,
and bad faith" levied against the judicial officers of this
the present application nor the Supporting Affidavit identify any arguable basis
for the relief sought. If filed, the Proposed
Writ would plainly be an abuse of
process on its face, in that it would seek to invoke this Court's jurisdiction
on a basis that
is "confused or manifestly
– having regard in particular to the following
observations regarding the nature of the relief sought by the applicant's
proposed orders.
Observations regarding the proposed
gravamen of proposed orders 1-4 is that all current justices of this Court
are said to be biased against the applicant and that
orders providing for
"special arrangements" (involving appointment of other, unbiased, justices to
this Court) should therefore be
made to facilitate the determination of the
applicant's claims. In that respect, the relief sought in the Proposed Writ (and
basis asserted for that relief) is substantially duplicative of that which
was the subject of the Previous Proposed Application for
which Jagot J
earlier refused leave to issue or
Her Honour relevantly
said the following of the Previous Proposed Application (and no arguable basis
has been identified to now revisit
conclusion):
from the applicant's sweeping allegations of corruption and conspiracies, and
the applicant's manifest long-held sense of profound
grievance, the material in
support of the application does not disclose any legally intelligible claim or
any meaningful legal or
factual foundation for any claim. The application, on
its face, exposes that it is both frivolous and vexatious and, accordingly,
abuse of process."
proposed orders 5-6, the applicant seeks to challenge the r 6.07.2
direction given by Beech-Jones J on 4 January 2024 (in respect
Previous Proposed Application). To the extent that a r 6.07.2 direction is
made in error, the appropriate recourse is for
the litigant to seek leave to
issue or file the document pursuant to r 6.07.3 of the
the applicant already sought and was refused leave to issue or file the Previous
Proposed Application (as explained above
]). Proposed orders 5-6 are not an
alternative remedy available to the applicant.
proposed orders 7-10, the applicant seeks to challenge Jagot J's
dismissal of his application for leave to issue or file the Previous
Application. To the extent that the dismissal of such an application (pursuant
to r 6.07.3 of the
) is infected by error, the appropriate
remedy is to be sought by applying for leave to appeal to this
Here, the applicant
has already sought and was refused leave to appeal from Jagot J's judgment
(as explained above at [
]). Proposed
orders 7-10 are not an alternative remedy available to the applicant.
proposed orders 11-14, the applicant seeks to challenge Gordon J and
my joint decision to refuse the applicant leave to appeal
from Jagot J's
judgment. That decision comprises this Court's final judgment in respect of the
applicant's efforts to file the Previous
Proposed Application, with which the
applicant exhausted his rights of appeal. The absence of any rights of appeal
from this decision
is a complete answer to the present proposed challenge,
subject to one caveat.
completeness, I note that this Court does have the power to set aside its own
orders (including final determinative orders from
which there lies no appeal, of
the kind the applicant here seeks to challenge), but only in "exceptional
circumstances, to repair
its own mistakes and oversights that would otherwise
occasion a serious and irremediable injustice, despite the fact that its orders
have been formalised".
Neither the present application nor the Supporting Affidavit disclose any such
"exceptional circumstances" which would warrant exercising
that power. The basis
on which the applicant seeks to advance his latest challenge(s) in the Proposed
Writ – being sweeping
and unsubstantiated allegations of corruption and
conspiracy levied against the justices of this Court – are substantially
duplicative of those allegations which the applicant has unsuccessfully
ventilated previously, save only that a larger number of
the justices of this
Court (including myself) are now named in the Proposed Writ. That minor
departure in the scope of the allegations
now advanced does not warrant this
Court revisiting its previous (and final) determinations, particularly given
that, in any event,
the applicant already maintained in the previous proceedings
justices of this Court are biased against him. This Court's
previous orders were final.
proposed order 15, the applicant seeks a "declaration that [certain
asserted rights] are each a common law and an international
treaty right and a
right that is further guaranteed by implication under Chapter III of the
Constitution
". The "rights" to which the applicant here refers are expressed to
"i) To the Rule of Law.
equality before the law.
the benefit of and the equal protection of the law.
the right to the protection of the law against unlawful attacks on his honour
and reputation.
the right to have serious and indictable criminal offences, committed upon his
person, properly investigated by competent and truly
independent and impartial
persons and, where the evidence warrants, the perpetrators prosecuted and
the right to due process, procedural fairness, and recognition as a person
before the law and not to have his rights to the benefit
and protection of the
law systematically impeded, stifled, frustrated, or wrongly and unlawfully
denied by the State (meaning Commonwealth
Government and constituent State
Governments) and their public officials, courts, police, servants and
have his rights and obligations in a suit at law determined in a fair and public
hearing by a competent, truly independent and
impartial court or tribunal
established by law that is free of corruption.
have his rights in a civil suit at law determined only upon the actual issues
presented and the facts put into evidence by the
have written court judgements published that properly and truthfully explain the
reasons for the decision and that any transcript
of the proceeding be true and
accurate record of the hearing.
initiate legal proceedings in tort against those responsible for the damages
suffered by him because of their wrongful acts including
acts of corruption by
public officials. ...
an effective and enforceable remedy including appropriate reparations and or
damages where his rights under the law have been violated."
is no arguable basis for this Court to make the proposed declaration. This Court
does not have jurisdiction to determine hypothetical
questions of law regarding
the existence and/or nature of asserted rights, particularly if those questions
are divorced from the
administration of the law (by way of application to the
facts in a particular
There is no
state of facts apparent on the applicant's Proposed Writ or Supporting Affidavit
which would warrant this Court making
any declaration regarding the asserted
"rights" to which the applicant refers.
proposed order 16, the applicant seeks an order that his Previous Proposed
Application "be filed and issued for service after
updating and modification by
the Plaintiff, which is then to proceed and to be determined by way of 'special
arrangements'". As explained
above, the applicant has identified no arguable
basis to revisit this Court's previous determinations that the Previous Proposed
Application (in its original form) should not be filed. It is apparent (from the
reference to "updating and modification" in the
proposed order) that the
applicant now seeks to file an amended version of the Previous Proposed
Application, but the materials he
has filed in this Court fail to articulate the
nature of those amendments.
substance of the relief sought by proposed order 17 appears to overlap
substantially with that in proposed orders 1-4 (addressed
above), save that
it would also purport to compel the Attorney-General to both make certain
"recommendations to Parliament" regarding
legislative amendments and also take
steps to "prosecute[] and punish[]" the alleged "perpetrators" behind the
applicant's conspiracy
allegations. The applicant has not identified any
arguable basis for this Court to grant such relief, nor does this Court have the
power to grant the relief proposed.
proposed order 18, the applicant seeks an order for payment of his costs on
an indemnity basis, including – on the basis
that the applicant asserts
that he is a solicitor of "49 years standing in the profession" – recovery
of indemnity costs for
his time "at a rate ... that he would have been able to
charge if he had acted for a client". Even if the applicant's claim for the
balance of the relief in the Proposed Writ were successful, this proposed order
would nevertheless be fundamentally misguided. Following
this Court's judgment
Bell Lawyers Pty Ltd v Pentelow
(which abolished the "
exception"), a self-represented solicitor is not entitled to recompense for
legal work performed on his or her own
successful, the applicant's costs recovery would be limited to his out-of-pocket
Disposition
the foregoing reasons, the application of 20 June 2025 is dismissed.
Pursuant to r 13.03.1 of the
, I dismiss the application
without an oral
Re Waterhouse
[2024] HCASJ
Re Waterhouse
[2024] HCASL
[2025] HCASJ 8
[2025] HCASJ 1
[2020] HCA 13
(2020) 94 ALJR
[2020] HCA 13
376 ALR 567
[2025] HCASJ 8
[2020] HCA 13
(2020) 94 ALJR 448
[2020] HCA 13
376 ALR 567
[2025] HCASJ 8
[2025] HCASJ 1
[2020] HCA 13
(2020) 94 ALJR
[2020] HCA 13
376 ALR 567
Re Waterhouse
[2024] HCASJ
Re Waterhouse
[2024] HCASJ
Judiciary Act 1903
Burrell v The Queen
[2008] HCA 34
238 CLR 218
per Kirby J. See also
State Rail Authority of
New South Wales v Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd
(1982) 150 CLR 29
per Mason and Wilson JJ.
Luna Park Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[1923] HCA 49
(1923) 32 CLR 596
at 600 (per Knox CJ);
Mineralogy Pty
Ltd v Western Australia
[2021] HCA 30
(2021) 274 CLR 219
Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane, Gordon, Steward and Gleeson JJ.
[2019] HCA 29
(2019) 269 CLR 333.
of this Court recently revisited (in
Birketu Pty Ltd v Atanaskovic
[2025] HCA 2
421 ALR 256)
exception with respect to recovery of the value
of work performed by an employee of a solicitor in favour of whom a costs order
been made, but that is of no application to the present matter.
RTF format (184 KB)
Signed PDF/A format