Schneider & Brass [2025] FedCFamC1F 588 (22 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Schneider & Brass
[2025] FedCFamC1F
File number
MLC 4029 of 2024
Judgment of
Date of judgment
– URGENT EX PARTE
APPLICATION – recovery and airport watchlist order for application filed
personally by the father and
not by the father’s solicitors – father
contending child is at risk – father’s time with the child suspended
pursuant to interim orders – no grounds exist for the making of a recovery
order or airport watchlist order – application
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs
Date of last submission
Date of hearing
Counsel for the applicant
Litigant in person
Counsel for the respondent
Ms N. Vogel
Solicitor for the respondent
Ressan Lawyers
Counsel for the independent children’s lawyer
Mr D. McLeod
Solicitor for the independent children’s lawyer
Bentleigh Family Lawyers
MLC 4029 of 2024
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
MS SCHNEIDER
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
DATE OF ORDER
THE COURT ORDERS THAT
father’s application in a proceeding dated 20 August 2025 is
of the independent children’s lawyer are reserved.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
Schneider & Brass
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act 1975
EX TEMPORE REASONS FOR
order of the Chief Justice made on 19 May 2025 this proceeding was transferred
to me and fixed for trial on 11 August 2025. On
that date the trial was vacated
because the mother’s legal representation ceased and the case was
otherwise seriously underprepared.
on 21 August 2025, the father purported to bring an application in a proceeding
seeking the determination of an urgent
ex parte application for a recovery order
in his favour in respect of the child who is the subject of this litigation. The
also sought orders in the nature of an airport watch list order. The
father also sought orders for the mother to provide hair follicle
test results.
He also sought an order for him to have sole parental responsibility for the
child pending further order. Other ancillary
relief was sought in his
application in a proceeding.
father is and remains represented by solicitors. Today, he appeared by counsel
who was in turn instructed by the father’s
solicitors. The application in
a proceeding on which the father relied in his ex parte application was not
prepared by the father’s
solicitors, nor was the affidavit that was made
by the father said to support the various applications in the father’s
ex parte application in a proceeding. The ex parte application in a
proceeding and the father’s affidavit made 20 August 2025
were not filed
in this court. Those documents did not bear the seal of the court nor did they
bear a date and time stamp disclosing
their filing.
to orders made by Senior Judicial Registrar Conlan on 10 October 2025, the child
(a) has lived with the mother;
(b) has had parental responsibility for major long-term issues allocated to the
mother; and
(c) has had his time with the father reserved pending the determination of the
father's criminal matters and hair follicle testing.
orders made by the Chief Justice on 19 May, no later than 28 days prior to the
trial on 11 August 2025, the mother and father were
required to complete hair
follicle testing. The case was woefully underprepared for trial on 11 August
2025. It could not proceed.
I had no choice but to vacate the trial date which
I so ordered. The father still has no order in his favour conferring on him time
with the child. Orders for parental responsibility, live with arrangements and
time with the child spends with each parent, are to
be contested at a trial to
be conducted at some future time.
father asserted on this application that the child is in an unsafe environment
at the present time. He seeks an order described
by him as a "recovery order"
for the child to be placed in his care even though no operative order presently
applies to that effect.
In other words, no existing order applies against which
the child is "recovered" into the care of the father. In the absence of an
conferring time for the father with the child, no grounds exist for the recovery
order to be made. I dismiss the recovery order
application on that ground.
evidence exists to support the making of an airport watch list order. This
application was brought by the father himself bypassing
his solicitors on the
record. That practise is to be emphatically denounced. Registry staff correctly
refused to accept for filing
the father’s application in a proceeding and
affidavit. This application was brought ex parte even though the mother had
of it and made viva voce submissions in respect of it. No basis existed
for the application to be brought ex parte. Mr McLeod, counsel
for the ICL,
correctly submitted that this application should be dismissed
. I agree. No reason was advanced for the bringing of this
application ex parte when the legal foundation of the bringing of the
application
so comprehensively failed.
dismiss the father’s application in a proceeding dated 20 August 2025. If
the father wishes to renew his application, he may
do so on proper material and
any such application must be filed by solicitors and not otherwise.
mother is not represented so she does not bear any costs.
reserved the ICL’s costs.
I certify that the preceding ten (10) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the ex tempore reasons for judgment of the
Dated: 22 August 2025
RTF format (294 KB)
Signed PDF/A format