DLA Group Pty Limited v Western Australia (Costs of Joinder Application) [2022] ACopyT 6 (11 November 2022)
DLA Group Pty Limited v Western
Australia (Costs of Joinder Application)
[2022] ACopyT 6
File number:
CT 1 of 2022
The Tribunal:
(ACTING PRESIDENT)
Date of decision:
Date of publication of reasons:
Catchwords:
– where third parties file
joinder application – where joinder application no longer pressed –
whether the Tribunal
has power to order non-parties parties to pay costs
Legislation:
Cases cited:
Re Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
[1997] HCA 6
(1997) 186 CLR 622
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the
Mr B Cameron
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Harris Freidman Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms F St John
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Herbert Smith Freehills
Counsel for the Civica Entities:
Mr P Flynn SC
Solicitor for the Civica Entities:
Gilbert + Tobin
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 1 of 2022
THE DLA GROUP PTY LIMITED (ACN 003 329
THE STATE OF WESTERN
CIVICA PTY LTD (ACN 003 691
CIVICA EDUCATION PTY LTD (ACN 086 405 174)
PERRAM J (ACTING PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
be no order as to costs on the interlocutory application.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
PERRAM J (ACTING PRESIDENT):
is an application for costs. The Applicant is The DLA Group Pty Ltd (‘DLA
Group’), the Respondent is the State of
Western Australia (‘the
State’) and there are two third parties, Civica Pty Ltd and Civica
Education Pty Ltd (together,
the ‘Civica Entities’). DLA Group and
the State seek an order that the Civica Entities pay the costs they incurred in
meeting an application by the Civica Entities to be joined to the proceeding.
That application is no longer pressed and as a result
of an order made on 11
November 2022 is being treated as if it had been discontinued.
are two issues: does the Tribunal have the power to order the Civica Entities to
pay costs; and if it does, how should that
power be exercised?
DOES THE TRIBUNAL HAVE POWER TO ORDER THE CIVICA ENTITIES TO
power to order costs is found in
(‘the Act’):
174 Costs of proceedings
(1) The Tribunal may order that the costs of any proceedings before it incurred
by any party, or a part of those costs, shall be
paid by any other party and may
tax or settle the amount of the costs to be so paid, or specify the manner in
which they are to be
first question which arises is whether the Tribunal has power to order a
non-party to the proceeding before it who has filed an
interlocutory application
to pay the costs of one of the other parties to that interlocutory application.
The substantive proceeding
before the Tribunal is a proceeding under
the Act, that is to say, a Crown copyright matter. The parties to such a
proceeding are specified in
of the Act:
153E Applications to Tribunal under
subsection 183(5)
(1) The parties to an application to the Tribunal under
subsection 183(5)
the fixing of the terms for the doing of an act comprised in a copyright where
the act is done for the services of the Commonwealth
or a State are:
(a) the Commonwealth or the State, as the case may be; and
(b) the owner of the copyright.
Tribunal has no power to order the Civica Entities to pay the costs of the
proceeding under
because the Civica Entities are not parties to that
proceeding. In my view, however, they are parties to the proceeding which arose
on the filing of their interlocutory application seeking joinder. As parties to
that proceeding, a power exists to order them to
pay the costs of any other
party to that proceeding. The other parties to that proceeding were DLA Group
and the State in their
capacities as respondents. Consequently, I accept that
the Tribunal has power to order the Civica Entities to pay the costs of DLA
Group and the State under
in relation to the interlocutory
application.
HOW SHOULD THE POWER BE EXERCISED?
were difficulties with the Civica Entities’ application to be joined to
the proceeding, however, it was not hopeless.
They have now, in effect,
withdrawn their application to be joined. As a result it has not been
determined. A Court (or as here
a Tribunal) may order costs even where there
has been no determination on the merits and where the moving party no longer
to pursue its proceeding, but it does not have to do so. The relevant
approach was set out by McHugh J in
Re Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
[1997] HCA 6
(1997) 186 CLR 622
at 624-625:
In an appropriate case, a court will make an order for costs even when there has
been no hearing on the merits and the moving party
no longer wishes to proceed
with the action. The court cannot try a hypothetical action between the parties.
To do so would burden
the parties with the costs of a litigated action which by
settlement or extracurial action they had avoided. In some cases, however,
court may be able to conclude that one of the parties has acted so unreasonably
that the other party should obtain the costs
of the action. In administrative
law matters, for example, it may appear that the defendant has acted
unreasonably in exercising
or refusing to exercise a power and that the
plaintiff had no reasonable alternative but to commence a litigation. Thus, for
R v Gold Coast City Council; Ex parte Raysun Pty Ltd
Full Court of the Supreme Court of Queensland gave a prosecutor seeking mandamus
the costs of the proceedings up to the date
when the respondent Council notified
the prosecutor that it would give the prosecutor the relief that it sought. The
Full Court said
that the prosecutor had reasonable ground for complaint in
respect of the attitude taken by the respondent in failing to consider
application by the prosecutor for approval of road and drainage plans.
Moreover, in some cases a judge may feel confident that, although both parties
have acted reasonably, one party was almost certain
to have succeeded if the
matter had been fully tried. This is perhaps the best explanation of the
unreported decision of Pincus J
South East Queensland Electricity Board v
Australian Telecommunications Commission
where his Honour ordered the
respondent to pay 80 per cent of the applicant's taxed costs even though his
Honour found that both
parties had acted reasonably in respect of the
litigation. But such cases are likely to be rare.
If it appears that both parties have acted reasonably in commencing and
defending the proceedings and the conduct of the parties
continued to be
reasonable until the litigation was settled or its further prosecution became
futile, the proper exercise of the
cost discretion will usually mean that the
court will make no order as to the cost of the proceedings. This approach has
been adopted
in a large number of cases.
(Citations omitted).
all sides have behaved reasonably. Whilst the application had its difficulties,
I would not say that it was bound to fail.
In that circumstance, the
appropriate order is that there be no order.
I certify that the preceding seven (7) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination of the Tribunal
constituted
by the Honourable Justice Perram (Acting
Dated: 17 November 2022
RTF format (307 KB)
Signed PDF/A format