YNHY and National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS) [2025] ARTA 2376 (10 November 2025)
YNHY and National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS) [2025] ARTA 2376 (10
November 2025)
Applicant/s: YNHY
Respondent: National Disability Insurance Agency
Tribunal Number: 2024/7945
Tribunal: General Member S Gooch
Place: Adelaide
Date: 10 November 2025
The decision of the Agency under review is set aside and
remitted for reconsideration in accordance with the direction that reasonable
and necessary supports in the applicant’s statement of participant
supports should include:
hours of speech therapy treatment per year for the duration of the current plan
(3 September 2025 to 2 March 2026).
other supports in the participant’s statement of participant supports
dated 2 May 2025, excepting any one-off assistive
technology supports already
used, are to be replicated pro-rata from the date on which the supports
specified above are included
in the applicant’s statement of participant
Statement made on 10 November 2025 at 1:28pm
Disability Insurance Scheme – reviewable decision of CEO – Statement
of Participant Supports – reasonable
and necessary supports –
Getting the NDIS Back on Track Transitional Support rules.
Legislation
Administrative Review Tribunal (Consequential and Transitional Provisions
1) Act 2024
(Cth) Schedule 16, item 24.
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment (Getting the NDIS Back on
Items 129 of Schedule 1
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Supports for Participants) Rules
2013 (Cth);
rr 2.3 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6. 3.7
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Getting the NDIS Back on Track No.
1) (NDIS Supports) Transitional Rules
2024 Schedule
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No. 2)
Johnstone and National Disability Insurance Agency [2025] ARTA
McGarrigle v National Disability Insurance Agency [2017
National Disability Insurance Scheme v KKTB by her litigation
representative CVY22
National Disability Insurance
Agency v WRMF
[2020] FCAFC 79
Public Trustee of South Australia (as
litigation representative for Isherwood) v NDIA (no2)
NDIS Operational Guidelines - Reasonable and Necessary
dated 28 March 2025.
Reasons for
is a review of an internal review decision (
the decision under review
dated 16 September 2024, made by a delegate of the CEO of the National
Disability Insurance Agency (
‘the Agency’
). The decision
affirmed an earlier decision, made on 25 July 2024, to
statement of participant supports for YNHY under
section 33(2)
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
is a 13-year-old girl who gained access to the National Disability Insurance
) on 8 May 2017 on the basis of impairments
attributable to autism spectrum disorder level 1. She lives with her father and
her younger
sister who is also a Scheme participant.
applied to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) on 3 October 2024 seeking
administrative review of the decision under review.
14 October 2024 the AAT became the Administrative Review Tribunal (
). Under the transitional provisions in the
Administrative Review
Tribunal (Consequential and Transitional Provisions No.
(the Transitional Act)
applications for review to the
AAT that were not finalised before 14 October 2024 are taken to be applications
for review to the Tribunal.
The Transitional Act gives the Tribunal the
authority to continue and finalise any aspect of the review not already
completed by
This decision
and statement of reasons is made by the Tribunal.
3 September 2025 the Agency issued a new plan for YNHY under section 48 of the
Act, with increased funding for occupational therapy
supports and for
consumables.
set out in the Agency’s amended SFIC, and confirmed by YNHY’s father
at the commencement of the hearing, the remaining
supports in dispute
hours per year of speech therapy (an increase of 22 hours per
hours per year of occupational therapy (an increase of 13 hours a year according
to the most recent plan);
hours per week of assistance with self-care activities;
hours per week of community, social and recreational activities assistance
(currently funded for 4 hours a week at 1:3 support);
days per year of 1:2 short term accommodation;
for consumables for iPad repairs, various iPad apps and a Belkin hardcase holder
(flexible consumable funding of $200 per
year is currently in
video hearing was held over 3 days on 15 – 17 of September 2025.
Tribunal has had regard to the following documents:
T-documents (referred to as exhibit 1);
joint tender bundle (referred to as exhibit 2) and
amended Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions (SFIC) (referred to as
exhibit 3).
Tribunal heard oral evidence from:
Rathore, occupational therapist; and
Burleigh, speech therapist
the reasons set out below the Tribunal sets aside the decision under review and
remits it to the Agency for reconsideration with
directions.
issue for determination by the Tribunal is whether the disputed supports are
‘reasonable and necessary’ having regard
to s34 of the Act, the
relevant Rules and the relevant operational guidelines.
THE LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
NDIS Act sets out the provisions by which the Agency is created and the Scheme
and the manner in which it is to be accessed and
administered, is
1, Part 2 of the NDIS Act sets out the Act’s objects and the principles to
be applied when undertaking actions under
the Act. The objects describe
aspirations aimed at supporting the independence, choice and control and social
and economic participation
of people with disability. The provision of
reasonable and necessary supports will be directed at achieving these objects
for participants
of the Scheme.
principles stress the rights of people with a disability to dignity, to
participation and contribution to social and economic
life and to the capacity
to realise their potential in pursuit of their
the objects and the principles state that in giving effect to the objects of the
Act, or in exercising powers under the Act,
regard is to be had to the need to
ensure the financial sustainability of the
issues are dealt with in Chapter 3, Part 1 of the NDIS Act. These provisions set
out the criteria an applicant must meet (under
either the disability
requirements or under the early intervention requirements) in order to become a
participant in the Scheme.
2 of Chapter 3 sets out matters in relation to the development and
administration of participants’ plans. Generally, a
participant’s
plan must include:
statement of participant goals and aspirations which they have prepared; and
statement of participant supports which includes the general supports that may
be provided and the reasonable and necessary supports
that will be funded under
the Scheme.
33(5) provides a list of all the factors the CEO must consider when deciding
whether or not to approve a statement of participant
supports. These
participant’s statement of goals and aspirations;
assessments conducted in relation to the participant;
satisfied in relation to all the criteria set out in section 34;
regard to the NDIS Rules made for the purpose of section 35 of the Act;
regard to the principle the participant should manage his or her plan to the
extent they wish;
regard to the operation and effectiveness of any previous plan of the
participant; and
history of use of NDIS funds in earlier plans.
National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment (Getting the NDIS Back on
the Amending Act
) made significant changes to
the NDIS Act. This Act commenced on 3 October 2024.
129 of Schedule 1 of the Amending Act provides that sections 33, 34 and 35 as
amended (all of which deal with the development
of participant plans) apply to
any old framework plans which are approved or varied on or after the Amending
Act’s commencement.
YNHY’s plan is an ‘old framework’
plan for the purposes of the Act.
I note that as YNHY’s latest plan was varied and approved on 3 September
2025, (after the commencement of the Amending Act),
the Act as amended will
apply to this review.
Section 34 (as amended) reads as follows:
(1) For the purposes of specifying, in a statement of participant supports,
the general supports that will be provided, and the reasonable
and necessary
supports that will be funded, the CEO must be satisfied of all of the following
in relation to the funding or provision
of each such support:
(aa) the support is necessary to address needs of the participant arising
from an impairment in relation to which the participant
meets the disability
requirements (see section 24) or the early intervention requirements (see
section 25);
(a) The support will assist the participant to pursue the goals, objectives and
aspirations included in the participant’s statement
of goals and
aspirations;
(b) The support will assist the participant to undertake activities, so as to
facilitate the participant’s social and economic
participation;
(c) The support represents value for money in that the costs of the support are
reasonable, relative to both the benefits achieved
and the cost of alternative
(d) The support will be, or is likely to be, effective and beneficial for the
participant, having regard to current good practice;
(e) The funding or provision of the support takes account of what it is
reasonable to expect families, carers, informal networks
and the community to
(f) The support is an NDIS support for the participant.
Note: For the purposes of paragraph (aa):
(a) The time at which the disability requirements or the early intervention
requirements need to be met is the time the CEO decides
to approve the statement
of participant supports; and
(b) A participant’s disability support needs arising from an impairment in
relation to which the participant meets the access
requirements or the early
intervention requirements may be affected by a variety of factors, including
environmental factors or the
impact of another impairment in relation to which
the participant does not meet either of those requirements.
(2) The National Disability Insurance Scheme rules may prescribe methods or
criteria to be applied, or matters to which the CEO is
to have regard, in
deciding whether or not he or she is satisfied as mentioned in any of the
paragraphs (1)(aa) to (f).
35 of the Act sets out matters which Rules made in relation to the statement of
participant supports may address. These (among
other things) include methods or
criteria to be applied in deciding supports which will be funded and
specifically identifying those
supports that will and will not be funded under
the Scheme. They supplement and inform the manner in which the criteria in s34
considered.
relevant rules to be applied in consideration of the funding of reasonable and
necessary supports are:
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Supports for Participants) Rules
the Support Rules
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Getting the NDIS Back on Track No. 1)
(NDIS Supports) Transitional Rules
the Transitional Support
). These rules were made under Item 138 of the Amending Act and
commenced on 3 October 2024.
Agency also publishes Guidelines to assist in making decisions in accordance
with the NDIS Act. The Guidelines are policy documents
without legislative
force and the Tribunal is not bound by them. However, it is generally held they
should be applied where there
is no conflict with the terms of the
The relevant operational
guidelines in this matter are:
Operational Guidelines - Reasonable and Necessary Supports
the Support
Guidelines)
dated 28 March 2025.
Legal principles
is no definition in the Act of ‘reasonable and necessary supports’.
Section 4 of the NDIS Act advises that ‘reasonable
and necessary
supports’ for people with disability should:
people with disability to pursue their goals and maximise their independence;
people with disability to live independently and to be included in the community
as fully participating citizens; and
and support the capacity of people with disability to undertake activities that
enable them to participate in the community
and in employment.
observations are reflected in section 34 of the NDIS Act and clause 2.3 of the
Support Rules which require the decision maker
should be satisfied
support will assist the participant to pursue their goals;
support will assist the participant to undertake activities so as to facilitate
their social or economic participation;
support represents value for money in that the costs of the support are
reasonable relative to both the benefits achieved and
the cost of alternative
support will be or is likely to be effective and beneficial for the participant
having regard to current good practice;
funding of the support takes account of what it is reasonable to expect
families, carers, informal networks and the community
to provide; and
support is most appropriately funded by the Scheme.
viability of the Scheme is also a
consideration.
National Disability Insurance Agency v
Full Court held that:
supports to be provided to a participant are intended to address their
impairments with a view to assisting them to be a fully
participating member of
the community;
a support is ‘reasonable and necessary’ will generally be a question
of fact on the evidence before the decision
maker. The phrase has a qualitative
aspect and, ‘subject to matters of rationality and legal unreasonableness,
there may be
some decisional freedom’ in reaching a
conclusion.
phrase is a composite phrase with each limb having work to do in the context of
the composite phrase.
its context, the phrase connotes supports which meet a threshold justifying the
expenditure of public funds for that support for
a particular
participant.
statutory task of determining the contents of a participant’s plan (and
what are reasonable and necessary supports) is a
fact-intensive exercise.
It is possible for reasonable minds
to differ in exercise of this
matters set out in s34(1) of the Act are in the nature of criteria the decision
maker must be satisfied
criteria in s34 are straightforward and pragmatic and the decision maker’s
approach is entitled to be the
McGarrigle v NDIA
[2017] FCA 308
Mortimer J considered that whether a support
was ‘reasonable’ might tie the relevant assessment to the kinds of
in section 34(1)(a), (b), and (d) of the NDIS Act, whereas consideration
of a support’s necessity might be tied to the kinds
of factors in
subsections 34(1)(c) and (f) of the Act.
Public Trustee of South Australia (as litigation representative for
Isherwood) v NDIA (no2)
Colvin J expressed the view that the statement in section 4(11) of the NDIS
Act was not confined by the financial sustainability of
the Act. Rather its
focus is upon what is reasonable and necessary to support a person with
disability to pursue their goals, maximise
their independence and be included in
the community. The mechanism for determining the extent to which reasonable and
supports will be funded was the need to form the requisite level of
satisfaction about each of the criteria in section 34(1) of the
considering plans relevant to a child with a disability, an additionally
relevant principle is set out in s5(f) of the NDIS Act,
which provides
the best interests of the child are paramount, and full consideration should
be given to the need to:
i). protect the child from harm; and
ii). promote the child’s development; and
iii). strengthen, preserve and promote positive relationships between the
child and the child’s parents, family members and
other people who are
significant in the life of the child.
The Agency’s position
on the Agency’s SFIC, the Agency contends that under her current
has funding for 30 hours of speech therapy annually. In their view there is
insufficient evidence to support any increase,
particularly where the applicant
is noted to have made ‘significant progress’ in communication,
confidence and social
interactions;
the new plan approved by the Agency on 3 September 2025, YNHY now has funding
for 52 hours of occupational therapy annually.
There is insufficient evidence to
support an increase beyond this
for a support worker to assist with self-care activities is not reasonable or
necessary in circumstances in which YNHY is
functionally able to perform all
self-care tasks. To the extent YNHY requires any prompting to complete tasks
this is a task that
it is reasonable to expect families to
is currently funded for 1:3 support for 4 hours a week of activities in the
community. There is insufficient evidence available
to support an increase in
these hours. No specific additional community based activities have been
identified as being necessary
to support YNHY’s goals.
agency contends that there is insufficient evidence available to support a
finding that funding for short-term accommodation is
reasonable and necessary to
support YNHY’s goals.
funding of an iPad (or repairs of same), the Agency contends that funding for
the purchase or repair of an iPad falls under
Item 4(d) of Schedule 2 of the
Transitional Rules and is consequently not an NDIS support which may be
Item 4(d) of the
Transitional Rules refers to ‘day-to-day living costs –
lifestyle’ and specifically ‘internet
devices (such as modems and
routers), landline phones, mobile phones (including smart phones), mobile phone
accessories, tablets
The Agency has
agreed that $200 for consumables is reasonable and necessary and this has been
included on a pro-rata basis in the
applicant’s new plan.
the Agency’s contention that the decision under review should be
The applicant’s contentions
father attended the hearing to advocate for his daughter. It was his oral
evidence that in doing so, he was simply relying
on the recommendations about
necessary supports which had been made by his daughter’s treating
professionals. He trusted their
expertise in determining what was required to
he did provide a written response to the Agency’s first SFIC, this simply
referred to the relevant treating professional
reports and the recommendations
therein. I will consider the reports directly as I consider each disputed
The participant’s impairments
appears that YNHY gained access to the Scheme on the basis of impairments
attributable to autism spectrum disorder, mild intellectual
disability and
receptive and expressive language delay.
participant’s goals
to the consideration of reasonable and necessary support are the
participant’s goals set out in their statement of
participant
YNHY’s goals
would like to improve my social skills so that I can interact and engage in play
with my peers;
would like to develop my fine motor skills and life skills so that I am able to
attend to some of my self-care and daily tasks independently;
would like to learn strategies to self-regulate my emotions and build skills to
improve my confidence in various situations;
would like to improve my language and communication skill so that I can
effectively express my wants and needs to my family and
would like support to complete my personal care task and daily living task so
that I am less reliant on my father.
speech therapy supports
currently has funding for 30 hours of speech therapy a year. She seeks an
increase of 22 hours a year.
a report dated 23 February 2024
Ms Dam, speech therapist reported that:
had been receiving 45 minute sessions of one-on-one therapy via Zoom.
had made progress including greeting the therapist correctly, improved responses
to familiar who, what, when and where questions,
better vocabulary and reading
of body language and identifying her emotions.
deficits included inability to communicate complex ideas, difficulty in
maintaining reciprocal conversations for long, vulnerability
in social contexts
due to her openness, impaired ability to read ‘between the lines’ of
social communication, impaired
expressive and receptive language, and difficulty
with cognition and task completion.
deficits were deemed likely to continue to impact YNHY’s academic and
social progress, limit social relationships and
impact her safety in unfamiliar
social settings.
this time Ms Dam recommended that weekly one-hour sessions were required to
build YNHY’s social and communication skills
along with sessions to allow
for communications with YNHY’s school.
Dam also recommended YNHY have access to a working iPad with keyboard and
various apps.
a report dated 21 March 2025 Ms Carol Burleigh, speech pathologist, wrote in
support of increased funding for speech
She indicated
continued to have difficulty with reciprocal conversations, impacting her
ability to form friendships. Speech therapy would
be focused on instruction and
practice to:
and respond appropriately in conversations.
social cues such as tone, facial expressions and sarcasm.
Differentiate
between friendly interactions and social manipulation;
strategies to self-advocate and set boundaries.
was at risk of exploitation in unfamiliar/unsafe social situations. Additional
speech therapy hours were required to support
her in learning and rehearsing
real-life social scenarios to develop protective skills.
has difficulty in managing her emotions, leading to inability to express
distress other than inappropriately. Additional speech
therapy would focus on
building expressive language skills for self-regulation and skills for asking
therapy has been instrumental in improving YNHY’s communication,
confidence and ability to engage socially. But it was
said to be critical to her
continued development to independence that she receives the recommended
increased speech therapy supports.
a subsequent report
Ms Burleigh
noted that the rationale for increased supports included that YNHY’s gains
were contingent on:
weekly direct therapy to teach and shape skills (accounting for 40 hours of
increase at weekly 45-60 minutes sessions);
regular liaison with school staff and support workers to give strategies to
progress YNHY’s skills and to monitor her
success in applying these when
in real life situations (accounting for 12 hours of increase);
worker practice between sessions.
Burleigh noted that missed sessions had interrupted YNHY’s momentum. It
was her professional opinion that weekly speech pathology
at the above dosage
with funded liaison time and co-ordinated support-worker practice was clinically
required for YNHY to achieve
and maintain functional communication. Lower
intensity intervention placed YNHY at high risk of regression.
oral evidence to the Tribunal Ms Burleigh, YNHY’s long term speech
therapist and the director of Speechify, advised the Tribunal
Speechify first started working with YNHY she was not very talkative and her
language skills were all jumbled. At the time speech
therapists worked with
YNHY in the classroom alongside a teacher’s aide. YNHY made some good
sessions became fortnightly via telehealth as the school no longer wanted
therapists in the classroom and YNHY’s father
was unable to bring YNHY to
Speechify’s clinic. Staffing issues at Speechify also meant it
wasn’t possible to manage
weekly sessions.
Ms Burleigh had restarted work with YNHY and had been undertaking weekly,
face-to-face sessions after assessment of YNHY’s
needs. This was in the
context of YNHY’s sister having been sexually assaulted at school and
realising YNHY did not have the
advocacy or communication skills to speak up for
herself around unsafe relationships. YNHY was worried because of her
experience but did not know how to express this.
Burleigh has also been helping YNHY to broaden her means of communication to
include access to email. This was after school liaison
confirmed YNHY was still
very quiet in the school setting. It was Ms Burleigh’s evidence that YNHY
has embraced communication
in this setting and is actively requesting certain
information and activities be included in her sessions.
Burleigh also stated that YNHY used those skills and her confidence in their
relationship to ask Ms Burleigh about assistance in
learning about personal care
issues. These were related to YNHY’s development as a teenager. Ms
Burleigh has generalised
her speech therapy work with YNHY to communication
around practical life skill settings such as cooking, shopping (applying maths
skills) and problem solving. Ms Burleigh indicated she understood this fell
slightly within the OT space, but felt it was appropriate
and of assistance
because of the strength of her established relationship with YNHY.
was Ms Burleigh’s intention to link YNHY to other services (ie GP,
counsellor, school staff) and then withdraw. It was her
evidence that liaison
with the school had been particularly helpful for both staff and YNHY. The
school had altered the way they
work with YNHY and had linked her to a school
counsellor. Once YNHY can generalise confidence in communication across a range
people, she will be in a better place to manage life.
Burleigh’s opinion is that YNHY has a great deal of potential and just
needs a service push now to give her the skills she
needs to ask for what she
Burleigh agreed there was a cross-over with the work she was doing and OT-type
work. She thought the increased OT hours would be
YNHY’s personal care issues. She acknowledged two hours of therapy on top
of school could be a lot for
YNHY to manage but thought that it was not going to
be forever, just while they were building YNHY’s skills. Ms Burleigh
the view there would come a time when YNHY would not need to rely on
the Scheme as much, particularly if she developed her communication
skills now.
Intensive work now would develop skills so that less work would need to be done
in the future. At the moment there were
still new issues coming up each session
and because of this Ms Burleigh was not able to say how long the extra time
would be required.
Burleigh expressed the view that there had been things missed under the surface
which meant that straight forward speech therapy
was not all that was needed.
Not only conversational skills and language, but social communication skills and
emotional learning
and regulation were required. She was concerned that lower
intensity support risked regression. Ms Burleigh confirmed that she kept
is the respondent’s contention that the Tribunal cannot be satisfied that,
although an increase in funding for speech therapy
may be advantageous to
YNHY’s progress, it is necessary or reasonable. Having regard to the need
to consider the sustainability
of the Scheme the respondent contends increased
funding should not be approved. YNHY has made progress with current levels of
suggesting an increase was not necessary. Any deficit may be due to
YNHY’s lack of access to her working iPad and speech specific
apps on that
device, rather than lack of access to speech
CONSIDERATION
– Speech therapy
starting point is section 33(5) of the NDIS Act.
the requirements of section 33(5)(a) I have had regard to YNHY’s goals and
aspirations which include:
would like to improve my social skills so that I can interact and engage in play
with my peers;
would like to learn strategies to self-regulate my emotions and build skills to
improve my confidence in various situations;
would like to improve my language and communication skill so that I can
effectively express my wants and needs to my family and
social, language, communications and emotional regulation skills are all express
goals of YNHY. The program envisaged by
Ms Burleigh directly addresses all
these skills by increasing language, improving YNHY’s capacity for
and understanding social cues and giving her language to
name and appropriately express emotion. Improving YNHY’s access to
alternative means of communication other than oral (ie via email) also feeds
into these goals.
have had regard to the assessments undertaken of YNHY (s33(5)(b) of the NDIS
assessments conducted by treating speech therapists note YNHY has made progress
but requires greater input to continue and consolidate
this, particularly as
YNHY enters
teenage-hood.
report of Ms Hassan, OT,
that YNHY has reduced ability to engage with unfamiliar people, difficulty in
understanding and identifying emotions and reduced
social skills and consequent
limited social interactions. It was noted that YNHY demonstrated little to no
eye contact and had difficulty
in answering open ended questions. She did not
initiate conversation and tended to ‘yes’ or ‘no’
report of Mr Shakti Rathore, OT, reported that YNHY was able to respond to all
questions appropriately.
believed that one session of speech therapy a week was reasonable but otherwise
was unable to comment as he considered this beyond
regard to the criteria in section 34(1) of the NDIS Act (as required by
s33(5)(c)) I consider that:
therapy is required to address needs arising from impairments attributable to
mild intellectual disability and autism, for
which YNHY meets the access
criteria. Current levels of therapy have led to progress but not sufficient for
the life stage YNHY is
at. Ms Burleigh suggests the need will reduce over time.
I find the criterion in section 34(1)(aa) is met.
set out in paragraph 47 (above) I am satisfied the criterion in s34(1)(a) is
met. Increased speech therapy hours is aimed at assisting
YNHY to achieve her
goals, particularly in improved peer relationships and better emotional
regulation.
am satisfied on the basis of Ms Burleigh’s evidence that improved
communication skills and emotional regulation will facilitate
better social and economic participation, thus meeting the criterion in
s34(1)(b) of the NDIS Act.
YNHY is assessed as having reduced communication skills, particularly with
people she is unfamiliar with. Ms Burleigh expressed
the view YNHY’s
reduced abilities in reading social cues means she is vulnerable in social
interactions and does not have the
capacity to assess risks in relationships.
Given her emerging teenagerhood and her sister’s recent assault, skills to
for and express herself are essential. YNHY has demonstrated the
capacity to progress with speech therapy in the past but has not
made as much
progress necessary to allow her to communicate confidently. Ms Burleigh is of
the view YNHY has the potential to go
to TAFE and to work if she develops her
skills. She anticipated YNHY’s need for Scheme supports will reduce over
consider that the criteria in s34(1)(c) (value for money) and (d)
(effective and beneficial according to current good practice) are
speech therapy treatment is beyond the capacity of untrained persons to provide
except as part of a co-ordinated program.
Part of the program proposed by Ms
Burleigh involves liaison with the school and support workers to practice and
generalise the
skills learned in therapy. I am satisfied the criterion in
section 34(1)(e) is met.
is no doubt speech therapy is an NDIS
have considered the relevant Rules (per s33(5)(d)) in reaching the conclusions
above. I do not consider the other considerations
in s33 are relevant to this
summary I consider that increasing speech therapy hours to 52 hours a year is a
reasonable and necessary support in this circumstance
but that this should be
time limited before further review. Although Ms Burleigh was unable to say how
long the additional services
are likely to be required, I consider that the
increase should apply for the duration of the current plan (3 September 2025 to
March 2026). Future needs can be assessed on review of that
Increased occupational therapy
the new plan in place YNHY now has access to 52 hours of occupational therapy a
year, an increase from 30 hours a year. YNHY
seeks an additional 13 hours a
regard to the section 33(5) considerations:
Occupational
therapy aimed at increasing YNHY’s capacity for personal care and
independence would be in line with her personal
goals and aspirations to develop
her fine motor skills and attend to some self-care and daily tasks
independently. Particularly Ms
Hassan, OT, identified personal hygiene (needing
prompting), transport (dependent on others), interpersonal relationships
emotional insights and impaired judgement) and leisure and recreation
(needing support) as areas in need of
development.
Ms Hassan did not
however, specify how the hours requested would be disbursed. It is not clear to
me how a further 13 hours of
OT will enhance YNHY’s capacity. Ms Hassan
has identified as a deficit to be addressed, YNHY’s skills in relation to
interpersonal relationships. These are likely to be captured in the additional
speech therapy hours to be included in YNHY’s
have considered the assessments (as required by s33(5)(b)) and
Hassan’s report (dated 10 April 2025) recommending increased OT engagement
(from funded 30 hours a year) and support worker
assistance in order to increase
YNHY’s independence in personal care. At the time of her report YNHY was
noted to have not
engaged in OT since October 2024. No detail as to the services
to be offered in the additional hours were provided;
Rathore produced a report (dated 22 May 2025) in which he assessed YNHY as being
physically able to complete personal care tasks
but requiring prompting to
initiate and finish the task. Mr Rathore noted YNHY’s father was
uncomfortable about supervising
YNHY’s showering and dressing as she has
matured. This must be a common issue for single fathers of teenage daughters.
Rathore was confident that increased OT supports would be critical in
improving YNHY’s functional capacity. He thought 54 hours
would allow for
one hour per week and some funding for reports. He did not discuss the need for
65 hours a year and was not able
to be more specific about likely
have considered the s34(1) criteria (as required by s33(5)(c)) and I do not
consider that there is enough evidence before the Tribunal
on which I can be
satisfied that an additional 13 hours of OT a year is necessary to address a
need arising from YNHY’s impairments
or that it constitutes value for
money. Particularly where YNHY had not engaged with OT for some 6 months prior
to the report of
Ms Hassan, any deficits in function may simply be due to lack
OT input, rather than too little input. I consider it was
appropriate for the Agency to increase funded hours from 30 to 52, allowing
regular input moving forward.
I have found that the criteria in section 34(1)(aa) and (c) are not met (noting
the criteria in section 34(1) are mandatory considerations)
I do not have to
consider any other aspects of this section. I find that an additional 13 hours
of occupational therapy is not a
reasonable and necessary support in this
circumstance.
Funding for assistance with self-care activities
goal is to become increasingly independent in self-care and daily tasks. This
is not an unusual expectation for any
person at YNHY’s developmental
Hassan, OT, recommended an increase in YNHY’s support worker allocation to
include 4 hours of support worker assistance per
day (currently she receives 1:1
assistance for four hours only on a Saturday). The purpose of this increase was
to assist with YNHY’s
personal care, said to be necessary to reduce the
need for YNHY’s dad to supervise and prompt her.
There was some concern about
YNHY’s father feeling uncomfortable with supervision of personal care as
she matured.
Rathore, OT, noted YNHY was currently supported by a support worker on Saturdays
for four hours, but usually only received support
from her father. This support
was noted to be by way of verbal prompting and assistance brushing YNHY’s
hair. Mr Rathore
noted YNHY was independent with personal care, although she
did sometimes require prompting and her father had noted she sometimes
shower wet and naked. Mr Rathore was of the view the need for YNHY’s
father to prompt her in her morning routine
was ‘straining the family
dynamic’. Mr Rathore’s report did not engage with his expertise in
answering whether
YNHY’s need for support went beyond the ordinary needs
of developing children. He stated that all children were different.
simply relied on the current allowance of once a week support worker funding to
suggest YNHY’s needs must be greater
than other children’s. Mr
Rathore otherwise noted that YNHY was developing domestic skills as was
appropriate for her age.
regard to the section 34(1) criteria, I find that there is insufficient evidence
before the Tribunal to support a finding that
the level of support required by
YNHY is beyond what it is reasonable to expect a parent to provide (section
34(1)(e) of the NDIS
Act). Prompting of children to complete their chores and
self-care is a regular feature of parenting. It is acknowledged that this
often cause angst in familial relationships, but this is not sufficient to make
it an NDIS responsibility. With the recently
increased occupational therapy
hours approved, YNHY is likely to receive additional help to build her capacity
for independence in
self-care tasks. This better reflects her goals and
aspirations than funding support workers to intervene. I find this requested
support does not meet the criteria to be considered a reasonable and necessary
Funding for increased community, social and
recreational activities
is currently funded for 1:3 support for four hours a week. There is no evidence
that this is being utilised
no evidence in either Ms Hassan or Mr Rathore’s report of any specific
activities that are required or that would be beneficial
for YNHY to engage in.
Rathore specifically stated he was not aware of any routine or specific
community activities YNHY utilised supports for. He did
think she could benefit
from developing skills in the use of public transport but this might equally be
achieved through the additional
am not satisfied that on the evidence before the Tribunal I can make a finding
this is requested support meets the ‘value
for money’ criterion in
section 34(1)(c) of the NDIS Act. As such I am unable to find it meets the
criteria in section 34(1)
to be funded under the Scheme as a reasonable and
necessary support.
Funding for short -term
accommodation
is unclear where and when the recommendation for this support was first
proposed. There does not appear to be any mention of it
in Ms Hassan’s
report dated 10 April 2025.
a letter in support of YNHY’s application to the Tribunal, her father
recorded that 10-days short term accommodation per
year at 1:2 ratio may assist
in building YNHY’s independence and provide short breaks in school
holidays. This appears to
be a statement based on the report of Mr
Mr Rathore, in his report dated 22 May 2025, stated that YNHY’s father
thought short term accommodation may assist
her to develop independent living
skills. Mr Rathore does not appear to have engaged in any assessment beyond
reporting this statement.
He makes no recommendation either way that could be
said to be based on his expertise.
am not satisfied the evidence supports a finding this requested support
represents value for money, as required by section 34(1)(c)
of the NDIS Act. As
such it does not meet the criteria in section 34 to be funded as a reasonable
and necessary support.
Consumables
YNHY’s newest plan has increased consumable funding to $200 per
the extent that funding sought was to be utilised to purchase or repair a tablet
of any kind, I accept the Agency’s position
that with reference to Item
4(d) of Schedule 2 of the Transitional Support Rules, this is not an NDIS
4(d) bars the funding of internet devices (such as modems and routers), land
line phones, mobile phones (including smart phones),
mobile phone accessories
tablets and sim cards.
am satisfied that funding for purchase or repair of a tablet is not an NDIS
support as required by s34(1)(f). I therefore find that
funding for this item
does not satisfy the criteria in s34(1) and that this item is not a reasonable
and necessary support for the
purpose of that section.
is no other evidence before the Tribunal to support any increase in consumable
funding beyond the current level.
As I have reached a different conclusion to the
respondent I will set aside the decision under review and remit the matter to
Agency for reconsideration with directions that 52 hours of speech therapy
is a reasonable and necessary support.
decision of the Agency under review is set aside and remitted for
reconsideration in accordance with the direction that reasonable
and necessary
supports in the applicant’s statement of participant supports should
hours of speech therapy treatment per year for the duration of the current plan
(3 September 2025 to 2 March 2026).
other supports in the participant’s statement of participant supports
dated 2 May 2025, excepting any one-off assistive
technology supports already
used, are to be replicated pro-rata from the date on which the supports
specified above are included
in the applicant’s statement of participant
Administrative Review
Tribunal (Consequential and Transitional Provisions No.
1) Act 2024
Schedule 16, item 24
Agency Amended Statement of
Facts, Issues and Contentions (
Exhibit 3, pages 68-77 [6]
Section 3 of the NDIS Act
Section 4 of the NDIS Act
Section 3(3)(b) and 4(17) of
the NDIS Act.
National Disability
Insurance Agency v WRMF
[2020] FCAFC 79
Re Drake and Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No. 2)
(1979) 2 ALD 634
S4(17) of the NDIS Act
[2020] FCAFC 79
WRMF at [141]
WRMF at [143]
WRMFat [150]
WRMF at [151]
WRMF at [152]; see also
McGarrigle v NDIA
[2017] FCA 308
WRMF at [152]; see also
NDIA v KKTB by her litigation representative CVY22
[2022] FCAFC 181
WRMF at [201]
WRMF at [202]
[2023] FCA 852
Exhibit 3 [8]- [10]
Exhibit 3 [11] - [17]
Exhibit 3 [18] –
Exhibit 3 [ 29] [31]
Transitional Rules Schedule
Section 34(1)(a) of the Act
requires support will assist the participant to pursue their goals, objectives
and aspirations.
Exhibit 1 p61 to 65
Exhibit 1 p25
Exhibit 2 p 5-7
Exhibit 2 p21-23
Page 70 of Exhibit 2
See reports of Ms Dam and Ms
Page 13 of Exhibit 2
Page 47 of Exhibit 2
Page 51 of Exhibit 2
See Item 34 of Schedule 1 to
the Transitional Support Rules
Page 18 of Exhibit 2
Page 7 of Exhibit 2
Exhibit 3 at [23].
RTF format (13.1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format