Le v. Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] HCASJ 33 (17 September 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
QUANG SAU LE PLAINTIFF
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP DEFENDANT
[2025] HCASJ 33
Date of Judgment: 17 September
S71 of 2025
Migration Act 1958
(Cth), the period of time within which
the plaintiff's application may be made is extended to 10 June
to r 4.02 of the
High Court Rules 2004
(Cth), the periods of time within which
to file the plaintiff's application, fixed by rr 25.02.1 and 25.02.2(b), are
enlarged to
10 June 2025.
plaintiff's application for a constitutional or other writ filed on 10 June 2025
is dismissed.
plaintiff is to pay the defendant's costs of and incidental to the
application.
Representation
The plaintiff is represented by Wickham
The defendant is represented by Sparke Helmore Lawyers
By an application for a constitutional or other writ, the plaintiff
(Mr Quang Sau Le) seeks judicial review of a decision
of a delegate of the
defendant (the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship). The plaintiff also
seeks an extension of time within
which to make that application.
the following reasons, the extension of time is granted but the application is
plaintiff is a Vietnamese citizen, who seeks a Business Talent
(Subclass 132) (Permanent) visa in the Significant Business History
(the "Visa"), being one of several Australian business skills
The Explanatory
Statement to the regulations which created that visa stream explains that it
"applies to applicants who have had
a successful business career and are
proposing to establish or participate in a business that the sponsoring State or
Territory has
determined is of exceptional economic benefit to the State or
Territory".
The relevant
history in respect of the plaintiff's efforts to obtain the Visa may be broadly
summarised as follows.
24 March 2020, the plaintiff lodged an expression of interest for a Visa.
Later that year, on 16 September 2020, the plaintiff
lodged a nomination
application with the Government of South Australia (it was a requirement for the
grant of the Visa that the plaintiff
be nominated by a State or Territory
government agency).
17 September 2020, the plaintiff received confirmation from the Government
of South Australia that his nomination application
had been approved, and that
the plaintiff would shortly receive an invitation from the Department of Home
Affairs (the "Department")
to apply for the Visa (it was a requirement for the
grant of the Visa that the plaintiff be invited in writing by the Minister to
apply for the Visa).
that same day, the plaintiff received that invitation from the Department, which
specified that his application for the Visa
must be lodged on or before
16 November 2020.
14 November 2020, the plaintiff lodged an application for the Visa (the
"Visa Application"). The Visa Application included the
plaintiff's three
children as secondary applicants. Later, on 28 October 2022, the plaintiff
notified the Department of Home Affairs
of his marriage to his new wife (in
February 2021) and the birth of their new child (on 24 June 2021). The
plaintiff's notification
confirmed that neither the plaintiff's new wife nor new
child intended to migrate to Australia with the plaintiff and his other three
13 November 2024, the plaintiff lodged a "Statement of Business Intention
for South Australia" (which was dated 15 November 2020)
in support of his
Visa Application (the "Business Plan"). That Business Plan outlined the
agricultural export business – Sunshine
SA Pty Ltd ("Sunshine") –
which he asserted he intended to carry on in Australia in the event the Visa was
granted. In short,
the plaintiff therein asserted that "[t]he focus of
[Sunshine] will be on the export of South Australia meats, grains, honey and
natural products such as nutrition foods from South Australia to Vietnam (and
other Southeast Asian countries)" and that "[Sunshine]
will be developed to meet
the growing demand for Australian agriproducts by the Asian demographic".
23 December 2024, the plaintiff received notification from the Department
of Home Affairs that his Visa Application had been refused
by a delegate of the
Minister (the "Delegate's Decision"). That notification also specified that the
plaintiff had no right to merits
review of the Delegate's Decision. The
Delegate's Decision is outlined in greater detail below (at [
26 January 2025, the plaintiff filed an application for judicial review of
the Delegate's Decision in the Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia
(the "Previous Judicial Review Application"), which was listed for hearing on
9 June 2025. On 2 June 2025,
the plaintiff was served by the Minister
with written submissions in that proceeding, which referred to this Court's
unreported decisions
Gajjar v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
Nguyen v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
– in support of a submission that the Federal Circuit and Family Court
lacked jurisdiction to determine the Previous Judicial
Review Application (prior
to receipt of those unreported decisions, the plaintiff believed that the
Federal Circuit and Family Court
had jurisdiction on the basis that he had no
rights of merits review in the Administrative Review Tribunal). As a result, on
2025, the plaintiff discontinued the Previous Judicial Review
Application.
thereafter, on 10 June 2025, the applicant filed the present application in
this Court seeking judicial review of the Delegate's
Decision (the "Present
Application"). The Minister accepts that this Court has jurisdiction to
determine the Present Application
and that it should not be remitted to another
The Delegate's Decision
Delegate's Decision (to refuse the Plaintiff's Visa Application) was expressed
in the "Decision Record" to be made on the basis
of a finding that "the criteria
for the grant of a [Visa] are not satisfied". Specifically, the delegate
indicated that in this case,
he was not satisfied that cl 132.227 of
Sch 2 of the
Migration Regulations 1994
Clause 132.227
relevantly prescribed the following criteria for the grant of the
"(1) The applicant genuinely has a realistic commitment
(a) establish a qualifying
in Australia; or
(b) participate in an existing qualifying business in Australia.
(2) The applicant genuinely has a realistic commitment to:
(a) maintain a substantial ownership interest in the qualifying business
mentioned in subclause (1); and
(b) maintain a direct and continuous involvement in the management of the
qualifying business from day to day, and in the making
of decisions that affect
the overall direction and performance of the qualifying business, in a manner
that benefits the Australian
that respect, the delegate noted that the applicant was currently "a 100 percent
owner of ... Quang Sau One Member Company Limited",
being a "Vietnam-based
timber trading business, which focusses mainly on the processing and trading of
timber /or wood products since
the business was established in February 2017".
He went on to observe that the only supporting documents relevant to
cl 132.227 which
the plaintiff submitted were: (i) online "yes"
responses to the business talent declarations contained in his Visa Application;
(ii) the Business Plan, which the delegate acknowledged was "approved
by the Government of South Australia" but which he described
"[A] short business plan with little detail ... [which] stated the
applicant's intentions to inject approximately AUD 1 million into
new Adelaide-based agricultural produce export business dealing in meats,
grains, honey, and natural products. The business is
forecast to potentially
achieve a turnover of at least AUD 800,000 within the first 2 years
and then generate annual turnover of
AUD 1 million from the
5th year onward."
delegate then went on to refer to what he described as the policy "objectives of
the Business Skills program", the "context"
for which he said was provided in
the "Department's GenGuideM – Business Skills visas – Visa
application and related
procedures" (the "Policy"). That Policy is therein
described as being the "Procedural Instruction" which relevantly "provides
and procedure for deciding ... Business Skills program visa applications
made on or after 1 July 2003". In his reasons, the delegate
outlined the
"objectives of the Business Skills program" with reference to several quotations
extracted from that Policy.
Thereafter,
the delegate set out the following reasons explaining why he was not satisfied
that the criteria in cl 132.227 were met:
"In the case of the
applicant's proposed business activity in Australia (as per
paragraph 132.227(1)(a) requirements), I acknowledge
the applicant's
intentions are to establish an agricultural product export business in South
Australia. However, for the reasons
outlined below, I am not satisfied the
applicant satisfies paragraph 132.227(1)(a) and
paragraph 132.227(2)(a) and (b):
• There is no evidence on file to suggest the applicant holds
specialised skills in the food and agriculture export business
• There is no evidence on file to suggest the applicant's proposed
business activity will substitute existing services in Australia,
or introduce
any new or improved technology, product, or service in a key sector such as new
medical technology or renewables energy
/or materials.
• The applicant's business plan does not address legal
requirements, regulations, mandatory industry codes & standards,
with regard to the exporting and wholesale trading industry and understanding of
trading laws, licencing/or permits requirements.
• The applicant's business plan does not address details regarding
employment opportunities for Australian citizens, Australian
permanent residents
or holders of a valid New Zealand passport, or if the positions will offer
competitive wages.
• There is no evidence that the proposed business holds successful
patents that would introduce new products or processes to
the Australian market
nor does it involve innovation activities, such as sourcing venture capital
funding towards product development
or manufacturing.
I accept that the establishment of an agricultural export business may
provide some benefit to Australian agriculture and some employment
opportunities; however, there is no evidence before me to suggest such a
business proposal will deliver any of the other expected
outcomes of the
Business program listed above.
As a result, I am not satisfied the applicant's intentions to establish an
agricultural export business in Australia are genuine,
realistic or commensurate
to the expected outcomes of the Business Skills program, or will offer any
significant benefit to the Australian
economy. Therefore,
paragraph 132.227(1)(a) , 132.227(2)(a) and 132.227(2)(b) are not met by
the applicant.
I have also given consideration to paragraph 132.227(1)(b) which enables
an applicant to participate in an existing Australian business,
rather than
establishing one on their own. In the case of the applicant, there is no
material evidence before the Department to support
the possibility the applicant
could become involved in an already operating Australian business. Therefore,
paragraph 132.227(1)(b)
is not met by the applicant.
As paragraphs 132.227(1)(a) and paragraph 132.227(1)(b) have not
been satisfied, subclause 132.227(1) is not met by the applicant.
subclauses 132.227(1) and (2) are not satisfied, clause 132.227 is not
The Present Application
the Present Application, the plaintiff seeks orders in the following
"1. An extension of the time for making this application to
6 June 2025 pursuant to the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) (‘the
High Court Rules 2004
writ of certiorari to quash the decision of the delegate of the defendant dated
23 December 2024.
writ of mandamus directed to the defendant, requiring the defendant to determine
the application made by the plaintiff on 14 November
2020, for a Business
Skills – Business Talent (Migrant) (Class EA) (Subclass 132) visa
according to law.
defendant pay the plaintiff’s costs of and incidental to the
Application.
other Order(s) as this Honourable Court deems fit."
grounds of the Present Application are expressed in the following
"The defendant’s delegate failed to address the correct
statutory question.
statutory question raised by Clause 132.227 of Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) ('the
Regulations
') required the
delegate to be satisfied that the applicant genuinely has a realistic commitment
to establish a qualifying business
in Australia, to maintain a substantial
ownership interest in that business, and to maintain a direct and continuous
involvement
in the management of that business from day-to-day, and in making
decisions that affect the overall direction and performance of
that business in
a manner that benefits the Australian economy.
delegate found that this Clause was not met as the applicant had not satisfied
the delegate that he genuinely or realistically
intended to establish a business
that was commensurate to the expected outcomes of the Business Skills program,
or will offer any
significant benefit to the Australian economy.
statutory question does not require the delegate to be satisfied that the
business activity was commensurate to the expected outcomes
of the Business
Skills program or will offer significant benefit to the Australian economy.
misconstruing the statutory question and failing to answer it, the decision was
affected by jurisdictional error."
Consideration –
extension of time
plaintiff acknowledges that the Present Application was filed outside the time
limits prescribed by
Migration Act 1958
Migration Act
") and rr 25.02.1 and 25.02.2(b) of the
(Cth) (the "
"). He seeks an extension of those time
limits pursuant to s 468A(2) of the
Migration Act
and r 4.02 of
Minister does not oppose the grant of the extension of time. Accordingly, and
also having regard to the fact that (as explained
above) the plaintiff acted
promptly to file the Present Application after the unreported decisions of this
were provided to him, I am satisfied
that the extension of time is in the interests of the administration of justice.
I grant the
extension of time.
Consideration –
plaintiff contends that the Delegate's Decision was infected by jurisdictional
error. The error in question is said to be a misconstruction
of the governing
criteria to the Visa prescribed by cl 132.227 (the plaintiff does not
otherwise take issue with any other aspect
of the Delegate's Decision).
particular, the plaintiff takes issue with the part of the delegate's reasons in
which he concluded that he was "not satisfied
the applicant's intentions to
establish an agricultural export business in Australia are genuine, realistic
or commensurate to the expected outcomes of the Business Skills program, or
will offer any significant benefit to the Australian
The plaintiff
submits that this passage, coupled with a reading of the delegate's reasons "as
a whole", illustrates that "what the
delegate has done is to assess whether the
applicant had a genuine and realistic intention of establishing a business that
the expected outcomes of the Business Skills program, or will offer any
significant benefit to the Australian
"not the question that [cl 132.277] required to be met". In doing so, the
plaintiff submits that "[t]he delegate has substituted
the policy for the
statutory test in a manner that is more restrictive than the statutory test".
This is said to constitute jurisdictional
error given that, as French, Sackville
and Hely JJ said in
Lobo v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
and Indigenous
"Where the Minister misconstrues one of the criteria prescribed in
the Act or Regulations and, because of that misconstruction he
considers that
the criterion has not been satisfied, it is as though he did not consider the
criterion at all. For, on the face of
it, he has failed to ask the question
which the Act and
Regulations
, upon a proper construction of the criterion,
require him to ask. In such a case ... the Minister’s decision would be a
The Minister has not done that which the Act requires him to have done.
The decision would be a purported decision of no legal effect."
am not satisfied that the delegate fell into such jurisdictional error. Two
propositions (addressed in further detail below) compel
that conclusion. First,
on a fair reading of the delegate's reasons as a whole, he did not err in the
manner which the plaintiff
contends. Second, in any event, even if he did so
err, that error was not material.
(1) The delegate did not
misconstrue the criteria in cl 132.227
is well-established that a reviewing court is required to give the
administrative decision-maker "beneficial construction" of
their reasons, in the
sense that the court should not be "concerned with looseness in the language ...
nor with unhappy phrasing"
by the decision-maker, and that their reasons under
review "are not to be construed minutely and finely with an eye keenly attuned
to the perception of
Such principles
"recognise the reality that the reasons of an administrative decision-maker are
meant to inform and not to be scrutinised
upon over-zealous judicial review by
seeking to discern whether some inadequacy may be gleaned from the way in which
the reasons
expressed".
plaintiff contends that the delegate applied an erroneously restrictive test
(derived from the Policy).
However, as Emmett J recognised in
Selliah v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
, the "Court
should not assume that a [decision-maker] did not apply the correct test unless
that appears clearly from the [decision-maker's]
it is readily apparent that the delegate had regard to the relevant Policy in
the determination of the plaintiff's Visa Application.
But importantly, having
regard to the Policy (in interpreting and applying the cl 132.227 criteria)
is not, of itself, objectionable.
As French CJ, Bell, Keane and
Gordon JJ recognised in
Plaintiff M64/2015 v Minister for Immigration
guidelines ... promote values of consistency and rationality in decision-making,
and the principle that administrative decision-makers
should treat like cases
alike. In particular, policies or guidelines may help to promote consistency in
'high volume decision-making'
... Thus in
Drake v Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs (No 2)
, Brennan J, as President of the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal, said that '[n]ot only is it lawful for the
Minister to form a guiding
policy; its promulgation is desirable' because the
adoption of a guiding policy serves, among other things, to assure the integrity
of administrative decision-making by 'diminishing the importance of individual
predilection' and 'the inconsistencies which might
otherwise appear in a series
of decisions'. The subjectivity of the evaluation by a decision-maker in a case
such as the present
highlights the importance of guidelines. The importance of
avoiding individual predilection and inconsistency in making choices between
large number of generally qualified candidates by the application of [an]
open-textured criterion ... is readily apparent."
delegate's consideration of the Policy would only here be erroneous if he, in
effect, substituted the criteria in cl 132.227
with requirements specified
by the Policy – with the effect that the plaintiff had to overcome
additional or more restrictive
criteria to obtain the
Applying the
necessary lens of "beneficial construction" and taking the delegate's reasons as
a whole, it cannot be accepted that
the delegate substituted or otherwise
misconstrued what was required by cl 132.227 in that manner. In that
respect, I note the following
delegate's reasons began with a clear statement that the Visa "cannot be granted
unless the relevant criteria specified in the
Act and the Regulation are
satisfied" and that, in this case, he was "not satisfied that
clause 132.227 ... is satisfied", immediately
followed by setting out the
text of cl 132.227 in full. This illustrates a clear understanding by the
delegate that the applicable
criteria come from cl 132.227 (as opposed to
from the Policy alone). Indeed, the delegate explicitly said that not being
that the cl 132.227 criteria were met was what drove his decision
to refuse the Visa.
better view is that, as the Minister submits – rather than
"substitut[ing]" cl 132.227 with the Policy, the delegate instead
regard to the Policy in interpreting the part of the criteria in
cl 132.227(2)(b) requiring the plaintiff's proposed business
to be run "in
a manner that benefits the Australian economy". This finds support in the Policy
at 3.10.3.7, which stated that: "[u]nder
policy, for the [benefits the
Australian economy] criterion to be satisfied, the applicant should satisfy the
decision-maker that
the proposed business activity will reflect the expected
outcomes of the Business programs", which is immediately followed by a
non-exhaustive
list of such outcomes. This broadly aligns with language in the
delegate's reasons that "there is no evidence before me to suggest
business proposal will deliver any of the other expected outcomes of the
Business program" and that the proposed business
activity was not "commensurate
to the expected outcomes of the Business Skills program" nor would it "offer any
significant benefit
to the Australian economy".
a proposed business will be run "in a manner that benefits the Australian
economy" is plainly a broad "open-textured criterion"
of the kind discussed in
Plaintiff M64/2015
, which benefits from policy guidelines to "promote
values of consistency and rationality in
decision-making".
Minister submits, this was "an evaluative question on which reasonable minds
could differ and it made sense for the Policy
to seek that decision-makers
consider that issue through the prism of the scope, purpose and policy of the
relevant visa scheme which
the Business Talent visa fell within". It is far from
clear that the delegate having regard to the Policy in this way (ie, to give
colour to the criterion) has, in fact, resulted in the application of a test
which is "more restrictive" than required.
that respect, it is worth observing that the delegate did conclude that the
plaintiff's proposed business "may provide
benefit to Australian
agriculture and
employment opportunities" but that "there is no
evidence ... to suggest [it] will deliver any of the other expected outcomes of
Business program" and further that he was "not satisfied ... [it] will offer
significant
benefit to the Australian
Notably, the
text of cl 132.227(2)(b) does not expressly provide that the benefit to the
Australian economy must be "significant".
But nevertheless, it is clear from the
foregoing that the delegate took the view that
benefit to the
Australian economy (no matter how small) would not, of itself, satisfy the
cl 132.227(2)(b) criteria. With respect,
that view is correct. This does
not emerge from the Policy (which does not express a requirement that the
economic benefit must be
"significant"), but rather as a matter of orthodox
statutory construction. Virtually any proposed business – no matter how
small, unsuccessful or poorly managed – might be of
the economy, in the sense of resulting in some kind of economic activity by way
of producing, buying or selling products
or services. It would be an "absurd
consequence[]"
economic benefit (and by extension virtually any proposed business)
met the cl 132.227(2)(b) criteria, because that would render
the criteria
effectively meaningless. That is particularly so recalling that, as noted above,
the relevant Explanatory Statement
stated that this visa stream applied in
respect of proposed businesses that had been determined to be "of
exceptional
economic benefit to the State or
Territory".
follows that there is no error apparent in the delegate's construction of
cl 132.227.
(2) Any error was not material
most cases, including with respect to the error the plaintiff contends infected
the Delegate's Decision, "an error will only be
material to the decision that was made in fact, in the sense that there is a
realistic possibility
that the decision that was made in fact
been different if the error had not
Curial relief
is only justified if that "threshold of materiality" has been
even if the delegate erred – in the sense that he erroneously imported
into cl 132.227 an additional requirement that
the business activity
proposed must be "commensurate to the expected outcomes of the Business Skills
program" or will "offer any
significant benefit to the Australian economy"
– that error could not have changed the decision made. Accordingly, even
the delegate erred, this did not give rise to jurisdictional error.
is so because cl 132.227 contained multiple separate and distinct criteria,
of which needed to be satisfied for the Visa to be granted. For
present purposes, the Minister broadly characterises these as two
requirements for the plaintiff to genuinely have a realistic commitment to both:
(i) establishing and maintaining a substantial
ownership interest in the
qualifying business in Australia (the "business establishment/maintenance
requirement", which falls from
sub-cl (1)(a) and
(ii) operating the proposed business in a particular manner, directed to
achieving benefits for the Australian economy (the "business
operations/benefits
requirement", which falls from sub-cl (2)(b)). The delegate's reasons
reveal that he was not satisfied that either
requirement was met, whereas the
error alleged is directed solely to the threshold called for by the so-called
business operations/benefits
requirement. Put another way, even if the delegate
erroneously imported additional requisites into the business operations/benefits
requirement – in any event, he was not satisfied that the plaintiff
satisfied the business establishment/maintenance requirement,
which is itself a
freestanding and complete reason for which the Visa Application must be refused.
As the Minister correctly submits
in respect of the Present Application: "unless
it could somehow be established that the delegate's reasoning/decision
[the business operations/benefits requirement] infected his
reasoning/decision concerning the business establish[ment]/maintenance
requirement ... the result of the case would inevitably have remained
unchanged".
the plaintiff accepts the Minister's characterisation of those two requirements,
he submits that "the reasoning on both aspects
is expressly merged" and
therefore "[t]he delegate regard[ed] the [erroneously imported requisites] as
applying to both [the business
establishment/maintenance requirement] and [the
business operations/benefits requirement]". With respect, that submission
mischaracterises
the Delegate's Decision. While it is true that the delegate's
reasoning is "merged" – in the sense that (as outlined above)
the delegate
set out a bullet list of factors directed to both requirements – this
falls well short of indicating that the
delegate considered that the erroneously
imported requisites applied to the business establishment/maintenance
requirement. This
is clear when one adopts the appropriate "beneficial
construction" of the delegate's reasons – particularly having regard to
the following:
(a) As noted above, the delegate set out the cl 132.227 criteria in full in
his reasons. The business establishment/maintenance requirement
sub-cl (1)(a) and (2)(a) is relatively basic and straightforward, and there
is no basis for inferring that the delegate did not
read and understand it.
(b) In the key conclusionary passage (with which the plaintiff takes issue), the
delegate outlined each of the distinct bases on
which he was not satisfied that
the cl 132.227 criteria were met, each of which were separated by the word:
"or". He relevantly said
that he was not "satisfied the applicant's intentions
to establish an agricultural export business in Australia are genuine, realistic
before going
on to advert to the other matters. It is apparent from this that the delegate
correctly understood that failure to meet
the business establishment/maintenance
requirement was a distinct and freestanding reason for which the Visa
Application must be
(c) The delegate demonstrated a clear understanding of the Policy, which itself
draws a distinction between the different criteria
in cl 132.227. This
renders it further improbable that any error (derived from the Policy) in the
delegate's approach to the business
operations/benefits requirement infected his
approach to the business establishment/maintenance requirement. In particular,
for example:
(i) the Policy at 3.10.3.3 clearly outlined the applicable criteria as being
distinct and separate, in the following terms:
"The applicant satisfying the primary criteria is required to demonstrate
plan to establish and maintain a substantial ownership interest in a business in
Australia ...
they plan to
maintain direct and continuous involvement in the management of the business in
Australia ...
the intended
business will be of economic benefit to Australia ...
their business
or investment intentions are genuine and realistic ..."; and
(ii) whereas the Policy at 3.10.3.7 addressed how the "benefit to Australia"
criterion would be satisfied (see above at [
]), the Policy at 3.10.3.8
outlined the factors to which regard should be had "[i]n
assessing whether the applicant's (realistic) commitment to establishing
participating in) and maintaining involvement in a business or investment in
Australia is genuine".
(d) The delegate expressly made multiple findings which, in any event, would
tend to lead a rational decision-maker to doubt whether
the plaintiff genuinely
had a realistic commitment to establishing and maintaining a substantial
ownership interest in the proposed
agriculture export business, including
(i) the plaintiff had submitted limited evidence concerning his proposed
business, save largely only for his Business Plan, which
was "a short business
plan with little detail";
(ii) "[t]here is no evidence on file to suggest the applicant holds specialised
skills in the food and agriculture export business
industry"; and
(iii) "[t]he applicant's business plan does not address legal requirements,
regulations, mandatory industry codes & standards,
insurance with regard to
the exporting and wholesale trading industry and understanding of trading laws,
licencing/or permits requirements".
Disposition
the foregoing reasons, the Present Application is dismissed with costs –
and, pursuant to r 25.09.1 of the Rules, without
This subclass of Australian visa
was permanently closed to new applicants in July 2024. However, the plaintiff's
application was
nevertheless processed on the basis that it was lodged prior to
that date (see below).
Explanatory Statement,
Migration Amendment Regulation 2012 (No 2)
(Cth) at 48.
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth), Sch 2, cl 132.212.
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth), Sch 2, 132.221.
Unreported (B37/2012),
1 November 2012 per Kiefel J.
Unreported (C1/2022), 22 July
2022 per Steward J.
Both the plaintiff and Minister
accept that cl 132.227 prescribed criteria which needed to be met for the
Visa to be granted. See
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth), reg 2.03.
A "qualifying business" is defined
by reg 1.03 of the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) to mean "an
enterprise that: (a) is operated for the purpose of making profit through
the provision of goods, services or goods
and services (other than the provision
of rental property) to the public; and (b) is not operated primarily or
substantially for
the purpose of speculative or passive investment".
Emphasis added to the Delegate's
Emphasis in the plaintiff's
written submissions.
[2003] FCAFC 168
(2003) 132 FCR 93
Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
(1996) 185 CLR 259
at 271-272.
Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
(1996) 185 CLR 259
[1999] FCA 615
[2015] HCA 50
(2015) 258 CLR 173
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs [No 2]
at 640-642 (citations omitted).
See, for example,
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2003] FCAFC 168
[2015] HCA 50
(2015) 258 CLR 173
Emphasis added.
See generally
Nugan Packing Co Ltd
[1950] HCA 51
(1950) 81 CLR 558
at 564-565;
Commissioner of
Taxation (Cth) v Barton
[1957] HCA 5
(1957) 96 CLR 359
Explanatory Statement,
Migration Amendment Regulation 2012 (No 2)
(Cth) at 48 (emphasis
LPDT v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
280 CLR 321
(emphasis in original).
LPDT v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
280 CLR 321
For completeness, as noted
above, in lieu of "establish[ing] a qualifying business in Australia", it was
also open to the plaintiff
to instead "participate in an existing qualifying
business in Australia" pursuant to cl 132.227(1)(b). This is of no
consequence
in the present matter; the plaintiff's Business Plan was directed
solely to the establishment of his own qualifying business. As
the delegate
observed: "there is no material evidence ... to support the possibility the
applicant could become involved in an already
operating Australian
Emphasis added.
RTF format (226 KB)
Signed PDF/A format