Kaur v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FedCFamC2G 1835 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Kaur v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1835
File number(s):
SYG 1874 of 2020
Judgment of:
JUDGE PAPADOPOULOS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Judicial Review –
absence of approved nomination – futility – no jurisdictional error
established –
Ministerial intervention – application
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) ss 359AA,
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) regs 2.08, 5.19(4), sch 2
cls 187.233, 187.311
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General
Federal Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) r 13.06(1)(c)
Cases cited:
Mora v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2018] FCA 1819
Singh v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] FCAFC 105
; FCAFC 105
Varsi v Minister for Immigration & Anor
[2018] FCCA 1280
Division 2 General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of final submissions:
Date of hearing:
Applicants:
Solicitor for the Respondents:
Ms Q. Q. Ren of HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
SYG 1874 of 2020
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
JASMEET KAUR
NAVNEET SINGH ARORA
JASMYRA KAUR
Third Applicant
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
Second Respondent
JUDGE PAPADOPOULOS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
name of the first respondent be amended to
‘Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship’.
application filed on 6 August 2020 be dismissed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or order to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors (r 24.04(g) of the
Federal Circuit
and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to
r 24.04 of the Rules.
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE PAPADOPOULOS
INTRODUCTION
the Court is an application seeking judicial review of a decision made by the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (
) on 13 July 2020. By that
decision, the Tribunal affirmed a decision of a delegate (
the first respondent (
) to refuse to grant a Subclass 187
Regional Employer Nomination (Permanent) (Class RN) visa (
) to each applicant.
Court has jurisdiction to determine this matter pursuant to
Migration Act 1958
the following reasons, the application is dismissed
background and procedural history to this matter was helpfully summarised in the
Minister’s submissions, which I primarily
The Subclass 187 visa application
2 November 2016, the first applicant in this case, a female national of India,
signed a job offer from VJN Group Pty Ltd (
) for the position of
Retail Manager.
28 November 2016, the first applicant applied for the Subclass 187 visa on the
basis of her prospective employment with the
first applicant’s husband, the second applicant in this case, made a
combined application with the first
14 August 2017, the third applicant was born in Australia. She is the daughter
of the first and second applicants. By operation
of reg 2.08 of the
Regulations 1994
Regulations
), the third applicant was taken
to have made a Subclass 187 visa application combined with the applications made
by her parents.
14 March 2018, the delegate refused to approve a nomination made by the
nominator in relation to the position to be filled by the
12 April 2018, the delegate refused the applications for the Subclass 187
The delegate found the first
applicant did not meet the requirements of cl 187.233(3) in Pt 187 of Sch 2 to
the Regulations as the
relevant nomination made by her nominator had been
refused on 14 March 2018. The delegate also found that the secondary applicant
did not meet the requirements of cl 187.311 in Pt 187 of Sch 2 to the
Regulations because he was not a member of the family unit
of a person who holds
a Subclass 187 visa granted on the basis of satisfying the primary criteria for
grant of the visa.
14 May 2018, the primary applicant notified the Minister’s Department of
the birth of the third applicant, and requested
she be included in the Subclass
187 visa application.
19 July 2018, a delegate refused to grant a Subclass 187 visa to the third
applicant as she did not meet the requirements of the
primary or secondary
criteria in Pt 187 of Sch 2 to the
Regulations.
The review application
3 May 2018, the first, second and third applicants (collectively, the
) applied to the Tribunal for review of the delegate’s
25 June 2020, the Tribunal invited the applicants to attend a telephone hearing
on 13 July 2020. The Tribunal elected to conduct
that hearing in combination
with the review application made by the nominator concerning the decision to
refuse the related nomination.
As the Tribunal chose to hear these review
applications together, it referred to the hearing as a combined
13 July 2020, the primary applicant and Mr Bharatkumar Virabhai Patel, the
nominator’s sole director, attended the combined
Later that day, the
(a) affirmed the decision under review to refuse to approve the nomination in
relation to the position to be filled by the first
(b) subsequently affirmed the decision under review not to grant a Subclass 187
to each of the first, second and third
applicants.
The Tribunal decision
its decision, the Tribunal identified the issue on review was whether the
applicants met the criteria for the grant of a Subclass
Tribunal noted the first applicant sought to meet the criteria specified within
the Direct Entry stream of the Subclass 187 eligibility
criteria specified
within Pt 187 of Sch 2 to the Regulations.
This required at least one
applicant, the primary applicant, to meet the common criteria in cl 187.21 and
the Direct Entry stream
criteria in cl 187.23 of the
Regulations.
hearing, pursuant to s 359AA of the Act, the Tribunal put to the first applicant
that in circumstances where the decision in respect
of the related nomination
was affirmed, the first applicant would not be able to meet the criteria in cl
187.233(3) of the Regulations.
The first applicant confirmed she understood that where there no approved
nomination her visa could not be granted and as a consequence
the applications
made by the second and third applicants could not
Tribunal did not seek further evidence or submissions from the primary applicant
on the ground of futility, given the relevant
nomination had been refused:
Varsi v Minister for Immigration & Anor
[2018] FCCA 1280
the absence of an approved nomination, the Tribunal found the first applicant
did not meet cl 187.233 and thereby affirmed the
delegate’s decision not
to grant her a Subclass 187
The Tribunal noted no
claim had been made in respect of any other visa
It followed that the
Tribunal affirmed the delegate’s decisions with respect to each of the
second and third applicants as
they did not meet cl
PROCEEDINGS IN THIS COURT
6 August 2020, the applicants commenced proceedings by way of originating
application. The applicants advanced three grounds of
review, set over four
paragraphs (reproduced below without alteration):
error - Member of Administrative Appeals Tribunal & Delegate of Minister
misinterpreted the r.5.19(4) while refusing
the Sc 187 nomination under Direct
Entry Nomination Scheme for my employer Business VJN Group Pty Ltd. And refused
my visa under
cl.187.233 of Schedule 2 to the Regulations while refusing my 187
RSMS visa application.
fairness - Tribunal did not consider my previous work and time spend in
Australia while making the decision under clause
of Administrative Appeals Tribunal & The Department of Immigration has
exceeded its jurisdiction in that it followed a
procedure contrary to law and
refused to approve my Regional Employer Nomination (subclass 187) visa
application under regulation
clause 186.233. My employer was not given a proper
chance to present his argument and provide further
information.
4. Annexed and marked 'A' is a copy of AAT Decision record.
nominator also filed an application for review in this Court in relation to the
decision of the Tribunal to affirm the delegate’s
decision to refuse to
approve a nomination made in relation to the position to be filled by the first
applicant (
related proceedings
held a hearing in relation to this matter and the related proceedings at 10.15am
on 24 July 2025. At that hearing, there was no
appearance on behalf of the
nominator in the related proceedings. After calling the matter three times, the
Minister sought to have
the related proceedings dismissed for non-appearance.
The Minister relied on the affidavit of Mr Henry Chapman, affirmed on 22 July
2025 to show that the nominator was served via email and made aware of the
consequences of non-appearance. I was satisfied the nominator
had been served
and for whatever reason had decided not to attend the hearing. I was further
satisfied the non-attendance occurred
in circumstances where the nominator was
put on notice by the Minister as to the consequences of a failure to attend. As
dismissed the related proceedings pursuant to
rule 13.06(1)(c)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal
Law) Rules 2021
the dismissal of the related proceedings, I stood the matter down for a short
period to allow the Minister’s representative,
Ms Ren, to speak with the
primary applicant, a litigant in person, about relevant options available to the
applicants. On return,
I proceeded to hear the matter.
RELEVANT LEGISLATION
the time the Tribunal made its decision, the first applicant was required to
satisfy the primary criteria for the grant of a Subclass
187 visa in the Direct
Entry stream, including clause 187.233, which provided as follows:
(1) The position to which the application relates is the position:
(a) nominated in an application for approval that:
(i) identifies the applicant in
relation to the position; and
(ii) is made in relation to a visa in a Direct Entry stream; and
(iii) seeks to meet the requirements of subregulation 5.19(12); and
(b) in relation to which the declaration mentioned in paragraph 1114C(3)(d) of
Schedule 1 was made in the application for the grant
of the visa.
(2) The person who will employ the applicant is the person who made the
nomination.
(3) The Minister has approved the nomination.
(4) The nomination has not subsequently been withdrawn.
(4A) Either:
(a) there is no adverse information known to Immigration about the person who
made the nomination or a person associated with that
(b) it is reasonable to disregard any adverse information known to Immigration
associated with that
(5) The position is still available to the applicant.
(6) The application for the visa is made no more than 6 months after the
Minister approved the nomination.
the time the Tribunal made its decision, the second and third applicants were
required to satisfy the secondary criteria for the
grant of a Subclass 187 visa,
including clause 187.311, which provided as follows:
The applicant:
(a) is a member of the family unit of a person (the primary applicant) who
holds a Subclass 187 visa granted on the basis of satisfying
the primary
criteria for the grant of the visa; and
(b) made a combined application with the primary applicant.
CONSIDERATION
ground 1, the applicants contend the Tribunal and delegate misinterpreted reg
5.19(4) of the Regulations in refusing the applications
of both the nominator
and the applicants.
Minister submits and I agree this ground can only be considered in relation to
the Tribunal’s decision affirming the decision
to refuse to grant a
Subclass 187 visa to each of the first, second and third applicants. The Court
does not have jurisdiction with
respect to the delegate’s decision made on
21 September 2019: see ss 476(2) and (4) of the Act.
the Tribunal’s decision, the Minister submits, and I agree, that reg
5.19(4) contains criteria that are relevant to
the approval of a nomination and
therefore not relevant to the Tribunal’s decision in this matter.
Accordingly, the applicant’s
complaint is misdirected and this ground must
ground 2, the applicants suggest the Tribunal failed to consider the first
applicant’s previous work experience and time
spent in Australia when
assessing whether she met cl 187.233. The Minister submits, and I agree, that
the first applicant’s
prior work history and time spent in Australia were
not relevant to the Tribunal’s determination of whether cl 187.233 was
met. Those matters had no bearing whatsoever upon the existence of a nomination
approved by the Minister. Accordingly, the applicant’s
complaint is
misdirected and this ground must also fail.
ground 3, the applicants allege the Tribunal and the Minister’s Department
exceeded jurisdiction by following a procedure
contrary to law. They further
complain the nominator was not provided with a proper opportunity to present
arguments and provide
further information.
Minister submits that this ground lacks sufficient particularity, making it
difficult to identify the specific allegations being
made. The Minister further
contends that the applicants have not explained how the first applicant’s
proposed employer was
denied an opportunity to provide further evidence, nor
have they identified what evidence the employer would have sought to
25 June 2020, the Tribunal invited the applicants and to attend a hearing on 13
July 2020. The first applicant and the sole director
of her proposed employer,
Mr Patel, attended that hearing to give evidence. Based upon my review of the
evidentiary record, along
with the applicants’ inability to further
particularise this ground at hearing before me, I share the Minister’s
that there is no indication that the Tribunal failed to afford the
applicants procedural fairness or denied Mr Patel an opportunity
additional evidence. I agree with the Minister that ground 3 cannot be
established.
Minister’s representative, Ms Ren, drew my attention to Collier J’s
observation in
Mora v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] FCA 1819
that decisions relating to nominations and the grant
or refusal of visas within this particular statutory context are
‘inextricably
linked’. It was submitted that in circumstances where
the related proceedings had been dismissed, then the present application
also be dismissed because:
(a) the applicants had failed to allege any error on the part of the Tribunal,
and none was apparent; and
(b) there would be no useful result to be obtained by remitting the matter to
the Tribunal in circumstances where the first applicant
could not satisfy the
criteria for the grant of the Subclass 187 visa (See, e.g.,
Singh v Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] FCAFC 105
(2017) 253 FCR 267
; FCAFC 105
), at [82] per Mortimer J, with whom Jagot and Bromberg JJ
find the Minister’s submissions compelling, particularly given my earlier
conclusion that the Tribunal did not err. Even if
established - which it has not - the absence of an approved nomination means
that, upon remittal, the
Administrative Review Tribunal would be unable to reach
a different decision. I accept that the relevant criterion for a Subclass
visa requires approval of the original nomination and cannot be satisfied by
reference to a new nomination lodged after the Tribunal’s
at [82]-[90].
Ministerial intervention
remains to say that the Court has utmost sympathy for the circumstances of the
applicants and it would be desirable that consideration
be given by the first
respondent to any available avenue of Ministerial intervention.
the above reasons, the application before this Court is dismissed.
as a consequence of the change in name of the Minister’s portfolio, the
name of the first respondent is to be amended
Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
will hear the parties as to costs.
I certify that the preceding thirty-nine (39)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Papadopoulos
Dated: 13 November 2025
Court Book (
CB 1 to 34; CB
CB 106 to 111; CB 115,
CB 116 to 117,
CB 117, [19]-[20]; CB
CB 117, [21]-[22].
RTF format (430 KB)
Signed PDF/A format