Lift Shop Pty Ltd v Next Level Elevators Pty Ltd [2024] FedCFamC2G 1300 (29 November 2024)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Lift Shop Pty Ltd v Next Level Elevators
[2024] FedCFamC2G 1300
File number(s):
SYG 2118 of 2023
Judgment of:
JUDGE BINGHAM
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
CONSUMER LAW
dismissal of Application in a Proceeding seeking orders for forensic imaging
and access – Respondents seek party-party costs
up to 12 June 2024 and
costs on an indemnity basis thereafter – costs awarded according to scale
Legislation:
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General
Federal Rules) 2021
(Cth) rr 1.04, 22.02, 22.04 and 22.09
Cases cited:
Australian and International Pilots
Association v Qantas Airways (No 3)
[2007] FCA 879
FSJ18 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2024] FCA 433
Re Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
[1997] HCA 6
(1997) 186 CLR 622
Division 2 General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submissions:
Date of hearing:
On the Papers
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Gilbert + Tobin
Counsel for the Respondents:
Mr Cordiner KC
Solicitor for the Respondents:
SYG 2118 of 2023
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
LIFT SHOP PTY LTD (ACN 109 724
NEXT LEVEL ELEVATORS PTY LTD (ACN 161 047
First Respondent
MADELINE KATERS
JUDGE BINGHAM
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Applicant pay the Respondents’ costs of the Application in a Proceeding
filed 7 June 2024 in accordance with Schedule 2
Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) as agreed, where costs cannot be agreed the cost will be taxed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or order to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors (r 17.05(2)(g)
Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 17.05
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal
Law) Rules 2021
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE BINGHAM:
Respondents seek costs with respect to an Application in a Proceeding filed on 7
June 2024 by the Applicant (
June 2024 Application
) seeking forensic
imaging and forensic access orders. The June 2024 Application was initially
listed for hearing before me in person
at the Sydney Registry on 2 August 2024.
On 2 August 2024 the June 2024 Application was adjourned to a date to be fixed
for the purpose
of making directions. Costs were reserved on this occasion. The
June 2024 Application was listed before me on 26 September 2024 for
management.
the case management hearing the Applicant sought to have the June 2024
Application adjourned again. I informed the Applicant that
the June 2024
Application could either be set down for hearing or dismissed. The Applicant
elected with the consent of the Respondents
to have the June 2024 Application
dismissed and I made orders giving effect to the dismissal. At the request of
the Respondents orders
were also made for submissions as to costs in relation to
the June 2024 Application and for those costs to be determined on the papers.
These are the Reasons for Judgment in relation to the Respondents’
application for costs.
substantive proceedings were issued on 22 December 2023 under Schedule 2 of the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth). It is alleged that the
Respondents breached an undertaking and engaged in misleading or deceptive
conduct and/or tortious
deceit which caused loss and damage to the Applicant.
The Applicant seeks declarations, permanent injunctions, delivery up of
confidential
information, damages, an account of profits, interest and costs.
The Respondents oppose the making of declarations and granting the
relief being
sought by the Applicant.
June 2024 Application sought “forensic imaging and access orders”
pursuant to
Federal Court Rules 2011
Respondents opposed the scope of the orders sought.
were made on 13 June 2024 listing the June 2024 Application for interlocutory
hearing and requiring the filing of materials.
At the request of the parties
Orders amending the timetabling for filing were made on 28 June 2024 and 18 July
1 August 2024 at 8:49pm my Chambers received a Minute of Proposed Consent Orders
from the parties (
). I was not minded to make orders in Chambers in
the form proposed by the parties. The Minute was unsatisfactory in that a
declaration
as required by rule 14.02 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court
of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Rules) 2021
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
) had not been made and related to a
timeline for dealing with “proposed categories of discovery”, and
simply adjourned
the June 2024 Application.
the interlocutory hearing on 2 August 2024 I sought submissions as to why I
should make orders as proposed in the Minute. After
hearing submissions I made a
declaration that it was appropriate in the administration of justice to allow
discovery in these proceedings.
I made Orders referring the issue of discovery
to a Registrar of this Court for a case management hearing, if necessary, on a
to be fixed by the Registrar and that the June 2024 Application be
adjourned to a date to be fixed for further directions.
Court received no correspondence from the parties regarding any outstanding
issues of discovery, no request was made for a case
management hearing before a
registrar to deal with any outstanding issues regarding discovery and no further
material was filed by
the parties. The June 2024 Application remained
the June 2024 Application remained on foot, and the Court’s overarching
purpose to facilitate the just resolution of disputes
according to law as
quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible, on 29 August 2024 I listed
the June 2024 Application for
a case management hearing on 26 September
23 September 2024 the Respondents filed an Application in a Proceeding seeking
to amend their Defence, by withdrawing admissions.
This was programmed at the
case management hearing and listed for an interlocutory hearing on 16 December
substantive matter has been before the Court four times since proceedings
commenced with Orders made on twelve occasions. The
matter has not been referred
to mediation and no evidence has been filed other than evidence which relates to
interlocutory skirmishes
between the parties.
COSTS APPLICATION
1.04 of the GFL Rules and s 190(2) of the FCFCOA Act deal with this
Court’s overarching purpose. Importantly the GFL Rules
and the FCFCOA Act
require the facilitation of the just resolution of disputes as quickly,
inexpensively and efficiently as
Further in giving effect
to the overarching purposes the parties must avoid undue delay, expense and
technicality.
Importantly, the
objectives of the FCFCOA Act includes the efficient disposal of the
Court’s overall caseload and the disposal
of all proceedings in a timely
22.02 of the GFL Rules relevantly provides:
Order for costs
(1) An application for an order for costs may be made:
(a) at any stage in a proceeding; or
(b) within 28 days after a final decree or order is made; or
(c) within any further time allowed by the Court.
(2) In making an order for costs in a proceeding, the Court may:
(a) set the amount of the costs; or
(b) set the method by which the costs are to be calculated; or
(c) refer the costs for taxation under
Federal Court Rules
(d) set a time for payment of the costs, which may be before the proceeding is
GFL Rules further provide at rules 22.04 and 22.09 respectively:
22.04 Costs reserved
If the costs of a motion, application or other proceeding are reserved, the
costs reserved follow the event unless the Court otherwise
22.09 Costs and disbursements
Unless the Court otherwise orders, a party entitled to costs in a general
federal law proceeding (other than a proceeding to which
Bankruptcy Act
applies) is entitled to:
(a) costs in accordance with Schedule 2; and
(b) disbursements properly incurred.
orders operate to compensate a successful party, rather than punish an
unsuccessful party where costs follow the event. An award
of costs requires
consideration of whether the party that is successful be permitted to recover so
much of its costs as are reasonably
incurred. The just resolution of disputes
does not necessarily require that a successful party recover all of its costs
and disbursements.
It is within the discretion of the Court to determine the
assessment of costs in the circumstances of the matter having regard to
objectives and overarching purpose of the Court.
test as to whether indemnity costs should be awarded is whether the justice of
the case might so require or whether there exists
some special or unusual
feature of the case to justice for the Court in departing from the ordinary
Australian and International Pilots Association v Qantas Airways
[2007] FCA 879.
I am of the view that this is not the type of case
where an award of indemnity costs is appropriate.
2 of Part 1 of the GFL Rules provides for costs for general federal law
proceedings other than migration proceedings. It
is this scale of costs that
will apply to any cost award that I might make with respect to the application
The Respondents’ case
Respondents relied upon written submissions filed 3 October 2024 and reply
submissions filed 15 October 2024. The Respondents
seek an award of costs on a
party and party basis or alternatively on an indemnity basis because the June
2024 Application:
(a) Resulted in both parties incurring significant and unnecessary costs.
(b) Wasted the Court’s time.
(c) Was futile.
(d) Was unnecessary.
(e) Constituted the Applicant acting unreasonably; and
(f) The Applicant’s “eleventh hour decision” not to pursue the
June 2024 Application supports the premise that
the application should not have
been brought in the first place.
Respondents submitted that they undertook their own “pragmatic”
imaging process once it was determined, on 27 May
2024, that that there could be
information on devices that was relevant to the proceedings and the Applicant
was well aware that
the imaging had taken place and that this process had been
undertaken for, among other reasons, to avoid the need for a foreshadowed
application for forensic imaging by the Applicant.
12 June 2024, five days after the June 2024 Application was made, the
Respondents’ Solicitors emailed the Applicant’s
Solicitors proposing
that the parties should proceed with a process of and timetable for discovery
and that having regard to comments
on Judge Baird at a case management hearing
on 7 May 2024 it was appropriate for a process of discovery to occur before the
put on their evidence.
Respondents submitted at the hearing on 2 August 2024 and at the case management
hearing on 26 September 2024 that the June 2024
Application was premature and
that the appropriate course to be taken by the parties was to engage in
response to submissions made by the Applicant with respect to this costs
application, the Respondents assert that they:
(a) Did not, on 13 October 2023, represent to the Applicant that “no
relevant documents” existed but rather stated that
the Respondents’
solicitors had not at that stage identified any relevant documents in the
possession of the Respondents which
evidenced the conduct complained of; and
(b) Any new forensic imaging application made by the Applicant after discovery
would not be the same as the June 2024 Application
as the parameters of such
application would be narrowed by the discovery process.
The Applicant’s case
Applicant relied upon written submissions filed 10 October 2024. The Applicant
contended that costs should be in the cause or
alternatively reserved.
Applicant referred to s 214(3) of the FCFCOA Act and the authority that the
Court should exercise its discretion judicially not
arbitrarily or capriciously:
FSJ18 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCA 433
. The Applicant also pointed to
Re Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
[1997] HCA 6
(1997) 186 CLR 622
for the principle that where the Court has not determined an application, it
does not embark on a mini-trial of the issues
and it would only make an adverse
costs order if one of the parties acted unreasonably.
Applicant submitted that:
(a) The June 2024
Application was not heard or determined by this Court;
rather, the Applicant agreed to dismissal the of the Application, proposed
the Court, knowing it could re-lodge the same application later.
Unreasonableness is therefore absent.
(b) The Respondents knew that the June 2024
Application was predicated on
the Respondents’ assertions that they had no relevant documents. Pursuing
discovery in the situation
would have had no utility. This Court held the same
view, being reluctant to make any discovery order without a declaration as to
its necessity. The Respondents implicitly accepted this by agreeing to forensic
imaging orders and undertook their own imaging in
the face of the June 2024
Application.
(c) Once the Respondents changed their position on the existence of documents,
in late July 2024, the Applicant acted reasonably
in agreeing to pursue
discovery. That decision was made to avoid unnecessary costs, once circumstances
had changed. It is wrong for
the Respondents to seek to punish the Applicant for
(d) Fourth, a costs order is premature. The Applicant has been permitted to file
an identical application to its June 2024
Application, subject to how the
discovery dispute has been determined. An adverse cost order now would need to
be re-opened if this
occurs. I do not accept this submission any new application
for forensic examination will be as a matter of logic narrowed by the
DETERMINATION
Should costs be awarded?
the case management hearing on 26 September 2024 the proposal, by consent, with
respect to the June 2024 Application was that it
be adjourned again to an
uncertain date in the future. Such a proposal was contrary to the Court’s
overarching purpose, this
application had been extant since June, affidavits and
submissions had been filed by both parties, there had been undue delay and
expense to both parties involved, the dispute required just resolution in these
circumstances. I advised the parties that I was unwilling
to adjourn the June
2024 Application and the matter could either be set down for hearing or
was the Applicant’s application, and it elected to have it dismissed with
the consent of the Respondents rather than have
it set down for hearing. The
Applicant described this as them “agreeing” to the dismissal, which
in its submission could
not be considered unreasonable conduct. I reject this
submission. I agree with the submission of the Respondents that the Applicant
should never have bought this application or withdrawn it in circumstances where
(a) The Respondents were prepared to consent to forensic imaging orders for the
preservation of evidence;
(b) The Respondents undertook a forensic imaging process;
(c) The Respondents provided a short draft minute of orders on 12 June 2024
regarding discovery being the next appropriate step;
(d) The Applicant agreed on 31 July 2024 that discovery was in fact the
appropriate next step two days prior to the listed date for
hearing of the June
2024 Application in circumstances where both parties had filed affidavit
material and submissions.
conduct of the Applicant has caused the Respondents to incur unnecessary costs
in defending the June 2024 Application and has
wasted Court time. In these
circumstances an award of costs to compensate the Respondents is
appropriate.
wish to make the following observation regarding the conduct of the proceeding
before me: discovery is not as of right in this Court.
The Court has an
expectation that the parties and their legal practitioners will genuinely engage
in an informal process prior to
troubling the Court with applications. The
parties to this proceeding and their legal advisers should keep this in the
of their mind.
reject the argument made by the Applicant that the same forensic imaging
application may be filed after discovery is complete. It
begs belief that where
the parties have genuinely engaged in informal and formal discovery that the
same or identical application
as the June 2024 Application could or would be
filed. As a matter of logic the scope of any application would be narrowed by
and a new supporting affidavit and submissions would have to be
already stated, this is not a matter where indemnity costs are appropriate. I
will order costs on scale in accordance with Schedule
2. Those costs will be
limited to the costs of preparation and filing of affidavits and submissions in
accordance with the Orders
of Judge Baird made on 13 June 2024 and the
appearance on 2 August 2024.
parties had to prepare and file material for the Interlocutory Hearing listed on
2 August 2024 pursuant to Orders. Senior Counsel
and Counsel were briefed and
appeared at the Interlocutory Hearing. The provision of the consent orders was
very late (8:49pm) the
night before the Interlocutory Hearing and not in a
satisfactory form necessitated the matter being called on in any event on 2
will not make an order for costs with respect to the appearance on 26 September
2024 as the Respondents’ filed their own application
in a proceeding which
was also listed on 26 September together with the June 2024 Application for the
purposes of case management
and an appearance was required in any event.
will be made
accordingly.
I certify that the preceding thirty-four (34)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 29 November 2024
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Rules) 2021
), r 1.04(1) and
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act
GFL Rules, r 1.04(2)
and FCFCOA Act, ss 190(2)(b) and
FCFCOA Act, ss 190(c) and
RTF format (395 KB)
Signed PDF/A format