1311504 [2015] RRTA 299 (27 May 2015)
[2015] RRTA 299
(27 May 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
Afghanistan
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Gabrielle Cullen
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the
direction that the applicant satisfies s.36(2)(a) of the Migration Act.
Statement made on 27 May 2015 at
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to
section 431(2)
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
applicant, a citizen of Afghanistan, originally from [District 1], claims to
fear return to Afghanistan as he is a Hazara and
Shia, as a person perceived to
be spying on the government and as he is a failed asylum seeker from the west.
applicant departed Afghanistan for Pakistan in 2009, then travelled to Iran and
lived there until the middle of 2011 when he travelled
lived in Pakistan from mid-2011 until his departure to Australia in
approximately February 2012 and arrived
in Australia by boat [in] June 2012. His
wife and child reside in Pakistan. He claims his [minor] nephews are also
dependent upon
him as his brother has died.
claims while working for [Mr A], a Pashtu, two Taliban Mullahs were looking at
him as they believed he was a government spy. He
claims two days later they
opened fire on him and as a result he fled Afghanistan with his family. He
claims since his departure
he has heard that [a certain person], a Pashtu has
been asking as to his whereabouts.
March 2013 the applicant was interviewed by the Department. The Tribunal has
listened to the tape of that interview and where
relevant the evidence from that
interview appears in this decision. The delegate refused to grant the visa [in]
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 27 May 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments and where relevant the evidence from
that hearing appears in
this decision. The applicant was assisted by an interpreter in the Hazaragi and
English languages. His registered
migration agent attended the hearing.
issues to be considered in this case are as follows.
Is the applicant
credible as to his claim to be a citizen of Afghanistan?
Does he have a
right to enter and reside in any other country?
Is the applicant
credible as to his claims?
Does he have a
well-founded fear of persecution in relation to Uruzgan?
protection available to him?
Is it reasonable
for him to relocate to Kabul or any other area in
Afghanistan?
RELEVANT LAW
criteria for a protection visa are set out in
of the Act and Schedule 2 to
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). An applicant for the visa must
meet one of the alternative criteria in s.36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c). That is,
the applicant is either a person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the ‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other
‘complementary protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same
family unit as such a person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same
Refugee criterion
36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant
for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the Minister is
satisfied Australia has protection obligations under the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status
of Refugees as amended by the 1967 Protocol relating to
the Status of Refugees (together, the Refugees Convention, or the Convention).
is a party to the Refugees Convention and generally speaking, has protection
obligations in respect of people who are refugees
as defined in Article 1 of the
Convention. Article 1A(2) relevantly defines a refugee as any person
owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group
or political opinion, is
outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is
unwilling to avail himself
of the protection of that country; or who, not having
a nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence,
unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to
91R and 91S of the Act qualify some aspects of Article 1A(2) for the purposes of
the application of the Act and the Regulations
to a particular person.
are four key elements to the Convention definition. First, an applicant must be
outside his or her country.
an applicant must fear persecution. Under s.91R(1) of the Act persecution must
involve ‘serious harm’ to the applicant
(s.91R(1)(b)), and
systematic and discriminatory conduct (s.91R(1)(c)). Examples of ‘serious
harm’ are set out in s.91R(2)
of the Act. The High Court has explained
that persecution may be directed against a person as an individual or as a
member of a group.
The persecution must have an official quality, in the sense
that it is official, or officially tolerated or uncontrollable by the
authorities of the country of nationality. However, the threat of harm need not
be the product of government policy; it may be enough
that the government has
failed or is unable to protect the applicant from persecution.
persecution implies an element of motivation on the part of those who persecute
for the infliction of harm. People are persecuted
for something perceived about
them or attributed to them by their persecutors.
the persecution which the applicant fears must be for one or more of the reasons
enumerated in the Convention definition -
race, religion, nationality,
membership of a particular social group or political opinion. The phrase
‘for reasons of’
serves to identify the motivation for the
infliction of the persecution. The persecution feared need not be
attributable to a Convention reason. However, persecution for multiple
motivations will not satisfy the relevant test unless a Convention
reasons constitute at least the essential and significant motivation for the
persecution feared: s.91R(1)(a) of the Act.
an applicant’s fear of persecution for a Convention reason must be a
‘well-founded’ fear. This adds an objective
requirement to the
requirement that an applicant must in fact hold such a fear. A person has a
‘well-founded fear’ of
persecution under the Convention if they have
genuine fear founded upon a ‘real chance’ of being persecuted for a
stipulated reason. A ‘real chance’ is one that is not
remote or insubstantial or a far-fetched possibility. A person
well-founded fear of persecution even though the possibility of the persecution
occurring is well below 50 per cent.
addition, an applicant must be unable, or unwilling because of his or her fear,
to avail himself or herself of the protection of
his or her country or countries
of nationality or, if stateless, unable, or unwilling because of his or her
fear, to return to his
or her country of former habitual residence. The
expression ‘the protection of that country’ in the second limb of
1A(2) is concerned with external or diplomatic protection extended to
citizens abroad. Internal protection is nevertheless relevant
to the first limb
of the definition, in particular to whether a fear is well-founded and whether
the conduct giving rise to the fear
is persecution.
an applicant is a person in respect of whom Australia has protection obligations
is to be assessed upon the facts as they
exist when the decision is made and
requires a consideration of the matter in relation to the reasonably foreseeable
Complementary protection criterion
a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s.36(2)(a), he or she may
nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant of
a protection visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the
being removed from Australia to a receiving country, there is a real
risk that he or she will suffer significant harm: s.36(2)(aa)
complementary protection criterion’).
‘Significant
harm’ for these purposes is exhaustively defined in s.36(2A): s.5(1). A
person will suffer significant harm
if he or she will be arbitrarily deprived of
their life; or the death penalty will be carried out on the person; or the
person will
be subjected to torture; or to cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment; or to degrading treatment or punishment. ‘Cruel or
treatment or punishment’, ‘degrading treatment or punishment’,
and ‘torture’, are further defined
in s.5(1) of the Act.
are certain circumstances in which there is taken not to be a real risk that an
applicant will suffer significant harm in a
country. These arise where it would
be reasonable for the applicant to relocate to an area of the country where
there would not be
a real risk that the applicant will suffer significant harm;
where the applicant could obtain, from an authority of the country,
such that there would not be a real risk that the applicant will suffer
significant harm; or where the real risk is one
faced by the population of the
country generally and is not faced by the applicant personally: s.36(2B) of the
Section 499 Ministerial Direction
accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the Act, the
Tribunal is required to take account of policy guidelines
prepared by the
Department of Immigration –PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian - Complementary
Protection Guidelines and PAM3 Refugee
and humanitarian - Refugee Law Guidelines
– and any country information assessment prepared by the Department of
Foreign Affairs
and Trade expressly for protection status determination
purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the decision under
consideration.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
Tribunal has before it the Department’s file relating to the applicant.
The Tribunal also has had regard to the material
referred to in the
delegate’s decision, and other material available to it from a range of
sources. This includes, but is not
limited to, the following.
The protection
visa application of the applicant dated [in] November 2012, including the
applicant’s statutory declaration as
to his claims and identity
Oral evidence of
the applicant provided at the Department interview [in] March 2013 and at the
Tribunal hearing on 27 May 2015.
provided at the entry interview as outlined in the written notes of the
interview dated [in] July 2012.
Submissions from
the applicant’s representative made at the Department interview and
Tribunal hearing.
submissions from the applicant’s representative received 21 May 2015,
including a copy of a letter being distributed
by ISIS in Afghanistan and
attached country information.
Department of
Immigration – PAM3 Refugee and Humanitarian – Complementary
Protection Guidelines and PAM3 Refugee and Humanitarian
– Refugee Law
Guidelines.
the reasons that follow, the Tribunal finds that the applicant has a
well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason.
applicant credible as to his claim to be a citizen of Afghanistan?
the basis of the applicant’s consistent evidence to the department and
before me as to where he is from in Afghanistan, I
accept that the applicant was
born in Afghanistan and is a citizen of that country and lived, as he claimed,
in [District 1], a district
of Uruzgan province. The applicant was also able to
provide information on the area he lived, consistent with the AIMS map
1] District” of January 2004. In making this finding, I
have also taken into consideration that during the entry interview,
Department interview and at the Tribunal hearing the applicant spoke fluent
Hazaragi, which is one of the main languages spoken
in Afghanistan.
therefore find that as a citizen of Afghanistan his claims should be assessed
against that country and that his home area in Afghanistan
is [District 1],
Uruzgan Province.
Does he have a right to enter and reside in any
other country?
accept the applicant lived in Iran from approximately 2009 until mid-2011, as he
has been consistent in this evidence to both the
Department and Tribunal.
Despite having lived in Iran for this length of time, I accept on the basis of
independent country
information
Afghans without a valid passport and visa, regardless of prior length of stay,
cannot enter Iran legally and would be subject
to forcible return to
Afghanistan. As there is no evidence to accept the applicant has such a visa, I
find that he does not have
a right to enter and reside in Iran in terms of
– (5) of the
Migration Act
accept that the applicant lived in Pakistan for a short time in 2009 and from
mid-2011 until he departed for Australia in February
2012. Despite having lived
in Pakistan for this period of time and his wife and children continuing to
reside there, I accept on
the basis of independent country information,
outlined above, and the applicant’s own consistent evidence that he lived
as a refugee and not a citizen, his family do not live there as citizens
or with permits, that Afghans without a valid passport and
visa, regardless of
prior length of stay, cannot enter Pakistan legally and would be subject to
no evidence to accept the applicant has such
a visa, I find that he does not have a right to enter and reside in Pakistan in
– (5) of the
Migration Act
therefore find he does not have a right to enter and reside in any other country
in terms of
– (5) of the
Migration Act
, other than
Afghanistan.
Is the applicant credible as to his claims?
to the applicant’s consistent evidence between the Department and
Tribunal, particularly at the interview and hearing and
his ability to provide
detail about the matters below when asked, I accept the following to be true.
The applicant is
Hazara and Shia. As to his religion and ethnicity, he has been consistent at all
stages of the process. He further
has been interviewed in Hazaragi at the
Department interview and at the Tribunal hearing. As Hazaragi is the language of
the Hazaras,
this adds to my finding.
The applicant
was born in Uruzgan Province in [year] and lived there until 2009 when he left
to travel to Pakistan, then lived in
Iran until mid-2011, returned with his
family to live in Pakistan and departed from there in February 2012 to travel to
He is married
and his wife and [child] live in Pakistan and are dependent upon him. His
[minor] nephews are also dependent upon him.
It accepts his evidence that he
continues to send money to them.
He undertook
[number] years religious education from [year] to [year].
farming on the family land from 1996 to 2009 and worked as a [occupation] in
[industry] until 2009 in Afghanistan, and worked
in [industry] in Iran and
undertook any work he could find in Pakistan.
His [siblings]
have fled to Pakistan and Iran and there are no relatives living in his home
area, or anywhere else in Afghanistan
to his claims that he was targeted while working for [Mr A], I am of the view
that while he faced some difficulties as a Hazara
and Shia working for a Pashtun
in a Pashtun area, he has embellished the severity of the situation and that
they are, six years on
still personally interested in him as they suspect him of
being a government spy.
therefore do not accept were he to return to Afghanistan he would be personally
known to the Taliban or face any difficulties resulting
from the incident he
claims led him to leave Afghanistan.
Does he have a well-founded
fear of persecution in relation to Uruzgan?
issue of whether persons of Hazara ethnicity and Shia religion are per se at
risk in Afghanistan for reason of their ethnicity
and religion is a complicated
assessed that Hazaras “are not currently at any
greater risk of violence than other ethnic groups in Afghanistan” but
[t]he security situation in Afghanistan remains fluid and varies from district
to district within individual provinces”,
noting that “any
categorical assessment on the security in a particular area could be rendered
inaccurate.”
a somewhat analogous assessment the Department’s 2015 COIS Paper on
Afghanistan states (with the internal reference footnoted
Although the Taliban leadership and the group as a whole has
not been anti-Shia or anti-Hazara, the sporadic killings of Hazaras in
regions since 2001 seems to indicate that a small number of Taliban commanders
in various parts of Afghanistan do hold either
anti-Shia or anti-Hazara views.
The Taliban is made up of individuals with a wide range of motivations –
some join for religious,
political or ideological reasons, others join for
financial reasons, others to solve local problems or pursue personal causes,
as revenge, and yet others are criminals who use the cover of the movement
to prey on the
population.
Biljert states: ‘The variety within the Taliban movement also illustrates
that the movement has a spectrum of enemies,
and that not all Taliban fighters
will attack the whole
UNHCR Guidelines for Assessing the International protection needs of
Asylum Seekers from Afghanistan
indicate that being a Hazara Shia does not
automatically attract serous levels of harm on ethnicity alone, but that each
to be assessed individually with other factors. The Guidelines note
that persons may be at risk because of their ethnicity in areas
where they do
not constitute an ethnic majority depending on the individual circumstances of
the case. The Guidelines note that the
relevant considerations include the
relative power position of the ethnic group in the applicant’s area of
origin and the history
of inter-ethnic relations in that area. The Guidelines
note that consideration should also be given to whether the person exhibits
other risk factors outlined in the Guidelines. They have identified a number of
groups as being at risk of persecution, including
those supportive or perceived
to be supportive of the government or international forces.
indicate that Uruzgan province is predominately comprised of ethnic Pashtun
advised that “Uruzgan is predominantly
2009 report by the Liaison Office (TLO), an Afghan non-government organisation,
provides a demographic chart of Uruzgan which indicates
that the ethnic
demography of province is 91% Pashtun tribes and 8% Hazaras, with the remaining
1% comprised of Sayed, Quraish and
report by the Afghan Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development states
that members of the nomadic Kuchi ethnic group
also reside in Uruzgan province
information before the Tribunal indicates that Uruzgan is one of the most
volatile provinces in Afghanistan. In its March 2014
‘Country Information
Report – Afghanistan’, DFAT
There are many areas of the country contested by insurgent forces
and no part of the country can be considered totally free from conflict-related
violence. The situation remains fluid and any categorical assessment on the
security in a particular area could be rendered quickly
inaccurate. Although
this list is not exhaustive, contested areas are mainly in the south (including
in parts of Helmand, Kandahar,
Uruzgan and Zabul) and east of the country
(including in parts of Ghazni, Paktika, Khost, Paktia, Nangarhar, Kunar and
Insurgents are also present in areas of western, central and northern
2014 DFAT provided this assessment for Hazaras in Uruzgan:
DFAT assesses that Hazara minorities living in Pashtun-majority areas in
Uruzgan, Helmand and Kandahar are less safe than those living
in Kabul or
Hazara-majority areas of Hazarajat. These Pashtun-majority areas typically
experience higher levels of violence, which
affects all Afghanistan. Afghans in
these areas, including Hazaras. Hazaras living in these areas typically avoid
travel outside
their immediate communities.
March 2015, the Department’s
Country of Origin Information Service,
issued its report ‘Afghanistan: Hazara Issues Paper’, which provides
an analysis of desk-top research on recent reports
relating to the security and
human rights issues facing the Hazara community in various parts of Afghanistan,
and included the following
information about the situation for Hazaras in
Uruzgan is a mainly Pashtun province, as all its Hazara districts
went to the new Daykundi Province in 2004. Today only Gizab and
Khas Uruzgan
districts have Hazara minorities – about 25% in each case ... The security
situation for Hazaras in Uruzgan province
is more dangerous than in other
provinces and Hazaras have been targeted by insurgents because of their
paper indicated the security situation for Hazaras in Uruzgan province is more
dangerous than in other provinces and Hazaras
have been targeted by insurgents
because of their ethnicity.
Department’s
Country of Origin Information Service
report provided the following information:
The Liaison
, an independent non-government organisation, provided an analysis in
of Uruzgan following a four year assessment of the province
from 2006 –
2010. It specifically highlights Uruzgan Khas as having ‘greater problems
with insecurity’ and to be
losing ground to the many insurgent groups in
the district. In June 2010, 11 Hazara males were discovered beheaded in Khas
According to the 2011
United States Commission on International
Religious Freedom Report,
police officials stated that they were killed by
the Taliban ‘because they were ethnic Hazaras and Shiite Muslims.’
Pajhwok Afghan News
reported that the bodies were ‘found in the
Baghchar area of Khas Uruzgan district, where a notorious Taliban commander,
Khan, was killed a month back during a clash with coalition troops’.
Other reports indicate the Hazaras were killed to avenge
the gruesome killing of
seven Pashtuns by a notorious Hazara commander from Ghazni province.
In December 2011 the
Wakht News Agency
reported that the local police
commander and local police in the district of Khas Uruzgan were actively helping
the Taliban to kill
Hazaras and seize their lands. Reports indicate that
confrontations continued in 2013-4 between the Hazara Afghan Local Police (ALP)
units and the Taleban. In May 2014, a group of 50 Afghan Local Police (ALP)
members fled from Khas Uruzgan to ethnically-Hazara
their commander was summoned to the provincial capital for questioning over his
In September 2010, the
Hazaristan Times
published an article
describing mass displacement forced migration of Hazaras in Uruzgan due to
insecurity and also made comment
on the limited amount of media attention
surrounding the events against the Hazara in the area. The displacement of
Hazaras was also
noted in the
Afghanistan Protection Cluster 2010 Report
published by the United Nations Office for the Co-ordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. The report provided data in relation to displacement
(note, not only
the displacement of Hazara) from Uruzgan Khas in April 2009 and June 2010
illustrating the insecurity in the area.
The report stated that in April 2009,
778 families originally from districts of Uruzgan (Khas Uruzgan, Chora and Char
been displaced and in June 2010, 277 Families or 1,939 individuals
were displaced to Uruzgan District Centre from Khas Uruzgan due
to insecurity.
The report also stated that in June 2010 the area was inaccessible for
government and NGOS ‘due to the conflict
one view, the available information indicates that, for most of the past decade,
the primary motivation of the Taliban and other
armed militants in attacking
people traveling on the roads in between Kabul and Kandahar, and in and out of
Uruzgan, appears to be
political, as it has mostly been targeted against persons
connected to or associated with the Afghan government or international
or simply criminal, in that it involves robbery, extortion, kidnapping and
ransom. However, the sources consulted by the
Tribunal agree that the Taliban
is predominantly Sunni and Pashtun, and that the Taliban and Pashtuns have a
historical hatred of
Hazaras based on ethnicity and religious sect, among other
things. Despite the gains made by some Hazaras in recent years, there
evidence to indicate that the entrenched enmity towards Hazaras by the Taliban
and Pashtuns has diminished, such that Hazaras
would not be at some risk of harm
for reason of their ethnicity or religion under an ascendant Taliban. More
recent reports indicate
that the Taliban and other armed insurgents, including
groups affiliated with Islamic State, have increasingly targeted Hazaras on
roads in and around Ghazni, Uruzgan and Zabul, and subjected them to incidents
involving serious harm. For example, the Department’s
of Origin Information Service
report includes a list of reported attacks on
Hazaras on the roads in Afghanistan, including the following attacks in 2014 and
March 2015 - A bus was stopped travelling between Ghazni and Jaghouri. Ten
Hazaras were abducted. After some hours nine were released
with one continuing
to be held at the time of writing. Unconfirmed reports believe the remaining
captive worked for the government.
23 February 2015 - Masked men stopped two vehicles traveling on the highway
near Zabul and identified and abducted 30 Hazaras. The
Hazaras were reported to
be Afghan refugees returning from Iran. Different reports identified the
abductors as possibly foreign and
either members of the Taliban or ISIS. As of
the time of publication, the men had not been found, although one Hazara escaped
25 February.
20 January 2015 - Eight or nine Hazaras were killed in Gilan district in
Ghazni when their van was exploded by a remote controlled
bomb. The Hazaras were
travelling from Kabul to Jaghori district. The pro-Hazara source
Kabul Press
claimed that ‘These victims were civilians who were going from Kabul
to Jaghori, did not work for any government offices and
did not have any
connection with any of Afghanistan’s political parties’, though
other sources do not give such details
20 September 2014 - Australian-Afghan Sayed Habib Musawi, a Hazara from
Jaghori district in Ghazni, was reportedly killed by the Taliban
travelling from Kabul to his home district of Jaghori. He was reportedly killed
as he was an Australian, but the fact that
he was also a Hazara may have been
16 September 2014 - Zainullah Naseri, a Hazara from Jaghori district in
Ghazni, was reportedly abducted and tortured by the Taliban
for two days in
Ghazni province after being deported from Australia. He escaped to Jaghori then
returned to Kabul. DFAT was unable
to confirm the report.
25 July 2014 - Suspected Taliban fighters halted two minibuses in Lal-o-Sar
Jangal district in the western province of Ghor, identified
14 Shia Hazara
passengers, including three women and a child, bound their hands, then shot them
dead by the side of the road.
28 June 2014 - The Taliban killed (Hazara sources say ‘beheaded’)
between 14 and 17 people, usually described as policemen
or ex-policemen, in
Gizab district of Uruzgan Province. This incident was little reported and
reports do not give much detail. According
to Hazara sources, the victims were
Hazaras, mostly students and workers, though other sources do not mention their
ethnicity. Other
information tends to support the assertion that the victims
were Hazaras: Hazaras comprised a disproportionately large part of the
force in Uruzgan and particularly in Gizab, according to a 2010 NGO report on
Uruzgan, and one of the reports mentions that
one of the victims was the nephew
of Governor Amanollah Timuri who is elsewhere reported to be a Hazara.
noted, 31 Hazaras travelling by bus on the highway from Kandahar to Kabul
were abducted in Zabul Province on 23 February 2015.
The armed men who carried
out the abductions stopped the vehicles in which people were travelling and
checked their identity cards
before abducting the Hazara
passengers.
Taliban denied involvement in the kidnapping and, as referred to above, there
have been suggestions that Islamic State was
responsible.
Reports suggest that traffic on the highway from Kabul to Kandahar has decreased
by a half as a result of this and other
Further, on 15 March 2015 ten Hazaras were kidnapped in the Qarabagh district
while travelling from Kabul to Jaghori in two cars.
Reports suggest that this
was not an isolated
have been further reports of attacks on Hazaras on the roads around Ghazni,
Uruzgan and Zabul since the Department’s
paper was published in March
2015. According to media reports, six Hazaras were abducted by armed masked men
on the Herat-Farah
highway in Farah province on 16 March
Hazaras were abducted in Ghazni as they were travelling out of their home
district, and their headless bodies were found
in Malistan district on or about
15 April 2015.
in September 2014, a dual Afghan-Australian citizen who came to Australia by
boat in 2000, Sayed Habib Musawi, was abducted and
killed by the Taliban when he
was on his way back to Kabul after visiting relatives in his village in the
Jaghori district of Ghazni
According to the most detailed report the minibus in which he was travelling was
stopped by the Taliban in Larga, a village in the
Muqur district, and one of the
Taliban ordered him by name to get off the bus. Another passenger heard one of
the Taliban asking
him, ‘Did you come from Australia?’ They found
his wallet, which had an Australian flag design, and also his driver’s
licence and Medicare card. His body was subsequently found in the Qarabagh
However, the Department’s recent
Country of Origin Information
report indicates he was killed in the Jaghori
According to the most detailed Australian news report, although Mr Musawi
was a Hazara his family believe that he was killed because
he was an Australian
citizen. The news report quotes Bashi Habib, the head of the security forces in
Jaghori, as stating that the
fact that Mr Musawi was an Australian citizen was
reported to the Taliban by an informant in his area.
recent reports suggest that Hazaras have been targeted by the Islamic State in
Afghanistan, with a
New York Times
report suggesting that the Taliban are
adopting a new campaign of brutality towards Hazaras in order to
‘compete’ with
IS. The report details the kidnapping and beheading
of four Hazara farmers in Ajristan District of Ghazni Province [and] the murder
of six Hazaras kidnapped from Daykundi
regard to what might happen in the foreseeable future in Afghanistan, the
independent evidence before the Tribunal including
from United Nations
Secretary-General,
International Crisis
Institute for the Study of War
indicates a significant likelihood that, following the handover from
international to Afghan security forces in late 2014, the Taliban
will further
increase its power and control over most parts of the country. It is clear that
Afghanistan remains in a highly volatile
and unpredictable phase, and it appears
likely that insurgent activity will increase in the reasonably foreseeable
future, as the
Taliban seeks to expand its sphere of control. In light of the
widely pessimistic outlook for Afghanistan’s security situation,
Tribunal considers it prudent to adopt a cautious approach in making predictions
as to the relative safety for a person in the
applicant’s situation. As
the independent information demonstrates, areas once thought to be relatively
free of Taliban influence
may not necessarily be so in the future. Assessing
the risks to the applicant in such volatile and uncertain conditions is a
task. However, in the Tribunal’s view, the independent
information supports the adoption of a sceptical view towards the proposition
that the risk of harm to a person in the applicant’s circumstances in
[District 1] of Uruzgan is remote, and will continue
to be so in the reasonably
foreseeable future.
carefully considered the information and evidence before it, the Tribunal is
unable to dismiss the contention that the reason(s)
Hazaras have, in the recent
past, been subjected to serious harm in Uruzgan, is because of their race and
religion and an imputed
considering this issue the Tribunal has taken into account information which
indicates that, even if the main focus of Taliban
activity is directed against
perceived supporters or associates of the Afghan national government or the
international forces, Hazaras
are nevertheless differentially at increased risk
if they come to the attention of the Taliban in the course of such activity,
if it is primarily directed at different targets; moreover, some sources
suggest that Hazaras are perceived to be associated with
the government and the
West, or associated with government or Western
institutions.
Given the evidence about the historic enmity towards Hazaras in Afghanistan, and
the current targeting of Hazaras in both Afghanistan
and Pakistan for reasons of
their religion and ethnicity by Sunni fundamentalist groups linked with the
Taliban, the Tribunal considers
the weight of recent evidence indicates that, in
his individual circumstances, the applicant would face serious harm amounting to
persecution from the Taliban or some other Sunni insurgent group in the
reasonably foreseeable future for the essential and significant
reasons of his
race, religion and imputed political opinion, if he returned to his home
district of [District 1].
Tribunal considers that, in the event he returned to [District 1], there are a
number of features and attributes of his background
and characteristics that
would make the chance of him suffering serious harm. These include the fact he
has the typical Asiatic
physical features of a Hazara person, which clearly
identifies him as a Shi’a Muslim, as well as his extended period outside
Afghanistan, including three years in Australia, a coalition partner in the ISAF
forces that were stationed in Uruzgan between 2002
Importantly, he has no remaining family or relatives in [District 1]. In these
circumstances, in light of the indications that the
Taliban is present and
active in more than 80% of [District 1], the Tribunal is unable to make a
confident finding that the chance
of him coming to the adverse attention of the
Taliban, on either the roads into or out of [District 1], or inside the
district, is
remote or far-fetched, or that it is based on mere speculation,
and, accordingly, finds that there is a real chance of him suffering
harm in this way in the reasonably foreseeable future.
therefore, find that there is a real chance that the applicant will suffer
serious harm at the hands of the Taliban were he to
reasonably foreseeable future. I am satisfied he will be targeted because he is
a Hazara and Shia. I am
satisfied that the applicant will suffer persecution for
the essential and significant reasons of his ethnicity and religion. I am
satisfied that the harm he fears amounts to persecution in the context of
Section 91R(1)
given the Taliban’s and IS’s record of assaults,
violence and killings. I am satisfied that the persecution will involve
systematic and discriminatory conduct in that it will be directed at him in a
non-random way for the reasons outlined above.
has noted that the ability of the Afghan security forces to maintain effective
state protection outside of the major cities is
a source of concern in the
post-2014 environment. DFAT gave the following outline of state protection for
Hazaras in Afghanistan
in its March 2014 thematic report:
ongoing insurgency, particularly in the south and east of Afghanistan means that
the Government struggles to exercise effective
control over parts of the
country. As a result, the Government lacks the ability to adequately address
human rights issues, protect
vulnerable groups and prosecute human rights
violators in those areas.
Despite these challenges, DFAT assesses that the Government maintains
effective control over major urban areas—particularly
provincial capitals including Herat, Mazar-e-Sharif and Kandahar and the
majority of district centres.
Many Afghans, including Hazaras, have expressed their concern about security
in Afghanistan post-2014. In the absence of effective
state protection outside
of major urban areas, DFAT assesses that many local communities, including
Hazaras, maintain their own militias
to protect themselves from criminals and
insurgents.
its most recent ‘Eligibility Guidelines’, UNHCR notes that state
protection in Afghanistan is compromised by high levels
of corruption,
ineffective governance, a climate of impunity, lack of official impetus for the
transitional justice process, weak
rule of law and widespread reliance on
traditional dispute resolution mechanisms that do not comply with due process
also stated that ‘to the extent that the harm feared is from non-State
actors, State protection is on the whole not available
in Afghanistan’.
In view of the unstable security situation in Afghanistan and potential for
further deterioration in the
context of the impending draw-down and the likely
resurgence of the Taliban, the Tribunal finds that the applicant would not be
to access state protection from the serious harm he faces from the Taliban
and other armed militants.
view of these reports and the number of attacks that continue to occur the
Tribunal is not satisfied there is protection available
Tribunal has also considered whether or not it would be reasonable for the
applicant to relocate to another area of Afghanistan,
and considers that, in his
circumstances, Kabul is the only realistic option.
on the economic situation for Hazaras in Kabul are mixed. The
Department’s March 2015
Country of Origin Information Service
report provides a helpful presentation of a range of views and analyses.
Most commentators appear to agree that the overall socio-economic
situation for
Hazaras in Afghanistan has improved significantly, and that many Hazaras have
been able ‘embrace and create’
work and business opportunities in
Kabul. However, it is also stated that individual Hazaras’ experiences
differ greatly,
and that not all Hazaras have benefited from the increased
economic opportunities, that patronage and connections are still a critical
element in a person’s survival, and that the Hazaras are still described
as amongst the poorest communities in Afghanistan,
‘underclass’ of Hazaras present in Kabul. UNHCR has reported of the
widespread unemployment in Kabul that limit
the ability of a large number of
people to meet their basic needs. DFAT has also referred to unemployment being
widespread in Kabul
and underemployment common.
Guidelines and the recent DFAT ‘Thematic Report: Conditions in
Kabul’, advise that traditional extended family and
tribal community
structures are fundamentally important for successful
relocation.
DFAT and UNHCR stress that internally displaced Afghans rely on these networks
for their safety and economic survival, including
access to accommodation and an
adequate level of subsistence. DFAT assesses that a lack of financial resources
and lack of employment
opportunities are the greatest constraints on successful
internal relocation. They assess that this is exacerbated by Kabul’s
relatively high cost of living, particularly the cost of housing. They note that
relocation is generally more successful for single
men of working age. Returnees
generally have lower household incomes and higher rates of unemployment than
established community
members. Although DFAT assess that men of working age are
more likely to be able to return and reintegrate successfully, UNHCR has
highlighted the importance of employment skills. While the
Danish Refugee
has suggested that Hazaras relocating from the Hazarajat can and do
access support and assistance from a large community support
network, accessing
that support is dependent on having a contact point from an existing network,
which usually comes from the person’s
village or tribe, which the
applicant does not have. DFAT has also stated that internal relocation to urban
areas is more likely
to be successful for single men of working age but this is
not the situation for the applicant.
addition, even though reports indicate that Kabul is safer than other parts of
the country, there is evidence of a number of insurgent
attacks against
government institutions, political figures and Afghan National Security Forces,
as well as other security services
and international organisations. Though this
is not sufficient, in itself, to establish a real chance that the applicant
serious harm, the existence of these attacks and the danger that the
applicant may be caught up in them, contributes to the unreasonableness
relocation. Further, in the Tribunal’s view, the available information
indicates that it is reasonable to assume that increased
levels of insecurity
and instability throughout the country will cause further large-scale
displacements, with Kabul receiving increasing
numbers of new residents, placing
further pressure on the city’s already over-stretched infrastructure.
these circumstances, in light of the fact the applicant has no family or
relatives or known tribal or clan ties in Kabul, has
a wife, minor child and
[nephews] to support, with limited financial means and employment-related
skills, and limited education,
in the Tribunal’s view, the widespread
unemployment and high costs of living in Kabul, as well as the general lack of
in Kabul and poor living conditions, mean that in his particular
circumstances, relocation to Kabul is not a reasonable option for
the applicant.
regard to all the particular circumstances and in view of the available general
information before it the Tribunal is not satisfied
it is reasonable, in a
practicable sense, for the applicant to relocate to Kabul or anywhere else in
Afghanistan to avoid the harm
he fears. The Tribunal finds that the applicant
does not have a reasonable relocation option in
Afghanistan.
Refugee Criteria
the reasons given above the Tribunal is satisfied the applicant has a
well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason
in Afghanistan. The
Tribunal is satisfied the applicant does not have a right to enter and reside in
any other country therefore
he is not excluded from Australia’s protection
of the Act.
CONCLUDING PARAGRAPHS
Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant is a person in respect of whom
Australia has protection obligations under the Refugees
Convention. Therefore
the applicant satisfies the criterion set out in
s.36(2)(a).
Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the direction that the
applicant satisfies
Migration Act
Gabrielle Cullen
According to the
2009 UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection
Needs of Asylum Seekers from Afghanistan,
July 2009, p.62:
Afghans who depart Iran without specific permission and an exit visa would
not be able to legally re-enter or be returned to Iran
in the absence of both an
Afghan passport and an Iranian visa, regardless of prior legal and possibly
long-term stay, or even birth,
in Iran. Those Afghans who attempt to enter or
are returned without meeting these requirements may be subject to arrest,
and forcible return to Afghanistan.
DFAT Thematic Report: Hazaras in Afghanistan and Pakistan
, 26 March,
Bijlert, M 2009, ‘Unruly Commanders and Violent Power Struggles: Taliban
Networks in Uruzgan’ in A Giustozzi (ed),
Decoding the New Taliban:
Insights form the Afghan Field
, Colombia University Press, NY,
, COIS, 2015, “Afghanistan: Hazaras Issues Paper”,
March, p. 49.
DIAC Country Information Service 2010,
Country Information Report No. 10/34
– CIS Request No. AFG10334: Sayyed Hazara
(Sourced from DFAT advice of
16 June 2010), 16
DIAC Country
Information Service 2010, Country Information Report No. 10/34 – CIS
Request No. AFG10334: Sayyed Hazara, (Sourced
from DFAT advice of 16 June 2010),
Liaison Office 2009,
Three Years Later: A socio-political assessment of
Uruzgan Province from 2006 to 2009
, 18 September, NRC Handelsblad website,
http://www.nrc.nl/multimedia/archive/00250/TLO_Uruzgan_Assessm_250835a.pdf
Accessed 2 September
Ministry of
Rural Rehabilitation and Development 2007,
Uruzgan Provincial Profile
http://www.mrrd.gov.af/nabdp/Provincial%20Profiles/Uruzgan%20PDP%20Provincial%20profile.pdf
- Accessed 2 September 2010.
Information Report - Afghanistan’,
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade 2014,
DFAT Thematic Report: Hazaras
in Afghanistan and Pakistan
, 26 March,
‘Afghanistan: Hazara Issues Paper’,
Department of Immigration and
Border Protection, Country of Origin Information Service,
March 2015,
‘Afghanistan: Hazara Issues Paper’,
Department of Immigration
and Border Protection, Country of Origin Information Service,
March 2015,
stalks Afghan minorities after rare attacks’,
News24 -South Africa
17 March 2015; ‘Drivers explain how Hazara passengers were kidnapped in
Afghan south’,
, 24 February 2015.
‘Taliban deny hand in abduction of 30 Hazara men in Zabul; Khalili says
they are safe’,
Afghan Zariza
, 7 March 2015, CXBD6A0DE2428;
Frud Bezhan, ‘Mass Abduction Of Hazaras In Afghanistan Raises Fears Of
Islamic State’,
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL)
February 2015, CXBD6A0DE1904; Ali M. Latifi and Shashank Bengali, ‘Afghan
officials acknowledge Islamic State presence
in their country’,
Angeles Times
, 17 March 2015, CXBD6A0DE3139.
Newly Abducted Hazara Passengers Released’,
2015; ‘Protests in Ghazni Over 31 Hazara Hostages’,
, 17 March 2015; ‘Traffic on Kabul-Herat highway down by a
Pajhwok Afghan News, Afghanistan
, 18 March 2015.
free 9 kidnapped passengers in Ghazni’,
Pajhwok Afghan News
-Afghanistan
, 15 March 2015; ‘9 abducted civilians freed by kidnappers
in Ghazni’,
Khaama Press
, 15 March 2015.
‘Another 6 Hazara Passengers Abducted’,
(Afghanistan), 18 March 2015.
abducted Hazaras beheaded in Afghanistan: officials,’
The Express
(Pakistan), 17 April 2-15, available at
http://tribune.com.pk/story/871896/five-abducted-hazaras-beheaded-in-afghanistan-officials/
man killed by Taliban because he was Australian report’,
Morning Herald,
29 September 2014; ‘Son of Afghan-Australian killed by
Taliban denied refugee status’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
September 2014.
Abdul Karim
Hekmat, ‘Hazaras face death on return to Afghanistan’,
Saturday Paper,
8 November 2014.
‘Programme summary of Afghan Bost Radio news in Pashto, 28 Sep 14’,
BostNews (Bost Bastan)
, 28 September 2014, CX1B9ECAB7743;
‘Programme summary of Afghan Sharq TV news in Pashto, 28 Sep 14’,
Sharq Magazine
, 28 September 2014, CX1B9ECAB7744.
‘Taliban Are Said to Target Hazaras to Try to Match ISIS’
Brutality’,
New York Times
, 23 April 2015, available at
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/23/world/asia/taliban-are-said-to-target-hazaras-to-try-to-match-isis-brutality.html?_r=0
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and
security: report of the Secretary-General’,
UN General Assembly
December 2014, available at
http://www.refworld.org/docid/549808194.html
‘Afghanistan Annual Report 2014: Protection of Civilians in Armed
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
, 18 February 2015.
‘Afghanistan’s political transition’,
International Crisis
, 16 October 2014, available at
http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/regions/asia/south-asia/afghanistan/260-afghanistan-s-political-transition.aspx
‘Post-ISAF Afghanistan: The early months’,
, 6 May 2015, available at
http://www.brookings.edu/research/reports/2015/05/bdc-nato-afghanistan-event-report
William Maley ‘On the position of the Hazara Minority in
Afghanistan’, 7 December 2011; ‘Afghanistan:
Situation in Ghazni
Province - views of Member of Parliament’, DFAT, 15 July, 2010;
‘Failure of Security Transition?’,
Kabul Perspective
August 2012, available at
http://kabulperspective.wordpress.com/2012/08/15/failure-of-security-transition/
‘Thematic Report Afghanistan, Hazaras in Afghanistan and Pakistan’,
, 26 March 2014 at 3.40; ‘Afghanistan: Hazara Issues
Department of Immigration and Border Protection, Country of
Origin Information Service,
March 2015; Foschini, F,
The Social Wandering
of the Afghan Kuchis
, Afghanistan Analysts Network, 1 November 2013, p.19
available at
http://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/20131125_FFoschini-Kuchis.pdf
‘Australian soldiers pull out of Uruzgan province’,
16 December 2013, available at
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-12-16/australian-soldiers-pull-out-of-uruzgan-province/5159220
DFAT Thematic Report: Hazaras in Afghanistan and Pakistan
, 26 March,
‘Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs
of Asylum-Seekers from Afghanistan’,
, 6 August 2013, at p
‘Thematic Report: Conditions in Kabul’,
, 3 October
2014, at p 5-7; ‘Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International
Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from
Afghanistan’,
August 2013, p 72-75. See also Majidi, N., ‘Urban Returnees and
Internally Displaced Persons in Afghanistan’,
Middle East Institute
& Foundation pour la. Recherche Strategique,
25 January 2011, available
http://www.refugeecooperation.org/publications/
afghanistan/pdf/01_majidi.pdf
; Saito, Mamiko,
Dilemmas Between Borders, Experiences of Young Afghans Returning
“Home” From Pakistan and Iran
, AREU Synthesis Paper Series, July
2009, available at
http://www.areu.
org.af/index.php?option=com_docman&Itemid=&task=doc_download&gid=686
RTF format (235 KB)
Signed PDF/A format