D20-21\082 [2020] SCTA 191 (16 November 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER: D20-21\082
FILE NUMBER: 18-1316
The Complainant
The Trustee
JOINED PARTY
The Insurer
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
The Employer
CORRIGENDUM
Errors appear on page 2 (paragraph 6, item 1 and item 3) and page 23
(paragraph 87, item 1 and item 3) of the Review Determination
and Reasons dated
16 November 2020.
In each instance of item 1 delete the words “up until the date of this
determination” in the cited text and substitute
the date “22 July
As a result, item 2 is rendered otiose and deleted.
In each instance of new item 2 (formerly item 3) substitute the following:
“In respect of decision 1, s57 interest per the ICA
applies to each
monthly benefit payable, as from 21 September 2017 until 22 July 2019; s57
interest will then apply to that total
amount up until the date payment is made
to the Complainant”.
Thereafter the item numbering will recommence, i.e. item 3 (formerly item 4)
item 4 (formerly 5) and finally item 5 (formerly item
6) now references
“decisions 3 and 4”.
Lynda Purcell, Presiding Member
Date of Tribunal signature: 11 December 2020
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\082
FILE NUMBER : 18-1316
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
JOINED PARTY
The Insurer
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
The Employer
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(the Complaints Act) and held on 21 September 2020
Lynda Purcell,
Presiding Member
Dr Laurie Warfe,
DECISIONS UNDER REVIEW
decisions under review are as follows:
of the Insurer ceasing payment of the Complainant’s monthly Income
Protection (IP) benefit on the grounds he was no longer
totally disabled;
Insurer’s denial of the Complainant’s Total and Permanent
Disablement (TPD) claim; and
Trustee’s agreement in respect of same.
Insurer notified the Trustee by letters dated 16 February 2018, June 2018 and 31
August 2020
of its decisions.
Trustee notified the Complainant by letter dated 31 July 2018 of its
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal does not affirm the decisions of the Trustee and the Insurer.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal sets aside the decisions of the Trustee and Insurer and substitutes
other decisions as below:
Insurer is to recommence payment of the Complainant’s IP benefit, direct
to the Complainant’s nominated bank account,
as from 21 September 2017 up
until the date of this determination; decision 3 below also applies.
Thereafter,
the Insurer is to assess the Complainant’s entitlement to IP monthly
benefits in accordance with the relevant IP
policy terms.
respect of decision 1, s57 interest per the
Insurance Contracts Act 1984
(ICA) applies to each monthly benefit payable, as from 21 September 2017 up
until the date of this determination.
Insurer is to admit the Complainant’s TPD claim.
57 interest per the ICA applies to the TPD benefit as from 17 October 2017, the
date the Insurer advised the Complainant directly
of its decision, up until the
date the Insurer makes payment to the Trustee.
Trustee, on receipt of the Insurer’s payments by reference to decisions 4
and 5 above, is to promptly confirm the accuracy
of same, prior to remitting
payment to the Complainant.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
to s32 of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal requested submissions from the
Submissions
were received from the Complainant and the Insurer, with the Trustee relying on
material previously provided to the Tribunal.
submissions were exchanged, and responses were invited. All Parties responded.
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
electronic files provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant made a complaint that the decisions of the Trustee and the Insurer
were unfair or unreasonable for the reasons summarised
determination.
Complainant permanently ceased employment on 22 June 2013 as a result of
abdominal cutaneous nerve entrapment syndrome.
Complainant submitted a claim for IP benefits which was admitted by the Insurer
and monthly benefits of $3,478.09 were paid to
the Complainant from 22 July 2013
until 21 September 2017.
Complainant lodged a TPD claim on 2 April 2015.
Insurer considered the medical evidence, as bolstered by its surveillance
material, indicated the Complainant was no longer totally
disabled, hence it had
ceased payment of his monthly IP benefit in September 2017; further it
considered same entitled it to deny
his TPD claim. The Trustee eventually
advised the Complainant on 31 July 2018 that it agreed with the Insurer’s
Complainant disputes the Trustee’s and Insurer’s contentions in
these regards.
resolution sought by the Complainant is acceptance of his TPD claim and
re-commencement of payment of his monthly IP benefit.
Benefit in dispute
to the Insurer:
amount of the monthly IP benefit as of 21 September 2017 (being the last date
benefits were paid) was $3,478.09 per month; and
amount of the TPD benefit as at the date of claim was $347,287
Events not in dispute:
− The Complainant’s date of birth.
year the Complainant first consulted his GP about his illness.
− The month the Complainant was last
physically at work.
− The date the Complainant’s employment with
the Employer was terminated.
− The date the Insurer commenced payment of the IP
− The date the Complainant lodged a TPD claim.
September 2017
− The month the Insurer ceased payment of the IP
The date the Insurer notified the Complainant that it had
his TPD claim.
Tribunal does not consider any provisions of the trust deed are relevant to this
INSURANCE POLICY
Tribunal notes the Parties are in agreement the relevant insurance policy
definitions of ‘total disability’, applying
respectively to the
Complainant’s IP and TPD cover, are as paraphrased below:
– not working in the Complainant’s regular occupation, nor able to
perform one or more duties of that occupation necessary
to produce income.
– disabled to such an extent by illness/injury the Complainant was
unlikely ever again to be able to engage in any occupation
for which he was
suited by his education, training or experience.
Tribunal, having carefully examined the definition of ‘total
disability’ in the respective IP and TPD policies, agrees
paraphrasing accurately reflects the requirements of same.
THE COMPLAINANT’S EDUCATION, TRAINING or EXPERIENCE
Complainant left school at age 14 having attended a special needs school; his
reading ability is described as poor.
leaving school the Complainant has worked in a variety of laboring roles
including at a mill, abattoir, chicken farm and a glass
company. The Complainant
has also worked as a die setter and forklift driver.
2007 until 2013, the Complainant worked as a Traffic Controller and held a
Traffic Control license.
MEDICAL REPORTS
Complainant worked as a Traffic Controller with the Employer, and ceased work on
April 2013 as a result of abdominal cutaneous
nerve entrapment syndrome.
Insurer carried out surveillance of the Complainant in the course of the TPD
claim’s assessment process in which the Complainant
was reportedly
observed engaging in activities inconsistent with his claimed symptoms and
restrictions and, according to the Insurer,
showing clear contradiction to
medical reports obtained in the course of the TPD claim assessment.
perceived clear contradiction led the Insurer to question the validity of the
medical evidence before it and it therefore declined
the TPD claim and ceased
payment of IP benefits on the basis of the balance of all information available,
it did not believe the
Complainant satisfied the TPD ‘Any
Occupation’ definition of the TPD Policy, or the Total Disability
definition for the
large amount of documentation was presented to the Tribunal in relation to the
medical background and condition suffered by the
Complainant. All documents were
read but the following documents were considered to be most relevant to the
matter before the Tribunal;
they deal with the diagnosis, treatment and clinical
sequelae in relation to fitness for work regarding the Complainant’s
of abdominal pain due to abdominal cutaneous nerve entrapment
following relevant medical reports were provided to the Tribunal in this matter.
They are listed in chronological order:
Ongoing treating doctor’s statement by Dr RN, treating
general practitioner, to Insurer dated 30 July 2013 in respect of IP:
statement gives a diagnosis of chronic left hip pain and chronic abdominal pain
of uncertain cause. Treatment is listed as Lyrica
and Norspan patches.
statement includes a list of specific usual occupational duties the patient is
currently unable to perform and is listed as ‘usual
duties of a traffic
controller’. Additional statement includes ‘on strong medications
which affect any potential rehab
at present’.
Ongoing Treating Doctor’s Statement by Dr FC, treating
general practitioner, to Insurer dated 17 September 2013 in respect of
FC gives the diagnosis as left hip pain and lower abdominal pain and outlines
treatment of Celebrex, Lyrica and referral for specialist
review. Dr FC states
that the prognosis is uncertain and that the Complainant cannot work and in
particular cannot stand or drive
for any extended period of time.
Ongoing Treating Doctor’s Statement by Dr RN, treating
general practitioner, to Insurer dated 30 November 2013 in respect of
in the statement include diagnosis of chronic abdominal pain with symptoms of
pain and hyperaesthesia in abdomen and current
treatment is listed as Norspan
patches and Lyrica. Usual occupational duties patient is currently unable to
perform is given as ‘cannot
stand for any extended period of time’
and recommendations for return to work given as ‘he has been referred to a
Letter from Dr TG, pain medicine
specialist, to Dr RN, treating general practitioner, dated 22 April
TG summarises the history, investigation and treatment and gives a diagnosis of
abdominal pain secondary to abdominal cutaneous
nerve entrapment syndrome
(ACNES). Treatment given was injections of local anaesthetic and betamethasone
which had a temporary beneficial
effect and further planned treatment included
pulsed radiofrequency to the pain sites.
Letter from Dr JR, senior medical officer pain management
service, to Dr RN, treating general practitioner, dated 9 September
JR stated that the Complainant suffers from ‘chronic abdominal wall pain
which is non-specific and myofascial in nature...
There is a possibility of
rectus sheet nerve entrapment syndrome and there is moderate limitation in
functional capacity’.
Treating general practitioner’s statement by Dr RN, dated
25 March 2015:
RN gives a diagnosis of abdominal cutaneous nerve entrapment syndrome diagnosed
in 2013. He lists the symptoms as persistent and
chronic peri-umbilical
abdominal pain and hyperaesthesia and gives a summary of past and current
treatment. Dr RN states that the
Complainant is unable to work due to chronic
pain and side effects of narcotic patches and Lyrica and has been referred to a
specialist clinic.
Certificate of medical attendant by Dr RN, treating general
practitioner, to Insurer dated 25 March 2015:
RN states that the Complainant has no other vocational training, education or
experience and that in his opinion the Complainant
is not ever likely to resume
duties in any occupation for which (he is) reasonably qualified by their past
education, training or
experience.
Certificate of medical attendant by Dr RJ, psychiatrist, to
Insurer dated 26 March 2015:
RJ states his opinion that the Complainant has no other educational
qualification, training and skills identified and that the
Complainant is not
ever likely to resume duties in any occupation for which (he is) reasonably
qualified by (his) past education,
training or experience.
Letter from Dr RN, treating general practitioner, to Insurer,
dated 15 October 2015:
the letter Dr RN explains that the Complainant has functional restrictions to
returning to work as a traffic controller and states
that he is unable to wear
the clothing required due to hyperaesthesia and chronic pain. He takes strong
medication which has side-effects
which affect his ability to work. He walks
stooped over. The Complainant needs to alternate position frequently with
respect to sitting,
walking and activities of daily living. Dr RN also states
the pain management specialist clinic has declared the Complainant’s
condition permanent and medically stable.
Letter from Dr SJ, orthopaedic surgeon, to Dr RN, treating
general practitioner, dated 16 December 2015:
SJ states that there is little to find on examination and that he could not
identify any orthopaedic condition present in the Complainant.
Report by Dr MN, consultant occupational physician, to Insurer,
dated 28 October 2016:
MN summarises the Complainant’s presenting symptoms, his examination
findings, current treatment and assessment regarding
functional impairment. His
assessment includes the statement the Complainant ‘does not suffer from
any significant condition’
and that he ‘demonstrated abnormal pain
and abnormal illness behaviours.’
MN also states the Complainant’s level of functional impairment is not
permanent, he has greater capacity than he would assert
in his presentation and
has a capacity to return to work, particularly in a relatively sedentary
Supplementary Report by Dr MN, consultant occupation physician,
to Insurer dated 22 December 2016:
supplementary report includes a statement that the Complainant had greater
physical capacity than he asserted in the assessment
and, hence, the attribution
as to his true capacity cannot be made purely on the basis of his medical
MN also states that ‘the assertions by [the Complainant] as to his lack of
capacity and sensitivity of his skin was not reproduced
during my physical
examination of him. This therefore calls into question [the Complainant’s]
assertion as to his true condition
and therefore the origin and consequences of
his reputed condition’.
Second Supplementary Report by Dr
MN, consultant physician, to Insurer dated 13 March 2017:
MN commented on the surveillance film taken of the Complainant; relevantly he
stated: ‘the [surveillance] material supplied
indicates that at the time
he was seen [by Dr MN] Mr [Complainant’s] presentation in October 2016 was
by his medical history,
completely contrasted with the evidence of the
[surveillance] materials obtained in June of 2016’.
MN relevantly concluded: ‘In my opinion, Mr [Complainant] has no
impediment to any form of employment’.
Letter from Dr RN, treating general practitioner, to whom it may
concern, dated 19 February 2020:
RN summarises the Complainant’s history, symptoms, treatment and
functional impairment over the previous five years. He states
Complainant’s neuropathic pain is constant with frequent flare-ups and the
treatment is only partially successful
with his own limitations and side-effects
of the treatment.
RN comments on the surveillance materials made available to him from the Insurer
and states that ‘the materials do not reflect
a complete picture of [the
Complainant’s] health’. He further states that, according to his
professional judgement, the
Complainant ‘is not capable of any meaningful
work, be it manual work or office-based’.
Letter from Dr RN, treating general practitioner, to whom it may
concern, dated 15 August 2020:
RN further comments on the merit of the surveillance material and states that
‘the photos and descriptions depicting [the
Complainant’s] shopping
and household activities (in the surveillance material) were consistent with
what he discussed with
me during our monthly consultations’. He stated
that ‘those activities were markedly limited, that the medication would
cause drowsiness and he would not be able to work even though he was able to
perform some duties at home’. Dr RN further confirmed
that in his
judgement, the Complainant ‘is not capable of any meaningful work, be it
manual work or office-based’.
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
main points made by the Complainant are as follows:
The Complainant
explains that he made a claim for IP benefit payments in 2013 and TPD in 2015
for his disability caused by ‘severe
and persistent’ nerve pain
diagnosed by pain specialists as Abdominal Cutaneous Nerve Entrapment
The Complainant
states that he was receiving IP benefits since 2013 when the payments suddenly
stopped from 22 April 2017 without
any notice.
The Complainant
considers the Insurer’s decision is unfair and unreasonable.
The Complainant
states that the Insurer has largely built its case upon the ‘so-called
discrepancies’ between what the
Complainant reported to his doctors and
what is captured on the surveillance recordings.
The Complainant
submits that:
The problem is that pain, not medication, is projected as
the main reason why I have been restricted in my job and daily capabilities.
[The Insurer] has failed to take the following points into consideration when
making the final decision.
− The decision is made without my treating doctor’s response to the
surveillance material.
− The fact that it is the medication that incapacitates me for work, not
the pain itself. Under the heavy doses of painkilling
drugs, I am a liability to
any employer.
− If I stop the medication, the pain is debilitating.
− My condition is stabilized [sic] under pain medication. Pain specialists
have advised me there is no cure.
− My poor education/work background has limited my work choice. I had
learning difficulties. I did not even graduate from special
school. I cannot
really read and write. My work/experience had always been manual labour.
− Doctors and specialists have considered me to be a risk at work.
The Complainant
states that being unable to work and having no job prospect means that the
Insurer’s decline of his TPD claim
has made him suffer more financial
pains, in addition to physical pain and psychological depression.
The Complainant
provides a brief background of his experience of his illness:
There are two development stages I have experienced with this
illness. At the first stage, while suffering persistent severe pain
worried and anxious about losing my job and not be able to provide for my
family. In a desperate pursuit of a cure, apart
from GPs and the [Name] Pain
Clinic, I went out of my way and exhausted my resources to visit a well-known
private pain specialist
where I had steroid-based shots injected into my
affected abdominal area, to have ten sessions of needle treatment with a
traditional
acupuncture practitioner, and even went to China for further herbal
and acupuncture therapies.
Upon release from the [Name] Pain Clinic, I was told there is no cure. They
put together a pain management plan for my GP to carry
through. That marked the
beginning of the second stage: to accept and to adjust. This is a long
struggling period in which my pain
intensity fluctuates, and my physical and
mental conditions are unstable, complicated by side effects of pain medication.
I still have not come into full terms with the fact that my general
health deteriorates from fit as a Mallee bull to a shadow of
what I used to be.
But even in a bad shape, I have made sure that I do all the right things. I
have placed my trust in my doctors and my insurer [the
Insurer]. I have been
keeping up with my GP visits on monthly basis. I have been using medication
according to the pain management
plan. I have been reporting truthfully and
accurately in my claim forms and sending them out together with on-going
treating doctor’s
reports. I have been keeping in contact with [the
Insurer] via email and phone. I have been doing all the things required by [the
Insurer], such as signing off authorization [sic] to [the Insurer] for further
information gathering and attending Dr [MN’s]
assessment interview.
The Complainant
submits that his reports of his symptoms and disability are true and accurate.
The Complainant
explains that while his symptoms and disability are consistent, his condition
fluctuates. On good days when his pain
intensity is around 6-7 out of 10 he can
do some light gardening and odd chores around the house and even go shopping.
However, on
bad days when his pain intensity reaches 9-10 out of 10 he can do
very little and does not leave the house for days.
The Complainant
submits that these ups and downs can be traced in his report to the doctors and
the Insurer.
The Complainant
states that his condition is not stable and he is constantly in pain ranging
from 6 out of 10 to 10 out of 10 with
medication only taking the edge off and
often causing its own ‘debilitating side effects’.
The Complainant
responds to the surveillance footage as follows:
Walking stooped over (Dr [RN] 10-11-12/2016)
This not only
happened but also lasted quite a while.
It has been off
and on ever since.
Recently I have
been walking with a stoop as well as walking with a stick.
I reported this
stoop over during October, November and December of 2016.
However, no
surveillance was put in place to pick it up.
A few weeks
later, a five-day surveillance conducted from 31 January to 4 February of 2017
did report that “Whilst this (stoop
over) was not demonstrated, he
certainly walked with a limp”.
With the absence
of surveillance evidence during that specific time frame, my report of the
symptom cannot be disputed.
Unable to wear clothes due to hyperaesthesia (Dr RN]
It was chilly
winter time.
controller is required to wear his work shirt tucked inside his belt for safety
reasons. I wear clothes loosely without
any tucked in. In fact, I haven’t
worn a belt ever since the nerve pain started.
Unable to perform even light duties (Dr [RN] 10/2015)
It was one of
those down day period. Otherwise, as I have always reported over the years, I
can do some light gardening and odd chores
around the house.
I reported this
condition in October 2015. Surveillance was conducted eight months later in June
2016 and in February 2017. This surveillance
evidence cannot be used to dispute
my claim which took place in a different time frame.
Unable to do work-related tasks for a continuous shift of at
least three hours (Dr [RN] 10/2015)
This was the
same period as above, namely October 2015. During this time, I was too sick to
perform even light day-to-day household
activities, not to mention to do a
continuous shift in an industrial work environment.
The activities
surveillance picked up were performed in June 2016, months after Dr [RN’s]
clinical note was made.
Unable to leave home and was out once in the prior month (Dr
[MN] 12/2016)
This was the
same time frame in which I reported walking with a stoop over.
Again, none of
the dates surveillance was conducted (four days in June-July 2016 and five days
in January-February of 2017) matches
the report period of September and October
No capacity to do any activities due to light headedness (Dr
[MN] 12/2016)
Insurer’s] quote from Dr [MN] is out of context. In the same supplementary
report dated 22/12/2017, Dr [MN] also stated
that “I am, however, unable
to validate such disparity. I am only able to report his physical
presentation.” He also
made it clear that this is only a
“supposition.”
I am amazed the
thickening and calluses with deeply ingrained dirt on the soles of my feet could
be used as evidence against me. The
idea that I must have undertaken some
hard-manual work in the past few years while on the income protection benefits
is beyond my
understanding. If [the Insurer] is serious about this theory, I
advise [the Insurer] to do [its] investigative work more thoroughly.
explanation I can offer, on my part, is I wear thongs almost all year round.
No capacity for anything touching the abdomen (Dr [RN]
I wear clothes
in chilly winter.
I wear clothes
when going out in the public.
For me this is a
matter of survival. Being on income protection benefits, I have no money to hire
someone to do the day-to-day light
duties for me. You do what you got to do,
even if it means suffering a lot of pain.
On the other
hand, I found in the surveillance material a large number of photos of me
wearing nothing on top and walking around the
yard and doing gardening and odd
chores half naked. Surveillance also reported a few times that I took off my
shirt as soon as I
came back home. It was in warm weather.
Most times lying down as standing and moving is difficult (Dr
[RN] 10/2016)
[The Insurer]
refer again to the same tough time when I also walked stooped over. There is no
surveillance evidence to dispute my
report. All the activities presented as
evidence were performed in other time periods.
Cannot stand for any extended period (Dr [RN] 11/2013)
During this
first stage of illness, being unable to stand for long was my major complaint
As time goes by,
sitting, walking and driving for long have also become an issue.
I noticed that
this is the only surveillance material that has matched the lot of Dr
[RN’s] statement.
I examined the
surveillance material very closely, line by line and minute by minute. I found
that not at any given time during the
three-day surveillance did I stand for
more than 8 minutes.
The Complainant
believes the way the surveillance materials are presented is confusing ‘if
not deliberately misleading’.
The Complainant
notes that his GP, Dr [RN], has consistently judged the Complainant as not fit
for any work.
The Complainant
submits that if the Insurer must consider a third opinion, he has recently seen
a specialist arranged by Centrelink:
This doctor told me during the assessment that if I go back to
work, I will put not only myself but other workers as well at risk.
The Complainant
has studied the terms and conditions set out in the Insurer’s handbooks
related to his insurance and TPD claims
and is confident that he satisfies both
the Totally Disabled/Total Disability definition and the Any Occupation TPD
definition.
In response to
the issue of Dr RN’s medical report, the Complainant submits:
First and foremost, Dr [RN] has already submitted two medical
reports. He did the first
report on 19/02/2020 right after the conciliation conference and the second
17/08/2020, despite the fact that he hasn't got the payment yet. I forwarded
both reports
in a timely manner to the SCT as submissions. The insurer's allegation that
"withhold providing a response to the Insurer’s request dated 7 July
2020" is baseless and incorrect.
The insurer believes the payment issue is "a matter between Dr [RN] and his
previous employer/medical centre." It is not. As indicated
in my previous
submissions in August 2020, the insurer made the payment without naming Dr [RN]
as the recipient and it has ended
up in an open account. Both Dr [RN] and his
previous employer/medical centre had no knowledge of this payment. Now that Dr
longer works for the medical centre, he is not in a position to sort
this payment out. It is the insurer's responsibility and obligation
its mistakes and to make rearrangements to pay Dr [RN] for providing his medical
reports. It is beyond belief that the
insurer has failed to acknowledge its
negligence and mistakes and to try to dodge its responsibilities and legal
obligations to its
The Trustee
main points made by the Trustee are as follows:
The Trustee is
in agreement with the Insurer’s decision that the Complainant’s
claim for TPD and further IP benefits,
on the balance of evidence available,
does not satisfy the ‘Any Occupation’ definition under the Policy.
The Trustee
refers to the surveillance reports gathered by the Insurer during the course of
its assessment of the Complainant’s
claims in which the Complainant was
observed ‘engaging in activities inconsistent with his claimed symptoms
and restrictions
and showing clear contradiction to medical reports obtained in
the course of the IP and TPD claim assessment.’
The Trustee
refers to the report of Dr MN dated 13 March 2017 who after reviewing the
surveillance reports opined that:
It was evident
that [the Complainant] was capable of fully mobilizing [sic] and remaining
active for many hours sequentially;
He was observed
to wear full body PPE without any evidence of impairment or difficulty;
tolerate items pressing against his trunk without any evidence of impairment or
manifestation of any difficulty;
He was capable,
in his view, of being able to perform all of the duties of his former
occupation.
The Insurer
main points made by the Insurer are as follows:
The Insurer
arranged for the Complainant to be observed under surveillance from June 2016 to
April 2017:
The surveillance footage over that time shows the
Complainant to be engaging in a wide range of activities that he has repeatedly
informed the Insurer and Medical Practitioners which we submit he knows provide
opinion to the Insurer, that he is unable to perform
(or that he alleges will
cause 10/10 pain) but without any observed indicia of pain or any pain avoidance
behavior whilst performing
these activities.
The Insurer
submits that due to the nature and extent of the activities the Complainant was
observed performing under surveillance
being so ‘significantly’
inconsistent with his presentation and reports of symptoms to his doctors, any
opinions provided
by a medical practitioner without an awareness of the
surveillance evidence, based on the Complainant’s self-reported and
complaints of pain, are ‘entirely unreliable’.
In response to
the Complainant’s example of comparison between his reported restrictions
and the activities observed on surveillance
in January and February 2017, the
Insurer notes that Dr RN reported on 9 January 2017 that the Complainant
continued to
‘walk hunched over’.
The Insurer states that
the surveillance footage in January and February 2017 showed the Complainant to
be engaged in a range of
activities, including domestic duties and shopping
trips, without ever being observed to be walking stooped or hunched over.
The Insurer
notes the Complainant’s response to the surveillance of him wearing upper
body clothing that it was ‘chilly
in the winter time’ and responds
that the surveillance included periods of fine, sunny weather including periods
and February 2017 when it was hot and sunny. Despite the heat, the
Complainant was observed wearing clothing on his upper body.
The Insurer
refers to the Complainant’s comments surrounding the degree of his
disability:
Unable to perform light duties
work tasks / leave the
any activities / lying down
The Complainant claims that he made these observations to Dr [RN] only once,
in October 2015, and so later surveillance cannot be
said to contradict that
However the Complainant has consistently reported an extreme degree of
disability. For
In October 2016
he reported to Dr [RN] that he spends most of his time lying down because
standing and moving is difficult. He reports
being unable to walk for more than
a short period before he becomes fatigued and disoriented and dizzy.
In January 2017
he reported that he was so disabled that he needed assistance in bathing,
dressing and sometimes walking. He reported
that he was "shirtless or half naked
all the time at and around home".
In April 2017 he
reported that he needed help with daily activities such as getting up from bed
or a couch, showering, and on some
days even walking.
The Insurer submits that these claims of such extreme disability
are irreconcilable with the observed functional activities on surveillance.
The Insurer further submits that the Tribunal would not accept the
Complainant's suggestion that the periods of surveillance all coincided
substantial improvements in his condition, such that the observed activities on
surveillance are not inconsistent with his reports
of severe disability at times
around and either side of each of the discreet periods of surveillance.
To the extent that the Complainant submits he simply had no choice but to
undertake the activities observed, we contend that although
it might be accepted
that the Complainant may, out of necessity, have to undertake some domestic
activities, if his reports of disability
are accurate he would, by his
consistent report, experience extreme levels of pain, and as a consequence, be
observed to do so with
obvious signs of pain and distress or pain avoidance
behaviours. The Insurer points out however that none of these signs or
are observed on any occasion.
The Insurer
further submits that the fact that the Complainant’s clinical
investigations in the form of CT scans, MRIs, x-rays,
ultrasounds and physical
examinations were all objectively unremarkable ‘entirely accords with his
demonstrated capacity while
under surveillance.’
The Insurer
denies that it has failed to consider the effect of the Complainant’s
medication and states that it has considered
the Complainant’s capacity
against all the evidence.
The Insurer
If the Complainant alleges that his condition, if he has one, is
stabilised by medication then his conduct while under surveillance
demonstrates
not only that he is quite able to undertake a raft of activities while wearing
upper body clothing in all seasons without
being restricted in any way, but it
also demonstrates that he is able to undertake all these activities objectively
unimpaired by
the effect of any medication.
The Insurer further submits that given the irreconcilability between the
Complainant's
continued allegations of extreme disability to both the Insurer and medical
practitioners when viewed against his conduct captured
on film calls the
Complainant's credibility into question to a degree that the Tribunal will not
be persuaded by his submissions
in respect of the effects of any pain medication
on his ability to perform the duties of his regular occupation as a Traffic
Controller.
In this respect, the Insurer submits that it was therefore correct
to deny the Complainant's IP and TPD claims.
The Insurer
notes that it issued the report of Dr MN dated 17 March 2017 with the
surveillance reports and DVD’s to Dr RN and
requested he review the
information and provide a report regarding the Complainant’s capacity in
light of this enclosed information.
However, no response was received from Dr
The Insurer
states that:
Notwithstanding receipt of the surveillance evidence and the
reports of Dr [RN] in May 2017, Dr [RN] continued to provide Ongoing
Doctors Reports up until October 2017 in which he continued to certify the
Complainant totally disabled with little to no
functional capacity (which
opinion was entirely inconsistent with the Complainant’s demonstrated
capacity on the surveillance
footage) without any reference to that footage or
the opinion of Dr [RN].
The Insurer submits that Dr [RN] had, by this time, become unable or
unwilling to provide objective medical opinion in respect of
Complainant’s capacity and had become an advocate in the
Complainant’s claim.
The Insurer
states that Dr RN has admitted that he was in possession of the surveillance in
2017 and that he did review it in 2017,
yet he continued to provide his opinion
that the Complainant was Totally and Permanently Disabled and ‘refused to
acknowledge
or refer to the information in the surveillance in his
assessment’ of the Complainant and in his certification that the
Complainant
was Permanently Disabled. This was in spite of the fact that the
doctor had reviewed the surveillance in 2017 which contradicted
Complainant’s self-reports.
The Insurer
submits that in his most recent report of 15 August 2020, Dr RN has still
‘failed’ to address the main questions
surrounding the
inconsistencies with the surveillance and the Complainant’s reported
symptoms and inabilities including:
whether the insured’s abdominal pain prevents him wearing
clothing, in particular on his upper body, whether abdominal pain
prevents him
donning shirt, belt, shoes and protective safety equipment such as high viz
jackets, whether his abdominal symptoms
prevent him from performing physical
activities and manoeuvres that would be required to don and doff clothing
required for work
and whether his abdominal symptoms prevent him from performing
physical activities and maneuvers that would be required for him
to perform the
physical aspects of work including walk, stand, push and pull, carry, bend and
...It is also our opinion, given the time taken to respond and the unusual
circumstances from Dr [RN] indicated above, that [Insurer]
has grounds to
contend that no weight can reasonably be given to Dr [RN’s] opinion now as
it is clear he has become an advocate
in Mr [Complainant’s] claim lacking
objectivity
The Insurer
notes that the Complainant’s claimed condition has been investigated by
pain specialists, orthopaedic surgeons and
a multi-disciplinary team and the
Complainant has been subject to a multitude of clinical testing, examinations
and investigative
regimes which found nothing remarkable.
The Insurer
states that all specialist medical practitioners eventually decided to return
the Complainant to the care of his GP without
more than a working diagnosis of a
possible condition which makes the determination of illness or injury for the
purpose of the TPD
definition ‘extremely difficult’.
The Insurer
states that without a firm diagnosis, determining a prognosis in terms of return
to suitable occupation also become an
‘exercise in uncertainty’.
Accordingly, the
Insurer submits that, set against this background of medical uncertainty, the
assessment of the likelihood of an
insured ever being able to return to suitable
employment cannot reasonably be completed in the same time frame as a more
straightforward
The Insurer
further submits that it is settled law that an insurer is to be provided with a
reasonable time to assess a claim:
While the Insurer’s assessment of the Complainant’s TPD
claim might, when compared to a straightforward claim, have taken
nevertheless submit that the time taken was reasonable in the circumstances.
In response to
the Complainant’s submission regarding his learning difficulties including
his trouble reading and writing, the
Insurer responds:
The Insurer does not consider this submission to have any relevance
in respect of the Complainant's regular occupation for the purpose
if assessment
of Total Disability nor to assessment of his ability to return to suitable work
within his education training and experience.
The Complainant was not
disadvantaged prior to his alleged illness in obtaining work as a Traffic
Controller by reason of his education
and there is no evidence before the
Tribunal that the educational requirements to return to that work has been
modified to the Complainant's
The Insurer would also submit that when considering the Complainant's written
correspondence with it over the years, his Claim (including
his response to
procedural fairness), his written Complaint to the Insurer and to the SCT, there
is no suggestion whatsoever that
the Complainant is other than articulate,
capable of clear expression, able to present an argument and understand and
reasonably complex issues.
The Insurer therefore submits that the Tribunal would not accept the
Complainant's submission that "he cannot really read or write
... ". The Insurer
submits that its response in this regard serves to support our current position
that the Complainant's credit
on this, and other matters is squarely in
In response to
the Complainant’s assertion that the Insurer attributed any delay in its
assessment to the Complainant’s
treating doctor’s untimeliness in
responding to the surveillance material, the Insurer maintains its position that
failure to respond to written inquiries did delay its ability to
make a decision regarding the TPD claim.
The Insurer
submits however that the Complainant cannot be said to have been disadvantaged
by this circumstance as the Insurer continued
to pay him IP benefits for this
The Insurer
In all the circumstances, in our opinion, the only evidence that is
available, containing the benefit of the full and accurate picture,
includes not only the member’s clinical presentation and history but also
his observed level of functional activity,
is firmly to the effect that the
member is fully capable of resuming his pre-claim occupation as a Traffic
Controller.
We have reached this decision after reviewing all the material provided by
[the Complainant] and obtained by us in connection with
the claim, as well as
the matters raised in [Dr RN’s] letters dated 19/2/2020 and 15/8/20.
The Insurer
maintains the position that its decision to deny further payment of benefits in
respect of the Complainant’s IP
claim and its decision to deny the
Complainant’s TPD claim was ‘correct, fair and reasonable’ and
therefore should
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
s37(2)(a) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must review the decisions of both
the Trustee and Insurer.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must initially determine whether:
Insurer’s decisions to cease payment of the Complainant’s monthly IP
benefit on the grounds he was no longer totally
disabled; and
Insurer’s denial of the Complainant’s TPD claim; and
Trustee’s agreement in respect of those decisions,
were fair and reasonable in their operation in relation
to the Complainant in the circumstances.
issue is not what decisions the Tribunal would have made on the material before
the Trustee and the Insurer but whether the decisions
were fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal has taken into account all the material
provided by the Parties, the relevant definition
in the IP and TPD policies and
relevant law. The Tribunal is satisfied that the material it has relied on has
been provided to all
the outset, the Tribunal notes the Insurer has, in a letter to the Tribunal
dated 29 January 2019, most helpfully summarised the
relevant IP and TPD
definitions as follows:
we [the Insurer] were not satisfied, based on all of the evidence,
that the Complainant was by reason of illness or injury:
not working in
his regular occupation as a traffic controller nor was he unable to perform one
or more duties of that occupation necessary
to produce income. Accordingly, the
Complainant was not able to satisfy the requirements of the definition of total
disability in
the Policy and was therefore not entitled to an IP benefit under
the Policy; and
disabled to such
an extent that he was unlikely ever to again be able to engage in any occupation
for which he was suited by his education,
training or experience. As such the
Complainant was unable to satisfy the ‘any occupation’ definition of
TPD in the Policy.
Tribunal agrees with the Insurer, that the two dot points above encapsulate the
respective IP and TPD policy definitional requirements,
determines.
Claim History
Insurer commenced monthly IP benefit payments to the Complainant on 22 July
2013. On 2 April 2015 the Complainant lodged his TPD
claim. As part of the
Insurer’s assessment of the TPD claim, the Insurer commissioned
surveillance of the Complainant ‘for
periods from June 2016 to April
2017’ (Surveillance). In October 2017, the Insurer advised the Complainant
it had denied his
TPD claim and was ceasing IP benefit payments – with the
last payment having been made on 21 September 2017.
Insurer’s Reasons
the Insurer considers acceptance of the Complainant’s illness from a total
disability perspective, relies heavily
on his self-reported symptomology
(Symptomology). In this regard it considers the Surveillance casts significant
doubt on the reliability
of the Complainant’s Symptomology. As the Insurer
relevantly asserted in critiquing Dr RN’s commentary on the
Surveillance:
Dr [RN] has still failed to address the main questions brought to
his attention surrounding the inconsistencies with surveillance
in context of Mr
[Complainant’s] reported symptoms and inabilities:
– including whether the insured’s abdominal pain prevents him
wearing clothing, in particular on his upper body;
– whether abdominal pain prevents him donning shirt, belt, shoes and
protective safety equipment such as high viz jackets;
– whether his abdominal symptoms prevent him from performing physical
activities and maneuvers that would be required to don
and doff clothing
required for work; and
– whether his abdominal symptoms prevent him from performing physical
activities and maneuvers that would be required for him
to perform the physical
aspects of work including walk, stand, push and pull, carry, bend and reach.
the Insurer submits Dr MN, in his second supplementary report dated 13 March
2017, supports the Insurer’s contentions
in this regard:
the [surveillance] material supplied indicates that at the time he
was seen [by Dr MN] Mr [Complainant’s] presentation in October
2016 was by
his medical history, completely contrasted with the evidence of the
[surveillance] materials obtained in June of 2016...
In my opinion, Mr
[Complainant] has no impediment to any form of employment.
Insurer relevantly summarised its reasons as follows:
The Insurer further submits that given the irreconcilability
between the Complainant's continued allegations of extreme disability
the Insurer and medical practitioners when viewed against his conduct captured
on film calls the Complainant's credibility
into question to a degree that the
Tribunal will not be persuaded by his submissions in respect of the effects of
any pain medication
on his ability to perform the duties of his regular
occupation as a Traffic Controller. In this respect, the Insurer submits that
was therefore correct to deny the Complainant's IP and TPD claims.
Tribunal’s assessment of the medical evidence and the
Surveillance
medical reports confirm that the Complainant has been suffering from persistent
abdominal pain, largely neuropathic in nature
and accompanied by hyperaesthesia,
since 2013. The diagnosis is not entirely certain but has been generally
accepted as a cutaneous
nerve entrapment syndrome of the abdominal wall.
reports attest to the fact that the Complainant continued to suffer disabling
pain and skin sensitivity sufficient to have significant
impact on his
functional capacity to perform his usual occupation.
reports from the Complainant’s treating general practitioner Dr RN confirm
that he has also been unfit to perform duties
in any occupation for which he is
reasonably qualified by his past education, training or experience.
to the reports from his treating practitioner, an independent specialist Dr MN
reports that the Complainant does not have
a clinical condition which would
limit his functional capacity to return to work and perform alternative duties.
Insurer prefers Dr MN’s report to that of the Complainant’s treating
practitioners and states that that preference
is supported by evidence contained
in the Surveillance. Despite that, the significance of the Surveillance is
questioned by the Complainant’s
treating general practitioner Dr RN, who
continues to certify that the Complainant is unfit for work and therefore meets
the definition
of TPD in the policy.
Insurer also contends the Complainant’s treating general practitioner Dr
RN has become an advocate in supporting the claim
and therefore lacks
objectivity. The Insurer maintains that accordingly, no weight can reasonably be
given to Dr RN’s opinion.
of the above, it appears clear that there is a considerable amount of evidence
to support the fact the Complainant has
been suffering from a significantly
disabling condition since 2013, has had limited response to treatment and
suffers from some side-effects
of treatment which adversely affect his work
capacity. This longitudinal evidence needs to be weighed against the independent
occupational
health physician’s reports (Dr MN), based on a single
consultation and assessment, regarding the Complainant’s medical
and work capacity.
the value of the Surveillance needs to be examined against the opinion of the
Complainant’s treating general practitioner
(Dr RN) who is familiar with
the Complainant’s complete medical history and personal circumstances and
is well placed to determine
functional capacity in the workplace, the status of
which is dependent on several factors not easily discernible by surveillance
domestic and recreational activities alone.
Dr RN relevantly noted:
the photos and descriptions depicting [the Complainant’s]
shopping and household activities [in the Surveillance] were consistent
what he discussed with me during our monthly consultations... those activities
were markedly limited, that the medication would
cause drowsiness and he would
not be able to work even though he was able to perform some duties at home.
Tribunal believes Dr RN has assessed all the issues with regard to relevant
health considerations and is of the view the Surveillance
does not give an
accurate picture of the Complainant’s disabling symptoms and the effects
of medication on his functional capability
and work capacity. Any suggestion
that this opinion is biased or subjective due to misplaced advocacy on behalf of
the treating practitioner
can only be unfounded conjecture and, quite unfairly,
threatens to impugn Dr RN’s professional integrity.
Tribunal’s summation
all of the above into consideration, there is a considerable amount of probative
medical evidence to support the disabling
nature of the Complainant’s
condition which cannot be negated by Dr MN’s reports, all of which emanate
from a single
consultation by him; nor by the Surveillance which, although
suggestive of a particular level of functional capability, does not
proof to the required standard whereby the opinion of the treating practitioner
Dr RN (obtained over many years) can be persuasively
refuted. Accordingly, the
Tribunal determines the evidence offered by the Complainant’s treating
practitioner Dr RN is to be
preferred over the opinion of Dr MN.
Cessation of IP benefits
light of the above, the Tribunal determines it was unfair and unreasonable of
the Insurer, with the Trustee’s concurrence,
to cease payment of the
Complainant’s IP benefits as from 21 September 2017, on the grounds he was
no longer totally disabled,
given the unrefuted medical evidence indicates the
Complainant was unable to perform any of the duties of ‘Traffic
Controller’.
For the sake of completeness, the Tribunal also determines
the Complainant’s medical condition renders him unable to work in
other occupation.
Tribunal notes the Insurer had requested Dr MN, by letter dated 5 December 2016
to advise whether, by reference to the Complainant’s
ETE, he would be
capable of working as a:
assembly worker
MN by letter dated 22 December 2016 relevantly responded:
Therefore, the leaning forward as a forklift driver and the lifting
requirement to move items as [sic] is a secondary need of a forklift
would be incompatible with the task demands to lift, due to pain around his
abdomen, aggravated by the tasks. Similarly, for
a die setter, leaning forward
against the equipment would be impossible such as would be applicable also for
d. and e. As outlined
above, working as a labourer requires flexing and bending,
resulting in the consequence that his clothing would come into contact
skin on his abdomen.
RN, of course confirmed that in his judgement, the Complainant ‘is not
capable of any meaningful work, be it manual work
or office-based’.
its part, the Tribunal, noting the Complainant’s ETE as recorded above, in
the section so marked, considers the Complainant’s
ETE only demonstrates
capacity for manual work and the medical evidence renders the future likelihood
of that occurring, to be, in
the words of Leeming JA ‘a remote or
speculative possibility’:
TAL Life Ltd v Shuetrim; MetLife Insurance
Ltd v Shuetrim
[2016] NSWCA 68.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal determines it was unfair and unreasonable of the Insurer, with the
Trustee’s concurrence, to deny
the Complainant’s TPD claim.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decisions under review
if it is satisfied that the decisions, in their
operation in relation to the
Complainant, were fair and reasonable in the circumstances. For the reasons
stated above the Tribunal
is not so satisfied.
the Tribunal does not affirm the decisions of the Trustee and the Insurer.
the Tribunal is not satisfied that the decisions of the Trustee and the Insurer
were fair and reasonable s37(3) empowers the Tribunal
to make a determination to
remit the matter to which the decisions relate to the Trustee and Insurer for
reconsideration in accordance
with the directions of the Tribunal, vary the
decisions, or set aside the decisions and substitute other decisions.
making its decisions, s37(5) of the Complaints Act requires that the Tribunal
must not do anything that would be contrary to law
or to the terms of the
insurance policies.
s37(4) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal may only exercise its determination
making power for the purpose of placing the complainant
as nearly as
practicable, in the position that they would have been in but for the
unfairness, unreasonableness, or both, that the
Tribunal has determined to exist
in relation to the Trustee’s and Insurer’s decisions.
accordance with these provisions, the Tribunal determines to set aside the
Trustee’s and Insurer’s decisions and substitute
other decisions
Insurer is to recommence payment of the Complainant’s IP benefit, direct
to the Complainant’s nominated bank account,
as from 21 September 2017 up
until the date of this determination; decision 3 below also applies.
Thereafter,
the Insurer is to assess the Complainant’s entitlement to IP monthly
benefits in accordance with the relevant IP
policy terms.
respect of decision 1, s57 interest per the ICA applies to each monthly benefit
payable, as from 21 September 2017 up until the
date of this determination.
Insurer is to admit the Complainant’s TPD claim.
57 interest per the ICA applies to the TPD benefit as from 17 October 2017, the
date the Insurer advised the Complainant directly
of its decision, up until the
date the Insurer makes payment to the Trustee.
Trustee, on receipt of the Insurer’s payments by reference to decisions 4
and 5 above, is to promptly confirm the accuracy
of same, prior to remitting
payment to the Complainant.
Lynda Purcell, Presiding Member
Date of Tribunal signature 16 November 2020
RTF format (439 KB)
Signed PDF/A format