D20-21\080 [2020] SCTA 187 (30 October 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\080
FILE NUMBER
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND REASONS
COMPLAINANT: The Complainant
TRUSTEE: The Trustee
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
FUND: The Fund
EMPLOYER: The Employer
AMENDING LEGISLATION:
The Amending Legislation
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(Cth) (the Complaints Act) and held on 2 October 2020 before:
McAlister, Presiding Member
MacDonald, Member.
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
decision under review is that of the Trustee declining the Complainant’s
request to retrospectively transfer her accumulation
account to the defined
benefit category.
Trustee notified the Complainant of its decision by letter dated 12 October
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal affirms the decision of the Trustee.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
to s32 of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal requested submissions from the
Submissions
were received from each Party.
submissions were exchanged and responses were invited. The Trustee responded.
The Tribunal forwarded a copy of this submission
to the Complainant. The
Complainant then provided additional material. A copy of this material was
provided to the Trustee.
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
papers provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant made a complaint that the decision of the Trustee was
or unreasonable for the reasons summarised in this determination.
Fund’s accumulation category became the Fund’s default membership
category for new Fund members on 1 May 2000. However,
members were able to apply
to transfer to the defined benefit (DB) category until 12 November 2008. On 12
November 2008, the DB category
was closed by the Amending Legislation.
Trustee states that it wrote to all members in early December 2008 to confirm
that, effective from 12 November 2008, the DB category
was closed to new
members. The letter also advised that existing members had until 12 May 2009 to
appeal to transfer to the DB category
if they could demonstrate that they had
taken positive action to join the DB category before 12 November 2008.
Complainant was offered and accepted a role with the Employer in October 2008, a
decision she states that she made on the basis
of becoming a member of the
Fund’s DB category.
was initially due to commence this role on 17 November 2008; however, on 16
November 2008 her step-son died in tragic circumstances
and it was agreed with
her hiring manager that she would instead commence her new role on 27 January
the Complainant became a member of the Fund on 31 January 2009,
she was placed in the
accumulation
12 September 2017, the Complainant wrote to the Trustee seeking to be
transferred to the DB category on the basis that she had
only recently become
aware that it was possible to appeal to join the DB category after it was
Trustee responded to the Complainant on 12 October 2017 and informed her that it
was unable to consider any appeal received after
12 May 2009 and as such was
required to decline her request.
Complainant lodged a complaint with the Tribunal on 23 February 2018 regarding
the Trustee’s decision to decline her request
to transfer her accumulation
account to the DB category.
resolution sought by the Complainant is to retrospectively transfer her
accumulation account to the DB category.
Events not in dispute:
− The Complainant’s date of birth.
− The date the accumulation category became the
Fund’s default membership category for new members.
− The date the DB category was closed to all
new members by the Amending Legislation.
December 2008
− The date the Trustee wrote to all existing
members advising that from 12 November 2008 the DB category was closed to new
members but there was an appeal window until 12 May 2009.
− The date the Complainant joined the Fund as an
accumulation member.
− The date the Complainant wrote to the
Trustee seeking consideration to be transferred to the DB category.
− The date the Trustee responded to the
Complainant and informed her that it could not approve her request as it was
to consider any appeal received after 12 May 2009.
− The date the Complainant lodged her complaint
against the Trustee with the Tribunal.
Trustee submits that the Tribunal has no power to review the actions of the
State Parliament in passing the Amending Legislation
to close the DB category on
12 November 2008. The Tribunal accepts this submission. The Tribunal’s
power is confined to reviewing
the Trustee’s decision (within the meaning
of the Complaints Act).
Tribunal considers that the governing rules of the Fund relevant to this
complaint are those in effect on the date of the Complainant’s
12 September 2017, being the trust deed as amended up to and including the
amendment dated 30 June 2017 (the Trust Deed).
Trust Deed provisions relevant to the complaint are:
and authorities
In addition to any other powers and authorities contained
in the Act or this deed, the board may—
(e) institute, conduct, defend, compound or abandon any legal proceedings by
or against the fund or its officers or otherwise concerning
the affairs of the
fund and also compound and allow time for payment or satisfaction of any debts
due and of any claims or demands
by or against the fund; and
(o) do all acts and things as and when and in the manner it considers in its
discretion necessary or expedient or convenient for
or in connection with the
management, operation, control and administration of the scheme and for the
exercise and performance of
its powers, authorities, functions and duties or to
comply with a RSE licensee law.
Discretionary
power of the board
(1) Where the
board is satisfied, after such inquiry as it thinks necessary, that a person has
lost or ceased to be entitled to a
right, privilege or benefit under this scheme
to which that person was otherwise entitled or might have obtained, and that it
just and equitable that the person should be allowed to have the enjoyment of
the right, privilege or benefit, the board may permit
the person to exercise the
right or grant to the person the privilege or benefit.
(2) The board
may, in the exercise of its power under subsection (1) impose such conditions
and requirements as it may think just.
Part 4A Transfers between membership categories
23E Closed defined benefit categories
A member may not transfer to a closed defined benefit category.
LEGISLATION
125 of the Amending Legislation inserted the following provisions into the
Fund’s governing rules, with effect from
the commencement day of 12
November 2008:
32N Closure of defined benefit category
(1) A person may not become a member in the standard defined benefit
(2) A person who is not a member in the standard defined benefit category in
relation to particular employment may not become a member
in the standard
defined benefit category in relation to that employment.
(3) To remove any doubt, it is declared that –
(a) subsections
(1) and (2) apply despite anything in the deed or other instrument in force
under this Act; and
(b) subsection
(1) prevents a person becoming a member in the standard defined benefit category
even if the person was previously
in that category (before or after the
commencement day); and
(c) subsection
(2) presents a person becoming a member in the standard defined benefit category
in relation to particular employment
even if the person was previously in that
category (before or after the commencement day).
(4) This section does not apply to a person with approval given under section
32O Approval to join after commencement day in particular
circumstances
(1) Within 6 months after the commencement day, a person may give a written
application to the government superannuation officer
for approval to become a member in the standard defined benefit category in
relation to particular employment.
(2) The person must give the officer the information reasonably required by the
officer to decide the application.
(3) The officer may approve the application if satisfied that, before the
commencement day, the application –
(a) took a step
for the purpose of becoming a member in the standard defined benefit category;
The applicant completed a form required to become a member in the standard
defined benefit category but on the commencement day the
form was with the
applicant’s employer.
(b) took a step for the purpose of deciding whether to become a member in the
standard defined benefit category.
The applicant arranged before the commencement day to obtain financial advice
for the purpose of deciding whether to become a member
in the defined benefit
(4) The officer must decide the application as soon as is practicable.
(5) The officer must give the applicant written notice of the decision and, if
the decision is not to give the approval, the reasons
for the decision.
(6) If the officer decides not to give the approval, the applicant may, within
28 days after receiving notice of the decision, give
a written application to
the chief executive for a review of the decision.
(7) The chief executive must give the applicant written notice of the chief
executive’s decision and, if the decision is to
confirm the
officer’s decision, the reasons for the chief executive’s
Explanatory Notes to the Amending Legislation explained the changes as
In response to the current global market situation and to ensure
the State can maintain the current level of benefits for [Fund] members,
proposed to close the defined benefit arrangements to new members from the day
the Bill is introduced into the House.
page 63 of the Explanatory Notes, more detail is provided:
Clauses 125 inserts a new part 5B to close the defined benefit
arrangements to new members from the day the Bill is introduced into
new section 32M
inserts definitions relevant to the new Part;
new section 32N
provides that membership of the defined benefit category will only be open to
current active DB members;
new section 32O
provides a mechanism to accept an application for DB membership for a period of
6 months. Such an application to be
considered by the Government Superannuation
Officer, a statutory position, with an appeal right to the Chief Executive;
new section 32P
provides that where a current active DB member changes public sector employment
they can recommence in the DB category
providing the break in service is less
than 1 month.
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
main points made by the Complainant are as follows:
financial advice, on which she relied, to apply to become an employee of the
State Government for the purpose of joining
the Fund’s DB category (which
she refers to as the ‘DBF’).
On 26 June 2008,
the Complainant and her husband met with an adviser who provided independent
financial advice. The Complainant provided
a Statutory Declaration that they
discussed seeking employment within the State Government as the Fund offered
similar defined benefits
to the Federal Government scheme, of which her husband
was a member. The adviser confirmed and explained how the Fund’s defined
benefits worked and the financial advantages of the DB category over the
accumulation category. She relied on this advice and commenced
applying for
State Government roles.
When she was
interviewed for her role with the Employer on 17 October 2008, the benefits of
joining the State Government were outlined,
including the defined benefits
offered by the Fund.
She relied on
this information provided by the Employer:
relied on joining the DBF
as the deciding factor
to apply and join the State Government.
I expected to join the DBF.
The Complainant
notes that the job she had before commencing employment with the Employer had a
higher salary, higher superannuation
contributions, a 9-day fortnight and
unlimited sick leave.
The Complainant
submits that this demonstrates that she sought advice and relied on that
information before the commencement day,
as required under s32O of the
Fund’s governing rules at the time.
She was not
advised that the DB category would no longer be available to her.
Trustee’s lack of disclosure, she has suffered ‘unnecessary
financial hardship’ and has been denied ‘natural
The Complainant
...Upon commencing in my role and learning the DBF was now closed
to new members, on 10 March 2009, I contacted [Trustee] to query
the possibility
of joining the DBF and whether any exceptional circumstances would be
considered.
I was advised by [Name] that the DBF was closed to new members and the only
option was the Accumulation Fund. No advice was provided
of the appeal period
from 12 November 2008 to 12 May 2009. I believe this to be misrepresentation and
demonstrates a policy position
to deny access to the DBF.
My contemporaneous notes of this conversation have been provided to [Trustee]
and the Tribunal. [Trustee] are unable to provide a
record by way of file notes
or call recording, as advised in their correspondence to the Tribunal in email
dated 2 June 2020.
[Trustee] contend in their correspondence dated 12 October 2017 and 3 July
2019 that State Government employees received advice of
their appeal rights by
way of letter dated 16 December 2008. [Trustee] also acknowledge in their
correspondence of my non-receipt
of the letter outlining my appeal options.
In email dated 18 November 2019, the Tribunal wrote to [Trustee] seeking to
understand why a letter advising members of their right
to appeal was not sent
to all members who joined the fund up to 12 May 2009, being the end date of the
appeal period. In response,
on 26 November 2019, [Trustee] advised it is likely
that such as disclosure was not sent to new members during this time as it would
be extremely unlikely that a person who was not already a member of the fund and
even more unlikely that a person who was not a [State]
Government employee
before 12 November 2008, would be able to demonstrate the requisite action/s.
[Trustee], by their own admissions, failed to advise new members of their
appeal rights based on it being “unlikely” that
a person would be
able to demonstrate the requisite action/s. By doing this, [Trustee] have failed
to represent the interests of
all its members which is against their purpose of
putting their members first and working in their best interests.
Further, [Trustee] responded that a person who had taken action to commence
employment to join the fund and upon receiving advice
the DBF was closed to new
members, would contact [Trustee].
I have demonstrated that I contacted [Trustee] on 10 March 2009 and was
advised the fund was closed to new members with no consideration
of exceptional
circumstances. No advice of an appeal period was provided.
How can I appeal something that I’m not aware of and when I sought
advice, I was informed I had no options?
Had she received
correspondence advising of the option to appeal to join the DB category or the
correct information when making enquiries
with the Trustee during the appeal
period, she would have made an application and ‘it is highly probable my
application would
have been accepted’ as she met the requirements of s32O
of the Act.
She has compared
her accumulation benefit with her projected defined benefit and believes her
financial loss is in the order of $340,000
- $400,000, together with the lack of
certainty provided in the accumulation category.
In response to
the Trustee’s submission that the Tribunal cannot substitute a decision of
the Government Superannuation Officer
or require the Trustee to do anything
contrary to law, she argues that she met the requirements of s32O so the outcome
would not be contrary to law. She further queries why she had not been
informed of this situation earlier, rather than waste three
years of her
She requests the
Trustee to refer her matter to the Government Superannuation Officer to
determine her application or alternatively
for the Trustee to use its powers
under section 14 of the Trust Deed to permit her to join the DB category.
The Trustee
main points made by the Trustee are as follows:
The DB category
was closed to all new members on 12 November 2008 via an Act of the State
Parliament.
The Trustee has
no power to override the closure of the DB category.
The Trustee
notes that new members, including the Complainant, were provided with a welcome
kit, which disclosed that they were a
member of the accumulation category and
that the DB category was closed to new members on 12 November 2008.
The Trustee
... There was a limited scope of appeal to join the DB
scheme for a 6-month period
between 12 November 2008 to 12 May 2009. These appeals were required to be in
writing and were assessed by the government superannuation
officer (the
Officer), not the Trustee. The Officer
have approved such an appeal
if the member was able to demonstrate they had taken positive action to join the
DB scheme before 12
November 2008, such as lodging an application to transfer to
the scheme or obtaining financial advice for the purpose of deciding
become a DB member.
The Complainant
became a member of the Fund on 31 January 2009 and she was
‘correctly’ placed into the accumulation category,
being the default
category of membership at this time.
The Trustee has
no record of receiving a written appeal from the Complainant requesting to join
the DB category within the required
time period:
... even if the Complainant had lodged an appeal for late entry
into the closed DB scheme in the required period, it does not, ipso
facto, mean
that she would have been granted membership. Whilst the Trustee did not assess
the appeals, and therefore cannot comment
on whether, if an appeal had been made
by the Complainant, it would have been successful, it does note that the appeal
process was
deliberately narrow in scope.
In response to
the Complainant’s claim about a telephone call with the Trustee on 10
March 2009, the Trustee has no recordings
or file notes relating to contact with
the Complainant between 12 November 2008 and 12 May 2009 and thus cannot comment
on any information
provided during that call.
The Trustee
... it is reasonable to expect that a person who had taken the
action of commencing
employment in order to join the DB scheme, and having received notification
that they were an accumulation member and the DB scheme
was closed to new
members, would urgently contact the Fund and make further enquiries ...
In response to
the Complainant’s claim that she obtained financial advice for the purpose
of obtaining membership of the DB
category, the Trustee notes:
the Complainant
was not a member of [the Fund] or employed with the [State] Government at the
time of the alleged advice;
the documents
provided by the Complainant to support her claim indicate that the advice
appointment was between the financial advisor
and [the Complainant’s
husband] specifically in relation to [the Complainant’s husband’s]
... redundancy payment.
There is no indication that the Complainant was a party
to the advice appointment, although the Trustee acknowledges that financial
advice often entails the consideration of a couple’s joint financial
position. Nevertheless, the documents provided do not
in any way suggest that
the financial advice provided included that the Complainant join the DB scheme;
the Complainant
has maintained [State] Government employment to date, despite not having
achieved the supposed sole purpose of obtaining
such employment.
Furthermore, the
Trustee states that the actual advice provided to the Complainant has not been
given to the Trustee.
In absence of
particular advice being given to the Complainant recommending she become a
member of the DB category, the Trustee submits
that the claims made by the
Complainant in this regard are ‘unreliable’.
The Trustee
notes that members must maintain continuous employment with an eligible employer
in order to maintain membership in the
DB category.
Trustee’s records show that the Complainant may have had several breaks in
service throughout her membership, which would
have made her ineligible to
continue in the DB category.
The Trustee does
not consider information provided to the Complainant by her employer and her
reliance on that information is a relevant
consideration for the Tribunal:
The Trustee is not the Complainant’s employer. The Trustee is
not responsible for, nor does it have any control over, information
provided to
the Complainant by her employer.
The Trustee does
not agree with the Complainant’s contention that commencing employment
with the State Government is evidence
of her intention to become a DB member;
The only thing that is clear from the Complainant’s
commencement of employment with the [State] Government is exactly that,
being her commencement of employment with the [State] Government. Whilst it is
true that an automatic outcome of employment
with [State] Government was
membership with [the Fund] in the Accumulation category, membership in the DB
category was not an automatic
outcome at the time of the Complainant’s
commencement. Therefore, the Complainant’s commencement of employment does
naturally demonstrate her intention to become a member of the DB
Additionally, the Trustee has not seen any indication that the Complainant
completed an Accumulation to Defined Benefit transfer form
which (up to the time
the DB category was closed to new members) was the way for a member to request,
normally via their employer,
for their membership with [the Fund] to be
transferred from the Accumulation to DB category.
In response to
the Complainant’s assertion that, had she submitted an application for
approval to become a member of the DB
category following its closure, her
application would ‘highly probably’ be approved, the Trustee states
that it does
not believe the Complainant has ‘sufficient knowledge’
of the decision-making process of the Government Superannuation
Officer to make
any assessment regarding the likely outcome of a ‘hypothetical
application’.
The Trustee
itself cannot make any assessment as to the likelihood of the success of an
application as it is not, and never was, the
decision-making authority.
The Trustee
submits that, for the Complainant’s argument regarding a
‘hypothetical application’ to be a material
consideration in any
deliberation, the likelihood of success must be greater than ‘highly
probable’. Rather it must be
‘certain’ that any application
that might have been made would have resulted in the Officer approving it.
Trustee reiterates that, not being the Officer, it is unable to make
a determination on this ‘hypothetical application’
The Trustee
notes the outcome sought by the Complainant, being ‘...to refer my matter
to the Officer established under Division
2, Part 3A of the [Act] to determine
my application to join the defined benefit category under section 32O of the
[Act]’, and
states that:
The power conferred upon the Officer under section 32O of [the Act]
has ceased in accordance with section 32O(1), therefore the Officer
cannot make
a determination as requested by the Complainant, as to do so would be contrary
to law. There is no alternative power
conferred upon the Officer, or any other
position, that enables a decision to permit a person to join the DB category
under any circumstances.
In addition, the Trustee believes the Tribunal is not able to make a decision
under section 32O of the Act. As per
Superannuation
(Resolution of Complaints) Act 1993
(Cth) the Tribunal has all powers,
obligations and discretions that are conferred upon the trustee of a
superannuation fund. Section
32O of the Act confers no powers, obligations, or
discretions on the Trustee and, therefore, the Tribunal does not hold the power
to effect an outcome of the Complainant being permitted membership of the DB
In response to
the secondary outcome sought by the Complainant, which is ‘...referral of
my matter to the Board of Trustees
to exercise its powers under
[Trust Deed]
to permit me the right to join the defined benefit
category’, the Trustee submits:
The [Trust Deed] is subordinate to the Act, and the Trustee must
not do a thing,
including make a decision, that would be in contravention
of the Act. The Act is clear in providing for the closure of the DB category,
well as the provisions relating to approvals of applications to join the DB
category following its closure. The Deed does not
enable the Trustee to do
anything that would not be in accordance with the provisions of the Act,
including to permit the Complainant
to join the DB category. Therefore, the
Trustee, and the Tribunal, must not make a decision to exercise section 14 of
the Deed to
permit the Complainant access to the DB category, as to do so would
be contrary to law.
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must initially determine whether the
decision of the Trustee declining the Complainant’s
retrospectively transfer her accumulation account to the defined benefit
category was fair and reasonable in its operation
in relation to the Complainant
in the circumstances.
issue is not what decision the Tribunal would have made on the evidence before
the Trustee but whether the decision was fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal took the whole of the evidence and
submissions into account. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the material it has
relied on has been provided to both Parties
Was the Complainant entitled to membership of the DB
Tribunal is satisfied that, when the Complainant joined the Fund on 31 January
2009, she was not entitled to membership of the
DB category. This is because the
accumulation category was the default category for new members and the DB
category had been closed
to new members on 12 November 2008.
Tribunal notes that the closure of the DB category appears to have happened
quite suddenly, as the date of the Treasurer’s
announcement of the closure
and the commencement day of the Amending Legislation were the same. For that
reason, the Employer may
not have been aware of it in its discussions with the
Complainant.
Could the Complainant have applied to transfer to the DB
wording of s32O inserted in the Deed by the Amending Legislation did not limit
the ability to apply for approval to join the DB
category by reference to the
date when a person joined the Fund. It therefore appears to the Tribunal that
the Complainant could
technically have made an application for approval to
transfer to the DB category before 12 May 2009, had she been aware of s32O.
However, as discussed below, there is no certainty that her application would
have been approved by the Government Superannuation
Officer (GSO).
Can the Complainant be transferred to the DB category
s32O, the ability to transfer to the DB category expired on 11 May 2009. There
is no power for either the GSO or the Trustee
to transfer the Complainant to the
DB category now.
Complainant has referred to s14 of the Trust Deed, which gives the Trustee
discretionary power to permit a person to exercise
a right (or grant a person a
privilege or benefit) if the person has lost the right (privilege or benefit)
and the Trustee is satisfied
that it would be just and equitable to do so.
However, under the Trust Deed, there has been no right to transfer to the DB
since 12 November 2008, before the Complainant was a Fund member. Even
if the Complainant had commenced employment on her original
start date of 17
November 2008, she would still not have become a Fund member before the DB
category closed. She therefore never
had this right to lose. In any event, s23E
of the Trust Deed now clearly states the DB category is closed.
Tribunal therefore agrees with the Trustee’s submission that it does not
have power under the Trust Deed to transfer the
Complainant to the DB category.
Even if the Trustee did have power, the Tribunal notes that it would be
administratively unworkable
to retrospectively ‘undo’ the
Complainant’s accumulation membership and recreate a DB membership at this
gist of the Complainant’s submission, however, is that she had a
‘right’ to be approved for transfer to the
DB category during the
six months to 12 May 2009. She says, if she had known of this
‘right’, she would have exercised
it. She also believes, if she had
made an application, she would have been approved. This is because she believes
her circumstances
fall within the two examples given in ss32O(3).
the Tribunal’s view, the Complainant’s submission overstates the
legal status of a person’s ‘right’
under s32O. Rather than a
right to be approved, the right is to
approval. The granting of
approval is not automatic. It is a discretion exercised by the GSO. This is
apparent from the words ‘may
approve’ in ss32O(3) (as opposed to
‘must approve’). Further, the examples are not conclusive. Just
because a person’s
circumstances align with the examples does not
guarantee that the GSO would exercise the discretion in the person’s
In other words, falling within the examples does not give a person a
‘right’ to be approved. Rather, the examples show
the intent behind
s32O, which appears to have been to ensure that Fund members who may have been
actively considering a transfer
to the DB category were not prejudiced by the
sudden closure of the DB category. To overcome this possible prejudice, a
window to apply for approval was conferred under s32O.
Was the Complainant misled by the Trustee?
appears that the Complainant was not given notice of the ability to apply for
approval to transfer to the DB category before 12
May 2009. This is because the
Trustee gave notice to Fund members in December 2008 and the Complainant did not
join the Fund until
January 2009. It is possible to say that she was misled by
omission in that, as noted above, the right to apply under s32O was not
technically confined to existing Fund members as at 12 November 2008.
the Trustee does not have any record of a telephone call on 10 March 2009, the
Complainant may also have been misled in that,
according to the
Complainant’s evidence, she was told she could not transfer to the DB
category, despite the alleged telephone
call of 10 March 2009 being within the
six month window to 12 May 2009.
Should the Trustee compensate the Complainant?
the benefit of hindsight, the Complainant has claimed loss in the range of
$340,000 - $400,000 because of the Trustee’s
failure to inform her of the
ability to apply for approval to transfer to the DB category before 12 May 2009.
Her claim relies on
her belief, as stated above, that she would have been
approved to transfer to the DB category if she had applied. She has then
her accumulation benefit with what she estimates her defined benefit
would have been. The Trustee has not made an express decision
for compensation, but a refusal to compensate the Complainant is implicit in the
Trustee’s submissions. The
Tribunal has power to consider whether a
trustee’s decision not to compromise a claim is fair and reasonable:
Retail Employees Superannuation Pty Ltd v Crocker
[2001] FCA 1330
Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme Board v Dexter
[2004] FCA 1434.
the Tribunal’s view, the fairness and reasonableness of the Trustee
refusing to compensate the Complainant depends on whether
the Complainant has
suffered loss in reasonable reliance on any misleading omission or statement by
the Trustee. This, in turn, depends
on whether the Complainant’s
application for approval to transfer to the DB category would have been
accepted. For the purpose
of assessing the fairness and reasonableness of the
Trustee’s implied decision, the Tribunal is prepared to make its
on the balance of probabilities.
indicated above, the Complainant believes the steps she took to become a member
of the DB category fall within the examples in
ss32O(3). These steps are:
She had accepted
a job with the Employer and submitted forms to join the Fund, which she believes
constitutes a step for the purpose
of becoming a member in the DB category
within paragraph (a) of ss32O(3).
She had received
advice from an independent financial planner about the benefits of the DB
category of the Fund, which she believes
constitutes a step for the purpose of
deciding to become a member of the DB category within paragraph (b) of
noting that it was not the decision maker for applications under s32O, the
Trustee questions whether these steps would have
been sufficient for the GSO to
exercise his discretion in her favour. It believes the step required under
paragraph (a) would be
completion of the relevant transfer form, not an
application for Fund membership. It also questions the advice received by the
Complainant,
noting that there is no copy of the advice and that the advice
seems to have been incidental to advice given to the Complainant’s
stated policy objective of the Amending Legislation, as set out in the
Explanatory Notes, was to close the DB category in order
to limit the State
Government’s financial exposure to the funding of defined benefits in the
wake of the global financial crisis.
Given this policy objective, the Tribunal
accepts the Trustee’s position that the steps taken for the purposes of
would need to be directly related to an intended transfer to the DB
Tribunal accepts that the Complainant had not completed the relevant transfer
form (as cited by the Trustee) before 12 November
2008, because she did not even
know that such a form was required at that point. It appears she thought she
could join the DB category
(by default). Although it is possible to construe
accepting employment with the Employer as ‘a step for the purpose of
[a DB member]’ the Tribunal queries whether the GSO would have
considered this step to have been sufficiently proximate to
fall within the
intent of paragraph (a).
Tribunal notes that, although there is no copy of the advice received by the
Complainant and her husband in June 2008, the Complainant
has provided a
statutory declaration recounting her recollection of the advice. The Tribunal
therefore accepts that the Complainant
did receive financial advice about the
financial benefits of the Fund’s DB category. However, the Tribunal
queries whether
this generic advice is the kind of advice contemplated for the
purposes of paragraph (b) or whether something more specific, in the
individual Statement of Advice comparing the accumulation category with the DB
category having regard to the Employer’s
contributions to both categories,
would be required by the GSO.
Tribunal also queries whether, in practice, given the stated policy objective
and the general intent of the Amending Legislation,
the GSO would only be
satisfied, and therefore exercise his discretion to approve an application, if
the steps contemplated under
paragraphs (a) and (b) had been taken by someone
who was already a Fund member when the DB category closed as at 12 November
these uncertainties, the Tribunal cannot find, on the balance of probabilities,
that the Complainant’s application for
approval to transfer to the DB
category would have been accepted, had she been made aware of the ability to
make an application and
applied before 12 May 2009. Therefore, the Tribunal
accepts that the implied decision of the Trustee not to compensate the
Complainant
is fair and reasonable in its operation in relation to the
Complainant in the circumstances.
completeness, the Tribunal notes that the Complainant’s calculations of
her ‘loss’ may also be inaccurate, because
if she had breaks in
service of more than one month, she would not have been able to continue in the
DB category. Therefore, her
projections of her defined benefit to retirement may
be overstated.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decision under review
if it is satisfied that the decision, in its
operation in relation to the
Complainant, was fair and reasonable in the circumstances. For the reasons
stated above the Tribunal
is so satisfied.
Tribunal affirms the decision of the Trustee.
Pamela McAlister, Presiding
Date of Tribunal signature: 30 October
RTF format (349 KB)
Signed PDF/A format