URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1941/37.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Geita Sebea v Territory of Papua [1941] HCA 37; (1941) 67 CLR 544 (24 November 1941)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Geita Sebea and Others Plaintiffs, Appellants;
and The Territory of Papua Defendant, Respondent.
On appeal from the Central Court of Papua.
24 November 1941
Rich A.C.J., Starke and Williams JJ.
R. D. Bertie, solicitor for the appellants, submitted,
T. W. Smith, for the respondent.
The following written judgments were delivered:—
Rich A.C.J.
I have had the advantage of reading the judgment of
J. and as I am in substantial agreement with it I
have nothing to add.
The appeal should be allowed.
Appeal by case stated from the Supreme Court of the Territory of
Papua pursuant to the
Papua Act 1905-1940
Counsel appeared for the Territory, but the appellants submitted a
legal argument in writing pursuant to the section.
The appellants in the Supreme Court claimed compensation under
Lands (Kila Kila Aerodrome) Acquisition Ordinance 1939
(No. 19 of 1939). By that Ordinance, sec. 2, certain lands
described in the schedules were vested in His Majesty, in the
events which
happened, for an estate of fee simple, freed and
discharged from all trusts and encumbrances whatever. That
Ordinance, sec. 3, also
provided:—"The Government of the
Territory of Papua shall pay compensation for the land vested in
His Majesty pursuant to this
Ordinance and the amount of such
compensation and the persons entitled shall be determined as nearly
as possible in the manner prescribed
in respect of land
compulsorily acquired under the Lands Acquisition Ordinance, 1914,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
such Ordinance." The
Lands Acquisition Ordinance 1914
(No. 7 of 1914) provides,
sec. 28, that in determining the compensation under the Ordinance,
regard shall be had, so far as material
to the case, to the value
of the land acquired, but without reference to any increase in
value arising from a proposal to carry out
a public purpose. In the
present case, that value should be assessed as on 1st January 1939
(Ordinance, sec. 29 (b)), but it would
not seem that the value of
the land was different at any subsequent date. The principle upon
which compensation is assessed is the
same as in English law. It is
the value that a willing vendor might reasonably expect to obtain
from a willing purchaser for the
land with all potentialities, but
any enhanced value attaching to the land by reason of the fact that
it is being compulsorily acquired
for the purpose of the acquiring
authority must be disregarded (
Cedars Rapids Manufacturing and
Power Co. v. Lacoste
Vyricherla Narayana Gajapatiraju v.
Revenue Divisional Officer, Vizagapatam
The natives or people of Kila Kila are divided into clans called
Iduhu, which control through headmen their lands. These natives or
people had a right of enjoyment in respect of the lands acquired:
it is a communal or usufructuary occupation with a perpetual right
of possession in the community. But the lands were controlled by
two Iduhu, of whom the plaintiffs in the action were the headmen
representatives. In 1937, the headmen or representatives of these
Iduhu by an instrument in writing describing them as the owners
the land leased to His Majesty portion of the land the subject of
the acquisition for a term of ten years at a yearly rental of
fifteen pounds per annum and this instrument becomes conclusive
evidence of the facts therein set forth and of the title of the
to the estate or interest referred to: See
Land Ordinance
, Second Schedule, clause 7. The majority of these
headmen or representatives are the appellants in this Court and it
has been assumed
in the Supreme Court and before this Court that
they sufficiently represent the persons entitled to compensation
under the Ordinance
already mentioned.
The compensation under the Ordinance is payable on the footing
that an estate in fee simple freed and discharged from all trusts
encumbrances whatever is being transferred from the natives or
people of Kila Kila to the Crown: See Ordinance 1939 No. 19, sec.
Amodu Tijani v. Secretary, Southern Nigeria
]. The persons entitled to the
compensation are the people or natives of Kila Kila, and it is
distributable among the members of the
community through the
headmen or representatives of the Iduhu, which controlled the lands
acquired. And no objection has been taken
to the form of the action
or to the parties thereto.
The value of the land is necessarily one of difficulty. It is
situated in an uncivilized country and can at best be only roughly
The learned judge fixed the value of the land for
agricultural purposes at six pounds per acre for a block of
seventy-one acres upon
which there was an aerodrome, and
twenty-eight pounds for another block of eighteen acres, or
£454 altogether. And he held
that this sum represented the
true value of the land with all its potentialities. But he declined
to consider as affecting the value
of the land certain improvements
and structures which existed upon the land at the date upon which
the value of the land had to be
assessed. These improvements and
structures had been made by the Government of the Territory or by
business firms who were licensees
of the Government. They were
aerodrome improvements such as the runways, drainage, roads,
parking areas, and fencing, a building
for housing the power plant
erected on a concrete base with walls of fibrocement sheets, a
building for a radio station and meteorological
laboratory erected on heavy cement blocks, a customs and quarantine
office, and there were also other buildings erected
by business
firms under the licence of the Government. The learned judge was of
opinion that these structures were not fixed to the
land so as to
become part of it, but remained chattels.
"The meaning of the word" (fixtures) "is anything annexed to the
freehold, that is, fastened to or connected with it, not in mere
juxtaposition with the soil. Whatever is so annexed becomes part of
the realty, and the person who was the owner of it when it was
chattel loses his property in it, which immediately vests in the
owner of the soil... But an exception has long been established
favour of a tenant erecting fixtures for the purposes of trade,
allowing him the privilege of removing them during the continuance
of the term" (
Bain v. Brand
]). And in determining whether or not a chattel
becomes a fixture, the intention of the person affixing it to the
soil is material
only so far as it can be presumed from the degree
and object of the annexation (
Hobson v. Gorringe
Provincial Bill Posting
Co. v. Low Moor Iron Co.
Reid v. Smith
The learned judge was unable to draw the inference that the
improvements and structures were part of the land, because they
be useless to the natives and because he could not think that
buildings erected in connection with a public utility were to
attached to the land. Here I think the learned judge was in
error. All he had to consider in connection with the structures on
land was the degree of annexation, which was very considerable,
and the object of annexation, which was patent for all to see,
their use as part of an aerodrome. Moreover, the
improvements on the land in the way of runways, drainage, parking
areas, and so
forth were inherent in the land itself and did not
depend upon annexation or affixation.
But the value of the land might, however, be affected and
diminished if the structures and buildings upon the land upon the
the assessment of its value were "trade fixtures" removable
by the Government. The land did not vest in the Government until
February 1940, when the
notice of vesting was
published pursuant to the
Lands (Kila Kila Aerodrome)
Acquisition Ordinance 1939
No. 19, but on 1st January 1939,
when the assessment had to be made, the Government's rights under
the lease from the natives subsisted,
including the right to remove
trade fixtures upon the land during the continuance of its term.
This latter right was a relaxation
in favour of the tenant for the
encouragement of trade.
But whether they are or are not trade fixtures is a question of
fact depending upon the circumstances of the case. In some cases,
the size and permanence and the general character and object of the
structures and buildings may lead one to the conclusion that
are not tenant's fixtures but something permanently annexed to the
Pole-Carew v. Western Counties and General Manure
the removal must be capable of being effected without material
injury to the land or the destruction of the fixture: Cf.
Landlord and Tenant
, 4th ed. (1907), p. 697.
It is for the learned judge to determine whether the structures
and buildings upon the land were or were not trade fixtures upon
land upon 1st January 1939. If they were, then in my opinion
the value of the land should be assessed upon the footing that the
had a right to remove them from the land and would,
rather than pay compensation therefor, remove them from the land
during the continuance
of its term. I do not of course refer to the
improvements upon the land such as runways and so forth already
mentioned, inherent
in the land.
The question remains how the land should be valued, if these
improvements and structures or any portion thereof form part of the
It is useless to consider what the land with the improvements
and structures upon it would bring in the open or any other market,
for there was no market. Some artificial method must be adopted,
and the most satisfactory, to my mind, is to take the agricultural
value of the land as fixed by the learned judge plus an addition
measured by what it would cost to make or establish the
improvements
and structures existing upon and forming part of the
land at the date of valuation but taking into account a proper
deduction for
obsolescence or depreciation: Cf.
Street Tramways Co. v. Lord Provost, &c., of Edinburgh
London Street
Tramways Co. v. London County Council
Melbourne Tramway and Omnibus Co.
v. Tramway Board
The leasehold interest in the Government also requires
consideration and a proper deduction made in respect of it. One of
the witnesses
placed a value, as I follow his evidence, of
£2,562 upon that interest. But the value of the interest
depends, I apprehend,
on the difference between the actual rent
paid and the improved annual rental that the property is worth
multiplied by the number
of years' purchase at which the tenant's
interest should be valued: See
Cripps, Compensation
ed. (1938), p. 189.
The appellants also claimed that they were entitled to ten per
cent or some other amount for compulsory acquisition of their
In practice, a ten per cent allowance is often made, but
"this percentage may be taken to cover various incidental costs and
to which the owner is subject whose land has been taken,
and if no percentage were added such incidental costs and charges
have to be considered in assessing the amount of
compensation" (
Cripps, Compensation
, 8th ed. (1938), p.
213). Otherwise there is no right to this percentage, and in the
present case the claim is untenable.
The question whether the provision of the
restricting the rights of the appellants to sell or
otherwise deal with the land affects its value should be answered
in the negative.
The Ordinance, sec. 3, provides that save as
thereinafter provided a native shall have no power to sell, lease,
or otherwise deal
with, or dispose of, any land, and any contract
made by him to do so shall be void. But the Government may in
certain cases purchase
or lease native lands (sec. 5). The
Lands (Kila Kila Aerodrome) Acquisition Ordinance 1939
however, disposes of the matter. It enables the Government to
acquire the lands in question here and prescribes for payment of
compensation
to the natives or persons entitled thereto.
The questions stated should be answered as follows:—
No. The land should be valued as on
1st January 1939 with such improvements upon it as formed part of
the land and such structures
and buildings upon it as were
permanently attached or affixed to it.
The land should be valued on the
footing that an estate in fee simple freed and discharged from all
trusts and encumbrances whatsoever
was acquired by the
Government.
) if subsisting
improvements on 1st January 1939, (
) if permanently
attached or affixed to the land on 1st January 1939.
Unnecessary to answer.
Finally, I would express the hope that the administration and
the Protector of the Natives will consider the propriety of
the money payable to the natives as compensation and
appropriating it by Ordinance or in some other lawful manner for
the permanent
welfare of the natives; e.g., in improving their
lands or dwellings or schools or hospitals, and not allowing it to
be wasted in
exchange for shells or beads or coloured cloths or
suchlike things.
Williams J.
On 23rd March 1937 the appellants, who are natives of Papua,
leased approximately fifty acres of land to the Crown for the term
ten years computed from 19th March 1937 at the yearly rental of
fifteen pounds. The Crown constructed an aerodrome upon this land
known as the Kila Kila Aerodrome. By 1st January 1939 the Crown had
constructed on the land a runway formed with concrete drains
parking areas and had enclosed the whole aero-drome with a fence.
The Crown had also erected certain buildings occupied as a
and meteorological station and office and a customs and quarantine
office; and certain companies had also placed buildings
land, which they used in connection with servicing the aircraft.
The owners of the buildings paid no rent and no charges were
for the use of the aerodrome. The buildings, with the exception of
one, were erected on concrete piers. There was no evidence
whether or not they were fastened to these piers. All the buildings
were erected for the purpose of using the land as an
aerodrome and
for no other purpose whatever. The value of the work done in making
the aerodrome was assessed on behalf of the appellants
£2,740 and of the buildings at £3,460. The respondent
gave no evidence of value.
After this work had been done to the land and these buildings
had been erected the
Lands (Kila Kila Aerodrome) Acquisition
Ordinance 1939
was passed, authorizing the resumption of the
leased lands which, together with about twenty acres of adjoining
lands and a further
area of land comprising about eighteen acres
situated about one mile from the leased lands, were included in the
schedules thereto.
Clause 3 of the Ordinance provided that the
Crown should pay compensation and the amount of such compensation
should be determined
as nearly as possible in the manner prescribed
in respect of land compulsorily acquired under the
Acquisition Ordinance 1914
. By notice in the
dated 7th February 1940 the lands described in the
schedules were resumed by the Crown.
The appellants brought an action in the Central Court of Papua
to determine the amount of compensation to which they were
The action came on for trial before
held that the resumed lands had no potentiality except for use as
agricultural lands and assessed the compensation on that
This appeal raises the question whether the basis of
compensation adopted by the learned trial judge was correct.
As appears from his Honour's informative report, the appellants'
title to the land was a communal usufructuary title equivalent to
full ownership of the land, so that they were entitled to be
compensated on this footing (
Amodu Tijani v. Secretary,
Southern Nigeria
Land Ordinance 1911-1935
3, prohibits the disposal of land owned by natives by sale, lease
or any other dealing and any contract made by them to dispose
land is void, but this restriction could have no detrimental effect
upon the determination of the value of the land when compulsorily
acquired, because in the hands of the Crown it would be freed
therefrom. Indeed, the reference in the
Lands (Kila Kila
Aerodrome) Acquisition Ordinance 1939
, sec. 3, to the
Lands Acquisition Ordinance 1914
is sufficient to show
that the appellants as full owners of the land are entitled to have
the compensation assessed upon as ample
a basis as though it had
been acquired from a European. The Crown stressed the fact that
under the peculiar circumstances of this
case it was the only
possible purchaser, but even so, as pointed out by the Privy
Vyricherla Narayana Gajapatiraju v. Revenue
Divisional Officer, Vizagapatam
], "if the potentiality is of value to the
vendor if there happen to be two or more possible purchasers of it,
it is difficult to
see why he should be willing to part with it for
nothing merely because there is only one purchaser. To compel him
to do so is to
treat him as a vendor parting with his land under
compulsion and not as a willing vendor. The fact is that the only
possible purchaser
of a potentiality is usually quite willing to
pay for it."
Lands Acquisition Ordinance 1914
, sec. 29, provides
as follows:—"The value of any land acquired by compulsory
process shall be assessed as follows:—(a)
In the case of land
acquired for a public purpose not authorised by a Special Ordinance
according to the value of the land on the
first day of January last
preceding the date of acquisition; and (b) In the case of land
acquired for a public purpose authorised
by a Special Ordinance,
according to the value of the land on the first day of January last
preceding the first day of the meeting
of the Legislative Council
in which the Special Ordinance was passed. (2) The value of the
land shall be assessed without' reference
to any increase in value
arising from the proposal to carry out the public purpose."
At the date of the resumption the leased part of the land had
been improved as an aerodrome, but the additional land was still
for this purpose. The
Lands (Kila Kila Aerodrome)
Acquisition Ordinance 1939
does not specifically authorize a
public purpose, but the preamble states that the lands described in
the schedules are required
immediately for the purposes of or
connected with the Kila Kila Aerodrome, and it appears to me that
this statement is sufficient
to bring the case within the
Acquisition Ordinance 1914
, sec. 29 (b). The correct date of
valuation is therefore 1st January 1939. It is true that the Crown
was free to acquire other suitable
lands of the same dimensions and
construct an aerodrome there, but to do so would require
considerable outlay, so that the resumed
lands had the potentiality
that, having been improved to the extent already mentioned, the
Crown would be willing to acquire them
for their agricultural value
plus the value of the expenditure already made rather than to have
to purchase other lands at their
agricultural value and then have
the trouble and expense of improving them to the same extent.
Assuming, therefore, that the appellants
were willing vendors and
the Crown was a willing purchaser the price would be determined
having regard to the fact that the vendors
would know that the
Crown would pay this amount but no more, and the Crown would know
that the vendors could reasonably expect this
London County Council and London Street Tramways Co.
Melbourne Tramway and
Omnibus Co. v. Tramway Board
]). Similar principles are applied where land
used as a church or school is resumed, the compensation being fixed
by ascertaining
what it would cost to acquire an equally convenient
site and erect equally convenient buildings there
, 2nd ed. vol. 6, p. 45;
Compensation
, 7th ed. (1931), p. 170). In determining the
amount, the improvements made to the leased land consisting of the
runway and the concrete
drains would have to be taken into
There remains the question of the buildings. On the scanty
evidence available to this Court they were apparently fixtures, but
is a matter for the learned trial judge to determine applying
the principles referred to in
, 2nd. ed, vol. 20,
pp. 96 et seq., and in the cases referred to by this Court in
Commissioner of Stamps (W.A.) v. L. Whiteman Ltd.
]. A tenant is allowed to
remove trade fixtures during or at the end of the term. The Crown
as lessee was not trading in the strict
sense, but the aerodrome
was used for commercial purposes, although not for profit, and it
seems to me that the principles applicable
to trade fixtures can be
applied to the buildings placed there by the Crown. The buildings
erected by the companies with the permission
of the Crown were
clearly placed there for the purposes of trade, and were therefore
tenant's fixtures (
, 2nd ed. vol. 20, pp. 105,
, and 106, note
Webb v. Bevis Ltd.
North Shore Gas Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner
of Stamp Duties (N.S.W.)
]). If, as appears to be probable, the
buildings can be removed, their only materiality in the assessment
of the compensation would
be that it would benefit the Crown to pay
something more for the resumed land rather than to have to go to
the expense of removing
and re-erecting them elsewhere.
The case is not one in which ten per cent should be added to the
value of the land when determined in accordance with these
principles.
This addition is often made to cover incidental costs
and charges to which an owner whose lands are taken is subject so
as to ensure
that he will receive full compensation, but there do
not appear to be any circumstances here which would require the
These considerations show that the valuation on an agricultural
basis made by the learned judge was erroneous and that the case
be referred back to him to amend his valuation in the light
of these general principles. When the amount of compensation has
determined, it will be necessary to consider whether the
rental of fifteen pounds per annum payable under the existing lease
fifty acres is equivalent to the full rental value of the
land. If it is not, as appears to be the case, the lessee would be
to an amount to represent the value of the lease to him
for the balance of the term and this amount should be deducted from
the compensation,
because, under an ordinary resumption, the lessee
would be entitled thereto as his share of the full value of the
land, but here
the Crown and the lessee are the same person.
As a check to the amount of the valuation arrived at according
to these principles, it would be justifiable to assess the rental
of the resumed lands by estimating the amount which the Crown
would be willing to pay to continue its occupation of the leased
having regard to the extent to which they had been improved
for the purpose of an aerodrome, and to occupy the additional lands
than to have to go elsewhere, carry out similar improvements
and remove the buildings thereto, and then to capitalize this
Earl of Eldon v. North-Eastern Railway
Athlone Rifle Range
The appeal should be allowed and the questions asked in the case
answered as suggested by my brother
Appeal allowed. Discharge the order of the Court below. Remit
the matter to it to award compensation in accordance with the terms
of this judgment. Respondent to pay the appellants' costs of this
appeal. Costs of the original hearing to be dealt with by the
Solicitor for the appellants, R. D. Bertie.
Solicitor for the respondent, H. F. E. Whitlam, Crown Solicitor
for the Commonwealth.
] (1914) A.C.
] (1939) A.C.
] (1921) 2 A.C.
] (1876) 1 A.C. 762,
] (1897) 1 Ch.
] (1909) 2 K.B.
[1905] HCA 54
; (1905) 3 C.L.R.
] (1920) 2 Ch.
] (1858) 27 L.J. Ch.
] (1894) A.C. 456,
at pp. 459, 460.
] (1894) A.C. 489,
at p. 491; (1894) 2 Q.B. 189, at pp. 191, 192.
] (1919) A.C. 667,
] (1921) 2 A.C.
] (1939) A.C. 302,
at pp. 316, 317.
] (1894) 2 Q.B.
] (1919) A.C.
[1940] HCA 30
; (1940) 64 C.L.R.
] (1901) 2 Ch.
388, at pp. 396, 397.
] (1940) 1 All
[1940] HCA 7
; (1940) 63 C.L.R.
52, at p. 68.
] (1899) 80 L.T.
] (1902) 1 Ir. Ch.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (392 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter