Application by Australian Salaried Medical Officers Federation [2025] FWCFB 229 (14 October 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 229
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Application for an intractable bargaining
declaration
Application by Australian Salaried Medical Officers
(B2024/1319)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT EASTON
COMMISSIONER MCKINNON
COMMISSIONER
SYDNEY, 14 OCTOBER 2025
Application for an intractable bargaining declaration; workplace
determination – medical practitioners – history of sector-wide
bargaining – two matters still in issue – wages and education
expenses – the merits of the case – bargaining
in context of
agreement made for the remainder of the ACT public sector – cost of living
– maintenance of real wages
– flat dollar increases –
appropriateness and reasonableness of distinguishing one group of employees
– no compelling
basis to distinguish a group of workers – workplace
determination to be made.
The Australian Salaried Medical Officers Federation (
and the Australian Medical Association (ACT) (
) have been bargaining
with the Australian Capital Territory as represented by Canberra Health Services
) for a new enterprise agreement. Bargaining commenced on 21 February
2022 and has largely been successful.
However, the parties remain in dispute about the level and timing of
wage increases for medical practitioners. There is a separate
question about
whether the terms of a Medical Education Expenses clause have been agreed.
On 9 October 2024, ASMOF applied to the Commission for an intractable
bargaining declaration to resolve the outstanding bargaining
intractable bargaining declaration was made by Deputy President Dean on 12
November 2024.
decision now determines the dispute for the purpose of the making of a workplace
determination to be known as the
ACT Public Sector Medical Practitioners
Workplace Determination 2025
Relevant Background
CHS is the Government directorate responsible for the provision of
health services in the Australian Capital Territory (ACT). It provides
hospital and other public health services to the ACT’s population of
approximately 470,000 people. It also provides
services in the Southern NSW
Local Health District, with a population of approximately 210,000 people.
The health services provided by CHS include:
public hospitals;
specialist palliative care hospice;
(c) several
community-based health services, including seven Community Health Centres, five
nurse-led Walk-in Centres, and several
early childhood, youth and women’s
health and dental health services; and
Health, Justice Health, Alcohol and Drug Services for detainees in custodial
facilities.
In providing health services, CHS is required to have regard to the
objectives set out in
Health Act 1993
’). Those objectives include: to improve the
efficiency, effectiveness and quality of health services, to maintain a strong
and viable public hospital system and a full range of community health services,
and to foster disease prevention and primary health
Employees working in CHS are employed as public servants in the ACT
Public Service (
) by the ACT as represented by CHS (referred to in
this decision as ‘
the Territory
As at 31 January 2025, approximately 35% of the ACTPS worked in CHS,
comprising 10,967 employees, including 1,333 medical practitioners
(approximately 12.15% of CHS’s employed workforce, and approximately 4.5%
of the ACTPS).
Parties were bargaining for a new enterprise agreement to replace the
ACT Public Sector Medical Practitioners Enterprise Agreement 2021-2022
2022 Agreement
). The 2022 Agreement and earlier related enterprise
agreements have also been generically referred to as the Medical Practitioners
Enterprise Agreement (
The 2022 Agreement commenced on 18 January 2022 and nominally
expired on 31 October 2022. Clause 2 of the 2022 Agreement stated that
purpose was to provide a ‘fast-tracked interim Agreement for a period of
12 months in recognition of the added burdens
imposed on the ACT Public Sector
workforce as a consequence of the Covid Pandemic’.
The 2022 Agreement provided for two 1.35% pay increases in December
2021 and June 2022. In 2022 the predecessor agreements were rolled
consent. There is a large spread in pay rates under the current 2022 Agreement.
For example, the base rate of a senior specialist
is more than three times the
base rate of an intern.
It is not in dispute that:
every employee in the ACTPS is employed under an enterprise agreement;
(b) there are
19 enterprise agreements that cover the ACTPS;
enterprise agreement includes a set of common core provisions and a set of
sector specific or directorate specific provisions;
(d) common core
provisions include rates of pay, pay increases and pay related matters;
negotiation and implementation of common core provisions has been in place for
some years and promotes ‘consistency
and fairness across the
(f) common core
conditions are negotiated centrally between the Office of Industrial Relations
and Workforce Strategy (
) and interested unions;
(g) the most
recent round of bargaining commenced in February 2022 for enterprise agreements
to apply from 2023 - 2026;
(h) at the same
time that bargaining meetings took place regarding the core conditions, CHS
conducted parallel meetings regarding
the MPEA for its employees, including
meetings with ASMOF and the AMA;
bargaining representatives for the other 18 enterprise agreements reached
agreement on 11 April 2023;
(j) the current
bargaining dispute means that the MPEA is the only enterprise agreement not
finalised following the 2023 - 2026 bargaining
(k) all other
ACTPS employees are now covered by new enterprise agreements reflecting the
agreement reached in April 2023.
Terms that are ‘Agreed’ and
‘Still in Issue’
Agreed draft determinations containing the agreed terms were filed
in accordance with s.274 of the Act. We accept that the agreed
determinations contain the agreed terms for the purposes of s.274 of the
Terms dealing with the appropriate level of wage increases are still
in issue and are not agreed terms.
There is a further remaining issue (the terms of the Medical
Education Expenses clause) and a dispute about whether it constitutes
‘agreed term’. ASMOF and CHS have been in agreement about the terms
of a proposed clause since June 2022. However,
the AMA neither opposed nor
agreed with the change. As such we will treat the matter as ‘still in
issue’ rather than
We deal with each matter still in issue separately.
The competing wage claims
The competing wage claims of the parties are summarised in the table
5.5% + $6000
*Proposal for increases to be payable from the first pay period after this
**The basis of the AMA proposal for wage increases is that they should be
equivalent to the relevant Consumer Price Index (CPI) +
The Territory also proposed:
(a) a one-off
cost of living supplement of $1,250 for all employees working at 0.5 FTE or
above (pro rata), which was external to
the agreement;
(b) superannuation
increases of 0.5% from 1 July 2025; and a further 0.5% from 1 January 2026; and
(c) a minimum
full-time equivalent salary floor of $62,860 from December 2024.
Legislative Context and General Principles
Under s.235 of the Act, the Commission may make an intractable
bargaining declaration in relation to a proposed enterprise agreement.
making a declaration, the Commission must have dealt with the dispute with the
applicant’s participation and must be
satisfied both that there is no
reasonable prospect of an agreement being reached, and that it is reasonable in
all the circumstances
to make the declaration.
If an intractable bargaining declaration has been made in relation
to a proposed enterprise agreement, the Commission must make an
intractable
bargaining workplace determination as quickly as possible after making the
declaration, or after the end of any post-declaration
negotiating period for the
declaration under s.235A (s.269).
The making of an intractable bargaining workplace determination
involves the Commission’s exercise of limited arbitration powers
determine particular terms of an industrial instrument where the parties have
been unable to reach agreement. Clearly this arbitration
power is only available
in very limited circumstances and only when the bargaining parties (bargaining
representatives as well as
parties to the proposed agreement) cannot reach
agreement by themselves in relation to a proposed agreement.
The resultant workplace determination must (and must only) contain
the terms set out in s.270 (agreed terms and terms dealing with
the matters at
issue), the core terms (s.272), and the mandatory terms (s.273).
Section 275 of the Act provides a non-exhaustive list of matters
that the Commission must take into account in deciding which terms
to include in
a workplace determination. These are:
“(a) the merits of the case;
(c) the interests of the employers and employees who will be covered by the
determination;
(ca) the significance, to those employers and employees, of any arrangements
or benefits in an enterprise agreement that, immediately
determination is made, applies to any of the employers in respect of any of the
(d) the public interest;
(e) how productivity might be improved in the enterprise or enterprises
(f) the extent to which the conduct of the bargaining representatives for the
proposed enterprise agreement concerned was reasonable
during bargaining for the
(g) the extent to which the bargaining representatives for the proposed
enterprise agreement concerned have complied with the good
faith bargaining
requirements;
(h) incentives to continue to bargain at a later time.”
Sections 577(1) and 578 provide further guidance on the exercise of
the Commission’s powers. Under s.577(1) such powers must
be exercised in a
manner that is fair and just, quick, informal and avoids unnecessary
technicalities, is open and transparent and
promotes harmonious and cooperative
workplace relations. Under s.578 the Commission must take into account the
objects of the Act,
as well as equity, good conscience and the merits of the
matter as well as the prevention and elimination of proscribed discrimination.
Of particular relevance in the present case are the objects of Part
2-4 of the Act (Enterprise Agreements) to provide a simple, flexible
framework that enables collective bargaining in good faith, particularly at the
enterprise level, for enterprise agreements
that deliver productivity benefits,
and to enable the Commission to facilitate good faith bargaining and the making
of enterprise
agreements including through dealing with disputes where the
bargaining representatives request assistance.
Transport Workers’ Union of Australia v Cleanaway
Operations Pty Ltd T/A Cleanaway Operations Pty Ltd
Cleanaway Erskine Park
), a Full Bench of the
Commission observed that the terms of s.275 should be construed consistent with
the earlier authorities. Relevantly,
those include
Automotive, Food, Metals,
Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union v Curragh Queensland Mining
(1998) 43 AILR 3-860 (Q4464)
Workers’ Union of Australia v Qantas Airways Limited
(2012) 225 IR 13
Schweppes Australia Pty Ltd
v United Voice - Victoria Branch
[2012] 226 IR 336
Parks Victoria v The
Australian Workers’ Union
(2013) 234 IR 242
Parks Victoria
To this we would add one further observation. Amendments introduced
Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes) Act 2023
imposed new limits on the exercise of the Commission’s arbitration
powers when making a workplace determination. Although it
does not apply in
relation to terms providing for a wage increase, the new s.270A requires that
any term included in a workplace
determination for the purpose of dealing with a
matter at issue must not be less favourable to each of the employees and union
representatives than a term of an enterprise agreement that applies
to the employees who will be covered by the determination and
deals with the
By effectively setting a floor under existing enterprise agreement
terms, this provision has the potential to discourage compromise
in bargaining
on potential trade-offs in any replacement agreement. This is a relevant
consideration in the making of workplace determinations
having regard to the
and in particular, the emphasis on collective bargaining at
the enterprise level. Workplace determinations have a place in the legislative
scheme where bargaining has failed, but they should not become a vehicle of
choice in preference to enterprise agreements made directly
between the parties.
a separate Full Bench
of the Commission described its task in the making of a workplace determination
as follows (at [28]-[29]):
“The factors in s.275 have a general bearing on the
package of terms to be contained in the Workplace Determination and a more
specific bearing on many of the particular claims. Both parties contended that
the approach of a Full Bench of the Australian Industrial
Relations Commission
under predecessor legislation in
CFMEU v Curragh Queensland Mining Ltd (the
Curragh Case)
43 AILR 3-860 (Q4464)]
should be adopted. We agree
that this is a leading case dealing with the approach to similar legislation in
the same context as the
present case and deals with many of the same factors we
are required to take into account. When amending legislation adopts wording
tests from predecessor legislation it is inferred that the legislature intended
that authorities dealing with the predecessor
legislation will continue to
apply. While there are some changes to the wording of the factors to which
regard must be given, the
provisions are substantially the same.
In particular we note the consideration by the Full Bench of the earlier
authorities and the endorsement of the approach that the
task of the tribunal in
a matter such as this is to assess the respective positions of the parties in
relation to the matters at
issue and, by reference to the statutory factors,
arrive at a conclusion that would be regarded as appropriate in the context of
the bargaining had the bargaining concluded successfully. The Full Bench in
the Curragh Case
noted that this did not involve a form of subjective
prognostication as to the outcome of the negotiations. Rather, the task involves
an objective assessment of the statutory factors and an overall judgment as to
an appropriate workplace determination to apply to
the operations concerned
until the parties replace the determination with a new enterprise
agreement.”
Parks Victoria
at [167] and
[174], the Full Bench distinguished between the Commission’s task under
s.275 and the making or varying of an award:
“But the task we are presently engaged in is quite
different to the making or variation of an award. As explained by the Full
] the task of the Commission in a matter such as this is to
assess the respective positions of the parties in relation to the matters
issue and, by reference to the relevant statutory factors, arrive at a
conclusion that would be regarded as appropriate in the
context of bargaining,
had the bargaining concluded successfully. Such an approach does not involve a
form of subjective prognostication
as to the outcome of the negotiations, but
rather involves an objective assessment of the statutory factors and an overall
as to an appropriate determination to apply to the operations
concerned until the parties replace the determination with a new enterprise
In determining the level and operative date of wage increases in a workplace
determination the Commission is seeking to arrive at
an outcome which is fair in
all the circumstances and that takes account of the factors in s.275 (and ss.557
and 578). Importantly,
those factors include merit (s.275(a)) and the interests
of the parties (s.275(c)).”
The reference to an outcome that is
“fair in all the circumstances” drew from an earlier Full Bench
decision in
“As to Schweppes’ first point we are not persuaded
that real wage maintenance is the dominant consideration in determining
level of wage increases in a workplace determination. Determining the level of
wage increases in this context does not lend itself
to the adoption of a
decision rule or a mathematical formula. Fundamentally the Tribunal is seeking
to arrive at an outcome which
is fair in all the circumstances and that
appropriately balances the interests of the parties. The factors in s.275 and
578 of the Act are also relevant and must be taken into
Two particular features of the current dispute are similar in
important respects to the underlying facts in the
disputes and the decisions that followed: in relation to
the interrelationship between employees covered by the determination and
other groups of employees of the same employer, and in relation
, that employees to be covered by the determination are public
sector employees.
the workplace determination arose from failed
bargaining for a new enterprise agreement to cover ground handling operations.
negotiations were aimed at reaching a replacement agreement intended to be
known as EBA8 (
at [8]-[9]). The Full Bench found:
(a) EBA7 was an
appropriate starting point because it represented the package of terms the
parties have previously agreed to apply,
the terms under which the parties were
operating, and the basis for the negotiations conducted by the parties (at
practices of other employers in the airline industry and the terms and
conditions applying to their employees are capable
of being relevant to the
fairness of particular terms as well as the appropriateness of the package of
benefits in a highly competitive
environment, particularly noting that in many
respects, the wages and conditions of the employees covered by the arbitration
the highest or among the highest of comparable employees in the airline
industry in Australia (at [35]);
(c) the extent
to which the parties have been prepared to deal with matters in enterprise
bargaining negotiations and their approach
to such matters for this and other
groups of employees will also be relevant. Such practices may provide a guide to
deciding what
provisions are fair and reasonable in a workplace determination
applying at this enterprise (at [37]); and
arbitrating various other conditions of employment the Full Bench decided that
the increase in wages should be 3% per annum,
which was the same increase
“usually provided” to employees covered by the determination and
“usually provided”
to other Qantas employees. The Full Bench
considered 3% to be “in line with appropriate other measures and has due
the current circumstances of the employees and Qantas” (at
[95]-[97]).
Parks Victoria
bargaining took place in the context of the
Victorian Government’s published wages policy that capped available pay
The employer had significant budgetary constraints that created
pressure to achieve cost savings (at [16]-[22]). In that matter:
position taken by the employer in the proceedings was heavily influenced by the
Victorian Government’s wages policy
(at [201]);
Victorian Government’s wages policy provided for increases of 2.5% per
annum and permitted further wage increases “which
can be funded from
identifiable and costed productivity savings derived from genuine workforce
reform” (at [202]);
(c) the wages
policy was said (by the employer) to be “sound, fiscally responsible
economic management, consistent with economic
principles which seeks to improve
the living standards of all Victorians”;
employer argued that the consequences of providing wage increases which go
beyond the policy were likely to have a negative
impact on the State’s
economic growth and would put at risk its fiscal sustainability; and
(e) the unions
argued that the government’s wages policy was “no more than a
negotiating position” and the Commission
should give it no greater weight
The Full Bench said at [207]:
“In our view, the Victorian Government’s wages
policy is relevant to our consideration of the level of wage increases
included within the workplace determination. The policy is, of course, not
determinative of that issue, however, given the
size of the state government
sector and the role of the government in allocating scarce resources to various
public services (such
as health, education and justice) it is appropriate to
accord the policy more weight than one would to the negotiating position of
parties without such responsibilities. Of course, such a policy cannot displace
the Commission’s consideration of the range
of statutory factors to which
it must have regard.”
The Full Bench found that on
Parks Victoria’s
a workplace determination which provided for wage increases totalling 12.875%
would be consistent with the government’s
wages policy (at [212]). After
taking into account matters including “wages outcomes for public sector
employees generally”
and that “the wages outcome is broadly
consistent with the Victorian Government’s wages policy” (at [248]),
Full Bench awarded pay increases of 13.5%.
The Evidence
Evidence from medical
practitioners
Both ASMOF and AMA led evidence from medical practitioners employed
in CHS. The medical practitioner witnesses provided evidence of:
work/career history;
(b) the work
that they do;
(c) how their
work area is organised;
(d) relevant
changes in recent years;
(e) pressures
they face in their work in terms of the sheer volume of work; and
(f) difficulties
arising from shortages in medical practitioners.
For reasons of confidentiality, we have not recorded in this
decision the details of the evidence received. It is sufficient to observe
acceptance of the general tenor of this evidence that the affected medical
practitioners are performing their work under what
can often be quite difficult
circumstances, including because of limited resources.
ASMOF’s evidence
ASMOF’s Evidence
– Witness MP-1
Witness MP-1 is a Senior Staff
Specialist at The Canberra Hospital and North Canberra Hospital.
Witness MP-1 said that in August 2024 a new emergency department
opened with a significantly larger footprint than the previous department.
Witness MP-1 said there are currently 128 treatment spaces/beds which is
anticipated to increase to 152 in the coming year. Witness
MP-1 said that the
previous emergency department had 90 spaces and there has not been an equivalent
increase in medical staffing.
Witness MP-1 said that usually roster requests go in two months in
advance, and the roster is released four to five weeks in advance.
additional work is released as overtime with the roster, when it is known, or on
a weekly or daily basis. However, at
Canberra Hospital, “we are barely
managing consultant numbers and registrar numbers are very short.”
Witness MP-1 stated that there is often a request to work on the
floor during clinical support time, depending on how busy the department
if there is significant staff shortage due to sickness. Usually a request is
made for one additional staff specialist to cover
a shift. The most recent
request was on 26 January 2025 to work extra shifts on 30 and 31 January. This
was paid as overtime and
with penalty rates.
Witness MP-1 said:
“We are required to perform additional work when there are
not enough doctors on the floor or the roster has collapsed due to
sick leave,
especially at the consultant or registrar level...
There is insufficient medical staffing at the senior or junior level. We have
an abundance of year 1 and year 2 doctors, and after
this, there is
The intense workload, and the remuneration not being at par with other
locations, is one of the reasons that people leave...”
In relation to ongoing vacancies Witness
“Most impacts of the ongoing vacancies are on the staff
that are working in the department who must work extra hard due to the
additional pressure. This includes picking up extra evening, weekend and public
holiday shifts as demands on the floor are too high.
Locums are used often in Emergency; however, it is very difficult to retain
locums due to the nature of locum work, locum rates of
pay, workload and various
factors. There are two locums currently on the roster on night shifts. Most
locums work a block of shifts
in Emergency.
Throughout my time working in Emergency at Canberra Hospital, doctors of all
levels have expressed to me that they feel exhausted
and that they struggle to
maintain a work-life balance because the nature of our work is so consuming and
because we regularly need
to use a significant portion of our time outside of
work to recover from our shifts.”
ASMOF’s Evidence – Witness MP-2
Witness MP-2 is a Resident Medical
Officer at The Canberra Hospital. At the beginning of 2022, Witness MP-2 was
employed by the Territory
as an intern.
At the time of making their statement Witness MP-2 was working in
the Acute Medical Unit (
) at Canberra Hospital, which they described
as an intense environment to work in and in which the workload is
relentless.
Witness MP-2 said that the AMU is supposed to have a maximum of 24
patients at any one time, however, it is often above this number,
problematic as the resources are only able to cover 24 patients.
Witness MP-2 said:
“During the time that I have worked in AMU, I have only
worked on a shift where there have been five RMOs once. However, I have
worked shifts where only two RMOs were rostered, which significantly increases
the workload for everyone.
... Because there are generally more morning RMOs, if one of the evening RMOs
calls in sick they tend to pull one of the morning RMOs
to work a double or
change to the evening shift.
There is no wiggle room in the AMU roster, and based on my experience, we are
running off the smell of an oily rag. If someone is
sick or injured, or needs to
take leave to care for a sick child, there is no one to cover them and we
usually just have to cover
the work with the resources that we have, or someone
has to work additional hours.
On average I would estimate that I work 30 minutes to two hours of overtime
each week, depending on the workload in any given week.
I do my best to record
and claim my overtime, though I often don’t have the energy to do
In relation to using locums Witness MP-2 said:
“CHS frequently relies on locum doctors to fill staffing
Locums are paid at a much higher hourly rate than CHS employees at the
equivalent level...
[Visiting Medical Officers] are also often in the AMU.”
Witness MP-2’s primary concern
regarding the working conditions is patient safety however “there are just
not enough of
us to provide the level of care that people need ... I am
concerned that the demands on the health care system in Australia are greater
than they have ever been and will continue to increase with the tsunami effect
of the ageing population.”
ASMOF’s Evidence – Witness MP-3
Witness MP-3 was employed by the
Territory as an Intensive Care Unit (ICU) Registrar within the CHS until
December 2024.
Witness MP-3 has worked in other jurisdictions and gave evidence
in 2020-2022.
Witness MP-3 said that they found the working conditions at Calvary very
difficult and at one stage put their training
on hold because “I felt
burnt out and needed time away from clinical medicine”. They said:
“The main difficulty I had working at Calvary was that it
was very short-staffed, and I was expected to provide care to patients
multiple teams. During the term that I worked there, there were multiple days on
which I had to carry multiple pagers and
respond to those calls because other
doctors were sick or otherwise unavailable. On one particular day, I was
carrying four pagers.
I recall that I called my [spouse] in tears during my
shift because I was so stressed and overwhelmed at the prospect of undertaking
the workload and responsibilities of four doctors: an intern, two General
Medicine registrars and an Infectious Diseases registrar.
I recall that throughout the term there were not enough staff to cover
multiple instances of expected and unexpected leave, and registrars,
interns would need to cover for one another, across different teams. Normally,
junior doctors would only work within their
team, looking after patients
admitted under that team’s set of specialists, and reporting only to those
specific specialists.”
After resigning in 2022, Witness MP-3
returned to medicine in the ICU at Canberra Hospital in 2024. Witness MP-3 said
that in 2024
staffing shortages were acknowledged and well known. The roster was
colour-coded such that it was easy to see unplanned leave and
shifts during
which there were fewer than the usual/expected number of doctors. Witness MP-3
chose not to work additional hours or
shifts but explained that if a doctor
works an extra shift, the rate of pay they receive for that work is based on how
they already have rostered in their fortnight and the day of the week
that shift is worked on.
Witness MP-3 said that they were
required to take on additional work/responsibility during shifts when the unit
was short staffed,
and that they often went home feeling exceedingly tired,
anxious, stressed and irritable. Witness MP-3 is contemplating a return
working at The Canberra Hospital but their decision is “heavily dependent
on whether current working conditions improve
ASMOF’s Evidence – Witness MP-4
Witness MP-4
has worked for CHS for 19 years. Witness MP-4 was employed as an ICU Registrar
within CHS until the end of 2024 and now
works as a Co-Director of a Department
for 30 hours per week plus on-call.
Witness MP-4 said that in their current department “staff
retention has greatly improved since we have implemented specific
measures to
improve work life integration. This has included preventing [medical] staff from
being directly asked to work late or
work extra shifts.”
Witness MP-4 is often asked to perform extra shifts or overtime.
They said that there is a lot of pressure from CHS to cover these
that “as I am the Co-Director, I have a greater ability to decline these
shifts and always allow other [doctors]
to do so as well.”
Witness MP-4 said the shortage in staff has been ongoing for as long
as they can remember. They said that due to budget restrictions:
“... we are not always allowed to recruit and employ more
staff. There is currently a direction from the Chief Operating Officer
increase FTE across the Territory, however, we will either need to increase our
FTE or cancel elective surgeries
The failure of CHS to fill these vacancies has caused mounting stress for
myself and other doctors in [the team].”
Witness MP-4 left their role at The Canberra Hospital because of the
burnout and fatigue they were experiencing, and the constant
pressure to pick up
extra shifts. Witness MP-4 said that CHS is widely known throughout the
Australian medical profession to have
a “horrible” workplace culture
where medical staff feel undervalued and frequently work excessive hours.
For Witness MP-4 the on-call requirement
as TCH1 (first on-call for emergencies) was six on-calls in six months. In
Witness MP-4’s
experience, 50% of on-call shifts at North Canberra
Hospital required attendance at the hospital, and previously 90% of on-call
at The Canberra Hospital required attendance.
ASMOF’s Evidence – Steven Ross
Steven Ross is employed as the Executive and Industrial Officer of
ASMOF in respect of the ACT Branch. Mr Ross has held this position
and has worked in industrial relations for approximately 35 years.
Since 2022, Mr Ross has had carriage of the negotiations for the
next iteration of the MPEA on behalf of ASMOF. He said that between
2022 and 8 March 2023, a total of approximately 40 bargaining meetings were held
focusing on the common conditions across
the ACTPS. Mr Ross also said:
“Since negotiations commenced for a replacement to the
MPEA 2021 until the commencement of these proceedings, there have been
almost 30 meetings of the parties for the purpose of negotiating the Core
components of the proposed replacement Agreement
and approximately 30 further
meetings of the parties for the purpose of negotiating the Medical
Practitioner-specific components.”
In November 2022 the Territory proposed an all of Government pay
offer that consisted of a combination of flat dollar increases and
increases over the term of a four-year agreement. ASMOF rejected this offer on
22 December 2022, asking that CHS “calculate
the figure for a universally
applied percentage increase within the financial parameters of the existing
spend on wage increases”.
The Territory “rejected”
ASMOF’s request. Mr Ross said:
“In my experience, the ACT Government’s approach to
the wages offered to Medical Practitioners broke faith with the long
‘whole-of-government’ approach advanced by the ACT Government
through the various iterations of the MPEA ...
This is because the net effect of
the offer is to provide different outcomes for different occupational groupings
rather than the
same outcome for all of the ACT Public Sector.”
In March 2023 and April 2023 the Territory revised its offers. The
April 2023 offer was ultimately accepted by each other union. However
revised offers, Mr Ross said, did not address the concerns of ASMOF’s
members that had been raised during bargaining meetings.
Negotiations continued throughout 2023 with meetings held at least
monthly, including two all day meetings in November 2023. However,
the parties
remained unable to reach agreement on key matters including wages.
Mr Ross said that since the beginning of bargaining for a new
agreement began in 2021, ASMOF’s claim has been that there should
decrease in real wages for Medical Practitioners over the life of the agreement
and that wage rates should not become a disincentive
to employment in the ACT.
On 12 December 2023, ASMOF sent a bulletin to members with a
comprehensive report on the Medical Practitioner-specific bargaining
and a link to a survey which asked members whether they would accept the Wages
Offer or wished for ASMOF to continue to
seek improvements. The survey results
showed that ASMOF members wanted ASMOF to continue negotiations to pursue an
outcome consistent
with the ASMOF’s May 2022 Wages Claim.
In mid-2024 the Territory put an agreement to a vote. Mr Ross said
that 58% of eligible Medical Practitioners voted and 86% of those
employees who
cast a valid vote, voted against the proposed agreement, which Mr Ross regarded
as an emphatic rejection of the Territory’s
In July 2024 ASMOF proposed several measures by which the Territory
could increase the remuneration package of Medical Practitioners
to bridge the
gap required to ensure no decrease in real wages without substantially moving
away from its ‘all of government’
wage offer. Mr Ross said that
ASMOF’s proposals were all rejected by the Territory.
Mr Ross observed that many ASMOF members have felt aggrieved by the
Territory’s various wages offers in light of the added burdens
them during the COVID crisis, in supporting the adoption of the Digital Health
Record system and with the increased demands
on public health services in the
Mr Ross compared wages in the ACT with other states. ACT wages were
less than many jurisdictions but significantly higher than NSW.
concluded that “while ACT Medical Practitioner relativities are
comparative to several competing jurisdictions, compared
with others, however,
some classifications are significantly undervalued.”
Mr Ross said that the Territory’s response to the impact of
the cross-jurisdictional Medical Practitioner labour market has
introduce confidential packages for individual or small groups of practitioners
in particular specialties through the mechanism
of Attraction and Retention
Incentives (
Mr Ross’s view is that the Territory’s wages offer, if
implemented, will “exacerbate” the recruitment and
“difficulties” that CHS is already experiencing within its Medical
Practitioner workforce.
Mr Ross suggested in his witness statement that the productivity of
Medical Practitioners employed by CHS has increased substantially
period since the commencement of the negotiations for a replacement agreement to
the MPEA 2017. The number of employees
covered by successive agreements has
increased slightly (1116 in 2017, 1062 in 2021 and 1345 employees in 2024). Mr
Ross listed “areas
indicative of, that have required, or that are leading
to increased productivity”, including the measures introduced to deal
COVID-19, the introduction of the Digital Health Record system, the acquisition
by the ACT Government of Calvary and the 10%
to 30% increase in patients in the
public hospital system.
In response to the Territory’s reliance on ‘onerous
hours’ allowance provisions for senior medical practitioners
observed that very few employees receive this allowance:
“The allowance is triggered where more than 90 hours are
worked in a fortnight. In that circumstance, if more than 100 hours
in the subsequent fortnight an allowance of 5% on base salary is paid. If more
than 120 hours are worked in that fortnight
then the allowance is increased to
10%. The net effect of this clause is that a full time [Senior Medical
Practitioners] is required
to work at least an additional 30 hours (above their
contracted 40 hours per week) in a four week period before they become eligible
for the very modest allowance.”
Similarly, Mr Ross indicated in response to the Territory’s
reliance on the introduction of a 25% shift penalty for Senior Medical
Practitioners working night shift, that the omission of the penalty was
recognised during bargaining to be an anomaly that was quickly
Mr Ross also opined that private practice arrangements are
undoubtedly of benefit to Senior Medical Practitioners who are eligible
receive payment under those arrangements and that, the financing of such
arrangements also provides a source of income or benefit
AMA’s evidence
AMA’s Evidence
– Witness MP-5
Witness MP-5 gave evidence on behalf of the AMA. Witness MP-5 is a
registrar at The Canberra Hospital and has lived in Canberra all
their life.
Witness MP-5 said that registrars are the workhorse of the hospital. Witness
MP-5 gave evidence about increases in household
expenditure since 2022,
including increases in childcare expenses, mortgage repayments, AHPRA
registration and HECS debts.
Witness MP-5 said that The Canberra Hospital’s struggles to
attract doctors made work more difficult.
AMA’s Evidence – Witness MP-6
Witness MP-6 is an intern at The Canberra Hospital who started an
internship at the beginning of 2024. They said “I chose to
be a doctor
because it's a great job and I have always wanted to be one”. Choosing to
be an intern at The Canberra Hospital
was the obvious choice for Witness MP-6
“since Canberra is my home”.
Witness MP-6 has sacrificed a lot of personal and family time for
their medical education, their patients and their job. Witness MP-6
“there needs to be fair compensation for these sacrifices”. Witness
MP-6’s salary as an intern is comparable
to the starting salary of a
public sector teacher in the ACT.
AMA’s Evidence – Peter Somerville
Peter Somerville is the Chief Executive Officer of the AMA. Mr
Somerville has had oversight of bargaining for the proposed agreement
early 2022. He said that bargaining took place in two streams – a
‘core’ stream, dealing with ACTPS-wide
issues, and a stream dealing
specifically with issues relevant to medical practitioners.
The core stream was conducted by holding separate meetings for union
and non-union bargaining representatives. Mr Somerville thinks
AMA’s first offer was fair and reasonable. He said that the Territory did
not provide any substantive reasons why
this was not so, and said that “I
was not during bargaining, and have not been since, convinced to adopt an
alternate position.”
Mr Somerville said that the ongoing difficulty in attracting and
retaining specialised medical staff is a problem acknowledged by
the Territory
in the CHS Annual Report 2018-19 and one that has not yet been overcome.
AMA’s Evidence – Gregory Schmidt
Gregory Schmidt is a Senior Workplace Relations Adviser for the AMA.
He was involved in bargaining for an agreement to replace the
2022 Agreement.
From July 2022 he was the primary bargaining representative on behalf of
bargaining employees who were AMA members.
He attended all bargaining meetings
and was responsible for advancing the claims of the AMA, and either supporting
or contesting
claims made by the other representatives. When Mr Schmidt joined
the AMA in July 2022 it had just put its first proposal to the Territory
of a log of claims. In that proposal the AMA sought wage increases of the ACT
Consumer Price Index (CPI) plus 1%.
This proposal was not accepted by the Territory. The Territory put
its first offer in November 2022, which the AMA in turn rejected.
period from early 2022 until June 2024, the AMA attended more than 50 bargaining
meetings with the Territory and other
bargaining representatives. Many matters
were raised and settled through those negotiations, although pay increases,
allowances and
a small number of other issues remained in dispute.
On 3 March 2023 the Territory made a second wage offer for a
three-year agreement. The AMA did not accept the second wage offer because,
Schmidt said, it did not provide salary increases that were close to the rate of
cost-of-living increases. The Territory made
some non-wage amendments to the
second wage offer on 11 April 2023 but continued the hybrid structure of
Mr Schmidt said that preserving real earnings remains a key priority
for the AMA. He provided calculations by reference to the December
quarter All
Groups CPI Canberra figures from the ABS. Mr Schmidt’s calculations
suggested that wages under enterprise agreements
have increased 14.4% since the
end of 2018, compared to an increase in CPI by 24.48% over the same period.
Mr Schmidt said the AMA’s position would prevent ongoing
erosion of real wages for employees and enable employees to catch up
wage losses arising from the 2021 Agreement.
Mr Schmidt gave evidence about workforce sustainability, citing data
from the Steering Committee for the Review of Government Services
Report on Government Services 2024 that suggested that a desirable workforce age
profile to maintain workforce sustainability
is one displaying high or
increasing proportions of the workforce that are new entrants and/or low or
decreasing proportions of the
workforce that are close to retirement, and that
compared with major cities in other Australian jurisdictions in 2022, the
medical practitioner workforce had the lowest proportion aged under
30 years, the highest proportion aged 40-49, and the second highest
aged 50-59 years.
Evidence from other medical practitioners
Evidence – Witness MP-7
Witness MP-7 is a doctor in training and has been employed as a
Doctor in Canberra for four years since 2021. Witness MP-7 was born,
raised, and
educated in Canberra, but left to study their undergraduate medicine interstate.
Witness MP-7 chose to return to Canberra
to be near their family as a young
junior doctor and have extra community support during their first couple years
Witness MP-7 become involved in the 2023 - 2026 Enterprise
Bargaining to help focus on specific industrial issues affecting the employment
of Medical Officers.
Witness MP-7 said “it seems that the hospital is simply having
to make do with less, and it certainly shows”, that “the
continuously under stress” and that:
“While not the whole solution, appropriate remuneration
incentives for Medical Officers to relocate to Canberra and stay, reduces
financial burden of having to move/relocate here, and thus encourages them to
invest in fixing management systems in the sector.
Appropriate remuneration isn’t going to solve each individual issue
listed above that contributes to Canberra’s inability
to attract and
retain doctors, however it does a substantial job of breaking down barriers and
deterrents that may otherwise push
people away.”
Witness MP-7’s evidence on the limitations around training
opportunities in the ACT echoed Ms Zagari’s evidence (see
The Territory’s Evidence
Territory’s Evidence – Alexandra Allars
Ms Alexandra Allars gave evidence on behalf of the Territory. Ms
Allars is the Executive Branch Manager - Whole of Government Industrial
Relations and Public Sector Employment within the OIRWS.
Ms Allars gave evidence about the structure of the ACTPS and how it
operates a single service under a ‘One Service’ approach.
workforce has grown from 26,141 in 2020-2021 (23,044 FTE) to 30,743 in 2023-24
(27,175 FTE). CHS is the biggest Directorate
within the Territory’s
workforce, employing 35% of all ACTPS employees.
Ms Allars said that OIRWS' role is to lead the industrial and
employment program of the ACTPS and has authority to develop and implement
of government policies and provide support to directorates and agencies working
through complex industrial and employment policy
Ms Allars identified the employment conditions generally covered by
the ‘common core’ conditions across the Territory’s
OIRWS is responsible for bargaining on behalf of the Territory in relation to
the common core provisions. Ms Allars said
that in practice, the Community and
Public Sector Union (
) is generally the lead union participating in
common core bargaining for employees. Employees are also entitled to nominate
own bargaining representative, but individual bargaining representatives
rarely actively participate in the common core negotiations.
Ms Allars recalled
that Mr Ross sometimes attended bargaining meetings regarding common core
conditions on behalf of ASMOF.
Ms Allars described the Territory’s approach to bargaining as
“The Territory did not come to the common core bargaining
with a prepared proposal. Unlike the Commonwealth and some State and
governments, the Territory does not have a wages policy. However, the fact that
OIRWS conducts the common core bargaining
centrally ensures a consistent
approach can be taken across the ACTPS. The core serves to ensure that all staff
across the service
have access to the same set of employment conditions and
entitlements, no matter their job role or work type. It also enables the
Territory to be more responsive to the claims that are actually brought by
The first weeks and months of bargaining meetings were spent receiving and
going through each union's log of claims, so far as they
related to the common
core. Once we had that information, we were able to consolidate the claims and
consider each of them, and how
they might impact the other core provisions. It
was only after considering those claims and the reasonableness and cost of any
enhancements
claimed, that the Territory was able to formulate a wage offer.
I was aware that ASMOF continued to oppose the final wage offer that had been
put by the Territory. However, there was enough agreement
with the other unions
that the Territory was prepared to move forward with a vote on the ACTPS EAs on
the basis of the final wage
offer, once the Directorate-specific bargaining was
In relation to the Territory’s hybrid offer Ms Allars
“The decision was taken to structure the pay increases in
the Territory's wage offer using a 'hybrid' model of flat dollar-amount
increases and percentage increases. Previous ACTPS EAs had used percentage pay
The reasoning for the inclusion of some flat dollar-amount pay increases was
to address cost of living pressures that were being highlighted
by unions, by
ensuring that the ACTPS' lower-paid workers received a more substantial benefit
than if they received only a small
percentage increase on a relatively small
The wage offer was also made in the context of the 'Fair Go for GSO' campaign
run by the CFMMEU, UWU and TWU, which advocated for
the Territory to focus on
better pay and conditions for some of the ACTPS' lowest-paid classifications,
including general service
officers, cleaning service officers, building service
officers, building trade group (including building trades assistant),
apprentices
in the building trade group, stores supervisors, facilities service
officers and sportsground rangers.
This campaign was later supplemented by the CPSU's Fair Go for Women
campaign, focusing on the introduction of a minimum public sector
wage. Those
campaigns emphasised the value to the Canberra community of the work undertaken
by those in the lowest ACTPS pay classifications.”
Ms Allars explained that directorates can pay employees more than
the base pay rate for their classification by using an ARIn under
the framework
in every ACTPS enterprise agreement, or by making an additional payment under
Public Sector Management Act 1994
(ACT). Ms Allars said this
enables the Territory to offer a competitive package for skills in high demand
that are essential to service
delivery, such as technical and medical
specialists. As at 30 June 2024, 377 employees across the ACTPS were receiving
payment. Of these 377 employees, 89% were employed by CHS.
Under cross-examination Ms Allars accepted that different types of
ARIns might apply, that some have a time limitation and some are
renewable. The
AMA’s cross-examination of Ms Allars included the following exchange
regarding the negotiation of wage increases
within the common core
conditions:
“Q: So is it just that it makes it, for the purpose of
negotiation, the quickness of negotiation, more efficient to put the
is that what you're really saying?
A: No. When it comes to the offer, I, sort of, reflected around how we arrive
at our offer, and the parameters for this round of bargaining
constrained environment where there were high costs of living pressures on our
lowest paid employees. We wanted to ensure
- and we presented a hybrid approach
to pay offered, which was different to what we'd done historically – we
wanted to ensure
that our lowest paid workers have the maximum impact of that
pay increase when they were experiencing high costs of living pressures.
wasn't about administrative ease, or efficiency. It was actually our
underpinning principle to give our lowest paid workers
the maximum pay increase
available.”
The Territory’s Evidence – Steven Linton
Mr Steven Linton is the Senior Director – Industrial
Relations within the People and Culture Branch of CHS.
Mr Linton has worked in the Industrial Relations team of CHS for
approximately 16 years and has been involved in negotiations for
each version of
the four agreements in which CHS is the lead agency: the MPEA, the ACTPS Nursing
and Midwifery Enterprise Agreement,
the ACTPS Health Professionals Enterprise
Agreement and the ACTPS Support Services Enterprise Agreement.
Annexure A of the MPEA sets out the base salaries for medical
practitioners at each classification and also provides for a number
financial benefits that doctors may regularly receive, most significantly:
ARIns, overtime/additional hours, on-call/recall
payments, professional
development and additional superannuation contributions.
Mr Linton said that the median medical practitioner’s salary
in CHS is the salary for a Registrar 4 ($141,084). Using this classification
convert the Territory’s proposed flat dollar increase to percentages, Mr
Linton provided calculations that indicated that
since September 2018 the annual
wage growth for the Registrar 4 classification would be 18.6% compared to annual
public sector growth
over the same period of 18.1%.
Mr Linton explained that ARIns do not change as base salaries
increase and are generally for a fixed dollar amount for an agreed period.
He said that the various extra benefits available under the 2022
Agreement mean that the regular remuneration of senior medical practitioners
be considerably higher than their base salary. Mr Linton said that the total
annual remuneration for some senior specialists
is in excess of $500,000.
After the common core conditions were resolved for all other ACT
bargaining groups, CHS proposed some additional enhancements to be
included in
the MPEA. Mr Linton described those enhancements:
“In relation to the MPEA-specific financial improvements
on the Current MPEA, the proposed MPEA provides:
(a) A trial of new systems for recording and remunerating on-call and recall
arrangements for senior medical practitioners (Specialist
level and above)
(clauses 43.7 to 43.19 of the proposed MPEA and draft determination). The
proposed trials aim to more accurately
link remuneration to the amount of on
call work actually undertaken. For some practitioners who undertake significant
on-call work,
it is envisaged that these arrangements will result in greater
remuneration for the same work that they are currently doing, even
without a pay
example, a Specialist 3 on $210,146 would get $36,565 per annum under the
current 17.4% provision. Under the trial, assuming
they were on-call one day in
4, with an average on-call period of 20 hours and 1 minimum (2 hour) recall per
day, they would receive
$42,297 in on-call and callback payments even after
allowing for 4 weeks leave. On the other hand, if the practitioner would receive
more under the existing arrangements, then they will continue to be paid under
those arrangements (see clause 43.13).
(b) The introduction of shift penalty rates (25%) for senior medical
practitioners for hours worked between midnight and 8am, from
midnight Sunday to
midnight Friday (clause 35.4.2) of the proposed MPEA / draft determination).
(c) Payment of the MEE allowance to all staff on a fortnightly basis without the
need to provide medical education expenses have
been incurred by the employee
(discussed in more detail below).”
In response to comparisons between
salaries in the ACT and in other jurisdictions, Mr Linton made the following
(a) many of the
comparisons made by ASMOF or the AMA compare the ACT salaries in 2022, which do
not take into account the Territory’s
wage offer;
such that it can be difficult to find an entirely
suitable comparator. For
example, some jurisdictions build elements into the base pay rate that are paid
as separate allowances in
other jurisdictions. Some jurisdictions provide
different remuneration components for different specialties;
(c) the use of
comparative base pay rates becomes particularly problematic at the
specialist/consultant level, where base pay can
form half or less of a
practitioner’s regular remuneration; and
(d) the MPEA
provides for standard base pay rates across each classification, regardless of
speciality. Where a certain speciality
may attract the higher remuneration in
other jurisdictions, the Territory addresses such situations through use of
Mr Linton said
that CHS regularly reviews comparative remuneration for senior practitioners as
part of its review of ARIns. The most
recent review was in mid-2024. As part of
the review process each senior medical practitioner who receives an ARIn
received a comparative
table for their specialty and classification. The
following example comparison table provided by Mercer to CHS illustrates the
difficulties
Mr Linton described above:
Mr Linton’s evidence in cross-examination including the
bargaining the Territory costed ASMOF’s proposal but did not cost
AMA’s proposal because it was not fundamentally
dissimilar to
ASMOF’s proposal;
(b) it was not
ever put during the negotiation that the ACT does not have the capacity to fund
either the ASMOF or the AMA proposal
(c) CHS did not
seek an exemption from the Territory that would allow it to negotiate
differently with the doctors in respect of their
enterprise agreement; and
certainly gave consideration to such options, but no exemption was sought. The
decision was taken that CHS was satisfied with
the government's pay offer.
The Territory’s Evidence – Janet
Janet Zagari is the Deputy Chief Executive Officer of CHS.
Ms Zagari said that almost all workers in the facilities and
services operated by CHS are engaged by the Territory, including administrative
and support staff, nursing staff, allied health professionals, medical
technicians and doctors. The Territory also engages Visiting
Medical Officers
s) although not as employees.
Ms Zagari provided statistics that indicate that the CHS workforce
has consistently grown since January 2021, including the following
January 2021
January 2022
January 2023
January 2024
December 2024
In response to the evidence filed by
ASMOF and the AMA, Ms Zagari provided the following evidence regarding
attraction and retention
(a) most junior
medical practitioners in the public sector workforce are interns in their first
year out of university;
(b) in 2024 the
Territory was the only jurisdiction in Australia that fully recruited/filled all
of its intern positions at the beginning
of the clinical year;
(c) in 2025 CHS
is again recruited to required levels;
(d) there are
several factors outside of the Territory’s control that feed into the
ability to attract or retain staff in the
(e) the ACT is
a relatively small population centre and as such doctors are less likely to
encounter more complex or specialised cases;
(f) For most
specialty training programmes, CHS trainees are required to travel away from
to train in a particular
subspecialty;
(g) the larger
metropolitan centres have more specialist training programme places
doctors may have a greater chance, or perceive that they have a greater chance,
of obtaining a training program place in
one of those larger metropolitan
centres to work as a resident or junior registrar at the hospital rather than
applying from the
Territory; and
(i) there is no
publicly accessible data to enable meaningful comparison of staff retention
rates between the jurisdictions.
Ms Zagari’s evidence under
cross-examination including the following:
doctors generally are under the supervision of a senior medical
practitioner;
(b) if a senior
medical practitioner is not available for any reason, such that there is not
appropriate training supervision for
junior doctors, it will eventually become
slower for junior doctors to become senior medical practitioners;
shortages can also risk a hospital's accreditation to deliver training;
Canberra Hospital has lost accreditation as a training college for obstetrics
and gynaecology at times;
Canberra Hospital there are currently less than 10 FTE unfilled senior staff or
staff specialists/senior staff specialists
positions, as well as 3.6 FTE
unfilled positions in psychiatry;
(f) VMOs and
locums are generally engaged for a fixed period to supplement employees;
(g) some VMOs
in the Territory are very long-serving, including some who have been with CHS
or, prior to CHS, ACT Health, for decades;
(h) there is
currently a recruitment pause on non-essential, non-frontline staff in the
(i) in recent
years there has been a significant increase in the demand for CHS services;
(j) in order to
maintain those services, CHS is more heavily reliant upon VMO, locum and agency
(k) between
2022 and 2023 CHS’ activity grew 12.3 per cent and was on track to grow a
further 9.3 per cent over 2024 and into
(l) it is not
that CHS’ bed base has grown by these amounts. The physical infrastructure
remains the same. More patients come
into emergency departments and are being
admitted, but their length of stay is decreasing;
(m) in January
2025 CHS announced its intention to phase out fee for service contracts for VMOs
to reduce the costs associated with
possible that some VMOs will choose not to stay with CHS. If so, CHS will need
to recruit to fill vacancies, whether through
VMO or direct appointments;
agreements are underpinned by available budget vacancies.
The Territory’s Evidence – Geoffery
Geoffery Hodder is a Senior Director within the Finance and Budget
Group in the Treasury ‘stream’ of the Chief Minister,
Treasury and
Economic Development Directorate. Mr Hodder currently leads the Treasury’s
health policy team.
Mr Hodder provided a high-level estimate of the additional costs of
ASMOF’s, the AMA’s and the Territory’s proposals
workforce snapshot data as at March 2024. Mr Hodder provided the following table
showing the cost of the pay increases from
each proposal for each relevant year,
as compared to wages staying at the current (June 2022) rates:
The Territory
In cross-examination Mr Hodder said that the calculations above
included on-costs such as additional workers compensation premiums
service leave accumulations.
The Submissions – ASMOF
The ACT Branch of ASMOF represents medical practitioners employed
by the Territory who work in CHS, including those who perform work
at Canberra
Hospital and North Canberra Hospital, and other CHS health facilities.
In support of its claim for wage increases totalling 18% across 3
years, ASMOF submitted the following:
(a) the 2022
Agreement was only a “fast tracked interim Agreement for a period of 12
months in recognition of the added burdens
imposed on the ACTPS workforce as a
consequence of the COVID pandemic”;
(b) the 2022
Agreement provided for two 1.35% pay increases;
(c) the concept
of wage fixation has always been fundamentally concerned with, at the very
least, maintenance of real wages to ensure
preservation of one’s standard
of living (referring to the
Basic Wage and Standard Hours Enquiry
[1953] CthArbRp 473
(1953) 77 CAR 477
National Wage Case 1975
, the Accord in
1983, the full
National Wage Case 1983
(1983) 4 IR 429
at 432 and s.577
of the Act);
Commission’s consideration is not only confined to wage maintenance.
Indeed, wage growth may be awarded without the
need to ‘be supported by
increases in work value or other relevant considerations’ (citing
at [181]-[182]);
workers, including medical practitioners, have experienced a steep decline in
real wages whether they are covered by awards,
collective or individual
agreements, and irrespective of their position in the wage distribution. The
constellation of high inflation,
low unemployment and falling real wages is
unprecedented in contemporary Australian economic history (citing
Annual Wage
Review 2023-24
(f) ASMOF’s
ask is not dissimilar to increases handed down by the Commission in the more
recent economic climate (citing
Cleanaway Erskine Park
[226]-[237]);
(g) medical
practitioners in the ACT are said to be the second-lowest paid cohort compared
to other jurisdictions in Australia;
(h) the fact
that other CHS employees (who perform completely different roles subject to
separate industrial instruments) accepted
the Territory's pay offer does not
assist the Commission in determining the merits of this case having regard to
the factors under
s.275. Unlike medical practitioners, other public sector
employees did not flex their industrial muscle as much as they should have;
Territory’s variable pay/flat dollar increases will compress wage
relativities and reduce the incentive for skill acquisitions
(referring to
Annual Wage Review 2021-22
To support its claim for what it says will maintain real wages for
medical practitioners ASMOF submitted:
(a) CPI is an
important factor in setting wages, albeit not solely determinative. The level of
remuneration and conditions of employment
of the same class of workers in the
same industry, as well as wage rates in comparable instruments are also
important factors (citing
Health Services Union v Austin Health
(2009) 180 IR 41
Austin Health
(b) real wages
have eroded by 15.9% since the last increase awarded to medical practitioners on
1 June 2022;
Australian Bureau of Statistics’ published Living Cost Indexes
), particularly the LCI for employees, is a better measure of the
purchasing power of employees than the CPI (citing
Annual Wage Review
). The LCI for employees takes into account changes in
mortgage rates. Interest rates have increased significantly since June 2022,
have interest rates charged in the Higher Education Loan Program; and
(d) medical
practitioners’ real wages and purchasing power has significantly
diminished “meanwhile, those with mortgages
and/or student debt have
simultaneously been subjected to a substantial increase in their living costs
with no sign of any substantive
reduction in sight. CHS’s wage offer does
not meaningfully redress these issues”.
ASMOF asserted labour productivity gains across CHS, arguing
(a) CHS has
been significantly under resourced for an extended period;
(b) in January
2025 the ACT Government announced a $227.3m cash injection because of
significant increased pressure on the health
(c) existing
staff have been required to stretch to reach ever-increasing demand;
pressure to meet growing demands has been acutely felt by medical practitioners
who have been required to perform more work
with less resources;
(e) in the AMU,
this resourcing issue has significantly increased everyone's workload. For
example because of the overlapping shift
pattern, employees are not supposed to
work a lot of overtime, but often do as it is easier to stay beyond the end of a
see a particular case through than to try and hand it over (evidence
of Witness MP-2 – see
(f) in the ICU
at North Canberra Hospital short staffing has created immense additional
pressures on doctors. Due to expected or unexpected
leave registrars, RMOs, and
interns need to cover for one another across different teams in which they do
not have experience. Even
when there are enough doctors, there are very few
times where the roster is full enough to cover unplanned leave (evidence of
(g) at North
Canberra Hospital anaesthetists are regularly called up to work late. There is
increased pressure to achieve elective
surgery targets however approximately 25%
of surgery lists run late each week. As a result there is a high number of
vacancies and
an increasingly demanding workload (evidence of Witness MP-4
above); and
Canberra Hospital and the North Canberra Hospital a new emergency department was
opened in 2024, increasing the number
of available beds from 90 to 128.
ED staffing levels did not increase, causing insufficient staffing at
senior and junior level.
Specialists are regularly required to work on the floor
during clinical support time (evidence of Witness MP-1 – see
ASMOF said the enhanced conditions and financial benefits that the
Territory relies on have existed in almost identical terms within
enterprise agreement iterations for a considerable period. The proposed new
entitlement to a 25% shift penalty rate for
senior medical practitioners between
midnight and 8.00am under clause 35.4.2 of the draft Determination is limited in
that it appears
to only be available to those working in the ED and ICU because
these are the only areas where shifts would be worked that trigger
allowance. Only 25% of medical practitioners receive ARIns.
In relation to the merits of the case (per s.275(a)), ASMOF
(a) its case
has significant merit from both a real wages and productivity standpoint;
(b) its wage
claim is modest considering the "long-standing erosion of real wages ... and the
unrelenting demands placed on [medical
practitioners across the ACT]".
In relation to the interests of employers and employees (s.275(c)),
ASMOF submitted that:
interests of the Territory includes the ability to meet the needs of its
patients, the ability to adapt to increased demand,
to have a larger pool of
direct employees and attract more entrants to the current workforce;
(b) increased
wages will assist in alleviating significant retention issues;
retention is improved the Territory could engage less locums (who are
significantly more expensive than employees); and
(d) granting
the pay increases by arbitration will assist the Territory to meet its
commitment to achieving an environment where employees
feel valued for the
contribution they make to achieving organisational goals, as well as the
Territory's commitment to achieving
and maintaining the highest level of health
and safety for all employees.
In relation to the public interest (s.275(d)) ASMOF
(a) consideration
of the public interest imports a discretionary value judgement confined only by
the subject matter, scope and purpose
of the Act. Public interest considerations
can overlap with the interests of the parties;
(b) in this
case, matters relevant to the public interest include job security, increasing
opportunities for permanent employment
for all members of the community,
appropriate and timely management of patients, and the competitiveness of the
Territory in the
(c) there is a
significant public interest in paying medical practitioners sufficiently such
that the Territory does not suffer from
further retention issues that cause
delays and significant health and safety risks to patients; and
(d) it is in
the public interest that employees' wages maintain their real value over
ASMOF also submitted that the Territory has significantly benefited
from labour productivity gains through its workforce as described
(s.275(e)), its bargaining representatives have bargained in good faith
(s.275(f)) and a workplace determination made in the
terms sought by ASMOF will
not disincentivise bargaining at any later time (s.275(h)) because "the wage
increases will see medical
practitioners recoup some of the real value of their
wages with plenty left in the tank for future bargaining."
In response to the Territory’s submissions (see
below) ASMOF said:
(a) the fact
that other CHS employees who perform completely different roles and are covered
by separate industrial instruments accepted
the ACT Government’s pay offer
does not assist the Commission in determining the merits of this case having
regard to the factors
under s.275;
Territory’s position is not a government wage policy of the kind
considered in
Parks Victoria
at [207] - it is simply a preferred form of
negotiation;
Territory’s suggestion that a disparity in the pay increases awarded to
one cohort of CHS employees over another risks
workplace disharmony is an
attempt to have its cake and eat it too. If anything, the provision of variable
pay increases to employees
within the same cohort (i.e. medical practitioners)
is far more likely to be productive of workplace disharmony than between
cohorts performing entirely distinct functions in different
(d) what those
other 18 enterprise agreements do not consider, as here, is the labour
productivity gains that have been made in respect
of this cohort of workers;
circumstances where all medical practitioners’ real wages have eroded,
there is no discernible reason for cherry-picking
wage increases for some and
not others;
on-call/re-call allowances, shift work, overtime and time off in lieu
entitlements, said by the Territory to be “enhanced
conditions”,
have existed in almost identical terms within previous iterations of the MPEA
for a considerable period;
(g) there is
only a ‘mere possibility’ that medical practitioners will receive an
ARIn. Only 25% of medical practitioners
received an ARIn or s.245 payment
as of 30 June 2024;
provision of additional superannuation, personal leave, birth leave, assisted
reproductive leave, primary care giver leave
and bonding leave, while no doubt
very welcome, does not assist in restoring the lost value of real wages and
purchasing power of
employees; and
(i) in January
2025 the Territory announced that no further fee for service contracts would be
issued to VMOs, which is likely to
place further demands on employed medical
practitioners. Medical practitioners ought to be compensated for the additional
productivity
gains that will benefit CHS.
ASMOF submitted that that there have been ongoing labour
productivity gains arising from work intensification. ASMOF relied on data
provided by CHS showing the number of patients growing from 20.6% to 29.3%, when
complexity is factored in. In the context where
there are less resources being
used, not because of the vacancies, and there is an increased workload, that
means that there is a
higher output with a less amount of inputs, which means
that there is increase in productivity from an economic standpoint.
The Submissions – AMA
The AMA submitted that the Commission should apply its proposed
wage increases because:
increases in wages have applied since 9 June 2022. The modest nature of past
increases, in real terms, is a factor that the
Commission must take into
(b) real wages
have decreased by 10.8% between December 2017 and December 2024;
Commission should apply uniform percentage increases;
increases awarded by the Commission should not upset established relativities
between classifications;
+ 1%” increases enable employees to recover some lost wages in real terms,
and benefits the employer insofar
as it distributes the 4% shortfall over four
annual pay increases rather than imposing it on the Territory in an upfront
In this regard the “+1% quantum itself is a
compromise”;
(f) in awarding
either retrospective or front-loaded increases to address shortfalls in real
wage increases, the Commission has held
that such decisions do not necessarily
depend on it being satisfied of any special, compelling or exceptional
circumstance (relying
Cleanaway Erskine Park
at [223]); and
(g) there is
nothing novel or unique about the present case that would lead to the Commission
adopting a different approach in respect
of CPI and inflation.
The AMA argued that real wages for medical practitioners have
declined. The AMA submitted that:
(a) maintaining
CPI is the predominant or, in the alternative, a significant consideration in
setting wage increases;
assessing wage claims in the context of other workplace determinations, the
Commission has placed emphasis on the importance
of maintaining real wages
Cleanaway Erskine Park
maintenance of real wages are matters relevant to the assessment of wage claims
in the context of workplace determinations
[241]– [242] and
Austin Health
at [35] and [45]);
(d) the most
appropriate measure to inform wage increases is the All Groups Consumer Price
Index for Canberra;
(e) the Full
Annual Wage Review 2023–24
and [155] appropriately used the LCI to fine tune its
deliberations. Other living cost indices may have a secondary role;
(f) real wages
decreased by 10.08% between December 2017 and December 2024 under previous
enterprise agreements including the 2022
Territory’s proposal did not cover CPI; and
AMA’s proposal will maintain real wages over the life of the
Determination;
The AMA provided its view of the history of bargaining for medical
practitioners in the ACT:
position has always been to reasonably bargain for pay increases that avoid a
reduction in real wages;
(b) over the
course of bargaining the Territory repeatedly put forward a complex hybrid offer
that included dollar figure amounts
as well as percentage increases, and did not
result in pay increases matching relevant CPI increases;
(c) the AMA
agreed with the concept of prioritising the needs of relatively lower paid
workers in a high cost of living environment,
but rejected the Territory's
proposal because its quantum failed to preserve real wages for any
bargaining had not become intractable it would have likely concluded by 1
January 2023 (in support of its argument that the
first wage increase should
operate from 1 January 2023); and
(e) the AMA has
complied with its good faith bargaining obligations.
In relation to the merits of the case (per s.275(a)), the AMA
(a) the AMA's
proposed wage increases will serve to maintain real wages over the life of the
Determination, enable bargaining employees
to recover from real wage losses and
provide the Territory with a time discount insofar as pay increases calculated
using historical
CPI data lag inflationary pressures that employees would have
already weathered;
(b) the AMA's
position reflects wage increases that appropriately balance the interests of
bargaining employees and the Territory
as an employer;
objectively likely outcome of the bargaining, had it continued, is that the
Territory's position on uniform pay increases
would have yielded to a result
more closely premised on (1) an account for real world losses in wages; and (2)
one that protected
against the prospect of real world losses occurring in the
future; and
(d) the modest
nature of the past pay increases is a factor that must be taken into
In relation to the interests of employers and employees (s.275(c)),
the AMA submitted that:
(a) the modest
nature of past pay increases, in real terms, is a factor that must be taken into
account; and
(b) basing wage
determinations on historical CPI figures reasonably balances employee and
employer interests and, in effect, represents
a compromise;
(c) on the one
hand, employees are better placed to meet living cost increases if increases are
based on CPI forecasts (albeit that
this approach imports inherent
uncertainties);
other hand, premising wage increases within an enterprise agreement on
historical CPI movements disadvantages employees
to the extent that real wage
increases then lag behind the inflationary consequences on the costs of goods
and services in real time;
(e) premising
wage increases on historical CPI movements helps employers by providing
budgetary certainty and, to some extent, causing
relevant wage expenses to be
incurred retrospectively.
In relation to the public interest (s.275(d) the AMA
(a) workforce
sustainability is a matter relevant to the public interest in this case;
increases proposed by the AMA “promote workforce sustainability, thereby
supporting the appropriate and timely provision
of medical services by ACT
hospitals”;
(c) there is no
evidence that either the AMA or the ASMOF proposal would adversely affect the
safe and effective delivery of high
quality health care to the community, or
would not meet the objectives of
Productivity Commission’s latest official data shows that the ACT’s
medical practitioner workforce age profile
is not ‘desirable’.
Compared with other major cities, the Territory’s workforce has the lowest
proportion aged
under 30 years, the highest proportion in the 40-49 years
category the second highest proportion of practitioners aged 50-59.
The AMA did not go so far as to submit that the Territory acted
unreasonably in the bargaining process (s.275(f)), but did
(a) there were
examples of “unreasonable bargaining”, including that “there
appears to be a devout adherence to
a particular calculation method, simply
because it has been applied at other of the ACT’s workplaces”;
(b) the whole
of government approach to bargaining has placed the Territory in a position
where it has decisively bargained with persons
who were not bargaining
representatives in respect of the proposed agreement for matters of essential
importance to those medical
practitioners who will be covered by the agreement,
which was an unreasonable approach;
Territory did not adequately demonstrate preparedness to take into account the
individual and personal circumstances of the
bargaining employees, as per
s.228(1)(d) of the Act. By definition, a uniform whole-of-government approach to
wage increases is antithetical
to a bargaining approach that takes into account
the living cost circumstances specifically facing medical practitioners;
Territory has used a biased benefit estimation methodology to support its
contention that the overall remuneration package
is substantial and reasonable.
In response to the Territory’s submissions (see
below) the AMA
Territory has acknowledged that there may be a ‘gap’ between its
position on wage increases and inflation. The
AMA accepts that the maintenance
of real wages is not a sole or independently determinative factor. Its
importance in the assessment
depends on the circumstances. The AMA contends that
the maintenance of real wages is clearly a significant factor in the instant
case, if not the predominant factor; and
(b) the AMA
agrees with the concept of prioritising the needs of relatively lower paid
workers in a high cost of living environment.
The AMA rejected the
Territory’s proposal precisely because its quantum failed to preserve real
wages for any bargaining employee.
The Submissions – the Territory
The Territory’s position
reflected the agreement reached with the remainder of the ACTPS employees
covered by enterprise agreements.
The Territory said the wage increases in its
(a) reflect
those that have been implemented in all other public sector enterprise
agreements applying in the Territory;
(b) strike a
fair balance between ensuring that all workers receive pay increases and
prioritising the needs of relatively lower-paid
workers in a high cost of living
environment; and
appropriate considering the extensive entitlements otherwise provided to medical
practitioners, including new enhancements
focused on senior doctors, as well as
historical pay increases under the 2022 Agreement and its predecessors and
overall public sector
wages growth across Australia.
The Territory’s submissions set out the context in which its
proposal was put to ASMOF and the AMA:
(a) bargaining
meetings commenced in May 2022 and continued on a regular basis. This included
bargaining for the ‘common core’
provisions conducted by OIRWS, and
parallel bargaining conducted by CHS for its employees, including with ASMOF and
the AMA for the
proposed MPEA. Bargaining meetings in both streams occurred on a
fortnightly basis. No issues were raised about the conduct of bargaining
either stream;
‘common core’ bargaining stream included three pay offers made on
behalf of the Territory. Each of those offers
included (a) pay increases in a
‘hybrid’ structure, with some percentage increases and some flat
rate increases, (b)
superannuation increases, including (in the second and third
pay offers) above the statutory superannuation guarantee charge rate,
one-off cost-of-living supplement; and (d) backpay to February 2023 in the first
pay offer and January 2023 in the second and
third pay offers; and
bargaining representatives other than those for the proposed MPEA ultimately
accepted the Territory’s third pay offer
made on 11 April 2023.
In relation to the merits of the application (s.275(a)) the
Territory submitted:
Territory’s position reflects the ACT Government’s position on
wages. This is significant because the money that
will be spent on medical
practitioners’ wages is public money (relying on
Parks Victoria
(b) it is in
the interests of consistency and fairness for all public sector employees to
receive the same relative pay increases,
especially those employees working
alongside one another in the same environments and facing many of the same
challenges in their
significant disparity in the pay increases awarded to one cohort of CHS
employees over another would risk workplace disharmony;
(d) the pay
increases proposed by the Territory are significant. For qualified medical
practitioners, the increases range between
approximately 8.1% (for a Senior
Specialist) and 13.6% (for an Intern) over the nominal term of the draft
determination, with the
median increase being approximately 10% over the life of
the proposed agreement. Considering the proposed pay increase, the median
medical practitioner will have received an 18.6% increase in their base salary
(not counting superannuation or other entitlements)
over the period from
September 2017 to September 2024, compared with an overall growth rate in
Australian public sector wages of
18.1% over the same period;
(e) the rate of
increase in base salary for the median medical practitioner under the
Territory’s proposal (10% over the life
of the proposed agreement) is
comparable to the rate of increase in base salary under the last two MPEAs
(total of 2.7% per year
from December 2017);
proposed determination incorporates several other enhanced conditions, which are
particularly beneficial for senior medical
practitioners;
(g) medical
practitioners may receive a range of other financial benefits extending beyond
their base salary. These benefits are said
to “have the general effect of
substantially increasing the total remuneration of medical practitioners
compared with their
base salary” and are discussed at
disadvantage to senior medical practitioners of lower increases in their base
salary is mitigated by the other enhancements
to their conditions that
disproportionately benefit senior medical practitioners, by rights of private
practice arrangements which
are only available to specialists and senior
specialists and because their base salary is higher to begin with, by the fact
they receive higher dollar increases in entitlements such as superannuation
and overtime which are calculated as a proportion of
their base salary and by
the availability of ARIns in some circumstances.
The Territory recognised that the medical practitioners covered by
the Determination have an interest (s.275(c)) in receiving pay
increases, and in
minimising the gap between those increases and inflation. The Territory also
submitted that the interests of relatively
lower-paid workers to be covered by
the Determination are more acute and deserving of greater weight in the
distribution of limited
financial resources.
The Territory submitted that its interests (s.275(c))
(a) promoting
consistency and equity in the terms and conditions of employment made available
to all employees in the ACTPS;
(b) preserving
its long-standing practice of bargaining for and agreeing ‘common
core’ provisions on a central basis;
(c) supporting
lower-paid workers in an environment of high cost-of-living pressures;
(d) ensuring
that pay increases awarded to public sector workers remain affordable, and
otherwise minimising any adverse fiscal or
economic impacts, having regard to
the competing demands for public money; and
(e) supporting
the ACT health system in meeting the objectives and commitments in
, including to improve the efficiency, effectiveness and
quality of health services while ensuring that those services remain strong
The Territory submitted that because the case concerns public
sector employment there were significant overlaps between the interests
parties and the public interest (s.275(d)). The Territory said its proposal is
consistent with the public interest:
(a) to promote
consistency and equity in pay increases awarded across the ACT Public
(b) to maintain
the Territory’s long-standing practice of bargaining for and agreeing
‘common core’ provisions centrally,
which promotes consistency and
equity as well as efficiency;
(c) to support
lower-paid workers, including in moving towards substantive equality with
higher-paid workers in terms of their capacity
to achieve an acceptable standard
(d) to strike a
balance between achieving pay increases for public sector workers on the one
hand, and the costs to the public purse
and potential economic impacts of those
increases on the other, especially having regard to competing demands for public
(e) to ensure
that the public health system remains efficient, strong and viable consistently
with the objectives and commitments
The Territory submitted that resolution of the disputed issues will
not have a bearing on productivity in the relevant sense (s.275(e)).
The reasonableness of the
Territory’s conduct in bargaining (s.275(f)) is demonstrated, the
Territory said, by the fact that
agreement was reached on ‘common
core’ provisions (including pay increases) in respect of most of the
ACTPS, including
most CHS employees, and most aspects of the proposed MPEA were
ultimately agreed with the relevant bargaining representatives. The
did not wish to raise any issues with the conduct of the other bargaining
representatives during bargaining.
In reply to ASMOF’s and the AMA’s submissions the
Territory said:
(a) viewed over
a longer historical timespan, the Territory’s proposal would not result in
a substantial reduction in real wages,
because pay increases under the MPEA have
historically outpaced inflation. For example, considering the Territory’s
the cumulative percentage pay increase for a Senior Specialist under
MPEAs over the last thirteen years is less than half a percentage
point short of
the cumulative increase in the CPI over the same period;
additional cost pressure, including additional spending on wages beyond that
which is incorporated in the Territory’s
budget, will increase pressure on
the Territory’s fiscal position. These budgetary and fiscal impacts are
relevant consideration
in terms of the merits of the case (s 275(a)), the
Territory’s interests (s 275(c)) and the public interest (s 275(d));
(c) neither
ASMOF nor the AMA contends that any party behaved unreasonably or failed to
comply with good faith bargaining requirements
in that process;
course of bargaining ASMOF’s and the AMA’s proposals were properly
considered. Good faith bargaining does not
require concessions or agreement.
The Territory acknowledged the
pressures felt by individual doctors in their work. However, the Territory said,
these matters do not
lead to a conclusion that ASMOF’s (or the
AMA’s) proposals should be accepted over the Territory’s proposal:
(a) CHS has
strong attraction at the junior medical practitioner level. The Territory is the
only jurisdiction that fully recruited
for its medical intern positions in
(b) for other
cohorts of medical practitioners, many factors influencing attraction and
retention are outside CHS’s control
and unrelated to pay;
(c) the CHS
workforce has consistently grown since January 2021;
(d) there is no
evidential foundation for the assertion that adopting ASMOF’s (or the
AMA’s) wages proposal over the Territory’s
will improve attraction
or retention rates, and there are good reasons to think they will not;
(e) accepting
that individual doctors may be experiencing increased workloads does not
necessarily mean there have been productivity
gains in the sense of the
conventional economic concept of quantity of output relative to the quantity of
inputs; and
extent that increased workloads translate to longer hours, employees other than
senior medical practitioners are paid penalty
rates for those hours, and senior
medical practitioners are entitled to access ‘onerous hours’
entitlements when they
work more than 90 hours in a fortnight.
In relation to the Territory’s capacity to pay the higher
increases sought by ASMOF and the AMA, the Territory’s closing
submissions
included the following:
“But the reality is, and you have the evidence – is
that government's capacity to pay often translates into governments
having to go
into deficit, which in turn is borrowing more money, which in turn has an impact
on the delivery of public sector services,
either increases of taxes, rates or
cut back in services.
So the capacity to pay issue here is not simply the government could pay if
it wanted to, which seems, in our respectful submission,
to be the subtext of
the submissions put against the Territory, because we haven't, as the Territory,
come out and said we cannot
pay this under any circumstance. But that doesn't
open the window that the capacity to pay means that the demands should be met or
that they're appropriate or they're divorced from the broader context in which
the delivery of public services and the payments associated
with the delivery of
public services for those who are employed shouldn't be taken into
Consideration – the merits of the case (s.275(a))
The primary issue for determination is the wage increases
applicable to medical practitioners.
ASMOF’s and the AMA’s merit arguments can be distilled
into the following propositions:
increases should be greater than the Territory’s proposal because real
wages have declined in recent years and the
Territory’s proposal would
result in a further decline in real wages;
(b) there have
been significant productivity gains in the CHS through medical practitioners
meeting ever-increasing demands and working
under increasingly difficult working
conditions;
wages will help attract and retain medical practitioners to the ACT; and
Territory’s decision to prioritise the needs of relatively lower paid
workers in a high cost of living environment fails
to preserve real wages for
any employees. Wages for medical practitioners should be increased by uniform
percentages rather than
fixed amounts.
The Territory’s merit argument can similarly be distilled to
the following propositions:
Territory’s position reflects the ACT Government’s position on
wages, which should be endorsed by the Commission
in the interests of
consistency and fairness for all ACTPS employees;
(b) the pay
increases proposed by the Territory are significant;
Territory’s proposal strikes a fair balance between ensuring that all
workers receive pay increases and prioritising
the needs of relatively
lower-paid workers in a high cost of living environment; and
(d) medical
practitioners may receive a range of other financial benefits extending beyond
their base salary.
In our view the following factors are particularly relevant in
assessing the merits of the respective cases:
(a) the history
of bargaining in the ACTPS and the fact that wage increases have been agreed for
all other ACTPS employee groups,
including those within the CHS;
sector considerations;
(c) the level
of inflation and its impact on real wages;
(d) attraction
and retention of medical practitioners;
(e) changes in
the conditions under which medical practitioners are required to work; and
Territory’s right to manage its health service subject to any demonstrated
unfairness to employees.
Consideration – Merits –
Bargaining in the ACTPS
The bargaining process for the ACTPS is not new. There are obvious
efficiencies in the process adopted by the Territory and the relevant
through which it negotiates common ‘core’ conditions in parallel to
bargaining with individual directorates and
The object of this approach includes to deliver outcomes that are
consistent across the ACTPS. The Territory’s departure in
the current
round of bargaining from its historical approach to wage setting, aims to
deliver higher net increases as a proportion
of salary to lower-paid ACTPS
employees in the context of heightened cost of living pressures. The necessary
consequence of this
approach for ACTPS employees in classifications attracting
higher salaries is that the net value of proposed wage increases is lower
proportion of base earnings.
The AMA criticised what it said was the Territory’s
“devout adherence to a particular calculation method, simply because
has been applied at other of the ACT's workplaces.” This is an
oversimplification of the Territory’s position, which
has the policy
objective described above.
There is no evidence to suggest that wage increases agreed in
connection with the 18 other ACTPS enterprise agreements were not the
genuine bargaining between the Territory and interested unions. We accept the
evidence of the Territory that it did not
come to the bargaining table initially
with any prepared wages proposal, and that it only put forward wage proposals
after having
received and considered the claims made by respective unions.
Ultimately, the agreed outcome for the other 18 enterprise agreements
the Territory’s third wages proposal. The evidence does not permit a
finding that the Territory’s decision
to limit the value of wages offered
to ACTPS employees was an arbitrary one, or irrational or unreasonable.
Although it had no formal published ‘wages policy’, the
Territory adopted a position in bargaining for the MPEA that it
would not agree
to wage increases outside of the parameters agreed in the common core bargaining
process. This was a position it
was entitled to take.
Conversely, it was open to ASMOF and the AMA to hold firm in their
rejection of wage increase offers put by the Territory in a bid
achieve a unique and more generous outcome for medical practitioners.
After its proposal was put to a vote in June 2024 and rejected, the
Territory explored with ASMOF and the AMA ways to bridge the gap
between the
parties to no avail. Although the Territory was firm in its view that wage
increases reflecting the outcome of bargaining
for the common core conditions
should apply, it remained open to the possibility of reaching a compromise. It
considered seeking
an exemption from the ACT Government that would allow it to
negotiate differently with the doctors in respect of their enterprise
but was not persuaded to do so.
The Commission’s task is to assess the respective positions
of the parties in relation to the matters at issue and, by reference
statutory factors, arrive at an outcome that is fair in all the circumstances,
that appropriately balances the interests of
the parties and would be regarded
as appropriate in the context of the bargaining had the bargaining concluded
successfully (see
In this matter, we consider the starting point to be that if
bargaining had concluded successfully, the appropriate and fair outcome
a consistency of approach to wage increases across the employed ACTPS workforce,
including for medical practitioners. A
departure from that principle would
require some compelling basis. In this respect, it is not necessary for either
ASMOF or the AMA
to show that the Territory acted unreasonably in rejecting any
proposals put in the course of bargaining.
We do not find the arguments in favour of such a departure in this
case compelling.
Firstly, we are satisfied that the outcome for ACTPS employees in
relation to improved common core conditions is, without more, equally
appropriate and fair for medical practitioners in the ACT. Although we accept
that on an overall basis, the Territory’s proposed
level of increases will
not keep pace with inflation over the relevant period (see below), wage
increases are only one component
of an overall bargaining outcome. Other
improvements in terms and conditions of employment have an overall net value to
The effect of the Territory’s position on real wages for
medical practitioners is not, on its own, a compelling basis to distinguish
medical practitioners from the remainder of the ACTPS.
Secondly, there is no cogent and persuasive argument as to why
medical practitioners should be treated more favourably than all other
employees, including their fellow CHS employees.
Thirdly, the Territory’s proposal for wage increases should
not be considered in isolation or without regard to the context
in which it was
put – being the long-established parallel bargaining process for the ACTPS
and a public policy position of
supporting low-paid employees in particular, on
the basis that they are most likely to have been affected by cost-of-living
in the post-pandemic period. We accept that flat dollar increases will
mean that higher paid employees will receive proportionately
less than those who
earn less. On the other hand, medical practitioners have access to a range of
benefits that do not appear to
be widely available to lower paid CHS employees.
Consideration – Merits – Public Sector
Considerations
It is important to recognise the Territory’s obligation as a
government to deliver a wide range of public services across a
wide range of
sectors using finite resources.
Both ASMOF and CHS are right when they say, respectively, that the
Territory can afford to pay more than they have offered and that
doing so comes
at a cost to the overall delivery of public services in the Territory.
The Commission is asked to make a decision about the
Territory’s allocation of its resources in relation to public sector pay.
We accept the evidence of Mr Hodder that the difference between the
Territory’s position and the AMA’s and ASMOF’s
positions on
wages amounts to somewhere between $92M and $105M respectively.
Consideration – Merits – Inflation and
Maintenance of Real Wages
The primary argument in support of the position put by ASMOF and
the AMA is that the Territory’s proposed increases will not
maintain real
wages for medical practitioners in CHS.
Unsurprisingly there was an active contest in the evidence about
whether real wages for medical practitioners have declined in recent
if so, by how much.
The Territory presented calculations indicating that salaries have
kept pace with inflation since 2011 – relying heavily on
larger salary
increases applied prior to 2018. The Territory also provided calculations
indicating that since 2018 salaries for medical
practitioners have kept pace
with seasonally adjusted public sector wage growth.
ASMOF and the AMA presented their own comprehensive analysis
showing that salary increases, including those proposed by the Territory,
not kept pace with CPI increases since 2018.
Plainly, the maintenance of real wages is a relevant consideration
for the reasons described above. We accept that the Territory’s
will deliver an outcome that is less than CPI over the relevant period. By how
much is not necessary to determine, because
it is not always the case that
enterprise bargaining must at least result in wage increases equivalent to CPI.
Sometimes, workplace determinations made by the Commission have
resulted in wage increases that are lower than CPI over the relevant
Sometimes, the reverse is true. As stated above, the task is to arrive at an
outcome that is fair in all the circumstances,
that appropriately balances the
interests of the parties and would be regarded as appropriate in the context of
the bargaining had
the bargaining concluded successfully. No particular outcome
is mandated by the legislative scheme on matters over which the Commission
arbitral discretion.
For this reason, the argument of ASMOF and the AMA that the
Territory’s proposal is inadequate merely because it does not maintain
real wages must fail, as must the converse contention that their respective
proposals must succeed because theirs do.
Consideration – Merits – Attraction and
ASMOF and the AMA submit that higher salary increases for medical
practitioners will have a positive impact on attraction and retention
practitioners in the ACT.
Within the evidence and the submissions there are several aspects
to this argument. It was said that:
Territory has struggled to attract and retain medical practitioners;
(b) shortages
caused by this struggle have had significant and ongoing impacts on the work of
medical practitioners and the services
they provide to the community;
(c) one of the
reasons that the Territory has struggled is because salaries in the ACT are
lower than in other jurisdictions; and
(d) awarding
higher increases will improve CHS’ capacity to attract and retain medical
practitioners.
Medical practitioner witnesses gave
evidence of the pressures and difficulties they encounter in their work.
Although we have not
published all of the detail of that evidence for reasons of
confidentiality, we recognise and appreciate that medical practitioners
ACT often work in difficult and challenging circumstances, including because of
staff shortages.
On the evidence, difficulties attracting and retaining medical
practitioners are not new. It is far from clear that wage increases
of the level
proposed by ASMOF and the AMA in this case would have any significant material
impact on this challenge, which is more
pronounced among senior and more
experienced doctors than those at the start of their career. For example, the
ongoing difficulty
in attracting and retaining specialised medical staff is a
problem acknowledged by the Territory in the Canberra Health Services
Report 2018-19.
Uncontested evidence went to several significant factors beyond the
control of CHS that have hampered attraction and retention - see
for example the
evidence of Ms Zagari summarised at
above. Such factors included the
ACT’s relatively small population centre and associated limits on the
number of complex or
specialised cases handled by the CHS.
We have reservations about the reliability and relevance of
comparisons of salaries across jurisdictions. As Mr Linton explained,
difficult to find a suitable comparator because of differences in how salaries
are constructed in different jurisdictions (see
above) and limitations on the
availability of data in relation to individual salary outcomes. As a
result, any comparisons must be
treated with caution. Taking them at face value,
medical practitioners in the ACT are paid relatively well in comparison to many
of their interstate colleagues. They may not attract the highest salaries in
Australia, but neither do they fall at the lower end
of the scale.
We also note the observations of the Full Bench in
Nurses Federation v Queensland Department of Health
(2003) 126 IR 244
at 264-6. At [59] the Full Bench
“The AIRC in exercising its discretion to grant a wage
claim would not as a general proposition, do so on the basis of attraction
retention for particular classes or categories of employees. It has long been
established within federal arbitral jurisprudence
that arbitral tribunals
consider it should be left within the province of the employer to determine such
incentives in accordance
with its policy settings. In this matter, issues
related to attraction and retention elements in remuneration packages pervaded
bargaining period; they have dominated the hearing before us; and, the
employer party has responded by itself seeking particular
award provisions,
selectively targeted. We have formed the view that, in the circumstances before
us, we should depart from the usual
practice adopted by the Commission and make
award provisions based upon attraction and retention considerations.”
As the extract above indicates, the Full Bench did depart from the
usual practice however they did so only in relation to two classifications,
because “a case has been made out on attraction and retention
grounds” (at [65]) and, perhaps, because the “structure
of targeted
adjustments had some support from [the employer]” (at [60]).
We have referred earlier in this decision to Attraction and
Retention Incentives (ARIns) which are explicitly intended to improve
and retention. ARIns are reviewed regularly by reference to comparisons with
other jurisdictions and, significantly, CHS
provides those comparisons to
individual senior medical practitioners (see
).There is of course an element of
discretion insofar as each ARIn applies at the discretion of the Director
General. However there
is also, as the evidence shows, elements of science and
methodology to the arrangements.
We accept that the Territory has struggled to attract and retain
medical practitioners for some time for different reasons. Although
discount the possibility that salaries in the ACT may have contributed to these
difficulties, on the evidence we are not
satisfied about how significant that
contribution is.
Consideration – Merits – Flat Dollar
It was said by ASMOF and the AMA that flat dollar increases will
disturb wage relativities in an unsatisfactory way.
If the Territory’s proposal is applied then the internal
relativities between classifications covered by the Determination will
the advantage of lower paid classifications. There is already a significant
range across base salaries within the classifications
under the 2022 Agreement.
For example, the base rate of a senior specialist is more than triple the base
rate of an intern. The flat
dollar increases proposed by the Territory will
compress relativities within the classifications in the Determination, although
significantly.
As noted above, for higher paid medical practitioners the flat
dollar increases deliver proportionately lower increases. In bargaining
common core conditions, ASMOF and the AMA argued strongly for the usual approach
to percentage increases, presumably to avoid
this outcome.
ASMOF referred to earlier decisions in which the Commission
expressed understandable reluctance towards applying flat dollar increases
because of the consequential effect on wage relativities.
The Territory argued that its approach allows for a fairer overall
result because it allows the Territory to apply larger increases
to lower paid
workers. The Territory said its approach and policy is to achieve the objects of
Public Sector Management Act
, and its ‘one service’
approach to operating the ACTPS across its directorates.
ASMOF’s submissions referred to potential disharmony in the
workplace if wage relativities were compressed by the inclusion
of flat dollar
increases. There are arguments for and against this submission. Applying wage
increases on a percentage basis also
delivers better net outcomes for higher
paid employees, leading to the potential for perceptions of unfairness. We
accept that the
Territory’s approach will reduce the gap between higher
paid medical practitioners and those at lower classification levels.
be the same outcome as applies to employees covered by the other three
enterprise agreements that apply to CHS.
ASMOF and the AMA submit that higher paid medical practitioners are
disadvantaged by the flat dollar increases compared to lower paid
However ASMOF and the AMA also submit that the Commission should disregard the
reliance placed by the Territory on benefits
only available to higher paid
medical practitioners, such as the ARIns. These arguments do not sit together
Consideration – Merits
– Other financial benefits
The Territory submitted that in
evaluating its pay proposal, it must be kept in mind that medical practitioners
may receive a range
of other financial benefits extending beyond their base
salary. These other benefits include on-call and recall allowances, shift
entitlements for medical practitioners required to work on shifts, penalty
entitlements and/or ‘time off in lieu’
for overtime or, in the case
of staff specialists, where they are required to work ‘onerous
hours’ (more than 90 hours
in a fortnight), rights of private practice
arrangements and the possibility of ARIns.
The existence of these other sources of
remuneration can be seen to ameliorate the effect of any reduction in the real
value of base
salaries under the MPEA.
We accept that most of the benefits relied upon by the Territory
have been available for some time. However, as noted above, we also
accept that
these other variable components, particularly the ARIns, are relevant to
consideration of the overall outcome in bargaining
for medical practitioners.
Consideration - the interests of the employers and employees
who will be covered by the determination (s.275(c))
Section 275(c) calls for an appropriate balance between the
legitimate expectations of the employers and employees (see
[39] adopting
Parks Victoria
at [272]). For
example, in
the Full Bench found that the employer and employees
shared a common interest in the viability and competitiveness of the employer
and that employees “have a legitimate expectation to be involved in the
development of the changes, and contribute to ways
in which the operational
goals of greater efficiency and reduced costs can be achieved without placing
undue hardship on them”
(at [40]-[41]).
On a superficial level, the interests of CHS lie in achieving its
proposed salary increases, while the interests of medical practitioners
adoption of the best aspects of ASMOF’s and the AMA’s proposals.
We acknowledge that ASMOF and the AMA have campaigned for a long
time for maintenance of real wages (and wage relativities) for medical
practitioners. For an even longer time salaries for medical practitioners have
been decided within the ACTPS’ parallel bargaining
process. It is not
possible to speculate about the degree to which medical practitioners have
benefitted from this parallel bargaining
process over the long term in the
absence of evidence going to the various elements that comprise bargained
outcomes over time.
Commonality so far as is practicable is plainly in the interests of
the Territory in the context of separate bargaining processes
covering 19
distinct work and employee groups. CHS also has an interest in managing
finite resources in complex healthcare settings;
balancing the need to
remunerate employees properly against the many competing demands for appropriate
resourcing of its services.
Medical practitioners need recognition of the
difficult work that they do, often in challenging circumstances. Recognition can
in a range of ways, including through the maintenance of real wages and
relativities with other CHS employees. They also need better
resourcing of the
facilities they use, and the services they provide, to reduce pressures
associated with roster shortages and lack
of work/life balance.
In the end, these are shared interests. They call for a balanced
approach, which allows for investment both in the wages of medical
practitioners
and in the resources they rely on to do their work.
Consideration - the significance, to those employers and
employees, of any arrangements or benefits in an enterprise agreement that,
immediately before the determination is made, applies to any of the employers in
respect of any of the employees (s.275(ca))
We have referred above to a range of other benefits available to
medical practitioners – many of which are incorporated as terms
2022 Agreement and in predecessor MPEAs. As important terms and conditions of
their employment, these have obvious significance
to employees to whom the 2022
Agreement applies. The same can be said for the various arrangements in the CHS
that reflect the systems
and processes established by CHS through which it
employs medical practitioners. These will largely continue in operation as
terms of the Determination.
Consideration - the public interest (s.275(d))
Consideration of the public interest imports a discretionary value
judgement as to matters that may affect the public as a whole as
distinct from
the interests of the parties, although these may overlap. That consideration is
confined only by the subject matter,
scope and purpose of the Act. Relevant
matters may include the achievement or otherwise of the objects of the Act,
employment levels,
inflation and maintenance of appropriate industrial standards
Parks Victoria
at [49]-[51]).
The parties all made submissions to the effect that the improved
functioning or operation of CHS is in the public interest, which
is undoubtedly
correct. However the parties did not agree on which outcomes would improve the
functioning or operations of the CHS
ASMOF submitted that its proposal would improve CHS’
operation or services to the community (and therefore be in the public
by providing improved job security for medical practitioners, increasing
opportunities for permanent employment for all
members of the community,
appropriate and timely management of patients, and improved attraction and
retention of medical practitioners.
The AMA submitted that its proposal would improve CHS’
operation or services to the community (and therefore be in the public
by paying medical practitioners sufficiently such that the Territory does not
suffer from further retention issues that
cause delays and significant health
and safety risks to patients, and that the increases proposed by the AMA
“promote workforce
sustainability, thereby supporting the appropriate and
timely provision of medical services by ACT hospitals” and improve
workforce age profile.
The Territory submitted that the public interest would be served by
granting its proposal which would promote consistency and equity
increases awarded across the ACTPS, support lower paid workers within CHS and
strike a balance between achieving pay increases
for public sector workers on
the one hand, and the costs to the public purse and potential economic impacts
of those increases on
We accept that, in broad terms, there are public interest benefits
to each proposal because of the important services provided by
Consideration - How productivity might be improved in the
enterprise or enterprises concerned (s.275(e))
ASMOF submitted that the Territory has significantly benefited from
labour productivity gains arising from work intensification. ASMOF
evidence of significant growth in patient numbers compared to lower rates of
growth in staff numbers.
The evidence of these matters was very broadly stated. Several
medical practitioner witnesses described their busy work environment
to cope with planned and unplanned staff shortages. Witness MP-3 and Witness
MP-4 referred to regularly being asked to
work additional shifts as paid
overtime but choosing not to. Witness MP-2 said that on average they work
“30 minutes to two
hours of overtime each week”.
Ms Zagari said that in recent years there has been a significant
increase in the demand for CHS services and, CHS is more heavily
reliant upon
VMO, locum and agency staff to maintain those services. Ms Zagari also referred
to the physical infrastructure remaining
the same. She explained that while more
patients were coming into emergency departments and being admitted, their length
was decreasing.
We are not persuaded that higher wage increases are justified based
on past productivity improvements, or that without more, they
will lead to
productivity improvements in the future. As a general principle, working in an
environment of staff shortages is more
likely to lead to burnout and reduced
productivity overall. To the extent that this problem can be overcome, it
requires new investment
in resources rather than increasing the cost of existing
resources. As such we do not find the resolution of the wages dispute as
to have a bearing on productivity in the relevant sense.
Consideration - the extent to which the conduct of the
bargaining representatives for the proposed enterprise agreement concerned
reasonable during bargaining for the agreement (s.275(f)); and
Consideration - the extent to which the bargaining representatives
for the proposed enterprise agreement concerned have complied with
faith bargaining requirements (s.275(g))
Earlier decisions have drawn a link between the conduct of
bargaining representatives and the awarding of retrospective increases.
Schweppes said
at [133]-[135]:
“[133] The bargaining process can be protracted,
particularly where a party is advocating significant changes to existing
The time taken in bargaining is not necessarily a function of
unreasonable behaviour by a particular party. Absent unreasonable behaviour
there is no reason in principle why a party should be disadvantaged by the time
taken in the bargaining process.
[134] In an appropriate case behaviour by a bargaining representative may
warrant a different approach. If the conduct of the bargaining
representative
was not reasonable (s.275(f)), or the bargaining representative did not comply
with the good faith bargaining requirements
(s.275(g)) then it may not be
appropriate to take into account the period since the nominal expiry date of the
previous agreement,
either in whole or in part. But this is not such a case.
Neither party contended that s.275 (f) or (g) were enlivened in this case.
[135] Protected industrial action is conceptually different. The very
purpose of such action is coercive. It is intended to facilitate
the making of
an agreement by inflicting losses on the other bargaining party. As we have
already noted, that statutory purpose would
be undermined if a party was later
compensated for the losses they incurred as a consequence of another party
engaging in protected
industrial action.”
[Footnote omitted]
Section 275(f) is not a vehicle for rewarding or punishing
bargaining representatives according to how reasonably they behaved during
bargaining. It simply requires the Commission to take the conduct of bargaining
representatives into account in arriving at a conclusion
that would be regarded
as appropriate in the context of bargaining, had the bargaining concluded
successfully.
We have described above the evidence about each party’s
conduct in bargaining. There is no claim that unreasonable conduct of
bargaining party should affect the wages outcome or backdating of salary
increases. As such we do not need to canvas this aspect
in any further detail.
Each party sought backdated salary increases and we do not propose to take a
different course.
Consideration - incentives to continue to bargain at a later
time (s.275(h))
Section 275(h) requires the Commission to take into account
incentives to continue to bargain at a later time, consistent with the
of encouraging collective bargaining and the making of enterprise
agreements.
We have described above the task of the Commission as being to
assess the respective positions of the parties objectively, and to
arrive at an
outcome that would be regarded as appropriate in the context of bargaining had
it concluded successfully. This requires
an overall judgment about what the
appropriate workplace determination should be until the parties replace it with
a new enterprise
agreement of their own. There is no principle that mandates a
particular outcome when it comes to wage increases and relativities,
although keeping pace with inflation is an important and relevant consideration,
each case turns on its own facts and circumstances.
For the reasons above, a compelling case might persuade us to
depart from an approach that delivers consistency of wage increases
employed ACTPS workforce. No compelling case for a different outcome has been
made out and we are not satisfied that setting
wage increases for medical
practitioners at more generous levels than applied in all other areas of the
ACTPS will incentivise future
bargaining between the parties.
Conclusion – Wage Increases
On balance, the appropriate and fair outcome is to apply the same
approach to salary increases in the workplace determination for
practitioners as those agreed for other ACTPS employees. This is the outcome
that in our assessment would be regarded as
appropriate in the context of
bargaining had it concluded successfully.
Medical Education Expenses
In the course of bargaining ASMOF proposed a change to the Medical
Education Expenses (
) allowance in the MPEA. The 2022 Agreement allows
Specialists and Senior Specialists to claim reimbursement for medical education
expenses up to a set limit. Mr Ross gave the following evidence about
(a) the funds
for MEE are held in trust in what is known as the Private Practice Fund
) for that purpose. The operation of the PPF and MEE is administered
under the terms of a Memorandum of Understanding between ASMOF
(b) while the
administration of the MEE is complex, for current purposes it should be
considered as a ‘reimbursement model’
under which eligible Medical
Practitioners pay for their own training costs and then claim a reimbursement of
those costs through
In 2022 ASMOF sought the option of having the MEE allowance paid as
an ongoing allowance that was not dependent on employees incurring
the expense.
Mr Linton said there was some negotiation over the superannuation consequences
of ASMOF’s proposal and about transitional
arrangements. Ultimately the
changes to the MEE arrangements were agreed between the Territory and ASMOF.
The AMA has not committed to a position on the matter, which we
found above means it is not an agreed term as between the Territory
and the AMA.
Shortly before the intractable bargaining declaration was made,
Witness MP-8 nominated as bargaining representative and took issue
proposed changes to the MEE arrangements. In the arbitration process a group of
radiation oncologists filed evidence and
submissions opposing the changes to the
MEE. Given that the matter was not an agreed matter between the Territory and
the AMA, we
do not need to precisely determine whether Witness MP-8’s
last-minute opposition separately caused MEE to still be in issue.
Witness MP-8’s evidence and submissions, as well as Witness
MP-9’s evidence and the submissions of the radiation oncologists,
summarised below.
Evidence – Witness MP-8
Witness MP-8 is a medical practitioner employed by the Territory.
Shortly before ASMOF applied for an intractable bargaining declaration,
MP-8 appointed themself as a bargaining representative and took issue with the
proposed changes to the MEE arrangements.
Witness MP-8 thinks that the MEE changes proposed are incredibly
detrimental to CHS.
Witness MP-8 filed two documents in the proceedings that are
primarily submissions as to why the proposed change to the MEE arrangements
should be rejected. Both documents contained a mixture of evidence and
submissions. Witness MP-8 was not required for cross-examination.
Witness MP-8 said that the value currently available for a
full-time senior medical officer is $21,668, but this can be doubled if
up to $43,336. This is in line with education expenses entitlement for NSW
Senior Medical Officers ($38,000). They explained
that the sum is reimbursed as
a remittance and is not subject to tax.
Witness MP-8 suggested that Senior Medical Officers were deeply
unhappy with the changes proposed by ASMOF at the ballot voted upon
2024. This was part of the reason that over 80% of doctors voted against the
proposed MPEA.
Witness MP-8 is concerned that Senior Medical Practitioners will
not use their allowance for education purposes, rather it will go
personal budgets and expenditure because it is easier and financially more
advantageous.
Evidence – Witness MP-9
Witness MP-9 is a staff specialist employed by the Territory since
2016. Witness MP-9 gave evidence on behalf of a group of radiation
oncologists who are concerned about the proposed changes to the MEE
arrangements.
Witness MP-9 explained that radiation oncologists are required to
undertake continuing professional development (
) activities on regular
basis, and that an aspect of CPD, but not the only aspect of CPD, is continuing
medical education.
Witness MP-9 and their radiation oncologist colleagues are
concerned that the nature of the “allowance” will be fundamentally
changed from being essentially a “reimbursement” to that of the
payment of a sum of money with no necessary or actual
connection to
“medical education expenses” or to the payment of such expenses.
Witness MP-9 reasoned that if the quantity (or amount) of medical
education that a medical practitioner undertakes is reduced or is
reduce then the quantity of output (number of patients property treated, number
of procedures performed (etc.)) using or
having regard to the latest medical
knowledge will reduce or likely reduce.
Witness MP-9 said that the current arrangements encourage medical
practitioners to complete a significant amount of continuing medical
without being ‘out of pocket’ and ensures that money that is
‘put aside’ as being expressly referable
to medical education
expenses is actually paid and used for medical education.
The radiation oncologists argued that:
“Put simply, if the quantity (or amount) of medical
education that a medical practitioner undertakes is reduced or is likely
reduce then the quantity of output (number of patients property treated, number
of procedures performed (etc.)) using or having
regard to the latest medical
knowledge will reduce or likely reduce.
... what is proposed by the Territory puts the medical practitioner on the
horns of a professional and ethical dilemma:
(a) do less medical education – which is not in the interests of either
the practitioner, the Territory or the public patients
that they treat; or
(b) do the same as you are presently doing, but pay the difference from what
your (reimbursement-based) allocation presently is out
of your own pocket.
That is not desirable from a public interest
perspective.”
In short, these medical practitioners were concerned that the
proposed change to the MEE arrangements would reduce the amount of time
money spent by medical practitioners on education, which would be detrimental to
the profession and consequently to the public.
Mr Schmidt was cross-examined by Witness MP-8. Under
cross-examination Mr Schmidt indicated that the AMA did not canvas ASMOF’s
proposed changes to the MEE arrangements with its members. Shortly before an
agreement was put to vote Mr Schmidt spoke to Witness
MP-8 about their concerns
regarding the MEE. Mr Schmidt said in cross-examination that he did not raise
Witness MP-8’s concerns
with ASMOF or the Territory because “it was
[his] belief that there was no opportunity to change the document that was to be
presented for a voting at that time.”
The Territory’s brief closing submission aptly summarises its
“On the issue of whether or not there was already an
agreement and the question of the MEE clause could even be raised, the
takes a neutral position on that.
In terms of the substantive merits, the Territory's submissions are that it
wishes to make clear its expectation as an employer that
the specialists and
senior specialists who receive the MEE allowance will use it for its intended
purpose of paying for medical education
expenses. They are now senior doctors
who have a professional responsibility to maintain their knowledge and skills.
The Territory
expects and trusts that they will use the allowance responsibly to
do so. They have a financial incentive to use the allowance for
education expenses rather than just pocketing it, but otherwise the arrangements
with the MEE and the decisions that the
practitioners make themselves are
matters for them to make, but you've heard the Territory's expectation that this
is not intended
to supersede or in any way to diminish the importance of ongoing
medical education.”
We are satisfied that it is appropriate and reasonable to include
the changes to the MEE arrangements in the Determination in the
form agreed to
as between ASMOF and CHS.
We accept that some medical practitioners have a generalised
concern that other medical practitioners will not spend as much money
education if the MEE system is changed. However, we note the Territory’s
expectations above and also that medical practitioners
have specific CPD
obligations. We proceed on the basis that senior medical practitioners covered
by the Determination will meet at
least their ongoing professional development
requirements.
In our view the proposed change will remove one administrative
layer to the benefit of the Territory without causing material detriment
medical practitioners. Instead of submitting expense records to the PPF for
reimbursement, medical practitioners will need to
maintain records of education
expenses incurred as part of their taxation requirements. As ASMOF
submitted – the change is
cost neutral for medical practitioners.
Witness MP-8 suggested that there might be taxation and/or
superannuation consequences if senior medical practitioners do not spend
equivalent amount on education or if the expenses incurred are not tax
deductible. We do not find these concerns persuasive.
Finalisation of the Workplace Determination
A draft workplace determination to give effect to our decision,
based upon the draft workplace determination filed by the parties,
will shortly
be issued to the parties.
The parties are directed to confer in relation to the draft
workplace determination, and to file any submissions (jointly or separately)
identifying any typographical errors or omissions or other inadvertent drafting
difficulties in the draft determination on or before
23 October 2025.
We will make the final determination shortly thereafter.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
of Counsel instructed by Slater & Gordon Lawyers for
Australian Salaried Medical Officers Federation
K Eastman SC
Counsel with
of Counsel and
of Counsel instructed
by ACT Government Solicitor for Australian Capital Territory as represented by
Canberra Health Servies
of BAL Lawyers for Radiation
Oncologists
of Counsel instructed by Sullivans Legal Co for
Australian Medical Association (ACT)
Witness MP-8
, Independent
Bargaining Representative
Hearing details:
March 3, 4.
Final written submissions:
CHS: 24 March 2025
Salaried Medical Officers Federation v Australian Capital Territory as
represented by Canberra Health Services
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (3.46 MB)
Signed PDF/A format