URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/cth/AUEPIP/2018/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:25:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Reef 2050: Good practice management for the Great Barrier Reef [2018] AUEPIP 1 (1 January 2018)
Target audience
Good Practice Management considerations
Implementation
Review and evaluation
Definitions
Further information
Attachment 1: Drivers of change, pressures and impacts on the Great Barrier Reef
Attachment 2: Risks to Great Barrier Reef values as reported in the Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report
Figure A2.1 - Likelihood scale
Figure A2.3 - Risk matrix legend
Attachment 3: Great Barrier Reef Outlook report condition and trend assessment approach (adapted from page 9 of the Great Barrier
Reef Outlook Report 2014)
Grading statements (refer to Table A3.1)
Trend and confidence
Evidence used
Table A3.1 - Condition of values grading statements
Attachment 4: Values, attributes and processes that underpin matters of national environmental significance relevant to the Great
Barrier Reef
Relationship between values and processes and ‘outstanding universal value’
© Commonwealth of Australia 2018
Published by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority
ISBN 978-0-6480964-4-3
Good Practice Management for the Great Barrier Reef
is licensed by
the Commonwealth of Australia for use under a Creative Commons By Attribution
4.0 International licence with the exception
of the Coat of Arms of the
Commonwealth of Australia, the logo of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park
Authority, any other material
protected by a trademark, content supplied by
third parties and any photographs. For licence conditions see:
http://creativecommons.org/licences/by/4.0
A cataloguing record for this publication is available from the National
Library of Australia
This publication should be cited as:
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority 2018,
Good Practice Management
for the Great Barrier Reef
, GBRMPA, Townsville.
Comments and questions regarding this document are welcome and should be
addressed to:
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority
2–68 Flinders Street
(PO Box 1379)
Townsville QLD 4810, Australia
Phone: (07) 4750 0700
Fax: (07) 4772 6093
info@gbrmpa.gov.au
www.gbrmpa.gov.au
Good Practice Management for the Great Barrier Reef
foundational considerations for making decisions or undertaking actions that may
impact on the Great Barrier Reef.
It is part of a suite of policy documents under the Reef 2050 Plan (refer
The target audience to apply these considerations is all stakeholders -
government, Traditional Owners, industry and the community
- involved in
delivering programs, plans, policies and on-ground actions that influence the
condition of the Great Barrier Reef.
Government agencies and authorities should apply these considerations when
revising or preparing relevant agreements, policies, plans,
strategies and
programs. Traditional Owners and stakeholders including, industry, businesses,
conservationists, infrastructure providers
and developers, are encouraged to
incorporate these considerations when developing proposals, guidance material,
programs or plans.
Researchers and the community can also apply these considerations to better
understand priorities for the Great Barrier Reef, and
focus areas for
improvement and measurement.
The Great Barrier Reef – like all reefs globally – is an icon
under pressure. Cumulative impacts are compounding over
space and time and are
diminishing the Reef’s ability to recover from disturbances. This loss of
resilience is especially concerning
given the importance of protecting the Reef
from climate change impacts.
The cumulative effects of these changes are impacting the resilience of the
Reef and we are witnessing a large-scale shift in the
ecosystem and
deterioration in its condition.
It also impacts the cultural values of Traditional Owners; the tourism and
fishing industries which rely on a healthy Reef; communities
along the coast for
whom the Reef is part of their life; and the broader Australian and
international community who consider it to
be ‘our Reef’.
There is an urgent need to review, rethink and substantively escalate our
collective management approach in response. Actions must
be timely, delivered at
the appropriate scales and be implemented in the context of a changing
The Reef 2050 Plan provides an overarching strategy for long-term management
of the Great Barrier Reef. It brings together actions
across government,
Traditional Owners, industry, researchers and the community. The Plan provides
an agreed outcomes-based, target-driven
framework for protecting the Great
Barrier Reef’s health and resilience while allowing for ecologically
sustainable use.
The Plan details primary principles to consider in all decision-making that
affects the Great Barrier Reef which are:
- maintaining and enhancing outstanding universal value in every action
- basing decisions on the best available science
- delivering a net benefit to the ecosystem
- adopting a partnership approach to management.
It is underpinned by the principles of ecologically sustainable development,
including the precautionary principle.
Practical approaches for addressing these principles are contained in the
Reef 2050 Policy Guideline for Decision Makers. This document,
Good Practice
Management for the Great Barrier Reef
, provides additional guidance for
decision-makers and the broader community (Figure 1).
Practice Management considerations
on outcomes
Adopting an outcomes-based approach was a key recommendation of the Great
Barrier Reef Region Strategic Assessment, and underpins
the Reef 2050
Plan’s delivery.
The condition and trend of the Great Barrier Reef’s values (Tables A4.1
and A4.2) are reported every five years in the Great
Barrier Reef Outlook Report
and provide an assessment of ‘very good’, ‘good’,
‘poor’ or ‘very
poor’ for each of the values (Attachment
A3.1 – reference condition). Desired outcomes for the Great Barrier Reef
to restore the condition of values assessed as ‘poor’ or
‘very poor’, and to maintain and enhance where condition
is assessed
as ‘good’ or ‘very good’. This is set out in Table
Decisions should align with the desired outcomes for the condition and trend
of Great Barrier Reef values, including its outstanding
universal value.
Decisions should be made in the context of a changing climate and accommodate
possible global warming of at least
C above pre-industrial
levels, be focused on ecological functions and minimising the cumulative impacts
of multiple stressors.
Management options should be compared with appropriate standards and
guidelines, including desired outcomes for the state of the Great
Reef’s values, to inform the acceptability of the proposed action. This
includes considering the precautionary principle
and principles of ecologically
sustainable use. Management options should recognise and be aimed at identifying
critical ecological
functions and identifying the key species that support the
Reef’s ecological processes, and target interventions to maintain
restore these ecological functions and to support those species.
Current condition
Desired outcome
The condition is maintained
The condition is maintained and enhanced
The condition is restored to good
The condition is restored to good
Trend in condition
Desired outcome
The trend is maintained
The trend is maintained and improved
Deteriorating
The decline is halted and reversed
: Desired outcomes for Great Barrier
Reef values
Future-looking, dynamic and adaptive
Prognostic or forecasting tools and reference scenarios should be used to
inform planning and actions, together with monitoring and
diagnostic tools to
adjust actions.
The results of targeted research, modelling and monitoring should be used to
evaluate the performance of actions and drive continuous
improvement.
Programs, plans and responses may need to be modified in response to advances
in predictive modelling, new science, emerging issues
or changing circumstances.
Where a condition of an approval or permission provides for adapting management
in response to impacts
and condition of values, there is also scope to modify
actions in line with new information.
The Reef 2050 Plan and the Reef 2050 Integrated Monitoring and Reporting
Program provide an adaptive management framework (Figure
2) to assess progress
towards outcomes and targets, and reduce impacts, using the Driver Pressure
State Impact Response framework.
Figure 2: Reef 2050 Plan Adaptive Management Framework
Avoidance of impacts is the highest priority
Measures to avoid impacts should be documented and consider prudent and
feasible alternatives, including the alternative of not carrying
proposed action.
Measures to mitigate impacts to reduce the likely significance of any
residual impacts should be clearly documented as part of the
avoid–mitigate–offset hierarchy (Figure 3). Consider how the action
could be redesigned, relocated or altered to avoid
and or minimise any likely
Figure 3 – Avoid, mitigate and offset
a systems perspective
Healthy and resilient ecosystems are fundamental to protecting Great Barrier
Reef values, and the community and economic benefits
they support.
The Driver, Pressure, State, Impact, Response (DPSIR) framework (Figure 2)
should be used to understand links between drivers of,
activities in and
pressures on the state of the environment, and the impacts on the benefits it
provides (refer to Attachment 1 for
the Drivers, impacts and pressures that
apply to the Great Barrier Reef).
Adopting a systems perspective focused on affected Great Barrier Reef values
provides a strong basis for achieving desired outcomes
(Table 1). Decisions
should clearly:
• specify the space and time scales in which the drivers, pressures and
impacts affect Great Barrier Reef values, including
the Reef’s outstanding
universal value
• specify the space and time scales at which affected values occur
including, for example, migratory pathways
• identify cause-and-effect relationships between drivers, pressures
and impacts on Great Barrier Reef values
• identify and account for connections between land and sea, and within
the marine environment.
the best available information
The best available information from the most appropriate sources should be
This includes historical information, monitoring data, Traditional Owner and
stakeholder knowledge, observation, modelling, forecasts,
expert judgement,
citizen science, peer-reviewed literature and science.
Actively engage affected communities and stakeholders regarding ecological,
cultural, social and economic values represented by the
Great Barrier Reef in
their area of interest.
Information should specify possible limitations of data and modelling;
divergence in expert judgement, or uncertainty, availability,
quality, quantity
and ongoing relevance of information.
and manage risk
Risk-management processes should be integrated into decision-making and
demonstrate consistency with the Australian/New Zealand/International
AS/NZS ISO 31000:2009
Risk management – Principles and guidelines
When identifying and analysing risks, the following factors should be
considered:
• time lags which may exist between cause-and-effect relationships of
impacts, both positive and negative, on values
• diversity, complexity and connectivity between environmental
components and processes, including cumulative or synergistic
• effects that are prone to change if the context changes
• lack of reliable data
• possibility of human error
• natural variation, where the likelihood of an outcome may depend on a
variety of factors and the vulnerability of components
of a system
• uncertainties likely to have a significant impact on
decision-making.
The Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report should be used as a guide to the types
and level of risks to the Great Barrier Reef from drivers,
pressures and
activities (refer Attachments 1 and 2).
Specific guidance for undertaking risk assessment for Great Barrier Reef
values has been developed (See Attachment 2 – example
of a risk assessment
procedure for the Marine Park permission system).
vulnerability and resilience
The vulnerability and resilience of the overall ecosystem and its values
(Figure 4) should be assessed. Consider whether exposure
of a value to
impacts – including the interaction of effects between impacts and past,
present and reasonably foreseeable future
pressures – is significant, by
• the sensitivity of the value(s) including:
o current condition and trend
o life histories/processes that are impacted
o dependency on impacted resources
o health thresholds
o risk and uncertainty around assumptions
• the adaptive capacity of the value(s) including:
o rate of recovery between disturbances, based on current condition
o rate of change and reorganising of a system to a desirable functioning
o risk and uncertainty around assumptions.
Vulnerability and resilience should be considered when assessing the level of
risk, identifying strategies for building resilience,
assessing the urgency of
action, evaluating the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of options, and for
engaging and empowering stakeholders
in adaptation processes.
Adopting a rigorous approach to risk assessment will highlight areas of
vulnerability where further analysis to improve resilience
may be required.
Specific guidance for considering vulnerability in risk assessment for Great
Barrier Reef values has been developed
(See Attachment 2).
Figure 4 - Illustrating system vulnerability and resilience
(Marshall, Tobin, Marshall, Gooch and Hobday, 2013).
collaboration and innovation
Participatory approaches based on international best practice should be
adopted to facilitate effective stakeholder engagement. This
is particularly
important where decisions affect community and economic benefits derived from
the Reef, including social, cultural
and economic values.
Innovative and collaborative approaches which create opportunities to
leverage resources, align effort, share information, generate
new ideas and
achieve multiple outcomes should be promoted.
Ensure transparent governance
Implementation of decision or actions should be supported by effective and
transparent governance measures.
Clear governance arrangements are required to promote alignment, maximise
efficient use of resources and reduce duplication of effort.
communicating information and engaging with relevant stakeholders should
facilitate timely, accurate and understandable
exchanges of information, while
considering relevant information security requirements (such as privacy and
confidentiality).
At a strategic level, accountability for delivery of actions and achieving
outcomes will occur through the Reef 2050 Plan annual reporting,
Barrier Reef Outlook Report and review of the Reef 2050 Plan. The Reef 2050
Integrated Monitoring and Reporting Program
will provide improved tracking of
progress towards outcomes and targets.
Where relevant, regulatory compliance and enforcement programs may contribute
to transparent and accountable governance by aligning
with and supporting the
Reef 2050 Integrated Monitoring and Reporting Program.
Traditional Owners and stakeholders including, industry, businesses,
conservationists, infrastructure providers and developers, –
encouraged to similarly adopt clear governance arrangements and public reporting
of outcomes.
evaluate and report
The Reef 2050 Integrated Monitoring and Reporting Program is establishing
standard protocols for collecting, storing, accessing and
reporting information.
Monitoring and reporting should be consistent with these protocols and
appropriate to the nature and level
Accountability for achieving outcomes should occur through fit-for-purpose
modelling, monitoring, evaluation and reporting programs
that align and form
part of the Reef 2050 Integrated Monitoring and Reporting Program. It will
clearly link performance indicators
to decision-makers that have the oversight
for the relevant project, program or plan.
Reporting should not only focus on implementation of actions but
achievements towards outcomes.
Modelling, monitoring and review should be systematically integrated into
decisions and implementation of plans, programs and actions
concerned with
reducing impacts and delivering net benefits. It is then possible to detect
change, maintain currency of information
and standards for modelling and
monitoring and evaluate the effectiveness of management interventions.
Implementation
This Good Practice Management for the Great Barrier Reef has been developed
with advice from the Reef 2050 Advisory Committee and
the Independent Expert
Panel (Figure 5) and targeted and public engagement. In finalising this
document, it is recognised that implementation
of the foundational
considerations in this document will be staged, recognising the need to develop
specific guidance for relevant
agencies and sectors.
and evaluation
The effectiveness of applying these considerations in decision–making
and achieving desired outcomes will be reviewed and evaluated
at the whole of
Reef level in line with the five yearly Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report.
Effective implementation should deliver
decisions and actions that apply these
good practice considerations. In the longer-term this should translate to an
improvement
in the condition or trend of the Reef’s values.
This document is to be read in conjunction with the Reef 2050 Policy
Guideline for Decision Makers which illustrates a wide range
of actions designed
to manage drivers and pressures on the Reef.
Definitions
Actions and activities are used to describe projects and project parts under
the EPBC Act and GBRMP Act. For this document actions
are used, assuming
activities comprise action, or a subset of an action. Also includes development
proposals and/or planning actions.
Adaptive capacity
The ability for a component of the environment to adapt to impacts to
maintain or improve its condition. Includes the environmental
component’s
ability to recover, reorganise or build capacity to learn and adapt in between
Adaptive management
A systematic process for continually improving management practices through
learning from the outcomes of previous management. It
includes a monitoring,
evaluation, reporting and improvement cycle.
Avoid-mitigate-offset hierarchy
Is used to guide assessment of actions and inform decision-making. The
highest priority is given to avoiding impacts on the environment.
measures must consider prudent and feasible alternatives to a proposed action.
Potential impacts that cannot be avoided
must be minimised. Mitigation measures
must consider direct, indirect and cumulative impacts, and account for the
likely spatial
and temporal scales of impacts across the duration of the
proposed activity. Offsets compensate for the residual adverse impacts
action on the environment.
Baseline condition
A description of existing conditions to provide a starting point (e.g.
pre-project condition of biodiversity) against which comparisons
can be made
(e.g. post-impact condition of biodiversity), allowing the change to be
quantified. Baseline conditions for the Marine
Park are measured from its World
Heritage Declaration in 1981.
Biodiversity elements
Biodiversity is the variety of life on Earth. It includes all living things
and the way they interact with each other and their environment.
Region’s biodiversity values which underpin matters of national
environmental significance include:
- Great Barrier Reef habitats
- terrestrial habitats that support the Great Barrier Reef
Community benefit
The interconnectedness of people and their environment as reflected in the
definition of ‘environment’ under the EPBC
Act and GBRMP Act and as
defined in this document.
Consequential impacts
Are a form of ‘indirect’ impact resulting from further actions
(including actions by third parties) that are made possible
or are facilitated
by implementation of the activity. For example, a port expansion may result in
an increase in shipping activity
which may bring with it a suite of
consequential impacts (e.g. anchoring impacts, displacement of uses).
Cumulative impacts
Cumulative impacts are defined as the interaction of effects between one or
more impacts and past, present, and reasonably foreseeable
future pressures.
Cumulative impact assessment
Takes into account direct, indirect and consequential impacts and the
incremental and compounding effects of these impacts over time,
including past,
present and reasonably foreseeable future pressures.
Decisions are not limited to regulatory decision-making. Decisions include
developing, revising or implementing relevant agreements,
policies, plans,
strategies and programs; implementing legislation as part of the Great Barrier
Reef planning and assessment processes;
prioritising and undertaking on-ground
An overarching cause that can drive change in the environment. It can affect
the environment indirectly by changing the way people
undertake activities that
affect the environment (indirect drivers) or by directing changing conditions in
the environment itself
(direct drivers). Examples include climate change,
economic growth and population growth.
Ecological processes and functions
Ecological processes comprise a number of functions including: microbial
processes, particle feeding, primary production, herbivory,
symbiosis, recruitment, reef building, competition and connectivity. Key
ecological processes of the Great Barrier Reef
are listed in Table A4.2. Changes
in these processes can have direct and indirect effects on other species such as
depletion of prey
or predators and the delivery of ecosystem services.
Ecosystem services are the benefits provided to humans through the
transformations
of resources (or environmental assets, including land, water,
vegetation and atmosphere) into a flow of essential goods and services
clean air, water, and food 12 (Ecosystem services definition cited in Department
of the Environment, Water, Heritage and the
Arts (2009). Ecosystem Services: Key
Concepts and Applications, Occasional Paper No 1, Department of the Environment,
Water, Heritage
and the Arts, Canberra).
Ecologically sustainable use
The principles of ecologically sustainable use are defined in section 3AA of
the GBRMP Act as:
a. decision-making processes should effectively integrate both long-term and
short-term environmental, economic, social and equitable
considerations
b. the precautionary principle
c. the principle of inter-generational equity—that the present
generation should ensure that the health, diversity and productivity
environment is maintained or enhanced for the benefit of future generations
d. the conservation of biodiversity and ecological integrity should be a
fundamental consideration in decision-making
e. improved valuation, pricing and incentive mechanisms should be
Is a deviation from the expected (positive or negative).
Environment
Includes ecosystems and their constituent parts, including people and
communities; natural and physical resources; the qualities and
characteristics
of locations, places and areas; heritage values of places; and the social,
economic and cultural aspects of the above.
(EPBC Act and GBRMP Act).
A change in situation; something happening or not happening (when it was
expected); an incident or occurrence that exposes a value
to a hazard.
The magnitude, frequency and duration of an environmental component’s
Great Barrier Reef
Refers to the Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area, Great Barrier Reef
Marine Park and Great Barrier Reef Region areas relevant
to the decision-making
A source of potential harm; a situation, action or behaviour that may
negatively impact on an environmental component, whether intentionally
unintentionally.
Heritage values
The Region’s heritage values, which underpin matters of national
environmental significance, are grouped into five broad categories:
Indigenous heritage values
: the heritage values of a place
that are of significance to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander persons in
accordance with their
practices, observances, customs, traditions, beliefs or
other heritage values
: a place’s natural and cultural
environment having aesthetic, historic, scientific or social significance, or
other significance,
for current and future generations of Australians
world heritage values
: the natural heritage and cultural
heritage of a property that is internationally recognised as being of
outstanding universal value
national heritage values
: the values of a place that are of
national significance as recognised through placement on the National Heritage
Commonwealth heritage values
: the values of a place that are
specified in its placement on the Commonwealth Heritage List.
Relates to ‘wholeness and intactness’ of the World Heritage
property and how it conveys the values it holds. Integrity
can also relate to
the size of the property (sufficient size to continue to represent the values)
and to any threats affecting the
The result or effect that happens when an environmental component is exposed
to a hazard; may be positive or negative.
Matters of national environmental significance
Those matters as defined in the Environment Protection and Biodiversity
Conservation Act
Net benefit
A decision or action which results in a net improvement to the condition
and/or trend of a Great Barrier Reef environmental value
or process as described
in Attachment 4 – Tables A4.1 and A4.2.
Outstanding universal value
Cultural and/or natural significance which is so exceptional as to transcend
national boundaries and to be of common importance for
present and future
generations of all humanity. Outstanding universal value is distributed
throughout the entire Great Barrier Reef
World Heritage Area. The relationship
between outstanding universal value and Great Barrier Reef values is described
in Attachment
Pressure (Threats)
An activity or group of activities that cause an impact on a value.
Includes programs, plans, decisions and on-ground actions.
Reference condition
Assessment of the reference condition and trend of Great Barrier Reef values
(taking into account past and present effects) is described
in Attachment 3 and
values are benchmarked and graded every five years through the Great Barrier
Reef Outlook Report.
Reference scenario
What is likely to have occurred in the absence of management response. The
reference scenario is based on the current condition and
trend, taking into
account reasonably foreseeable future pressures. Grading statements for
condition are described in Attachment
3 – Table A3.1.
The ability of an environmental component to cope with change or exposure and
remain in a desirable functioning state. It includes
the ability to absorb
impacts and continue functioning, and recover, reorganise or build capacity to
learn and adapt in between events.
Defined by the Australia/New Zealand Standard for Risk Management (AS/NZS
31000:2009 ) as “effect of uncertainty on objectives.”
policy/guideline, risk relates to uncertainty as to whether the objectives of
the policy can be achieved i.e. achieving
desired states for Great Barrier Reef
Sensitivity
The degree to which a component of the environment is responsive to a
specific impact.
How serious a consequence would be if it occurred; the degree of degradation
that would occur to the value if that consequence occurred.
Refers to values and processes as described in Attachment 4. Foremost,
healthy and resilient ecosystems are fundamental to the protection
biodiversity and heritage values and the community benefits they support.
Vulnerability
The susceptibility of environmental components to degradation from impacts.
Vulnerability is a function of the environmental component’s
sensitivity and adaptive capacity.
Zone of influence
The area or spatial extent in which an activity or pressure has the potential
to impact a component of the environment. The ‘zone
of influence’ or
‘zone of impact’ is used to describe the area and temporal scale of
effect at which impacts (such
as from an action, project, plan or program) are
occurring and the scope of response available or required to manage impacts. The
zone of influence includes the assessment of the boundaries to biological and
life processes needed to encompass the spatial and
temporal extent of impacts
that influence the condition of environmental values, ecosystem processes and
socio-ecological systems
throughout the period during which impacts of the
decision will occur. The zone of influence can be described in three parts:
- zone of ecological influence - the area or spatial extent in which an
activity or pressure directly impacts a component of the environment
- zone of system influence - the area or spatial extent in which an activity
or pressure has an indirect or consequential impact on
a component of the
environment, recognising the boundaries to biological and life processes extend
beyond the direct impact of the
- zone of management influence – which includes the scope of response
encompassing direct and indirect impacts and other past,
present pressures and
threats affecting values and processes.
information
Director- Policy and Planning
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority
2 - 68 Flinders Street
PO Box 1379
Townsville Qld 4810
Phone + 61 7 4750 0700
Fax + 61 7 4772 6093
reefcoords@gbrmpa.gov.au
www.gbrmpa.gov.au
Document control information
Approved by:
Great Barrier Reef Ministerial Forum
Approved date:
19 June 2018
Last reviewed:
Next review:
Document custodian:
Director- Policy and Planning, Great Barrier Reef Marine Park
1: Drivers of change, pressures and impacts on the Great Barrier Reef
Drivers are overarching causes that can drive change in the environment
(State of the Environment, 2011; Strategic Assessment Report,
2014) and have
also been referred to as underlying causes of change in the environment (Great
Barrier Reef Outlook Report, 2014).
For the purposes of this policy and the
Reef Integrated Monitoring and Reporting Program, it is proposed to adopt six
change for the Great Barrier Reef system:
1. Climate change
2. Population growth
3. Economic growth
4. Technological developments
5. Societal attitudes
6. Governance systems
Pressures and impacts are mechanisms that exert a change force (either
positive or negative) on a value. Put another way, pressures
and impacts are
the change mechanisms (e.g. processes or activities) that result from drivers.
For the purposes of this policy,
pressures are defined consistent with the Great
Barrier Reef Outlook Report ‘threats’ (2014) and the Strategic
Report ‘impacts’ (2014). The green boxes in Table A1.1
are pressures and impacts of particular relevance in the Great
Barrier Reef
catchment. Refer to Attachment 2 for the process for assessment of risk to
Great Barrier Reef values.
Table A1.1 – Pressures and impacts, their definitions and their
risks to values
Pressures and impacts
Definitions
Region-wide
Cyclone activity
Cyclone activity.
Sea temperature increase
Increasing sea temperature.
Ocean acidification
Increasing acidity of the Region’s waters.
Rising sea level
Rising sea level.
Modifying supporting terrestrial habitats
Clearing or modifying supporting terrestrial habitats such as wetlands,
saltmarshes, mangroves and sand dunes — this also includes
trampling and
damage from recreational vehicle use.
Nutrients from catchment run-off
Nutrients entering the Region in run-off from the catchment.
Sediments from catchment run-off
Sediments entering the Region in run-off from the catchment.
Outbreak of crown-of-thorns starfish
Outbreak of crown-of-thorns starfish (i.e. when the density exceeds about
30 starfish per hectare).
Illegal fishing and poaching
Illegal fishing, collecting and poaching (foreign or domestic) including of
species of conservation concern.
Extraction – incidental catch of species of conservation
Immediate or post-release effects (such as death, injury, reduced
reproductive success) of interactions of species of conservation
concern with
fishing gear.
Increased freshwater inflow
Increased freshwater inflow from prolonged or heavy rainfall including
flood events, and from changes to catchment ecosystems; resulting
Artificial barriers to flow
Artificial barriers to riverine and estuarine flow including breakwalls,
weirs, dams, gates, ponded pastures, and weeds causing changes
to hydrology,
groundwater and ecological connectivity.
Marine debris
Manufactured material discarded, disposed of or abandoned in the marine and
coastal environment (including discarded fishing gear
and plastics).
Incompatible uses
Activities undertaken within the Region that disturb or exclude other
users, such as recreational use in areas important for cultural
activities.
Extraction – discarded catch
Immediate or post-release effects (such as death, injury, reduced
reproductive success) on discarded species as a result of interactions
fishing gear. Does not include species of conservation concern.
Extraction — top order predators
Retained take (extraction) of top order predators (e.g. sharks) through
commercial, recreational and traditional fishing and the Queensland
Control Program.
Extraction — lower order predators
Retained take (extraction) of lower order predators (e.g. coral trout and
snapper) through commercial, recreational and traditional
Extraction — lower trophic orders
Retained take (extraction) of lower trophic orders (e.g. scallops, sea
cucumbers and prawns) through commercial, recreational and
traditional
Altered ocean currents
Altered ocean currents due to climate change or anomalies related to the El
Niño-Southern Oscillation, and altered coastal
water movement at a local
Local or regional
Pesticides from catchment run-off
Pesticides (including herbicides, insecticides, fungicides) entering the
Region in run-off from the catchment.
Disposal and resuspension of dredge material
Sea dumping of dredge material including smothering, loss and modification
of seabed habitats and resuspension.
Extraction — fishing in spawning aggregations
Retained take (extraction) of fish from unidentified or unprotected
spawning aggregations.
Outbreak of disease
Outbreak of disease, both naturally occurring and introduced.
Outbreak or bloom of other species
Outbreak of naturally occurring or native species, excluding
crown-of-thorns starfish.
Urban and industrial discharge
Point and diffuse-source land-based discharge of pollutants from urban and
industrial land use and mining, including polluted water,
sewage, wastewater and
stormwater.
Acid sulphate soils
Exposure and subsequent oxidation of potential acid sulphate soils.
Artificial light
Artificial lighting including from resorts, industrial infrastructure,
mainland beaches and coastlines, vessels and ships.
Damage to reef structure
Physical damage to reef benthos (reef structure) through actions such as
snorkelling, diving, anchoring and fishing, but not vessel
Damage to seafloor
Physical damage to non-reef benthos (seafloor) through actions such as
trawling and anchoring, but not vessel grounding.
Dredging of the seafloor.
Coastal reclamation
Coastal land reclamation, including for ports and groynes.
Exotic species and diseases
Introduction of exotic species and diseases from aquaculture operations,
hull fouling, ballast release, imported bait and release
of aquarium specimens
to the Region, plus the introduction of weeds and feral animals to
Extraction – herbivores
Retained take (extraction) of herbivores (e.g. some fish, molluscs,
dugongs, green turtles) through commercial and non-commercial
Grounding large vessel
Grounding of large vessels (>50m) including physical damage and the
dislodging of antifoulants.
Illegal activities — other
Illegal activities such as entering a protected or restricted area, illegal
release of industrial discharge, shipping outside of designated
Noise pollution
Noise from human activities, both below and above water.
Spill — large chemical
Chemical spill that triggers a national or regional response or is more
than 10 tonnes.
Spill — large oil
Oil spill that triggers a national or regional response or is more than 10
Vessel strike on wildlife
Death or injury to wildlife as a result of being struck by a vessel of any
Waste discharge from a vessel
Waste discharged from a vessel into the marine environment.
Wildlife disturbance
Disturbance to wildlife including from snorkelling, diving, fish feeding,
walking on islands and beaches, and the presence of boats;
not including noise
Grounding small vessel
Grounding of small vessels (<50m) including physical damage and the
dislodging of antifoulants.
Spill — small chemical and oil
Chemical or oil spill that does not trigger a national or regional response
and is less than 10 tonnes
Atmospheric pollution
Pollution of the atmosphere related to domestic, industrial and business
activities in both the Region and adjacent areas. The contribution
of gases such
as carbon dioxide to climate change is not included as this is encompassed under
threats such as sea temperature increase
and ocean acidification.
2: Risks to Great Barrier Reef values as reported in the Great Barrier Reef
Outlook Report
The Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report provides a full description of threats
and risks. The Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report has
a standard set of criteria
to allow the comparison of different types of threats within the one risk
assessment, based on the likelihood
and consequence of each threat. The
likelihood and consequence of each predicted threat are ranked on five-point
scales, as described
Figure A2.1 - Likelihood
Expected frequency of a given threat
Almost certain
Expected to occur more or less continuously throughout a year
Not expected to be continuous but expected to occur one or more times a
Not expected to occur annually but expected to occur within a 10-year
Not expected to occur in a 10-year period but expected to occur in a
100-year period
Not expected to occur within the next 100 years
Figure A2.2 - Consequence scale
Based on current management
Consequence
Broad scale
Local scale
Catastrophic
Impact is clearly affecting, or would clearly affect, the nature of the
ecosystem over a wide area. Recovery periods greater than
20 years likely
Impact is or has the potential to destroy a class or collection of heritage
places on a large scale; or is clearly affecting, or would
clearly affect, a
range of heritage values over a wide area.
Impact is, or would be, significant as a wider scale. Recovery periods of
10 to 20 years likely.
Impact is, or would be, extremely serious and possibly irreversible to a
sensitive population or community.
Condition of an affected part of the ecosystem possibly irretrievably
compromised.
Impact is, or would be, adversely affect the heritage values of a number of
places; destroy individual heritage places of great significance;
significantly affect the heritage values over a wide area.
Impact is, or would be, present at a wider scale, affecting some components
of the ecosystem. Recovery periods of five to 10 years
Impact is, or would be, serious and possibly irreversible over a small
area. Recovery periods of 10 to 20 years likely.
Impact is, or would, affect individual heritage places or values of
significance; or affect to some extent the heritage values at
Impact is, or would be, not discernible at a wider scale.
Impact would not impair the overall condition of the ecosystem, or a
sensitive population or community, over a wider level.
Impact is, or would be, significant to a sensitive population or community
at a local level. Recovery periods of five to 10 years
Impact is, or would, affect heritage places or values of local
significance, but not at a wider scale. Impact would not impair the
condition of the heritage values.
Insignificant
No impact; or if impact is, or would be, present then only to the extent
that it has no discernible effect on the overall condition
No impact; or if impact is, or would be, present then only to the extent
that it has no discernible effect on the overall condition
No impact; or if impact is, or would be, present then only to the extent
that it has no discernible effect on the heritage values;
or positive
Figure A2.3 - Risk
matrix legend
Likelihood and consequence are combined to determine risk level, in
accordance with the Australian Standard for Risk Assessment (AS/NZS
31000:2009).
Almost certain
CONSEQUENCE
Catastrophic
Insignificant
Example: Risk assessment procedure for the
Marine Park permission system
Determine sensitivity and exposure
Determine whether a risk event may occur. A risk event is when an activity
exposes a value to hazard to which that value is sensitive.
An event only occurs
if two things are true:
• The value is
to that hazard; and
• The value may be
to that hazard.
sensitivity
– is the value sensitive to the hazard,
that is, likely to change in response to the hazard, creating an impact?
• Low sensitivity – Value is not known to be affected by the
• Medium sensitivity – Value is known to be slightly affected by
the hazard (sub-lethal effects)
• High sensitivity – Hazard has well-documented negative impacts
on the value (lethal effects are possible)
• Uncertain – There is a high degree of scientific uncertainty,
or no knowledge about the value’s sensitivity.
– is the value likely to be exposed to the
• Low exposure – The value is not known to occur in the zone of
impact, or has been reported as a rare, aberrant visitor.
There are no reasons
to believe that the value occurs in the zone of impact.
• Medium exposure – The value has occasionally been reported in
the zone of impact, or there is reason to believe that
the value occurs in the
zone of impact.
• High exposure – The value is commonly reported or known to
occur in the zone of impact.
• Uncertain - There is a high degree of scientific uncertainty, or no
knowledge about the value’s occurrence or range.
Use figure A2.4 to determine whether a risk event needs to be considered in
the assessment.
Figure A2.4 – Does a risk event need to be considered in the
assessment?
SENSITIVITY 
Case by case decision
Case by case decision
Analyse the risks
Analyse the likelihood and consequence of how a risk may affect a value.
These effects are called “impacts.”
A “risk rating” is calculated based on:
• the consequence of the impacts to a value (expressed in terms of
severity) if a risk event occurs and
• the likelihood of that risk event occurring (expressed in terms of
probability or frequency).
The risk rating provides a measure of the level of risk, which is then used
to decide the acceptability of that risk and to establish
management priorities
for treating the risk.
Standard descriptions for consequence and likelihood, based on a five-point
scale, allow the comparison of different types of hazards
within a single risk
assessment.
Determine the possible impacts
For each event and hazard, list the potential impacts to relevant values that
might reasonably be expected to occur.
Impacts are distinct effects on some aspect of a value. They are different
from consequences (which are considered in the next step);
a consequence is the
overall outcome on the condition or trend of the value.
Consider the full range of values that might be impacted. For example, death
of a dolphin may impact not only on the biophysical value
of dolphins, but also
on social or Indigenous heritage values associated with dolphins.
Where quantitative information is available, this should be used to more
accurately identify the potential impacts.
Determine the severity of consequences
This step moves from impacts on an aspect of a value to considering the
consequence – that is, the overall outcome on the condition
or trend of
Table A2.3 provides a standardised description of consequences for different
general categories of values. These generic descriptions
may be supplemented
• The individual
assessment guidelines
provide consequence tables unique to specific
• Expert advice may be used to develop a consequence table for a
specific value, where Value Assessment Guidelines are not yet
Consider each value that may experience consequences, and how the severity of
these consequences differ depending on the value.
Consider at what scale the consequence may occur:
• Local scale – A single bay, reef or island; generally an area
less than 100 square kilometres
• Regional scale – A Natural Resource Management region
• Widespread scale – Overall condition of the value across
multiple regions or across the entire Marine Park; generally,
affecting 50 per
cent or more of the value’s extent.
Consider the vulnerability of the value, or of sub-groups within that value.
If there are populations, groups or individuals that
are particularly vulnerable
to a certain impact, the consequence level will typically be higher. In
particular:
• impact to different life histories/processes
• the dependency of values on impacted resources
• the current condition and trend in condition of values
• relevant health thresholds
• the ability of the value to adapt to the new impact to maintain or
improve its condition, such as the rate of recovery between
disturbances, based
on current condition or rate of change and reorganising of a system to a
desirable functioning state.
3: Great Barrier Reef Outlook report condition and trend assessment approach
(adapted from page 9 of the Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report 2014)
A set of assessment criteria is used to analyse available evidence. For
example, the assessment of biodiversity uses two assessment
habitats to support species and populations of species or groups of species.
Within each assessment criterion there
are multiple assessment components. A
series of statements is then used to standardise the allocation of grades for
all components
examined in an assessment, as well as the overall grade for the
Grading statements
(refer to Table A3.1)
The grade allocated is a ‘grade of best fit’, based on a
qualitative assessment of the available evidence for the Region.
It is not a
comparison of the Region in relation to other tropical ecosystems around the
world. The statements developed for assessing
most heritage values are based on
those used in the Australian State of the Environment Report and Strategic
Assessment draft report.
Those for the assessment of world and national heritage
values are adapted from a grading system developed by the International Union
for Conservation of Nature to assess the outstanding universal value of natural
world heritage sites. One aspect considered in grading
the condition of heritage
values is the degree to which those values have been recorded and identified.
This recognises the important
role an understanding of heritage plays in its
protection.
The approach to grading is refined by including an indication of trend and
confidence, similar to the Australian State of the Environment
Report and the
Strategic Assessment report. There are four categories for trend: improved,
stable, deteriorated and no consistent
trend. The category of ‘no
consistent trend’ is applied to a component when the available information
is too variable
to establish a trend, for example where there is strong
variation across broad areas or across species within a group. The terms
‘improved’ and ‘deteriorated’ are replaced with
‘increased’ and ‘decreased’ in assessments
of benefits,
impacts, threats and risks. Similar to the Australian State of the Environment
Report and the Strategic Assessment report,
the level of confidence in each
assessment of grade and trend is rated. The categories used are:
- adequate high quality evidence and high level of consensus
- limited evidence or limited consensus
- inferred, very limited evidence.
For components where the confidence level is ‘inferred, very limited
evidence’, the assessment is based on knowledge from
managing agencies,
Traditional Owners, topic experts and informed stakeholders (expert
elicitation).
Evidence used
The evidence used in the Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report is derived from
existing research and information sources. It is drawn
from the best available
published science based on:
- relevance to the required assessments
- duration of study
- extent of area studied
- reliability (such as consistency of results across different sources, peer
review and rigour of study).
Table A3.1 - Condition
of values grading statements
Functional group of values
Condition grading statement
Habitat to support species
All major habitats are essentially structurally and functionally intact and
able to support all dependent species.
There is some habitat loss, degradation or alteration in some small areas,
leading to minimal degradation but no persistent, substantial
populations of dependant species.
Habitat loss, degradation or alteration has occurred in a number of areas
leading to persistent substantial effects on populations
of dependent
There is widespread habitat loss, degradation or alteration leading to
persistent, substantial effects on many populations of dependent
Populations of species and groups of species
Only a few, if any, species populations have deteriorated as a result of
human activities or declining environmental conditions.
Populations of some species (but no species groups) have deteriorated
significantly as a result of human activities or declining environmental
conditions.
Populations of many species or some species groups have deteriorated
significantly as a result of human activities or declining environmental
conditions.
Populations of a large number of species have deteriorated
significantly.
Physical, chemical and ecological processes
There are no significant changes in processes as a result of human
activities.
There are some significant changes in processes as a result of human
activities in some areas, but these are not to the extent that
significantly affecting ecosystem function.
There are substantial changes in processes as a result of human activities,
and these are significantly affecting ecosystem functions
in some areas.
There are substantial changes in processes across a wide area as a result
of human activities, and ecosystem functions are seriously
affected in much of
Outbreak of disease, introduced species and pest species
No records of diseases above expected natural levels; no introduced species
recorded; pests populations within naturally expected
Diseases occasionally above expected natural levels but recovery prompt;
any occurrences or introduced species successfully addressed;
pests sometimes
present above natural levels with limited effects on ecosystem function.
Unnaturally high levels of disease regularly recorded in some areas;
occurrences of introduced species require significant intervention;
outbreaks in some areas affecting ecosystem function more than expected under
natural conditions.
Unnaturally high levels of disease often recorded in many areas;
uncontrollable outbreaks of introduced pests; opportunistic pests
affecting ecosystem function in many areas.
Indigenous, historic, social, aesthetic, scientific, Commonwealth and
Natural heritage values
Heritage values have been systematically and comprehensively identified and
included in relevant inventories or reserves. Known heritage
values are well
maintained and retain a high degree of integrity.
Heritage values have been mostly identified and included in relevant
inventories or reserves. Known heritage values are generally
maintained and
retain much of their integrity.
Heritage values have not been systematically identified. Known heritage
values are degrading and generally lack integrity.
Heritage values have not been identified. Known heritage values are
degraded and lack integrity.
World and national heritage values
All elements necessary to maintain the outstanding universal value are
essentially intact, and their overall condition is stable or
Available evidence indicates only minor, if any, disturbance to this element of
outstanding universal value.
Some loss or alteration of the elements necessary to maintain the
outstanding universal value has occurred, but their overall condition
causing persistent or substantial effects on this element of outstanding
universal value.
Loss or alteration of the elements necessary to maintain outstanding
universal value has occurred, which is leading to a significant
reduction in
this element of the outstanding universal value.
Loss or alteration of most elements necessary to maintain the outstanding
universal value has occurred, causing a major loss of the
outstanding universal
Economic and social benefits of use
Use of the Region provides significant economic and social benefit, in ways
that sustain the fundamental value of the natural resource.
The Region is
strongly recognised, valued and enjoyed by catchment residents, the nation and
the world community.
Use of the Region provides valuable economic and social benefit. The
Region is valued by catchment residents, the nation and the
There are few and declining economic and social benefits derived from the
use of the Region. Many do not recognise the value of the
Region and do not
enjoy their visit to the Region.
Use of the Region contributes little or no economic and social benefit.
The Region holds little value for catchment residents, the
nation or the world
Attachment 4: Values,
attributes and processes that underpin matters of national environmental
significance relevant to the Great
Barrier Reef
Relationship between
values and processes and ‘outstanding universal value’
A property is considered to be of ‘outstanding universal value’
if it meets one or more of 10 world heritage criteria
and is inscribed on the
World Heritage List. To be deemed to be of outstanding universal value ‘a
property must also meet the
conditions of integrity and/or authenticity and must
have an adequate protection and management system to ensure its
safeguarding’.
Effective future protection of the Great Barrier
Reef’s outstanding universal value, together with the seven matters of
environmental significance, relies on the integration of management
measures and a systems approach to the protection of values and
Table A4.1 - Key values and attributes of matters of national environmental
significance
The following table outlines key values and attributes
for the Great Barrier Reef. These values and attributes underpin Reef-related
Matters of National Environmental Significance. For the World Heritage Area,
values are based the Statement of Outstanding Universal
Given the scale and complexity of the Great Barrier Reef and its diversity
and interconnectedness, key values and processes are combined
comprehensive set as a basis for assessment of outstanding universal value and
the seven matters of national environmental
significance. The key values and
processes presented in the following tables are based on those identified in the
description of
each matter in Sections 4.2 to 4.9 of the Great Barrier Reef
Region Strategic Assessment Report.
World heritage properties
Listed migratory and
threatened species
Key values and attributes
Criterion i (now viii)
Criterion ii (now ix)
Criterion iii (now vii)
Criterion iv (now x)
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park
National heritage places
Commonwealth marine areas
Marine turtles
Estuarine crocodiles
Sharks and rays
Wetlands of international importance
Biodiversity — Great Barrier Reef habitats
Beaches and coastlines
Mangrove forests
Seagrass meadows
Coral reefs (<30 m)
Deeper reefs (>30 m)
Lagoon floor
Continental slope
Open waters
Biodiversity — terrestrial habitats that support the Great Barrier
Saltmarshes
Freshwater wetlands
Forested floodplain
Heath and shrublands
Grass and sedgelands
Rainforests
Connecting water bodies
Biodiversity — species
Benthic microalgae
Other invertebrates
Plankton and microbes
Sharks and rays
Marine turtles
Estuarine crocodiles
Geomorphological features
Coral reefs
Islands and shorelines
Channels and canyons
River deltas
Seagrass meadows
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander heritage
Cultural practices, observances, customs and lore
Sacred sites, sites of particular significance, places important for
cultural tradition
Stories, songlines, totems and languages
Indigenous structures, technology, tools and archaeology
Historic heritage
Places of historic significance — historic shipwrecks
Places of historic significance — World War II features and sites
Places of historic significance — lightstations
Places of historic significance — other
Places of scientific significance (research stations, expedition
Places of social significance — iconic sites
Community benefits of the environment
Understanding
Appreciation
Access to Reef resources
Personal connection
Health benefits
Table A4.2 Key
environmental processes relevant to matters of national environmental
significance
For the World Heritage Area, connections are based on the Statement of
Outstanding Universal Value. For listed species, processes
that have a major
supporting role in maintaining the species are shown (for example, the role that
beaches play in the nesting of
listed marine turtles). For wetlands of
international importance, the connections shown are those discussed in the
Ramsar Convention
information sheet.
World heritage properties
Listed migratory and
threatened species
Key environmental processes
Criterion i (now viii)
Criterion ii (now ix)
Criterion iii (now vii)
Criterion iv (now x)
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park
National heritage places
Commonwealth marine areas
Marine turtles
Estuarine crocodiles
Sharks and rays
Wetlands of international importance
Waves, currents and tides
Sedimentation
Sea temperature
Nutrient cycling
Ocean acidity
Freshwater inflow and salinity
Microbial processes
Particle feeding
Primary production
Competition
Connectivity
Recruitment
Reef building
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (8.92 MB)
PDF format (2.2 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter