Williams v Robinson [2000] HREOCA 42 (13 October 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
SEX DISCRIMINATION ACT 1984
No. H 99/67
KATHERINE WILLIAMS
Complainant
COLIN ROBINSON
First Respondent
THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
(AUSTRALIAN DEFENCE FORCE)
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR DECISION OF INQUIRY COMMISSIONER
THE HON JOHN NADER QC
Location of Hearing: Sydney, Newcastle and Brisbane
Dates of Hearing: 28 March, 1-2 May, 7-8 August
and 10-11 August 2000
Date of Decision: 13 October 2000
Appearances: Complainant: Mr J Millar of Counsel instructed by
Etheringtons Solicitors
First respondent: appeared in person
Second respondent: Ms R Henderson of Counsel instructed by the Australian
Government Solicitor
1. INTRODUCTION
This Inquiry concerns a complaint lodged with the Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission (“the Commission”) on
12 March 1998 under the
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
(Cth) (“the Act”) by Ms Katherine
Williams (“Williams”) against Mr Colin Robinson
(“Robinson”)
and the Commonwealth of Australia (Australian Defence
Force) (“the Second Respondent”). Williams alleges that she was
sexually harassed by Robinson during the time she was a member of the Australian
Defence Force, serving in the Royal Australian Air
By letter dated 9 April 1999 the Sex Discrimination Commissioner informed the
Director of Legal Services of the Commission that efforts
to effect conciliation
of the complaint were unsuccessful and the complaint was referred for inquiry by
the Commission pursuant to
s.57(1)(b) of the Act. In accordance with s.57(1) of
the Act, a report relating to the inquiry into the complaint made by the Sex
Discrimination Commissioner accompanied the referral.
On 27 October 1999 I was appointed Inquiry Commissioner pursuant to s.60(1)
of the Act for the Inquiry into this complaint.
On 28 March 2000 I commenced the Inquiry into the complaint. The Inquiry
proceeded on 1 and 2 May 2000, 7 and 8 August 2000, and
10 and 11 August 2000.
On the last date I adjourned the Inquiry to await written submissions. Williams
filed submissions on 31 August
2000, Robinson filed submissions on 4 September
2000 and the Second Respondent filed submissions on 14 September 2000.
The relevant statutory provisions are as follows:
28A Meaning of sexual harassment
(1) For the purposes of this Division, a person sexually harasses another
person (the “person harassed”) if:
(a) the person makes an unwelcome sexual advance, or an unwelcome request for
sexual favours, to the person harassed; or
(b) engages in other unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature in relation to the
person harassed;
in circumstances in which a reasonable person, having regard to all the
circumstances, would have anticipated that the person harassed
offended, humiliated or intimidated.
(2) In this section:
“conduct of a sexual nature” includes making a statement of a
sexual nature to a person, or in the presence of a person,
whether the statement
is made orally or in writing.
28B Employment, partnerships etc.
(2) It is unlawful for an employee to sexually harass a fellow employee or a
person who is seeking employment with the same employer.
106 Vicarious liability etc.
(1) Subject to subsection (2), where an employee or agent of a person does,
in connection with the employment of the employee or with
the duties of the
agent as an agent:
(a) an act that would, if it were done by the person, be unlawful under
Division 1 or 2 of
(whether or not the act done by the employee or agent
is unlawful under Divison 1 or 2 of
(b) an act that is unlawful under Division 3 of
this Act applies in relation to that person as if that person had also done
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to an act of a kind referred to
in paragraph (1)(a) or (b) done by an employee or agent
of a person if it is
established that the person took all reasonable steps to prevent the employee or
agent from doing acts of the
kind referred to in that paragraph.
3. EVIDENCE AND FINDINGS ON THE EVIDENCE
3.1 Background
It is expedient to start the factual narrative some years before the events
giving rise to these proceedings.
Williams was born on 20 May 1966. She completed her higher school
certificate at St Anne's Catholic High School, Adamstown. In January
commenced a secretarial course at Belmont College of TAFE, while working
part-time in a supermarket at Warners Bay.
She is the daughter of a former member of the RAAF who served in Vietnam. Her
grandfather served in the RAAF during World War II.
She decided to follow in
their path by seeking a career in the RAAF.
She enlisted in the Australian Defence Force, namely the RAAF, on 4 June
1985. After completing about 13 weeks' recruit training,
she was posted to
Wagga Wagga for clerical training, and then to Townsville in November 1985 in
the rank of Aircraft Woman.
3.2 Events in 1985
It is relevant to the issue of the extent of damage to refer to an event that
occurred in Townsville in 1985.
Williams gave evidence that at about 2am on 23 November 1985 (Williams’
submissions suggest 20 November 1985, but the precise
date is not important), at
Townsville RAAF Base, in a room in single female members' quarters, Williams
awoke feeling a man's hand
on her inner thigh. He moved his hand to her crotch.
She wore a nightdress and was covered by a sheet; her left leg was exposed.
She saw that there was another man present in her room standing behind her
assailant. Williams 'took a swing' at the man who had
assaulted her. Both men
then moved to the door of Williams’ bedroom. Williams got out of bed,
walked across the room and turned
the light on. The men were still standing in
the room, one in front of the other.
She said, "You're in trouble now". Her assailant mimicked her repeating,
"You're in trouble now". He turned to the man behind him
and laughed. Williams
said, "I've got your faces". Her assailant then turned around to the other man
again and said in a mocking
way, "She's got our faces" and laughed.
They started walking towards her. Williams walked backwards and screamed.
Both men then ran from the building. This assault occurred
on the first or
second night after Williams had finished her recruit training.
Before the assault, at about 10pm while lying in bed, Williams heard men
outside of her room chanting, “Gang bang, gang bang”.
In her words
that assault made her feel, “Sick, very sick, sick in the stomach”.
She said that she “just wanted
to disappear off the face of the
Because of embarrassment, she did not want to have to tell anyone about it.
However, she reported the assault to a female corporal
who arrived at her
section: she had not wanted to speak about it to a man. The complaint was
eventually relayed through various non-commissioned
officers to RAAF Police who
interviewed Williams and took a statement from her.
Williams later identified her two assailants. They were dealt with at a
proceeding of some kind at Williamtown. According to Williams,
they suffered
some kind of disciplinary action, not for the offence of sexually or indecently
assaulting Williams, but with being
in the accommodation block with alcohol. It
was said that they were fined and suffered loss of seniority. In fact, the
is ambiguous as to whether they were formally found guilty of any
offences. The Second Respondent could have cleared up this point
at the Inquiry
but did not do so.
Williams said that the men who sexually assaulted her were required to
apologise to her. She remembered only the name of one of the
men who assaulted
her, the principal offender, Michael Devlin. A promise was made to Williams
that she would never be required to
serve at the same base as either of the men
again. Williams received no counselling or any offer of counselling to assist
recover from the assault.
After the assault she became withdrawn. She avoided anything that might
attract attention to herself. She did not want responsibility.
She said that
she just wanted to go away and hide. She felt that her life was in ruins.
If Devlin and his alleged co-offender were not prosecuted for the alleged
sexual assault, it was a serious falling short of proper
conduct on the part of
Williams’ superior officers. One cannot be sure why charges were not
laid. But one thing is clear,
there was then and is now no justification for a
serving member of an armed service to be treated more leniently for a sexual
that a civilian would be. Indeed, one might expect the opposite in a
disciplined service.
The fact that Williams’ evidence may have been uncorroborated would not
of itself have been sufficient reason for not charging
the offenders: many
criminal trials are based on the uncorroborated evidence of complainants. A
decision based on the perceived
quality of her evidence would have been a
different matter.
This apparent failure to deal properly with the assault on Williams in 1985
was to be a major factor in the extent of damage suffered
by her years later as
a result of the sexual sexual harassment now under this Inquiry.
The fact of the offenders not being dealt with appropriately, at least in the
mind of Ms Williams, was to be a factor aggravating
the deleterious effect of
the subsequent assaults, yet to be described, upon her. It must have suggested
to her that her physical
and psychological integrity were of little importance
to her superior officers. It caused Williams to be very much more sensitive
the effects of any further assaults that she might suffer at the hands of fellow
RAAF members.
3.3 Events giving rise to this Inquiry
3.3.1 Williams’ return to duty at 1 CAMD: September
I now pass over a period of some years to deal with the assaults that
triggered this Inquiry.
Williams gave birth to a daughter, Laura Mae Williams, on 24 April 1995 and
returned to duty from maternity leave on 25 September
1995. At the material
times, she performed her duties in the medical centre of 1 Central Ammunition
Depot, a RAAF depot known as
“1 CAMD”. She described the medical
centre at 1 CAMD as being a substation of 3 Hospital where she was posted.
Her immediate superior was Robinson: then a sergeant, now a civilian.
Williams worked under his daily supervision.
3.3.2 The first assault: April 1996
Williams gave evidence concerning the first alleged assault by Robinson upon
her, which took place in about April 1996.
Williams was standing in the orderly room of 1 CAMD facing the front desk.
She saw her then boyfriend, Roger Smith, enter the building
through a door
directly in front of the orderly room desk. Williams said to Robinson, "There's
my boyfriend." Robinson said, "Does
that mean he'll get upset if I do this."
He then moved to a position behind her and grabbed her with his arms from behind
He wrapped his right leg around her right leg and pressed his body against
hers. He held her in that way for some seconds and then
released her and
laughed. I do not accept the conversations earlier in this paragraph to be
precisely the words spoken but, rather,
that they were Williams’ best
recollection as she testified and that they do fairly convey the import of what
Roger Smith came to the counter and said, "What the f--- is going on."
Williams said, "Don't worry about it. We'll talk about it
later," and he left.
Asked how she felt after the first assault, Williams gave the following
answer: "Well, I actually had a panic attack; I was frozen,
I couldn't think
straight, I just wanted to shrink down into nothing, and I wanted Sergeant
Robinson to go away - and I didn't want
anyone to know how pathetic I was."
Williams said that she felt weak for not being able to stand up to him, for
being scared of him and for letting him do what he did.
She said that she felt
scared because he was a man, because he was a sergeant, because, as her
immediate superior, he could make
her life difficult if he wanted to.
There was a delay in officially reporting the first assault which is a matter
that I have taken into account when considering Williams’
credibility.
Williams said that she did not complain straight away because she thought that
Robinson would not be working with her
after the first assault. She thought he
was to be transferred to 3 Hospital. I accept her evidence in this respect. I
strong impression from the manner of her giving evidence as well as
from the substance of her evidence that Williams found sexual
matters extremely
hard to discuss with strangers and was embarrassed when she did so. She would
certainly have sought ways not to
have to do so. She felt easier discussing
such things with friends whom she felt she could trust. In fact, if she had not
assaulted again by Robinson she may never have complained of the first
assault. One might speculate that Robinson was emboldened
to perpetrate the
subsequent assault by the very fact the Williams had not complained of the
earlier one.
3.3.3 The second assault: May 1996
However that may be, on 9 May 1996 Williams was at 1 CAMD by herself but she
had to attend an appointment at 3 Hospital at Richmond.
Warrant Officer James
(“James”) had sent Robinson to 1 CAMD to replace Williams during her
When Williams returned to 1 CAMD from her appointment at Richmond, Robinson
was in the treatment room attending to a patient. Williams
told him that she
could take over what he was doing. Williams went to the patient, took the
stethoscope and put it to her ears in
order to take the patient's blood
pressure. She bent over the patient who was on a chair at a lower level than
Williams gave evidence that while she was bending over, Robinson came from
behind her and grabbed her around the waist. He pulled
his body into hers and
held her there. He said something and laughed before releasing her. Williams
could not make out what Robinson
said. She heard only a muffled voice because
she had the stethoscope in her ears. Williams finished taking the patient's
blood pressure.
When she walked out of the room Robinson had left the
Williams could not remember the name of the patient who was present at the
assault. She did remember that he was a male.
Williams said that this second assault affected her in much the same way as
the earlier one. She felt very embarrassed, ashamed and
confused. However,
this time she was angry: she badly wanted to hurt Robinson physically. She said
that her heart was racing and
she "just wanted to really hurt Sergeant
3.3.4 Events subsequent to the assaults
Williams complained about the second assault to her father, Kerin Williams,
almost immediately after it happened. Kerin Williams testified
to this effect at
the Inquiry.
A few days after the second assault, she also complained to LACW Dunn
(“Dunn”) who also testified and corroborated the
complaint. Part of her testimony was as follows:
MR MILLAR: Did Ms Williams have a conversation with you in 1996
concerning something that happened between her and Sergeant
MS DUNN: Yes, she did.
MR MILLAR: What did she say to you about that?
MS DUNN: Well, she told me - there were two incidents. She told me about
how he groped her.
MR MILLAR: Can you remember to the best of your recollection what she
actually said?
MS DUNN: She was taking a patient's blood pressure. He was lying on the
trolley. She was bending over with a stethoscope and he
came in behind her and
pulled her into his groin.
MR MILLAR: Yes.
MS DUNN: Yes, and she told me that when I was at home with her, that she
was quite upset about it and she had a panic attack.
THE COMMISSIONER: Is that what she told you or what you observed?
MS DUNN: I didn't see it.
THE COMMISSIONER: No, she told you she had a panic attack?
MS DUNN: Yes.
MR MILLAR: What I am asking you to do is recount the conversation, you see,
to the Commissioner - - -
MS DUNN: Okay.
MR MILLAR: - - - that Ms Williams actually had with you about the
MS DUNN: Yes, because she told me that she suffers from panic attacks
before this time and, yes, because of that incident she suffered
a panic attack.
She said she felt her heart racing and she felt dizzy and a bit sick and
everything after that.
THE COMMISSIONER: Did we get a date for this conversation?
MR MILLAR: I am just coming to that. About when in 1996 did this
conversation occur?
MS DUNN: I think it was early in the year. I can't really remember the
exact date, but it was early 96.
MR MILLAR: It must have been after the incidents obviously that she's
describing.
MS DUNN: Yes, it was. It was probably about April I guess.
MR MILLAR: You said earlier that she told you of two incidents.
MS DUNN: Yes.
MR MILLAR: Do you recall whether the leaning over the patient with the
stethoscope one incident was the first of them or the second
MS DUNN: I'm not exactly sure, but I think that was the first incident.
MR MILLAR: What did she say to you about another incident?
MS DUNN: She was behind the counter at the 1 CAMD medical section and
her boyfriend at the time, Roger, was walking through
door, the main door,
and as he was walking in Sergeant Robinson pulled her and wrapped his leg around
her and said, "Would he
upset if he saw this?"
MR MILLAR: When you say wrapped his leg around her, what did she say about
her position in relation to his approach to her?
MS DUNN: From what I can remember she just said that he pulled her into him
and wrapped his leg around her.
MR MILLAR: Did she tell you any more about that incident?
MS DUNN: That she felt really uncomfortable. She thought Roger was - I
remember her saying she thought Roger was going to jump
over the counter and,
you know, do something to him but, yes, she felt very uncomfortable about
MR MILLAR: How did she appear to you to be in herself when she was
describing these incidents to you in the conversation with you?
MS DUNN: Well, she was not happy. She was quite stressed out when she was
telling me. She didn't know what to do. I recall saying
that she probably
should report it because it's not acceptable behaviour, especially for an NCO to
do that to a junior rank.
I do not consider the inconsistencies between Williams’ evidence and
Dunn’s evidence as reflecting adversely on the value
testimony. They were the very kinds of inconsistencies that suggest defects of
recollection as well as suggesting
that her evidence had not been learned by
rote. In this regard I note the fact that she thought, although she was not
certain, that
the 'blood pressure' incident came first. Dunn is still a member
of the RAAF, now with the rank of corporal; and she has potentially
something to
lose by testifying in support of Williams.
Evidence given by Roger Smith (“Smith”) provided some
corroboration of the earlier assault by Robinson. At the time of
testifying,
the relationship between Williams and Smith had long ceased. He said in
MR SMITH: I proceeded down to the medical section from my work area.
As I entered the medical section at 1 CAMD I opened
that there was a person behind me. I kept the door open. As I turned
around I looked directly
over the top of the counter.
I noticed a
person in a white uniform, who I now know as Sergeant Robinson, who had
his arms wrapped around her top torso in
a bear hug situation with his
right leg crossed across her right thigh. I then looked in
disbelief, because I
couldn't believe that
a person of his structure [sic] could do such a thing. I
then approached Kathy Williams
and asked her, "What the fuck is going on?"
stated to me that she would let me know at a later date, because she was shocked
and horrified at what happened.
MR MILLAR: What happened then?
MR SMITH: Sergeant Robinson released Katherine Williams as I proceeded to
the counter. He walked off behind the desk with a smile
on his face. I then
talked to Kathy, as I said before. We later on that night got together and
discussed the situation. I asked
her again what happened. She said that he had
said to her prior to me entering - that she had said to him prior to me entering
medical section, "That's my boyfriend," which in turn he had come up behind
her, placed his arms around the top of her, wrapped his
right leg around her
right leg and stated to her that, "He won't like me doing this then, will
Counsel for the Second Respondent made submissions to the effect that Smith
was not to be relied upon. There may be something in
those arguments to the
extent that Smith may have augmented his memory with what he had been told.
However, I intend no more than
to point out that he was a corroborating witness.
His absence from the evidentiary scene would not have affected my conviction
Williams is a witness of truth, but counsel for Williams may well have
thought that not to call him would lead to a submission that
I should conclude
that his evidence would not have assisted Williams’ case.
Williams said that about a week or two later she reported the assaults to
Corporal Croft (“Croft”) who, she recalled,
was then standing by a
photocopying machine. According to Williams, Croft's reaction to being told of
the assaults was to say, "Oh
When it was put to her, Croft said that that "would not be the case". I
prefer Williams’ evidence on the point. She spoke
with more certainty of
a matter that she had very good reason to remember. Croft was asked to recall
the event much more recently:
at the beginning of this year for the first time.
I perceived some hostility towards Williams on the part of Croft, less in what
Croft said, than in the manner in which she gave her evidence. In the end, the
point is not of real significance.
Flt Sgt John Jones (“Jones”), like Dunn, a presently serving
member of the RAAF, gave the following evidence:
MR JONES: Yes, Kathy rang me at home, I believe it was a Sunday. She was
quite distressed. I asked her what the problem was.
She said Robinson had
dry-rooted her. She was intimidated - felt intimidated about a prospective
debrief by Sergeant Robinson the
following day.
MR MILLAR: What did she actually say to you, as best you can remember,
MR JONES: She said that he had - "Robinson had dry-rooted me."
Robinson denied the allegations on every occasion they were put to him of
which there is any record to which I was given access.
I say that advisedly
because neither the legal representatives of Williams nor I was given access to
some official RAAF records,
namely notes made by Flt Lt Timms
(“Timms”), relating directly to what seems to me to have been
Timms’ attempt
at mediation with respect to Williams’ allegations of
assault by Robinson. (What Timms was really expected to do is obscure:
refer to it as mediation). Those records were neither discovered nor produced at
the hearing. I refer to the missing records
Neither were there any records produced of the investigations by Wing
Commander Austin (“Austin”), described by him as
investigations”, with senior non-commissioned officers and medics.
Neither the identity of, nor statements
made by, the persons interviewed by or
on behalf of Austin were disclosed. (Yet that investigation was of such
significance that
it resulted in Austin concluding that there was “no
evidence in support of the allegations.”). Again, I refer further
investigations below.
One of the witnesses Austin relied upon, identified in Squadron Leader
Sellick's (“Sellick”) report, was Robinson himself.
According to
Sellick's note, Austin counselled Robinson and having known Robinson for some
time, Austin found no evidence to suggest
“any truth” in
Williams’ allegations.
Austin testified that he had to interview Williams concerning disagreements
between her and Dr Horvath. They involved Dr Horvath's
complaints about her
work and attitude towards him and her complaint about Dr Horvath. Austin's
evidence includes the following:
DR AUSTIN: Yes. I conducted an interview with her, in the presence of
Warrant Officer James. I think the first interview was conducted
out at 1 CAMD,
and it was - whilst I can't remember the exact nature of the interview, it was
along the lines of, "I have concerns
operated. It is causing Dr Horvath concern" and that "I would like to see the
remedied," that it was going to be difficult to us to - from the main
hospital, to, if you like, adjudicate, but I was hoping that
they would be able
to bring the issues out in the open, address them and resolve them.
MS HENDERSON: Do you recall what reaction, if any, LACW Williams made
DR AUSTIN: No, not specifically. My general recollection is that she was
upset and somewhat resentful of that initial interview,
but I don't remember the
material details.
MS HENDERSON: You've described it as an initial interview. Was there a
subsequent interview?
DR AUSTIN: There was. Again, I cannot recollect exactly the time line to
the second interview but Warrant Officer James and I drove
out to 1 CAMD, in a
service vehicle, with the intent of having a second interview with LACW
Williams, and we got out there, we arranged
to speak with her. And very soon
after I'd made her aware that the interview was going to be conducted and the
nature of the interview,
she advised me that she was particularly upset because
of an alleged incident of harassment that had taken place between herself
one of my other staff, a sergeant, medical assistant.
This is significant to this Inquiry because it demonstrates that
Williams’ complaint about Robinson arose in the course of an
investigation
into her own conduct. Because records relating to the Horvath inquiry were not
made available, for a reason unknown
to me, or because records were not kept,
Austin's evidence is vague as to time and lacking in precision.
The document shown to Austin by Williams, at the interview referred to in the
passage of his evidence set forth above, is Exhibit
2. I accept the Second
Respondent’s submission that the episodes of assault described in that
document were brought to light
by reason of the inquiry into her conduct then
being conducted. It does not follow at all that her allegations were for that
untrue. It was a situation in which it seems Williams had been
procrastinating as to whether to complain officially about Robinson's
It is understandable that when she found herself being forced to defend herself
against allegations by Dr Horvath and Robinson,
she resolved to bring the matter
of Robinson's conduct to her Commanding Officer's notice. It was a situation in
which one might
say, 'I am being attacked from all quarters, why should I remain
silent any longer about what one of these attackers has done to
I have taken into account that Williams and Dunn, who were friends and who
worked together, were the subject of possible disciplinary
action on the
complaint of Dr Horvath, a civilian medical practitioner employed by the RAAF at
1 CAMD. I have also taken into account
the fact that the investigation of Dr
Horvath's complaint was in progress when Williams made her first official
However, I am quite satisfied that the complaint of sexual assaults against
Robinson was not a fabrication designed to derail that
investigation. An
examination of the facts of that matter show that, while Dr Horvath was
displeased with some aspects of the work
of Williams and Dunn, including that
fact that he had felt humiliated by an action of Williams, when Williams later
apologised to
Dr Horvath matters were sorted out between them. Dr Horvath said
in evidence that “in a very conciliatory manner we both sat
think she did apologise” and “that everything was worked out very
satisfactorily at a later date”.
I have considered all of the arguments put by Counsel for the Second
Respondent as to why I should find Williams’ evidence
unreliable. I do
not consider any of them of any real significance. Some of the matters put are
readily understandable. For example,
the reference for the first time in
Williams’ oral evidence to the expression “I could feel his private
I do not think it was in Williams’ character to use overtly
sexual references to persons who were not friends that she felt
she could trust.
She used the quoted expression upon my urging her to be specific. The relevant
passage from the evidence was as
THE COMMISSIONER: Go on, you tell me, because that's really an important
part of this case. What could you feel?
MS WILLIAMS: I could feel every part of his body pushed up against my back
and my - - -
MR DOMINELLO: Is that in relation to the first assault by the officer?
MS WILLIAMS: Both. Both.
MR DOMINELLO: What do you mean by he simulated sex?
MS WILLIAMS: Like - well, it was like he had his genitals pushed up against
the back of me.
THE COMMISSIONER: I'm just going to ask you a blunt question. Do you say
he had an erection when he did that? Could you feel that,
MS WILLIAMS: Well, I could - I could feel his private part.
THE COMMISSIONER: Pressing into you?
MS WILLIAMS: Yes.
THE COMMISSIONER: Is that what you're trying to tell us?
MS WILLIAMS: Yes.
This can hardly be categorized as either a 'contradiction' or an 'accretion'
to her allegations. I think it was fairly implicit in
them in any event.
Other inconsistencies were of no consequence and were typical of the kinds of
inconsistencies that can be found where a person has
had to recall and repeat
allegations over a long time. I consider them just as likely to reinforce her
credibility by tending to
show that she did not start by fabricating a story
which she then learned by heart.
I have also taken into account the fact that there is no doubt that, while
they seem to have been quite friendly at first, later Robinson
and Williams did
not get along well together. There were a number of occasions of friction
between them. Those matters were elaborated
in evidence, but the detail is
unimportant. Considerable evidence was given of the facts giving rise to that
hostility. In evaluating
her evidence, I have kept in mind the possibility that
Williams may have felt some, perhaps strong, hostility towards Robinson.
Timms, the officer appointed to “mediate” Williams’
complaint against Robinson and/or to advise Williams about her
complaint (a
matter as I have indicated shrouded in obscurity) made notes of her
conversations with the persons involved. Those
notes, which were not produced
at the Inquiry, may have made her role clear and would otherwise have been of
great value to this
Inquiry. The absence of the file notes was not the subject
of any satisfactory evidence. It is unlikely that those notes would
assisted the respondents' cases, but I draw no inference as to what they did
The kind of difficulty that arose by reason of the Second Respondent’s
failure to produce Timms' notes was illustrated by her
first asserting that she
advised Williams that, if she wished, she could take her complaint to the
civilian police. Later, cross-examination
cast doubt on that assertion. She
relied, not on recollection of any conversation, of which she had none, but on
an alleged practice:
one that was slight indeed. She had dealt with three or
four allegations of assault over a period of four years.
Passing over the circumstances in which a statement by Williams relating to
the assaults by Robinson came into existence, such a statement
was in fact made
and in the course of time came into the hands of Timms. That statement is
Exhibit 2 in this Inquiry. The material
allegations contained in the statement
are in the following terms:
...There have been two episodes recently when SGT Robinson has invaded my
personal space and assaulted me physically. On the first
occasion it was at
1CAMD Medical Section Admin Office. I was standing at the front counter when
two Airmen entered the building,
I spoke to Sgt Robinson and said
‘that’s my boyfriend’, SGT Robinson then said 'So if I did
this, would he get
upset' whilst he was saying this he pulled myself towards him
so the left side of my body was against the front of his body, and
lifted his right leg and wrapped it around my right leg. I was extremely shocked
with his actions and stood dumb-founded
and very much afraid of the outcome if
my boyfriend had happened to see it. I then continued as if nothing had
happened, although
very shocked and bewildered. From that time onward, I have
felt threatened, uncomfortable and intimidated in the presence of SGT
On the second occasion of assault I was in the treatment room tending to the
needs of a patient. That morning I had attended a Medical
appointment at 3 Hosp
and SGT Robinson had been sent to man Medical Section 1CAMD in my absence. After
returning I was in the treatment
room and SGT Robinson announced that he was
going to leave. I asked him not to, as his presence was needed. I had a
stethoscope in
my ears and was holding a sphygmomanometer and was in the middle
of monitoring a patient’s blood pressure. I was unable to
hear completely
what SGT Robinson said, but during his comment he pressed his body against mine,
I was slightly bent over with my
and with pressure pulled me towards him so I was pressed up against the front of
his body having contact with his stomach, legs and groin. Again the feelings
which came over me were extreme shock, revulsion and
embarrassment. I also noted
that the patient looked at me with disbelief. SGT Robinson was laughing quite
loudly at the time.
Timms informed Robinson of the precise nature of the allegation of Williams:
Williams’ statement was either read to him or he
read it himself or both.
Under examination-in-chief, Timms gave the following answers to questions
from Counsel for the Second Respondent:
MS HENDERSON: Do you recall what occurred at that meeting with Sergeant
MS TIMMS: Yes. When I spoke to Sergeant Robinson, he came to my office,
and before I actually gave him the written complaint from
Kathy, I actually
broadly outlined the allegations that she was making. His first reaction was -
to me he was devastated, he was
stunned, he was in disbelief. He - I recall
him, at the time, saying something about, "There's no way that that happened.
like a daughter to me." I recall him saying that. When I actually gave
him a copy of the statement to look through he acknowledged
that he had done
certain things, but vehemently denied any of the sexual assaults. He said that
he may have, on occasion, told risqué
jokes; he acknowledged that at
times he would have put his arm around Kathy.
He said that that was because he was that kind person; he was a touchy-feely
kind of person; and that it was - he was just being friendly.
acknowledged that he put his arm around her. But, at that time he was adamant
that at no stage did he ever do the certain
things - the sexual assaults that
were alleged.
MS HENDERSON: Did he appear, as far as you could see, to read the
allegations that were made about him in the statement?
MS TIMMS: Yes, he did read - did read them.
MS HENDERSON: Did he make any reaction to them?
MS TIMMS: He was in tears at one stage;...
As a result of his meetings with Timms, Robinson provided a written apology
to Ms Williams. It is Exhibit B in this Inquiry. It is
in the following
LACW Williams
I would usually prefer to make any apologies I feel necessary to another
person face to face, however the course of this particular
event prevents this.
In relation to your complaint, should I have invaded your personal space
, I sincerely apologise as this was not my intention. [My
The apology was signed by Robinson.
Robinson testified at the Inquiry. He denied any assault upon Williams,
either of the kind alleged or of any other kind. He had great
explaining why he wrote the apology. I understood him to be trying to convey by
his evidence the impression that he wrote
it and used those terms only because
Timms suggested he do so in order to put an end to the matter. My evaluation of
the evidence
of both Timms and Robinson is that she probably did not suggest any
particular course of action or form of words to him, although
one would be rash
to express any certainty. In either event, I am not in doubt that Robinson well
knew the import of the document
when he wrote and signed it.
In answer to questions asked of him in chief, Robinson gave the following
MS HENDERSON: Can you recall having any physical contact with LACW Williams
in the time that you knew her?
MR ROBINSON: The only physical contact that I ever recalled was when -
after the car was repaired and after - and that was really
quite minor, and I
believe there was another occasion, the day she bought me lunch for repairing
MS HENDERSON: When you say there was a quite minor matter in relation to
the repair of the car, what do you mean by that?
MR ROBINSON: It was just a hug, she said, "Thanks very much." That was
MS HENDERSON: On the other occasion you said that she bought your
MR ROBINSON: Yes.
MS HENDERSON: Were you both working at 1 CAMD then?
MR ROBINSON: Yes, it was, it was at the time when I was there for the week
or 10 days or whatever it was.
MS HENDERSON: So, apart from that, had you actually physically had any
MR ROBINSON: No, I did not. No, I did not.
In respect of the same matter, Timms testified as follows:
MS HENDERSON: Did you tell him [referring to Sgt Robinson ] when you called
him what it was that you would be speaking about, or
did you summons him simply
to see you?
MS TIMMS: No, I rang and said that the LACW had made an allegation, an EEO
allegation, and that I wanted to see him about that.
MS HENDERSON: Do you recall what occurred at that meeting with Sergeant
MS TIMMS: Yes. When I spoke to Sergeant Robinson, he came to my office,
and before I actually gave him the written complaint from
Kathy, I actually
broadly outlined the allegations that she was making. His first reaction was -
to me he was devastated, he was
stunned, he was in disbelief. He - I recall
him, at the time, saying something about, "There's no way that that happened.
like a daughter to me." I recall him saying that. When I actually gave
him a copy of the statement to look through he acknowledged
that he had done
certain things, but vehemently denied any of the sexual assaults.
that he may have, on occasion, told risqué jokes; he acknowledged that at
times he would have put his arm around Kathy
. [My emphasis]
He said that that was because he was that kind person; he was a touchy-feely
kind of person; and that it was - he was just being friendly.
acknowledged that he put his arm around her. But, at that time he was adamant
that at no stage did he ever do the certain
things - the sexual assault that
were alleged.
The difference between the evidence of Robinson and that of Timms is
apparent. However, one cannot have confidence in Timms' evidence.
In the first
place, as I have noted, her file notes were not produced, which compelled her to
rely entirely on her memory of conversations
that took place some years before
she testified. They were not conversations that would have loomed important in
her life. In the
second place, rightly or wrongly, I gained the impression that
her evidence, perhaps unconsciously, I cannot say, had a distinct
bias in favour
of Robinson.
Those with experience at the criminal bar and/or who have presided over
criminal trials know that vehement protestations of innocence
and emotional
displays in support of them are frequently not at all true indications of
innocence. Timms, at times in her evidence,
purported to report Robinson's
emotional reactions to the allegations. I did not stop her. She is not to be
criticised for that.
But, I have read her evidence down to mean no more than
that Robinson said certain things to her and presented the appearance of
person who was shocked by the falsity of the allegations.
In any event, in its terms, the apology contains an implicit admission of the
allegations of the assaults set forth in some detail
in the letter of complaint.
The apology includes the words I have emphasised above, “as stated”.
I consider those words
to be likely to have been a reference to invasions of
space “as stated” with specificity in Williams’ letter of
complaint. Otherwise the words “as stated” would have been
superfluous. Of course, I do not construe the apology as
if it was a formal
legal document, but the construction I put on it is in keeping with the other
circumstances of the case.
Although the foregoing matters tended to convince me of the truth of
Williams’ allegations, her demeanour and the manner in
which she testified
were enough to convince me that she was a truthful witness. I do not mean that
I accept every particular of
her testimony as an accurate account of what
happened. Imperfections of recollection and observation make that impossible.
I accept her as a witness who did her best to remember what happened and
who then tried to relate it truthfully. In all significant
respects she
succeeded. There were occasions when I preferred the testimony of others to
hers, but they did not relate to significant
matters and were typically the
kinds of matters that were either genuinely misunderstood at the time or which
had become vague in
memory since. With respect to matters significant to these
proceedings, I confidently accept her evidence in preference to evidence
I am very conscious of the dangers of convicting an accused person upon the
uncorroborated evidence of a complainant. A judge may
warn a jury of that
danger, although in NSW s/he is no longer required to do so in all cases.
Juries properly instructed frequently
convict in such circumstances. In this
case I have not only been able to consider the form and content of
Williams’ allegations
of assault, but I have carefully studied her
demeanour throughout the hearing: even during those times when she sat in the
room observing the proceedings: there were no dramatic reactions.
I have accorded the same careful scrutiny to the evidence of Robinson. He
gave me the impression of a person who was equivocating
(as indeed he had in his
'apology') when asked awkward questions, and on some occasion lying.
Robinson has a good record of public service, especially with St John's
Ambulance, and I have given weight to that matter. He has
a good service record
in the RAAF. I accept that he came to the Inquiry as a person of good character
and, as such, he was less
likely to have done the acts alleged, and also less
likely to lie under investigation or on oath, than a person not of good
Of course, people of otherwise excellent character sometimes do
reprehensible acts and later dissemble when questioned about them.
particular, it is well known to those practising in the criminal law that
persons found guilty of sexual assaults are frequently
mature persons of
otherwise exemplary character.
Findings adverse to Robinson in this Inquiry are so serious that I have
applied a high standard of proof. Although I am aware that
the criminal
standard is not required by law, but rather the civil standard, I am in fact
left with no reasonable doubt that Robinson
assaulted Williams as she alleged.
He was, in the significant respects, untruthful.
Notwithstanding Robinson's denial that he never assaulted Ms Williams or
touched Ms Williams in a sexual way, I am quite satisfied
on the evidence that
Robinson did assault Ms Williams by pressing his groin into her body. I am also
satisfied that the assault was
sexual even if the element of sexual
gratification for Robinson might have been slight or nil, and even if he might
have been motivated
by a desire to belittle or make fun of Williams. That
Robinson might not have been seeking erotic gratification does not deprive
assault of its character as sexual.
3.3.5 Investigation of the allegations
Williams’ complaint came to be allocated to Timms by Austin, now Group
Captain Austin, a medical officer. Timms was the 486
Squadron EEO officer. The
evidence was that “EEO” stood for Equal Employment Opportunity. (The
nature of Timms’
role has been touched on above and I shall return to her
further role in matters in my reasons below).
After giving an answer which prompted a question from me, Austin subtly but
unmistakably shifts the aim of his answer. I will let
the transcript speak for
DR AUSTIN: There was. Again, I cannot recollect exactly the time line to
the second interview but Warrant Officer James and I drove
out to 1 CAMD, in a
service vehicle, with the intent of having a second interview with LACW
Williams, and we got out there, we arranged
to speak with her. And very soon
after I'd made her aware that the interview was going to be conducted and the
nature of the interview,
she advised me that she was particularly upset because
of an alleged incident of harassment that had taken place between herself
one of my other staff, a sergeant, medical assistant.
At that stage, once she made me aware of that, I formally terminated the
counselling interview and suggested to her that she needed
to speak with an EEO
counsellor, to make her complaint - sorry, to speak with an EEO counsellor, so
that that person could assist
her in the resolution or addressing of the issues
that she had raised with me. I advised her that I considered it to be a
significant
matter and that it needed to be proceeded with, and I gave her the
name of a person who I believed would be appropriate to help her,
and that was
the name of a senior EEO counsellor on the base, whom I'd had previous dealings
with, and that was a lady by the name
of, I think, then, Flight Lieutenant
Tracey Timms.
THE COMMISSIONER: Ms Henderson, can I ask you a question?
MS HENDERSON: Yes.
THE COMMISSIONER: I'm not following this completely but you might explore
it a bit more for me, if you will. Is it said that this
was the first time, of
course, that Dr Austin knew about the complaint of sexual assault, and that
he recommended counselling
the complainant rather than any more formal
complaint about the assault itself? Can you explore that?
MS HENDERSON: I'm certainly happy for the witness to comment on the matter
and, perhaps, just to listen.
DR AUSTIN: No, sir, it's - no, it's not just a recommendation of
counselling at all. Sir, the procedures in place - because the
Defence Force has, as you're no doubt aware, been the subject of many episodes
of harassment which, with hindsight, have
not been adequately addressed by
external and objective terms in a fair and equitable manner, all of us were
very, very sensitive
to this issue, and harassment had been receiving a very
high profile as an issue within the defence force. As such, we have appointed
network of equal opportunity counsellors and basically they act as independent
people outside the chain of command who can hear
the complaint or who can speak
with the complainant and then advise them in an independent manner of how best
to resolve the issue.
Clearly, if the issue was one of frank assault, then that's - that is a
disciplinary [matter] that rightfully should be addressed
under the Defence
Force Discipline Act, would warrant an independent investigation and, perhaps,
the laying of charges. If it's
a lesser - well, I guess, I've got to preface
this by saying that the procedure attempts to look after the best interests of
person who has laid the complaint. Now, there are situations were the
complainant may not wish to proceed under the Defence Force
Discipline Act, they
may seek some other form of redress, be it, an apology, or the moving of the
person away from the workplace,
So the EEO counsellor is the first point of contact who can then work with
the complainant and determine the best course of action.
So it is not an
attempt just to simply say, "I will counsel you so that you are not aggrieved by
this." It is an attempt to make
sure the person gets the right help at the
right time.
There is not a word here about causing an investigation into Robinson's
conduct to be made. Conduct which, if it occurred, should
have been firmly and
formally dealt with as a possible matter of reprehensible conduct at the very
least. I am confident that no
real investigation was undertaken. Such
investigation as there was, was carried out as an “in-house
investigation” by
Austin himself. It is referred to earlier in these
Austin was interviewed by Sellick on 19 December 1996. Sellick was
conducting a “screening process” into the administrative
which followed Williams’ complaint. That Austin regarded the case as one
requiring counselling for Williams is supported
by the following extract from
Sellick's report (which is annexed to Exhibit A, pages 131 to 159):
6. Two weeks later WGCDR Austin again counselled Katherine and this time she
mentioned the assault. He immediately ceased to discuss
this matter and advised
her to contact SQNLDR Timms. He offered Katherine counselling either through the
system or outside. “Katherine
is a medic and knows what’s
available.” (Note. WGCDR Austin mentioned in this context that a number of
staff members
(4?) were already in receipt of counselling by psychologists at
the hospital at North Richmond.) WGCDR Austin advised Katherine to
know how I can assist.”
Later in the same report appears the following:
10. I asked about investigating complaints. WGCDR Austin advised that he
conducted an in-house investigations dealing informally with
SNCOs and senior
medics. Found no evidence in support of the allegations.
11. Held counselling session with SGT Robinson. Has known him for sometime
and no evidence to suggest any truth in the allegations.
In my opinion, the so-called “in-house investigation” was
inappropriate. There is no evidence of any more formal or independent
investigation. For Austin to have tried the matter in the way he did was a
denial of natural justice to Williams. The very fact
that he knew Robinson
“for some time” really required him to disqualify himself from
determining whether Robinson was
guilty of sexual assault.
This failure to institute a formal investigation, either within or outside
the service, was a major factor contributing to the damage
suffered by Williams.
Williams had made allegations of what, if they occurred, were instances of what
Austin called “frank
assault”. To have dismissed her complaint on
the basis that there was “no evidence to suggest any truth” in it
was, to put a charitable light on it, a serious misunderstanding of the
situation. That finding involved implicitly a finding that
testimony itself would be of insufficient evidential value to establish the
truth of her allegations. It is difficult
to accept that a person as
sophisticated as Austin was not aware that persons who very plausibly and
vehemently deny any wrongdoing
are frequently convicted of crimes on the
uncorroborated evidence of victims.
Having regard to Williams’ letter of complaint, the subject matter of
her complaint was clearly one of assault and should have
been dealt with as
such. Some formal proceeding was called for.
Flt Sgt John Jones (“Jones”) was present at the interview between
Williams and Austin. He gave the following evidence:
MR MILLAR: Did that happen before or after the interview you have just told
us about with Wing Commander Austin?
MR JONES: From memory, I believe it was after and it fits into the picture
of my mind because I was concerned that there seemed
to be no action being taken
for quite some time, so I rang Warrant Officer James and I asked him, "What's
going on?" and he just
had said to me that Col Robinson was being presented with
a medal from the St John's Ambulance, I believe, for 25 years
to that organisation, and I said, "So what? What's that got to do with
what we're discussing?" "Well, this can ruin
MR MILLAR: Who said that?
MR JONES: Warrant Officer James said to me, "This could ruin that" or "him"
and cast aspersions upon him, and I said to him, "Well,
I don't understand the
correlation about the two things we're talking about here ...
Shortly after the interview at which Jones was present, James called Williams
back into his room and according to Williams said, amongst
other things, "I am
sick of running a sheltered workshop". He had just then ordered her back to 3
Hospital to work. Robinson was
working at 3 Hospital at the time and Williams
was showing that she was upset to have to go to a place where she might
him. She had only just then told James and others about Robinson's
assaults upon her.
James denied having made that statement but I accept Williams’
testimony on the point. It is not insignificant that in respect
of a number of
other allegations of things said by James, he said he could not remember the
conversation. To fully appreciate James'
testimony it was necessary to observe
him giving his evidence. A sample passage from his testimony is set forth
hereunder. It includes
the denial to which I have just referred:
MR MILLAR: I suggest that, after the interview that you will agree that you
were present for, you approached Ms Williams and said
this to her, or words to
this effect, "The CO," referring to Wing Commander Austin, "wants you back at 3
Hospital because if DPA
found out you were here the CO would have his arse
kicked." Did you say that or words to that effect?
MR JAMES: I don't recall that.
MR MILLAR: Does that mean you might have said it but you don't specifically
MR JAMES: I just don't recall ever saying something like that.
MR MILLAR: I suggest that Ms Williams said to you, "Can't I be posted here
permanently," referring to 1 CAMD, to which you said,
"No, the position is
established for a corporal." Were those things said?
MR JAMES: I don't recall it.
MR MILLAR: I suggest that she said to you, "I can't go to the hospital,"
referring to 3 Hospital, "What can I do," to which you
replied, "I'm sick of
running a sheltered workshop." Were those things said?
MR JAMES: Not by me.
MR MILLAR: So you deny you made that statement, do you?
MR JAMES: I did not make that statement.
MR MILLAR: And I suggest Ms Williams said to you, "What do you mean by
that?" and you said, "Don't be so bloody stupid." Is that
MR JAMES: I don't recall.
MR MILLAR: I suggest she then said, "When do you want me back at the
hospital?" to which you replied, "ASAP."
MR JAMES: I don't recall the conversation.
MR MILLAR: At the time that you told her that she was required back at 3
Hospital by the CO, you knew that the complaint had been
made concerning the
conduct of Sergeant Robinson, didn't you?
MR JAMES: Obviously.
MR MILLAR: And you knew the content of the complaint, didn't you?
MR JAMES: Yes.
MR MILLAR: And Sergeant Robinson was working at 3 Hospital, wasn't he?
MR JAMES: Yes.
I agree with a submission of Williams’ counsel that James’
approach to the giving of evidence left him in a bad light.
He seemed not to
make a genuine effort to assist the Inquiry. His demeanour in particular was
hardly short of offensive: he had
a “like it or lump it” attitude.
It was as if it were a waste of his time for him to have to testify. He was of
if any assistance except that he tended to reinforce my suspicion that
Williams’ complaint had little more than nuisance value
to some of the
persons involved.
The following passage from the evidence demonstrates how Williams felt when
told that she had to return to the place where Robinson
was working:
MR DOMINELLO: How did you feel after you were informed that you had to go
back and work with Sergeant Robinson?
MS WILLIAMS: Like, "Who is going to help me here? What - didn't they
understand?" Like, I was just confused, I didn't know what
they were trying to
do. They weren't - they obviously weren't - trying to help me. I was just - I
was just ready to kill myself,
go AWOL, whatever, just get out.
The conduct of the RAAF, through the agency of the officers who dealt with
Williams, after she had made her complaint was unsatisfactory.
I have already
said that apart from the “in-house investigation” upon which I have
just commented, there was no formal
investigation. Quite clearly
Williams’ Commanding Officer thought she was a fabricator, a person whose
evidence itself could
by classified as insufficient unless there was supporting
evidence or corroboration. If those sentiments were passed by Austin to
Robinson and/or James, one has some explanation of why they may have felt free
to deal so contemptuously with her as they did.
There is no doubt that from the time of the complaint, Williams’
superior officers should have taken immediate steps to separate
her from any
real risk of encountering Robinson in the course of her duties. It would have
been time enough after the completion
of proper procedures to decide what final
dispositions of Williams and Robinson
one another should have
That failure on the part of the RAAF created or permitted circumstances to
exist that aggravated and compounded the effect upon her
of Robinson's
misconduct.
It was open to the RAAF, upon becoming aware of her complaint, to remove her
forthwith from all risk of contact for the time being
with Robinson; to
investigate her complaint with appropriate formality; if warranted by the
investigation, to take such proceedings,
within or outside the service, as may
have been appropriate; and to provide Williams with comfort and rehabilitative
support. It
is very likely that action of this or a similar kind would have
mitigated the effects of Robinson's assaults upon Williams. She
would have seen
that she mattered to the RAAF as a valuable member. Not to proceed along such
lines was to signal once again to
her, as had been done in 1985, that she was a
person of little significance. One asks oneself rhetorically whether a
complaint by
a female of officer rank of assault upon her by a sergeant would
have been dealt with in such a manner merely because there was no
It is desirable to outline other things that happened after the assaults that
aggravated their effects on Williams.
Williams said that Timms called her by telephone after she had interviewed
Robinson. She told Williams that Robinson would not apologise
and that he was
going to have her “charged with defamation of character”. When that
was said Williams was “petrified”
at the prospect of having to go to
court and all that that entailed. Timms also told Williams that Robinson would
have a “QC”
supplied by St John's Ambulance. Williams did not then
know what a “QC” was. She asked Timms what she could do. Timms
said that she did not really know. Williams said that she could not afford a
solicitor. Timms advised her to see Wing Commander
Wise, a RAAF legal officer.
Williams made an appointment with the Legal Officer, Wing Commander Wise, and
went to see him. She told him all that had transpired.
He informed her that
the matter of her complaint could go as far as a Court Martial. He also said
that Robinson was either trying
to scare or bluff her with the defamation
threat. He told her that she could not be charged with defamation (sic) because
“not post all this information out to people and it wasn’t
on public display, or something, something like that”.
He advised her
“to go back to Timms and tell her to tell Sergeant Robinson to go ahead
with whatever he saw fit, whatever
he thought - whatever he wanted to do”.
Williams contacted Timms as soon as possible and “told her to tell
Sergeant Robinson
to go ahead with whatever he thought - whatever he wanted to
Williams said that her discussions with Timms were “taking a very long
time, it was all just drawn out. It seemed to be like
a catfight or something.
It was like - he was just - he was still trying to get me somehow, he was still
harassing me, by threatening
me with defamation, which - which he couldn’t
, you know, I soon found out; but - like, I was still scared of him, I was still
afraid that he was going to have me charged, somehow, and I was - I was getting
really fed up with trying to cope with it all”.
I interpolate to say that these things happened in the context of an inquiry
(if it could be so called) into complaints of sexual
assaults upon Williams.
The management of the case by Williams’ superior officers was
unsatisfactory.
3.3.6 Williams’ response: requests for referral, transfer and
It is relevant to the issue of damage and to the credibility of Williams that
as early as June 1996, Williams asked Dr Horvath for
a referral to a
psychologist. She said she did so because she was not coping and needed someone
to help her. She said she was ready
to break down. She was thinking of killing
herself and her daughter, “and all sorts of horrible things”.
Williams had to deal with James in connection with an application she had
made for a transfer to Williamtown on 9 July 1996. Their
accounts of what took
place between them were conflicting. I have already expressed my opinion of
James as a witness in this Inquiry
and I do not propose to repeat it. Suffice
it to say that his treatment of Williams was abrupt and unhelpful. To have a
officer treat her in that way at that time could only have aggravated
the condition she was then in.
In July 1996 Williams was informed by James that she was posted to Amberley.
Williams then checked with a RAAF member in the communications
centre to see
whether Michael Devlin was at Amberley. He was one of the men who had assaulted
her in 1985. After that assault she
had been promised that she would not be
required to work at the same place as either of those men in the future.
Williams was informed
by her contact, LACW Reid, that Devlin was in fact then at
Amberley. Williams felt extremely worried and scared. She could not cope
the situation. She wanted to get out of the RAAF.
It is possible that the Devlin at Amberley was not the person who had
assaulted Williams in 1985. In fact, as far as I can remember,
Counsel for the
Second Respondent did not inform the Inquiry whether the Devlin at Amberley was
her assailant or another person with
the same name. It would seem to me to have
been easy for the Second Respondent to have given that information to the
Williams made a discharge application in which she gave her reason for
seeking a discharge from the RAAF.
I think it is helpful to set forth some of the evidence given by Williams in
relation to her attempts to be discharged:
MS WILLIAMS: I wanted to fill out a discharge and make sure that it was
approved, because I didn't want to be kept in the RAAF,
so I filled out a
discharge application, and in the comments I explained what happened. I said,
"I've been assaulted three times
and, due to the lack of care and my inability
to cope, I just want a discharge from the air force," and then I showed it to
Officer Peter Hall, and he said, "They won't let you discharge if you
write that on your discharge paper, they will not let you discharge.
to change it." So I changed it and it was still too whatever - still had too
much about the assaults in it, and so I changed
it again. I probably changed it
She submitted her discharge application by post to James on 6 August 1996.
She heard nothing for a long time, not even an acknowledgement
of receipt of the
application. She did not want to speak to James for understandable reasons.
On 20 August 1996 Williams had a session with a civilian counsellor. In
respect of that session Williams gave the following evidence:
MS WILLIAMS: I told her I couldn't cope with the harassment and what they
were doing to me, and she said, "Well, if you can't handle
it, then you should
seriously think about discharging because it doesn't - it's the way it is." "If
you can't handle the heat, get
out of the kitchen," I think she said.
...She said I'd be better off, emotionally, if I discharged.
I am of course not critical of the counsellor for saying that, it was
probably the best advice she could have given and, in any event,
Williams had
applied for discharge. The significance of that evidence is that Williams was
in fact advised to leave the RAAF. It
tends to prove that her leaving the RAAF
was appropriate in her circumstances. With the benefit of hindsight and having
the psychiatric evidence available to me, I agree with the
counsellor's advice.
On 16 October 1996 Williams submitted an application for higher duties
allowance (“HDA”) to Corporal Croft with a request
to put it on
James’ desk. On 24 October 1996 an interview took place between James and
Williams. Williams gave her recollection
of what was said. James said
“Did you know it's the CO’s prerogative to give HDA?” ...
“The CO doesn’t
have to give HDA if he doesn’t want to and,
another thing, you don’t apply for HDA, no-one applies for HDA; the CO
give it if he wants to....You’ve applied for HDA,” and ... If
you don’t withdraw your application for HDA, then
I’ll move you back
to the hospital....I'll give you 24 hours to think about your response and
whether or not you’re going
to withdraw this application for HAD”.
This was a reference to 3 Hospital where Robinson was then working. Williams,
asked whether she regarded that as a threat, said,
“Absolutely”.
I mention the matter of the conversation between Williams and James, not to
suggest that the payment of HDA was improperly withheld
(there is not enough
evidence to enable me to decide that point), but rather to show the disregard on
the part of James for the Williams’
fear of coming into contact with the
man who had assaulted her. His conduct was at least insensitive, and possibly
more deliberately
reprehensible.
The matters contained in paragraphs 47, 48, 49 and 50 of Williams’
submissions are well established by the evidence. Dunn,
now a corporal in the
RAAF and at the material times an LACW, strongly corroborates Williams with
respect to the inappropriate behaviour
of James before the interview described
in paragraph 49. Those paragraphs are set forth hereunder:
47. On 29 October 1996 Ms Williams contacted a psychologist at 3 Hospital
because she needed some medication or sick leave. She had
been breaking down at
work whereby she would start crying for no reason, was unable to stop and unable
to perform her work: T85.
48. On 1 November 1996 Ms Williams attended a hearing to give evidence in
relation to a charge against LACW Dunn. Warrant Officer
James was present at
the time. Ms Williams asked to be released so that she could attend her
psychologist appointment and return
and Warrant Officer James initially refused
and after Ms Williams broke down, he eventually allowed her to leave: T86.
Williams went to her psychologist she was crying uncontrollably and
could not control herself. She could hardly speak: T86. She
found herself
under great stress and could not cope. She was afraid of Warrant Officer James
as she could smell alcohol on his breath
and because of his temper. His threats
and body language intimidated Ms Williams: T87.
49. Ms Williams returned to 3 Hospital and Warrant Officer James had told her
to come to his office. Ms Williams wanted support and
accordingly brought LACW
Dunn with her. Warrant Officer James told LACW Dunn to get out. When Ms
Williams insisted that she was
entitled to have another female with her, he
again told LACW Dunn to get out, whereupon she left: T87. Flight Sergeant
was in the room at the time and had his feet on the desk with his arms
folded. Ms Williams felt very intimated in the presence of
the two men.
Warrant Officer James said to Ms Williams that because she was a single female
and unable to perform her duties and
unable to attend the 1 CAMD bike ride, a
medic from 3 Hospital had to be sent to the bike ride and as a result she would
work at 3 Hospital to replace that person: T88. When Ms Williams
enquired about Sgt Robinson being at 3 Hospital Warrant Officer
James replied
that he did not care and that what happened between her and Sgt Robinson was in
the past: T88. Ms Williams asked
Warrant Officer James for her HDA application
form to be returned. Warrant Officer James handed Ms Williams a record of the
conversation
which had just occurred but as it was not correct she did not wish
to sign it.
50. At T89, Ms Williams said to Warrant Officer James that the statement was
missing the section of conversation concerning her wish
to have another female
present at which Warrant Officer James insisted that she sign it and snatched it
out of her hand. When she
asked for a copy of the record of conversation
Warrant Officer James said no. When Ms Williams said that she was entitled to a
he responded that he was aware of that and that he would make a copy and
give it to her. At that point he turned around and slammed
the paperwork in to
her stomach and she thought that he was going to hit her in the face. Ms
Williams took the document and left,
returning it after making a photocopy of
Williams was discharged from the RAAF on 2 January 1997.
The manner in which Williams received notice of her discharge must have been
hurtful to Williams. Ms Williams said that she received
a telephone call
informing her that her discharge message was on a dressing trolley in the ward 2
treatment room at 3 Hospital.
She was also informed by Flight Sergeant Matthey
that her discharge message was found on a stretcher in James' office. Williams
that this made her feel her discharge message was being dragged around the
hospital and that it was classified information which
she should have been told
communicate to her a matter
as formal as her discharge from the RAAF.
3.3.7 Summary of above findings on the evidence
There can be little doubt, if any, that Williams’ discharge was the end
result of a series of events commencing with the 1985
sexual assault. That
assault was followed by the apparent failure of the RAAF properly to prosecute
the offenders; and after the
commission of that assault, the failure of the RAAF
to provide any counselling or other support for Williams. Then came the two
assaults upon Williams by Robinson in 1996, followed again by the failure to
investigate those assaults in any appropriate manner
and to call Robinson to
account. Thereafter, there was the obstructive and unsympathetic manner of
dealing with Williams’
attempts to work well away from any place where she
might encounter Robinson.
The events referred to before the 1996 assaults by Robinson had the effect of
rendering Williams very sensitive and vulnerable to
those assaults and the
events which followed them. It is only in the light of the 1985 events that one
can understand the great
impact upon Williams that the later events were to
have. When Robinson twice assaulted her as he did in a crude and belittling
the fact of her earlier experiences operated to cause those assaults to
affect her very greatly.
In themselves, as sexual assaults, Robinson’s assaults might be rated
at the minor end on a scale of seriousness, but they happened
in a context that
rendered their effects upon Williams far from minor. The subsequent conduct of
her superior officers, including
that of Wing Commander Austin, James and
Robinson himself, by acts in some instances and by omissions in others, forced
edge of a breakdown. Austin failed to set in train an appropriate
response to her complaint of assaults. The evidence discloses
that for James,
Williams was a considerable nuisance, not to be given any assistance that could
be avoided. I need say no more about
Robinson's behaviour. His hostility is
manifest in the matters already mentioned in these reasons.
The tragedy of this case is that if Robinson's assaults had been swiftly and
properly dealt with, the effects upon Williams would
almost certainly have been
minimal. There is little doubt in my mind that the conduct of her RAAF superior
officers following her
complaint of assaults in 1996 caused those relatively
minor assaults to be considerably more damaging that they would have been if
they had been swiftly and effectively dealt with. If Austin had ensured that
his subordinates had effectively investigated the complaint,
Williams, and otherwise properly prosecuted the matter by putting in train
definite and specifically directed procedures,
the effects of the assaults on
Williams would have been immeasurably less. None of that was done.
I am confident that if Williams’ superior officers had acted in the way
I suggest that they should have, Williams would not
have felt compelled to seek
her discharge from the service. She would have understood that she was
important to the RAAF, that her
personal well being mattered to the RAAF, and
that Robinson's conduct was as unacceptable to her superiors as it was to her.
fact, the subsequent conduct signalled to her that she was of little account.
Austin said in his testimony that he sent Williams
to Timms to get her the help
she needed at the right time. The best help that he could have given to the
victim of such assaults
would have been to bring the offender to account.
3.3.8 Medical evidence
Williams was interviewed by a consultant clinical psychologist, Ms Jill
Farrelly, on 30 August and 17 October 1996 upon a referral
of Dr Horvath. In
the light of the history taken by Ms Farrelly, there can be no suggestion of
recent invention concerning the seriousness
of the effects of the 1985 assault.
I have had regard to the other matters set forth in that history, in material
respects consistent
with her evidence in this Inquiry, and to that extent
supportive of her credibility.
Ms Farrelly's conclusions, which are set out in the psychological reports
annexed to Exhibit A (pages 37 to 43 and 77; see page 41),
are as follows:
The indications are that LACW Williams was functioning as a psychologically
normal individual at the time she enlisted in the RAAF.
By her account, the sexual assault she suffered and also the disciplinary
hearing in relation to it had an adverse impact on her psychological
adjustment,
resulting in feelings of low worth, and resulting in depression, panic, social
withdrawal, and fear of intimacy. I would
agree that her avoidance of
job-related exercises which would require her to live at close quarters with her
peers is an outcome
of the original sexual assault.
The more recent sexual assault by her Sergeant has exacerbated her
psychological status in that it has re-awakened the memories of
the original
assault and aggravated feelings of anger, resentment, low self-esteem, and is
likely to have aggravated a chronic depression.
Compounding this is her belief
that the Sergeant’s behaviour was not viewed with the gravity which was
warranted, and that
the Sergeant himself paid mere lip-service to any fault on
Another factor in her disturbed psychological state was the advice she
received that she would be posted to Amberley, where one of
the men who
originally assaulted her is posted, prompting her to apply for discharge from
the RAAF. She stated that she had been
promised that she would never have to
posted to the same base as either of them.
In my opinion, LACW Williams requires ongoing psychological interventions to
attempt to address a complex of problems which are now
extremely entrenched.
I note that when interviewed on 8 November 1996, Ms Farrelly made the
following note (Exhibit A, page 42):
LACW Williams said that she felt obliged to take out a restraining order
against the Sergeant, and had gone to the Police to do so.
'If they won't look
after me I have to look after myself.'
In a report based on an interview on 9 December 1996, Ms Farrelly said
(Exhibit A, page 77):
LACW Williams reported that she has returned to work the previous Monday to
With regard to the restraining order on her sergeant, she is intending to
revoke it, and she now feels no threat from this quarter,
as she will not be in
various charges laid against
him for breaches of conduct.
She is to be discharged on 2.1.97, but her last working day is 24.12.96.
LACW Williams reported that in the last two weeks she has been experiencing
unpleasant images when she wakes up from sleep. The appear
to be hypnogogic
phenomena and not psychotic hallucinations. I would assess these to be stress
related rather than being any indication
of decompensation into psychosis.
Her psychological state, being as it is over recent months, requires some
monitoring.
Dr R Sim, Williams’ general medical practitioner, referred her to a
consulting psychiatrist, Dr G S Robinson. Dr Robinson's
report of 17 November
1997 (Exhibit G) notes that he had been Williams’ treating psychiatrist
since 18 April 1997. Dr Robinson
formed the impression that Williams was
suffering from Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. He said that this followed the
1985 assault
and further episodes of abuse in 1996. He added that the disorder
was compounded by her perception that she was not fairly treated
by the RAAF
following her complaints, by loss of her chosen career and by ongoing
psycho-sexual difficulties. He said that she was
gradually improving and that
she would need long term treatment to overcome the psychological problems
resulting from her experiences
serving in the RAAF.
Dr Robinson reported again on 20 March 2000 (also Exhibit G). He confirmed
his diagnosis of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder adding
that it was chronic in
course. He said the disorder relates to the history of sexual assaults, the
first in 1985 and subsequent
episodes of assault in 1996.
Dr Robinson assessed Williams’ disability by reference to a Guide to
the Assessments of Rates of Pensions (GARP 5th Ed). He
assessed Williams at a
final rating of 43, a high score on table 4, indicative of how severely affected
by Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder he considered Williams to be.
The report names the medication prescribed. Dr Robinson notes that he sees
Williams on a regular basis (every two weeks) for psychotherapy.
Dr Robinson
said that Williams’ prognosis for the long term remains guarded, her
condition is clearly chronic and she is likely
to need to remain in therapy for
the foreseeable future.
Dr Robinson concluded in his examination in chief as follows:
MR MILLAR: How do you see the future for Miss Williams with respect to
the need for ongoing psychotherapy?
DR ROBERTSON:[sic] I guess that's one point where I do agree with
Dr Moore; that Miss Williams does require ongoing psychotherapy.
would envisage that being at least another three years' duration from an
optimistic viewpoint. I'm hopeful in that time
recover sufficiently to
look at being able to broaden her life experience. Perhaps being able to return
to some sort of meaningful
social contact with other people - hopefully with
members of the opposite sex. Optimistically with some ongoing rehabilitation
may be able to gain further qualifications and perhaps re-enter the
workforce but I would have to say that would be an optimistic
viewpoint but one
that I would hope for.
At the time of testifying, Dr Robinson had read Dr Moore's report and he gave
his reasons for adhering to his own opinions and rejecting
Dr Marilyn Moore reported on 18 April 2000 (Exhibit 9). She saw Williams
only once for about one hour on 14 April 2000. After the
history section, the
report deals with her examination of Williams and then sets forth her diagnosis
and opinion. She opined that
Williams suffered from longstanding avoidant
traits in her personality. She says that they are likely to have been present
to the assaults experienced in the RAAF. She notes that Williams was
nineteen at the time of the first assault and although it was
likely to have
been traumatic, her reaction to it was exacerbated by the experience of the
court martial. (It is not clear to me
what is meant by court martial in this
Dr Moore said that Williams has intermittent low grade depression
insufficient to fulfil diagnosis criteria for a major depressive
disorder. She
rejects the suggestion that Williams suffered from post traumatic disorder at
the time of her examination, if she
ever did so suffer. Dr Moore thought a more
appropriate diagnosis "is likely to be adjustment disorder with anxiety and
depression."
According to Dr Moore, who testified at the Inquiry, Williams is likely to
require long term psychotherapy to address underlying difficulties
personality. Dr Moore said that Williams is fit to work at least part time as a
nurse's aid/nursing assistant. Dr Moore
thought that Williams was not
particularly well motivated to seek employment. With appropriate therapy, Dr
Moore thought that Williams’
condition would improve over a period of
Having read the reports and having seen both psychiatrists testify, with one
highly significant exception (addressed below), I prefer
the opinion of Dr
Robinson. Not only has Dr Robinson been the treating doctor for some years, but
I think that he took more of the
relevant events more fully into account.
Importantly, I think that Dr Moore underestimated the trauma of the 1985 assault
sequelae as a major factor upon the effects of the 1996 assaults and
their sequelae.
I have not overlooked the fact that a treating doctor may unconsciously
favour his patient in a case like this. Nor have I overlooked
the fact that a
psychiatrist employed by a party to litigation for the purposes of litigation
may unconsciously tend to favour the
interests of those retaining him/her. I
will return to this question later in these reasons.
4. FINDINGS ON THE LAW
4.1 Liability of Robinson
I do not propose to take up time considering whether the conduct of Robinson
was sexual harassment within the meaning of s.28A of
the Act. It follows from
my findings on the evidence that I find that Robinson's conduct on the two
occasions in 1996 complained
conduct of a sexual nature” in relation to Williams, and that it was
which “a reasonable person, having regard to all the
circumstances, would have anticipated that the person harassed [that is,
Williams] would be offended, humiliated and intimidated”. Accordingly, I
find that it was clearly sexual harassment within
the meaning of s.28A of the
Section 28B(2) of the Act provides that “it is unlawful for an employee
to sexually harass a fellow employee...”. As
I understand it, there is no
contention in this Inquiry as to whether either Williams or Robinson was a
Commonwealth employee within
the meaning of the Act. Section 4 of the Act
provides, inter alia:
Commonwealth employee
means a person who: ...
(f) is a member of the Defence Force."
Clearly, for the purposes of s.28B(2) of the Act, Robinson was an employee of
the Second Respondent and Williams a fellow employee.
Accordingly, I find that
the acts of Robinson constituting sexual harassment within the meaning of s.28A
of the Act, were unlawful
pursuant to s.28B(2) of the Act.
As I have already said, the extent of the damage caused by Robinson’s
actions is many times greater than it would have been
if the RAAF had acted
appropriately following both the 1985 assault and those assaults perpetrated by
him. However, he was caught
by the inappropriate conduct of the RAAF.
The reality is that Robinson will not have the means to pay an award of
damages and, as a result, he may well escape free from his
wrongdoing. But this
finding as to his liability on the public record may not only act as a deterrent
to persons who may be minded
to behave as Robinson did, but it will act as a
vindication to Williams who has suffered very greatly by reason of
assaults and whose life cannot be put back where it might have
been by the award I have in mind.
Robinson is liable for damages in his own right, so that the damages I award
against him take into account all the circumstances that
operated as factors
productive of the damage that Williams suffered by reason of Robinson’s
conduct. I have referred to those
circumstances several times.
4.2 Vicarious liability of the Second Respondent
The RAAF, or more precisely the Second Respondent, as I will more expressly
state below, is vicariously liable for Robinson's conduct.
Although I have
referred to the conduct of the RAAF that created the conditions in which the
conduct of Robinson operated and which
aggravated the effects of Robinson's
conduct, the conduct of the RAAF is not the primary source of its liability, but
rather renders
it vicariously liable for Robinson's conduct.
With respect to the question as to whether the Second Respondent, through the
RAAF, is vicariously liable for the conduct of Robinson,
it is necessary to ask
whether the elements of s.106(1) of the Act have been established by the
As stated above, there is no contention in this Inquiry as to whether either
Williams or Robinson was a Commonwealth employee within
the meaning of the Act.
It is contended by the RAAF that, if I were to find that Robinson had
sexually harassed Williams as alleged, the unlawful acts of
Robinson were not
done “in connection with the employment of the employee”. I was
referred to authority on the point.
The unlawful acts of Robinson were done at the place of work of both of them,
while both of them were performing their duties. Those
unlawful acts were done
by Robinson as a person in authority over Williams by virtue of the employment
relationship.
It is difficult to imagine how sexual harassment, which is constituted by
unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature, could be more integrated
employment of the employee than in the present case. It seems to me that such
conduct would be more closely connected only
in a case where it constituted a
way of the employee actually performing the duties of the employment. I think
that would be a very
I am satisfied for the purposes of s.106(1) of the Act that the unlawful acts
of Robinson constituting sexual harassment were done
in connection with the
employment of Robinson with the RAAF. Accordingly, s.106(1) provides that the
Act applies in relation to the
employer, the Second Respondent, as if that
employer had also done the act.
I now turn to consider the requirements of s.106(2) of the Act. Section
106(2) of the Act provides for an exception to vicarious liability
employer “took all reasonable steps” to prevent the employee from
doing the acts constituting sexual harassment.
Counsel for the Second Respondent
submitted that the exception applied in this case.
In the course of his testimony, Austin said:
...the Australian Defence Force has, as you're no doubt aware, been the
subject of many episodes of harassment which, with hindsight,
have not been
adequately addressed by external and objective terms in a fair and equitable
manner, all of us were very, very sensitive
to this issue, and harassment had
been receiving a very high profile as an issue within the defence force. As
such, we have appointed
a network of equal opportunity counsellors and basically
they act as independent people outside the chain of command who can hear
complaint or who can speak with the complainant and then advise them in an
independent manner of how best to resolve the issue.
This evidence establishes that sexual harassment had for some time been a
problem in the RAAF. Against that background, strong measures
were required to
prevent members from sexually harassing other members.
One of the things said to have been done to reduce or minimise sexual
harassment was to appoint a network of “equal opportunity
counsellors”. However, a great deal more was required than merely to
appoint a network of EEO counsellors. There is little
evidence, if any, of what
more was done than to appoint such persons and to state the reason for doing
Of course I cannot say in this Inquiry precisely what procedures could have
been put in place, or what might have been the best way
to minimise sexual
harassment, but some fundamental matters can be identified as desirable, however
they may be given effect to in
All members of the service should be made aware by a means designed to bring
it to their conscious minds that sexual harassment is
unlawful and will be
punished. All members should know that they can and should report any instances
of sexual harassment experienced
by them. There should be a universally known
policy by which reporting of sexual harassment is seen not only as acceptable
but appropriate.
This would minimise the concern of a member that he or she may
be branded as a “dobber”.
Every member of the service should be informed from time to time as
circumstances change who is his/her designated person for the
purposes of making
complaints of sexual harassment. Each member would then know who is the person
to whom he/she should go in the
event of a sexual harassment problem. The
person designated should be well distant from the chain of command of the member
and including the member's own Commanding Officer. Unless the designated
person is out of the chain of command a member may be concerned
friendship between a Commanding Officer and an officer or a senior
non-commissioned officer complained about may lead to the
victimisation. It is clear that Austin himself recognised the desirability of
All members should know that they can report a matter of sexual harassment to
their designated person in strict confidence, knowing
that, unless the matter
constitutes an offence so serious that it cannot be let pass, it will remain in
confidence as long as the
member wishes. A member may be unwilling to seek the
advice, including advice on his/her rights, of the designated person before the
matter goes beyond the two of them.
“In confidence” reports of sexual harassment should not be
entered on the service record of the member complained against
except after what
might be conveniently called due process. This requirement would protect
members against whom complaints are made
from having matters entered on their
records without having had the chance to be heard.
Persons designated for this purpose should be specially and fully trained to
advise complaining members of all of the possible courses
open to them. The
need for training of such designated persons is obvious.
The object of these minimum conditions would be to ensure as far as it is
possible that members are deterred from sexually harassing
other members. The
measures would operate by instilling into the minds of members who might offend
that they are likely to be reported
if they do so.
Junior members should no doubt be educated in respect to the unacceptability
of sexual harassment as part of recruit training but
it can hardly be suggested
that a person of the experience and seniority of Robinson was not aware that
what he did was unlawful,
or at least that it was wrong.
Some or all of the above measures, or others designed to achieve a similar
purpose, could and should have been put in place to maximise
the likelihood of
sexual harassment being reported and therefore to act a deterrent to persons,
including Robinson, minded to offend.
Whatever the content of the minimum obligations or conditions however, the
conduct of the RAAF as I have described in this case clearly
did not amount to
taking “all reasonable steps”.
I conclude therefore that it has not been established for the purposes of
s.106(2) that the RAAF took all reasonable steps to prevent
members of the RAAF,
including Robinson, from doing acts of the kind specified in the section 106.
The kinds of measures to which
I have referred would have provided a deterrent
to members, including Robinson, from indulging in sexual harassment as alleged
proved in this Inquiry. It would have been reasonable to take all or some
of those steps.
In summary, I am satisfied that the conditions for vicarious liability in
s.106(1) of the Act are satisfied in this case. I am further
satisfied that the
requirements of the exception in s.106(2) of the Act have not been made out. I
therefore find that the Second
Respondent is vicariously liable pursuant to
s.106 of the Act for the unlawful acts of Robinson constituting sexual
harassment.
5. DETERMINATION
Section 81 of the Act provides for the kind of determination I may make after
holding the Inquiry. Section 81(1) provides:
81(1) After holding an inquiry, the Commission may:
(b) find the complaint substantiated and make a determination, which may
include any one or more of the following:
(iv) a declaration that the respondent should pay to the complainant damages
by way of compensation for any loss or damage suffered
by reason of the
conduct of the respondent.
Having found the complaint substantiated, I propose to make a determination
in accordance with s.81(1)(b)(iv) that Robinson and the
Second Respondent pay
damages by way of compensation to Williams.
In assessing an appropriate amount of general damages in this case I have
adopted the principles set out in
Hall and Ors v A & A Sheiban Pty Ltd
[1989] FCA 72
(1989) EOC 92-250.
It is important that I reiterate here that the events in 1985, being the
previous sexual assault of Ms Williams by members of the
RAAF and the apparent
failure of the RAAF to deal adequately with that assault, were a major factor in
the extent of damage suffered
by Williams by reason of the subsequent assaults
in 1996. As stated above, this caused her to be very much more sensitive to the
effects of those subsequent assaults.
However, the “eggshell skull” rule would appear to be well
established in cases of this kind: see eg.
Hall and Ors v A & A Sheiban
Pty Ltd and Ors
supra. The identification of compensable loss and damage
suffered is not to be assessed by reference to the “reasonableness”
of a complainant’s response to the conduct in question. The sexual
harasser must take his victim as he finds her. The question
is what was the
effect on the particular complainant of the conduct complained of?
I am satisfied that life in the RAAF became intolerable for Williams for the
reasons that can be readily inferred from the facts that
I have expressed to
have been proved. In the condition that she was in because of the matters dealt
with in these reasons, she had
no real choice but to seek her discharge from the
service. If would almost certainly have been otherwise if she had been treated
differently following the assaults, both in 1985 and in 1996. It should be
remembered that Robinson's conduct following the assaults
in 1996 was itself
part of the background circumstances against which those assaults had their
adverse effect on her.
Therefore, in addition to the emotional pain, humiliation, embarrassment and
other negative emotions suffered by Williams in the circumstances
following Robinson's harassment of her, she also lost the chance to fulfil her
desire to follow a career in the RAAF. These
are not slight matters, and may be
said to have blighted her life to a considerable extent. They are the matters
for which general
damages are awarded.
A claim for aggravated damages was made by analogy with the circumstances in
which aggravated damages are awarded in defamation cases.
It is true that a
proper investigation and, subject to the findings of that investigation, an
early apology by the RAAF, would have
minimised the damage suffered by Williams.
It is true also that the defence run by the RAAF in this Inquiry was without
may have tended to aggravate the damage already suffered by Williams.
However, in my opinion these matters can be adequately addressed by way of
general damages. As noted above, I think that the appropriate
approach in this
case is to look at Williams as she is in fact, and to award damages to
compensate her for any loss or damage suffered
by her by reason of the acts
constituting sexual harassment.
In all of the circumstances, I think an appropriate measure of general
damages would be $30,000 and I will include that amount in
With respect to economic loss, I have the assistance of both counsels'
submissions and a report of John B Harrison, FCPA, ACIS (Exhibit
report concludes that Williams’ economic loss for past and future wages
and superannuation benefits is in excess
of $890,000. That report also proceeds
on the premise, derived
from Dr Robinson's opinion, that
Williams is unable to do paid work and that she will be unable to do so for the
indefinite future.
I disagree with Dr Robinson's opinion in that respect.
Williams left the RAAF because, in all of the circumstances, dealt with at
length in these reasons, she could not tolerate working
in the RAAF environment
any longer. However, I do not accept it to be the fact that she left the RAAF
because she was not longer
capable of doing the work required, as such. If she
had been required to perform her duties in an entirely different personnel
environment
(or similar duties) I have little doubt that she would have been
able to perform them satisfactorily. A supportive and friendly environment
have made a great difference to her. Therefore, it is my opinion that a premise
significant to Mr Harrison's conclusions is
Whilst in a general way I accept the diagnosis and prognosis of Dr Robinson,
I disagree with his opinion as to her ability to perform
paid work. I think
that Williams has been able, and continues to be able, to perform some paid work
and could have made efforts
to find suitable employment. In this respect I
agree with Dr Moore.
There is no physical reason why Williams could not have done paid work. She
has the physical strength necessary. She is not psychiatrically
extent or in a way that would prevent her from working. Upon the whole of the
evidence she emerges as a person of at least
average intelligence. The
distraction of work can often operate beneficially especially in cases, like
this, where the person concerned
has become inward looking.
The discomfort and distress that is undoubtedly caused by her psychiatric
disorder are and will remain with her whether she is gainfully
employed or not.
It would appear that her choices are very much more restricted. There is nothing
that I can identify that prevents
her seeking employment, in a female
environment if she thinks she would suffer unduly working in the immediate
presence of men.
For this reason, I have to reject the calculation of damages
suggested as appropriate by Mr Harrison and to which she may have been
if she had been unable to seek and hold employment in any real sense.
It is my opinion that she has been able to perform duties of the kind she has
been doing in the RAAF and that she has been able to
do so at all material
If she had demonstrated efforts to find paid employment, and had failed to
find paid employment or had been unable to perform the
duties involved in such
employment as she may have found, the issue would have been differently decided.
But, that is not the case.
Nevertheless, it is likely that having left the RAAF, Williams would in any
event have suffered considerable loss of income for a
number of reasons. In the
first place, experience in a disciplined service is not always readily
translated into an industrial environment.
Therefore it is likely that a period
of time would have been required in which to find suitable employment and to
train for it.
A considerable loss of income is involved there. Also, it is
unlikely I think that she would have readily found employment so remunerative
an overall career sense as service in the RAAF. Employment outside the RAAF may
not have had the career path that employment
in the RAAF offered.
It is clear that the assessment that I have to make is not susceptible of
anything like precise calculation, even if it could be said
to be calculable at
all. The most one can do in a case like this is to make an assessment based on
impressions of Williams’
capacities and of the opportunities for paid work
that would have and will present themselves to her. There is really no evidence
of the latter so I have to rely on my own general understanding of the
industrial environment.
Of course, the vicissitudes of life have to be taken into account in all such
cases as this, and I do so.
I think that Williams’ economic loss, past and future, should be
assessed at $100,000.
Although I did not calculate that sum by reference to a yearly salary in the
RAAF, I note that, in roughly the mid-range of her RAAF
career, that amount
would be the equivalent of two years’ loss of pay, very approximately.
This accords with the amount that
I think, at the end of her working career, she
will in retrospect have lost in the course of that career by reason of the loss
her RAAF employment through no fault of hers. In the nature of things, this
has to be a rough approximation.
Accordingly, I make a declaration pursuant to s.81(1)(b)(iv) of the Act that
Robinson and the Second Respondent should pay to Williams
by way of compensation
an amount of $130,000.00, made up of $30,000 general damages and $100,000 for
economic loss. Both Robinson
and the Second Respondent will be jointly and
severally liable to pay the amount of $130,000 to Williams.
Although the liability of the Second Respondent is vicarious, it must be
clear by now that the Second Respondent itself created the
conditions that
resulted in the actions of Robinson causing damage to Williams out of all
proportion to the inherent gravity of his
actions. I expect the reality to be
that the Second Respondent will pay the damages.
Dated this 13th day of October 2000
The Hon John Nader QC
Inquiry Commissioner
RTF format (183 KB)
Signed PDF/A format