Oracle Corporation Australia Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation [2025] FCAFC 145 (21 October 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Oracle Corporation Australia Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Taxation
[2025] FCAFC 145
Appeal from:
Oracle Corporation Australia Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation (Stay
Application)
[2024] FCA 1262
File numbers:
NSD 1716 of 2024
NSD 1717 of 2024
NSD 1718 of 2024
Judgment of:
HESPE, BUTTON AND YOUNAN JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
proceedings under s 23 of
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
– public interest considerations – double taxation treaties –
mutual agreement procedure (
) – where primary judge refused
Appellants’ application for a stay of proceedings pending finalisation of
a MAP under
the double taxation treaty between Australia and Ireland –
where domestic proceedings commenced to preserve taxpayer rights
statutory time limits – where Commissioner suspended the MAP when domestic
proceedings were commenced and opposed the
stay application – where
underlying withholding tax dispute concerned characterisation of certain
payments as royalties –
where primary judge found that public interest in
domestic proceedings providing judicial guidance in respect of the affairs of
approximately
15 other taxpayers and a dispute with the United States favoured
refusal of the stay – appeal allowed
Legislation:
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997
(Cth) Subdiv 719-B
International Taxation Agreements Act 1953
(Cth) ss 4, 4AA, 5,
Judiciary Act 1903
Taxation Administration Act 1953
Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of
Ireland for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention
Evasion with Respect to Taxes on Income and Capital Gains
, signed on 31 May
[1983] ITS 25 (entered into force on 21 December 1983) Preamble,
Arts 1, 3, 13, 25, 26
Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to
Prevent Base Erosion and Profit Shifting
, signed on 7 June 2017,
(entered into force on 1 January 2019 for Australia and 1 May 2019 for
Ireland) Arts 2, 6, 16, 19, 20, 23, Pt VI
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
, opened for signature 23
1969, 1155 UNTS 331
[1974] ATS 2
(entered into force 27 January 1980) Arts
Cases cited:
Commissioner of Taxation v Pepsico Inc
[2025] HCA 30
(2025) 99 ALJR 1211
Epic Games Inc v Apple Inc
[2021] FCAFC 122
(2021) 286 FCR
GLJ v Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of Lismore
[2023] HCA 32
(2023) 280 CLR 442
(1936) 55 CLR 499
HVAC Construction (Qld) Pty Ltd v Energy Equipment Engineering Pty
[2002] FCA 1638
(2002) 44 ACSR 169
Impiombato v BHP Group Ltd
[2025] FCAFC 9
(2025) 308 FCR 250
International Business Machines Corporation v Commissioner of Taxation
[2011] FCA 335
(2011) 91 IPR 120
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR
Onslow Salt Pty Ltd v Buurabalayji Thalanyji Aboriginal Corporation
[2018] FCAFC 118
Oracle Corporation Australia Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation (Stay
Application)
[2024] FCA 1262
Sterling Pharmaceuticals Pty Ltd v Boots Co (Aust) Pty Ltd
OECD, ‘Commentary on Article 12 Concerning the Taxation of
Royalties’ in
Model Tax Convention on Income and Capital: Condensed
(OECD Publishing, 2017)
OECD, ‘Commentary on Article 25 Concerning the Mutual Agreement
Procedure’ in
Model Tax Convention on Income and Capital: Condensed
(OECD Publishing, 2017)
Explanatory Statement to the MLI
(adopted on 24 November
Making Dispute Resolution Mechanisms More Effective, Action 14
– 2015 Final Report
(OECD Publishing, 2015)
General Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellants:
J Sheahan KC with C Winnett, A Roe and J Schwarz
Solicitor for the Appellants:
Herbert Smith Freehills Kramer
Counsel for the Respondent:
M O’Meara SC with N Li
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Australian Government Solicitor
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
NSD 1716 of 2024
ORACLE CORPORATION AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
ACN 003 074 468
First Appellant
VANTIVE AUSTRALIA PTY LTD ACN 076 201 619
Second Appellant
ORACLE CAPAC SERVICES UNLIMITED COMPANY
Third Appellant
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
NSD 1717 of 2024
ORACLE CORPORATION AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
ACN 003 074
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
NSD 1718 of 2024
ORACLE CORPORATION AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
ACN 003 074
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
three Appellants are part of the
Oracle group
of companies. The Third
Appellant (
Oracle Ireland
) is resident in Ireland for tax purposes, and
the First Appellant (
Oracle Australia
) is tax resident in Australia. The
Second Appellant
) is the provisional head company of a
multiple entry consolidated group (MEC group) of companies, of which Oracle
Australia is a
subsidiary member, for the purposes of Subdivision 719-B of
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997
three proceedings were filed on 7 November 2023. The first proceeding is an
application for relief under
Judiciary Act 1903
the other two proceedings are brought pursuant to
Administration Act 1953
), appealing the
Commissioner’s disallowance of objections to penalty assessments issued on
the basis that there had been a
failure to withhold amounts from royalty
payments made by Oracle Australia to Oracle Ireland in the tax year 2013 and the
2014–2018. Appeals to the Federal Court against objection
decisions must be filed within 60 days of the objection decision:
of the TAA. There is no statutory power to extend the time for a Federal Court
underlying tax issue is whether amounts paid by Oracle Australia to Oracle
Ireland under intra-group licensing arrangements are
royalties as defined by
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
Art 13 of the
Agreement between the Government of Australia and the
Government of Ireland for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention
Fiscal Evasion with Respect to Taxes on Income and Capital Gains
, signed on
31 May 1983,
[1983] ITS 25 (entered into force on 21 December 1983)
). The Commissioner’s position is that the amounts paid under
the intra-group licensing agreements are royalties, as defined,
such that Oracle
Ireland was liable to pay withholding tax (at a rate of 10% because of the DTA)
pursuant to ss 128B and 128C of
the 1936 Act, thus exposing Oracle
Australia to penalties for failing to withhold. Where an entity fails to
withhold from a dividend,
interest or royalty payment, or withholds less than
the amount required, the entity is liable to a penalty equal to the amount they
failed to withhold: s 16-30 of Sch 1 to the TAA, ss 128B(2B) and 128B(5A)
of the 1936 Act.
appeals concern the primary judge’s refusal of the Appellants’
applications to stay the three proceedings pending
finalisation of the
“mutual agreement procedure” (
) between the competent
authorities of Australia and Ireland under the DTA:
Oracle Corporation
Australia Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation (Stay Application)
). The Commissioner suspended the MAP when the present domestic
proceedings were initiated, and opposed the application for a stay.
We will say
something more about the chronology later in these reasons.
the primary judge refused the stay applications, his Honour granted leave to
appeal that refusal.
THE DOUBLE TAXATION AGREEMENT AND THE MUTUAL AGREEMENT
DTA is a bilateral agreement between the government of Australia and the
government of Ireland (the
contracting states
) which, like other double
taxation agreements, has been enacted as and forms part of Australia’s
domestic taxation law:
International Taxation Agreements Act 1953
ss 4(1), 4AA(1), 5(1), 11K.
of the DTA’s terms are relevantly modified and/or supplemented by the
Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent
Base Erosion and Profit Shifting
, signed on 7 June 2017,
[2019] ATS 1
(entered into force on 1 January 2019 for Australia and 1 May 2019 for Ireland)
), to which both Ireland and Australia have acceded: MLI Art 2(1)(a).
The primary judge referred to a “Synthesised Text”
incorporates the MLI modifications into the text of the DTA (PJ [6],
Schedule A).
purpose of the DTA is to eliminate double taxation with respect to the taxes
covered by the agreement: DTA Preamble; MLI Art 6(1).
Royalties are among the
taxes covered by the DTA: DTA Art 13. Pursuant to Art 13(1)–(2),
royalties “arising” in
one contracting state, to which a resident of
the other state is beneficially entitled, may be taxed in that other state, save
the contracting state in which the royalties “arise” may impose
a tax, not exceeding 10% of the gross amount of the royalties.
“royalties” is relevantly defined as follows by Art 13(3) of
(3) The term “royalties” in this Article means payments or credits,
whether periodical or not, and however described
or computed, to the extent to
which they are made as consideration for-
the use of, or the right to use, any copyright
, patent, design or
model, plan, secret formula or process, trademark, or other like property or
supply of any assistance that is ancillary and subsidiary to
and is furnished as a means of
enabling the application or enjoyment of, any
such property or right as is mentioned in subparagraph (a)
equipment as is mentioned in subparagraph (b) or any such knowledge or
information as is mentioned in subparagraph (c);
(Emphasis added.)
taxpayers are not parties to this intergovernmental agreement, they are the
objects of the agreement and are by no means
passive bystanders. Not only is the
DTA incorporated into domestic law (by the ITA Act), by its terms, the DTA is
stated to “apply
to persons who are residents of one or both of the
Contracting States”: DTA Art 1. Further, and as set out below, it is
who submit instances of perceived double taxation to the competent
authorities of the contracting states, and who may invoke the
arbitration
process under Part VI of the MLI.
intended method by which double taxation is to be eliminated is set out in
Art 25 of the DTA. Broadly, subject to their respective
domestic laws, each
of Ireland and Australia is to allow, as a credit against tax payable in its
26 of the DTA makes provision for the MAP. Article 26(1) (as modified by
MLI Art 16(1)) provides that, where a resident of
a contracting state
considers that the actions of one or both of the contracting states result, or
will result in, taxation not in
accordance with the provisions of the DTA
— ie that there will be double taxation — that person may
“irrespective
of the remedies provided by the domestic law” of the
contracting states, “present” the case to the competent authority
either state. For the purposes of the DTA, Australia’s competent authority
is the Commissioner of Taxation or his authorised
representative
Commissioner
), and Ireland’s competent authority is the Revenue
Commissioners or their authorised representative: DTA Art 3(1)(j). In
officers of the Australian Taxation Office (
) handle the MAP
on behalf of the Commissioner.
MAP must be initiated by a resident within three years of the first notification
of the action resulting in taxation contrary
to the terms of the DTA: DTA Art
26(1); MLI Art 16(1).
the claim appears to be justified, and the competent authority is not itself
able to arrive at an appropriate solution, the
competent authority is obliged to
endeavour to resolve the case with the competent authority of the other
contracting state, with
a view to avoiding taxation contrary to the DTA: DTA Art
agreement reached between the two contracting states is to be implemented
“notwithstanding any time limits in the domestic
law of [the contracting
states]”: DTA Art 26(2); MLI Art 16(2).
the competent authorities are unable to reach an agreement resolving a case
presented by a taxpayer within two years, subject to
a potential extension of
time, the taxpayer may request that any unresolved issues be submitted to an
arbitration process under Part
VI of the MLI: MLI Art 19(1). Each contracting
state is to appoint one member to the arbitral panel, with that individual to
“expertise or experience in international tax matters”: MLI Art
20(2). The two appointed members appoint a third as their
Chair, with default
appointment mechanisms provided if the Chair cannot be appointed by agreement.
There are strict time limits for
the appointment of the panel: MLI Art
to the terms of Art 23 of the MLI, the arbitration conditions to which Australia
and Ireland have agreed provide for each
contracting state to submit a
“proposed resolution” which is generally limited to being a specific
monetary amount. While
the contracting states can submit position papers for
consideration by the arbitral panel, the panel is to “select as its
one of the proposed resolutions” with respect to each issue. The
panel’s decision is in writing, but it is prohibited
from including any
“rationale or any other explanation of the decision”. In other
words, where the arbitral panel selects
one of the monetary sums put forward by
one of the contracting states, it does not give any reasons for its decision(s).
the competent authorities can agree to vary the manner in which an
arbitration is to be conducted: MLI Art 23(1).
arbitration decision is final and, subject to some exceptions, binding on both
contracting states: MLI Art 19(4). However, it
is not binding on the taxpayer.
The taxpayer can choose not to accept the outcome of any mutual agreement
reached under the MAP,
whether that be a mutual agreement reached as a result of
negotiations between the competent authorities, or a mutual agreement that
implements an arbitration decision: MLA Art 19(4)(b)(i). A taxpayer will be
taken not to have accepted the arbitral panel’s
decision if it does not,
within 60 days, withdraw all issues dealt with by the decision from
consideration by any court or administrative
tribunal process, or otherwise
terminate those proceedings.
all double taxation agreements adopt the arbitration procedures set out in Part
VI of the MLI, but the DTA between Australia and
Ireland does adopt those
procedures.
MAP may be suspended in certain circumstances. In particular, Art 19(2) of
the MLI refers to a competent authority having “suspended
agreement procedure ... because a case with respect to one or more of the same
issues is pending before a court or administrative
tribunal”. This
provision implicitly empowers each competent authority to suspend a MAP where an
issue is brought before a
domestic court or tribunal. Article 19(2) provides
that any such suspension has the effect of stopping time running on the two-year
pre-arbitration period until either: a final decision has been rendered by the
court or administrative tribunal, or the case has
been suspended or withdrawn.
was no dispute that, although the power is implicit in Art 19(2) of the
MLI, the Australian competent authority did have the
power to suspend the MAP
upon the Appellants having commenced the domestic proceedings. It is also common
ground that, although the
DTA and MLI address the interaction between the MAP
and domestic proceedings in a number of respects, they do not explicitly provide
for what is to occur where a taxpayer commences domestic proceedings in order to
comply with a strict time limit, but wishes to have
a MAP continue.
a domestic proceeding is not stayed, but proceeds to judicial resolution, the
reservation made by Art 19(12) of the MLI will
apply such that any
(unresolved) issue within the scope of the arbitration process provided for by
the MLI will not be submitted
to arbitration if a decision on the issue has been
rendered by a domestic court or tribunal of either contracting state.
FACTS CONCERNING THE WITHHOLDING TAX DISPUTE AND INTERACTIONS
CONCERNING THE MAP
Australia and Oracle Ireland were parties to a “Fourth Amended &
Restated Distribution Agreement” (
Distribution
) and a “Fifth Amended & Restated Distribution
Agreement” (
Distribution Agreement
) (together,
Distribution Agreements
). Under each agreement, Oracle Ireland granted
Oracle Australia the right to market, promote, distribute, copy (for limited
and sell licenses for the “Programs” to “End
Users”, as defined. Oracle Australia undertook, pursuant to
the terms of
the agreements, to do a number of things, “[i]n consideration for the
rights granted herein”: Art 2.4 of
the Distribution Agreements.
End User Licence Distribution rights granted under Art 2.2.A of the
Distribution Agreement permitted Oracle Australia to do a number
of things, including: to enter into End User Licenses for the Programs;
the Programs to provide training product support and additional support to End
Users and Subdistributors; to use the Programs
for demonstrations; to use the
Programs to prepare marketing material; to grant trial End User Licenses; and to
use and reproduce
the Programs, only to the extent necessary for internal use,
safekeeping, back-up and archival purposes. The End User Licence Distribution
rights granted under Art 2.2.A of the 5
Distribution Agreement were
in similar terms.
each of the agreements, Oracle Australia was to “pay a fee as set forth in
Schedule 1 hereof” “[i]n consideration
for the distribution rights
granted under Article 2.2.A”: Art 4.4 of the 4
Distribution
Agreement and Art 5.2.A of the 5
Distribution Agreement.
Schedule 1 of each of the agreements contains five parts, labelled
“Part I”, “Part II”
etc. The heading to each such part
purports to refer to the Article to which the part relates, but in the case of
Distribution Agreement, all but one of those references
is wrong and two such references are wrong in the 5
Distribution
Agreement. Nevertheless, it appears to be the case that Parts II to V are
revenue recognition provisions, and do not
provide for any fee to be payable by
Oracle Australia to Oracle Ireland.
addition to “Schedule 1” being referred to in Arts 4.4 and
5.2.A of the Distribution Agreements, respectively, both
of the agreements
contain a further provision that cross-refers to fees payable under Sch 1.
Article 4.4.A of the 4
Distribution Agreement provides that
“[i]n consideration for each End User License of a Program granted by
[Oracle Australia
or its Subdistributors]”, Oracle Australia is to provide
Oracle Ireland “a fee equal to that set out in Part I of Schedule
1”: Art 4.4.A of the 4
Distribution Agreement and
Art 5.2.B of the 5
Distribution Agreement. As mentioned,
Part I of Sch 1 in each agreement is the only part of that schedule
which appears to provide
for a fee to be paid by Oracle Australia to Oracle
Ireland, but that fee is specified to be payable in consideration both for the
grant of general distribution rights pursuant to Art 2.2.A and the grant of each
“End User License”.
Distribution Agreement, the fee specified by Part I of
Sch 1 was determined by a formula which was calculated — to
— as the amount that would provide Oracle Australia with the
amounts set out in two sub-clauses, the first of which was 97%
of “Program
and Support Net Revenue” less a stated percentage of Oracle
Australia’s “Direct and Indirect
Software Operating Costs”.
The corresponding fee payable under the 5
Distribution Agreement
was the amount that would provide Oracle Australia with stated amounts
calculated by reference to five sub-clauses.
Distribution Agreement made provision for a number of tasks to be
undertaken by Oracle Australia, which included: using commercially
efforts to promote the marketing and distribution of the Programs; maintaining a
suitable sales organisation; preparing
marketing materials; servicing End Users
and others; providing education and training; providing support to End Users and
Subdistributors;
maintaining and submitting financial records; and representing
Oracle Ireland. These obligations were the subject of detailed terms.
Australia’s obligations under the 5
Distribution Agreement
were in similar terms, but included provisions in relation to “Managed
Cloud Services”, and “Cloud
Software Services”.
30 May 2018, the ATO issued to Oracle Australia a “Notice of penalty for
failure to withhold amounts” for the 2013
financial year. This notice was
issued after an audit process conducted by the ATO through 2017, which included
the issue, by the
ATO, of a position paper and, later, a statement of audit
Commissioner decided, on 6 December 2019, not to remit the penalty. That
rejection was preceded by a letter dated 5 November 2019,
in which Oracle
Australia summarised its arguments. These arguments included that the rights
granted under the 4
Distribution Agreement fall under the
definition of “simple use” rights where payments for licenses for
such rights are
not royalties, and that, except for those “simple
use” rights, the other rights conferred on Oracle Australia under the
Distribution Agreement would not infringe copyright even if
exercised without a licence. Oracle Australia contended, alternatively,
even if the rights it acquired under the agreement did include a right to use
Oracle Australia contended that
the Commissioner had misconstrued Art 2.2.A of the
Distribution Agreement and the rights conferred on it
pursuant to the terms of that agreement.
23 March 2022, the ATO issued to Oracle Australia a “Notice of penalty for
failure to withhold amounts” for the 2014
to 2018 financial years.
penalties were premised on amounts paid by Oracle Australia to Oracle Ireland
under Art 4.4 of the 4
Distribution Agreement and Art 5.2
Distribution Agreement being “royalties”.
3 February 2020, Oracle Australia lodged an objection to the penalty notice
issued in respect of the 2013 year. The supporting
submissions contended that
the Commissioner misconstrued the 4
Distribution Agreement in
concluding that the payments were royalties. It contended, in the alternative,
that if any part of the
payments were royalties, that part was nominal or,
failing that, that there should be an apportionment of the payments made under
Art 4.4 on the basis that they were only royalties in part.
18 May 2021, Oracle Ireland wrote to the Irish competent authority, invoking the
MAP under Art 26 of the DTA in respect of the
2013 year (relevantly to the
royalty withholding tax issue). Oracle Ireland requested the Irish competent
authority enter into a
mutual agreement with the Australian competent authority
requiring the Australian competent authority to withdraw the assessed tax
Oracle Ireland’s position were rejected, to allow Oracle Ireland a
corresponding downward adjustment to its income so
that the amounts in question
were not subject to taxation both in Australia and Ireland.
ATO issued a statement of audit position to Oracle Australia on 11 February
2022, addressing the 2018–2022 years. In a later
letter to the Irish
competent authority (dated 8 March 2022), the ATO referred to the
Australian taxpayer having requested MAP in
respect of those years on 22
February 2022. By a letter dated 4 March 2022, Oracle Australia referred to the
ATO’s statement
of audit position in relation to the 2014–2018 years
and requested that the ATO “reconsider the need to issue any penalty
notices, or at least defer the issue of the penalty notices until the conclusion
of MAP”. As that letter noted, the issues
in respect of the
2014–2018 years were substantively the same as those in respect of the
2013 year, which was already the subject
of an active MAP under the DTA.
appears that that request was not acceded to, as the Commissioner issued the
penalty notice on 23 March 2022 and, it appears, a
decision not to remit
penalties issued the same day, following which, on 20 May 2022, Oracle Australia
lodged an objection against
the Commissioner’s decision not to remit the
penalty for the 2014–2018 years. This objection decision set out the same
analysis as that advanced in the objection decision in respect of the 2013 year,
but by reference to the terms of the 5
Distribution Agreement.
decision to proceed and issue an objection decision was taken even though, on
8 March 2022, an officer of the ATO wrote to the
Irish competent
authority and said that, as the “Australian taxpayer ha[d] requested that
the objection process be put into
abeyance while the MAP process is
undertaken”, it was no longer necessary to discuss the request in the
ATO’s earlier
correspondence for an extension of the arbitration process
pending the outcome of the objection process. The same letter noted that
Australia wanted the 2014–2018 years included in the MAP and proposed that
those years be treated as constituting a
separate MAP. It also observed that
“the taxpayers are now relying on the MAP process as the primary mechanism
for resolving
the [redacted] and royalty withholding tax issues”.
with its understanding that the 2014–2018 years were also to be addressed
under the MAP, the ATO provided its position
paper to the Irish competent
authority on 4 May 2022. That paper addressed both the 2013 year, and the
2014–2018 years. It
also referred to both Australia and Ireland having
accepted those years into the MAP. That position paper set out, at length, the
ATO’s views, which views were again advanced through a detailed analysis
of the Distribution Agreements between Oracle Ireland
and Oracle Australia, the
nature of the operations undertaken pursuant to those agreements, the nature of
the rights conferred, the
fees paid and how all of those matters were to be
regarded having regard to the concept of “copyright” under the
). (While we note that the
Appellants’ submissions on the appeals raised the point that it should not
be assumed that the term
“copyright” in the DTA takes its meaning
from domestic law (ie Australian law), that point was not taken any further
argument before us. Rather, the appeals were conducted on the basis that the
resolution of the Appellants’ proceedings would
into consideration. Accordingly, we say no more about the Appellants’
apparent reservation of their position on this point.)
a letter to the ATO dated 3 August 2022, the Irish competent authority noted
that the objection process was being put into abeyance,
and agreed that the
2014–2018 years should be addressed pursuant to the MAP, but asked whether
a formal MAP request had been
made to the ATO for those years. The ATO responded
by a letter dated 5 July 2023, noting that no formal MAP request had yet been
submitted to it for the 2014–2018 years, thus confining the extant MAP to
2013. The Irish competent authority agreed with this
approach (by a letter dated
25 July 2023).
8 September 2023, the ATO notified Oracle Australia that its objection in
respect of the 2013 year had been disallowed. That was
despite the ATO having,
in 2022 and earlier in 2023, proceeded in its interactions with the Irish
competent authority on the apparent
basis that the objection process would be
put into abeyance while the MAP was pursued.
its objection decision, the ATO noted that, pursuant to Art 13(3) of the DTA,
the term “royalties” means payments or
credits “to the extent
to which they are made as consideration for ... the use of, or the right to use,
any copyright ...”.
The next step in the reasoning is that, as copyright
is not defined in the DTA, it takes its meaning from domestic law, specifically
pursuant to Art 3(3) of the DTA. The ATO referred to the
definition of copyright in
and then addressed, in
detail, the rights granted to Oracle Australia under Art 2.2.A of the
Distribution Agreement, including by reference to whether the
nature of the rights conferred extended to the right to “reproduce”
a work in material form (by reference to the scope of reproduction under
). Further detailed analysis of the provisions of the
Distribution Agreement was undertaken by reference to other
concepts addressed in the
, including the right to communicate to
, the right to authorise
the right to make an adaptation
The objection decision also addressed
the detailed terms of the 4
Distribution Agreement having
regard to the DTA’s inclusion (in Art 13(3)(d)) of payments in respect of
ancillary and subsidiary
services. The ATO concluded that the rights granted to
Oracle Australia went beyond “simple use” rights, and that neither
the exception to copyright infringement for certain incidental and automatic
reproductions in
, or the exception for back-ups in
, applied. Finally, the ATO detailed its reasons for rejecting the alternate
contention that the payments should be apportioned and
were only partly
referable to any royalty.
18 October 2023, the ATO wrote to Oracle Australia advising it that the two
competent authorities had agreed to extend the pre-arbitration
time period by
one year, making the earliest date that arbitration could be requested 18
November 2024. In corresponding with the
Irish competent authority about the
extension to the arbitration date, the ATO noted that it had issued an objection
decision and,
if the Australian taxpayer exercised its review rights before an
Australian court or tribunal, the ATO would advise the Irish competent
and the MAP would be suspended.
formal MAP request was submitted to the Irish competent authority in respect of
the 2014–2018 years on 2 November 2023 (GMT)
(being 3 November 2023 in
Australia). While the formal application was submitted then, it should be
recalled that it is clear from
the ATO’s correspondence with the Irish
competent authority in March 2022 that Oracle Australia had already indicated in
2022 that it wanted a MAP in respect of those years, and also that the
taxpayers were treating the MAP as the primary mechanism for
resolution of the
double taxation issues.
3 November 2023, Oracle Australia’s solicitors wrote to the ATO and noted
that Oracle Australia “requested that the
issuing of the objection
decisions be delayed so as to enable alternative dispute resolution mechanisms
(including MAP proceedings)
to be completed”. This observation was made in
explaining that, as that request had not been acceded to, proceedings would
commenced, but would be accompanied by an application for a stay of the
proceedings pending the conclusion of the MAP proceedings.
The solicitors noted
that “[o]ur clients consider that the dispute between the parties can and
should be resolved through agreement
or binding arbitration under the processes
prescribed by the [DTA]”. The proceedings were commenced on the last
possible day
for the filing of
proceedings, and the
was filed at the same time. An affidavit sworn in support of the stay reiterated
that the Oracle companies wanted to pursue
processes under the DTA (as modified
by the MLI) to conclusion, including through arbitration, but the ATO’s
suspension of
the MAPs prevented these processes from continuing.
proceedings were commenced on 7 November 2023, the ATO notified Oracle Australia
on 17 November 2023 that the 2013 MAP had been
suspended as at 7 November 2023
following the filing of the proceedings. At the same time as the Irish competent
authority confirmed,
on 21 December 2023, the entry of the 2014–2018 years
into the MAP, the ATO notified Oracle Australia that the 2014–2018
also been suspended as at 20 December 2023, as a result of the filing of these
proceedings.
following are the relevant points to be observed, having regard to this
chronology:
(1) The issues arising in relation to the question of whether the fees paid by
Oracle Australia under the Distribution Agreements
were “royalties”
for the purposes of Art 13(3) of the DTA require a close analysis of the
terms of the two Distribution
Agreements, and consideration of how the
arrangements and rights established by those agreements mapped to several
aspects of the
including, but by no means limited to, the
definition of “copyright”. The centrality of these issues is further
by the description of the issues arising in the underlying tax dispute
in the affidavit of Ms Melissa Anne Spurge, filed by the Commissioner
opposing the stay application below (at [31]–[36]). Similarly, the
Commissioner’s oral submissions on the appeal addressed
the contractual
terms between Oracle Australia and Oracle Ireland in detail. None of the
material concerning the underlying tax dispute
identified any question of
construction about the meaning of “royalty” in the DTA that was
capable of being answered
at a level of generality, or in a manner divorced from
the specific terms of the agreements between Oracle Australia and Oracle
(2) The ATO was, for a significant period of time, proceeding on the basis that
it was open to the Commissioner to defer making decisions
on the objections, so
as to allow the MAP to progress at the taxpayers’ request. When and why
the Commissioner changed his
view and decided to issue objection decisions was
not explained in the evidence. While it did not have to be, the change in the
Commissioner’s
position exposes his argument, in the appeals, that he was
merely issuing the objection decisions because he was duty bound to do
ill-conceived submission diverting attention from the fact that the Commissioner
decided to take a step that would force
the taxpayers to elect either to bring
domestic proceedings in 60 days and risk one or both of the competent
authorities suspending
the MAP, or to forever forego domestic appeal rights and
place all their eggs in the MAP basket. In the abstract, putting a taxpayer
an election may be routine, and not a matter that would feature in an
application for a stay, but in the specific context of the
MAP and the
procedures and interactions with domestic remedies for which it provides, the
commencement of domestic proceedings by
the Appellants needs to be considered in
light of the context and manner in which their hand was forced.
(3) Although the formal request for a MAP for the 2014–2018 years was made
after the objection decision had already issued
on 8 September 2023, that bare
fact (which was relied on by the Commissioner in argument on the appeal)
obscures the history, which
makes it clear that it was always apparent to all
concerned that Oracle Australia wanted the 2014–2018 years also to be
under the MAP. In February 2022, Oracle Australia had requested this
be done and, for quite some time, the MAP process was being
pursued on that
basis — including by the ATO, whose position paper covered the
2014–2018 years, as well as the 2013 year
— until it appears that it
was realised that a separate process needed to be initiated.
THE PRIMARY JUDGE’S REASONS
addressing factual matters and describing the operative provisions of the DTA,
MLI and, in particular, the MAP provisions, the
primary judge addressed the
matters relevant to the question of whether a temporary stay ought to be granted
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
). In particular, the primary judge identified that matters that can be
inferred from the subject matter, purpose and scope of any
relevant legislative
context will be relevant in exercising the discretion to grant a stay (PJ [20],
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR
at 39–40 (Mason J, Gibbs CJ agreeing at 30 and Dawson J agreeing
HVAC Construction (Qld) Pty Ltd v Energy Equipment Engineering Pty
[2002] FCA 1638
(2002) 44 ACSR 169
(French J)).
primary judge then turned to addressing the subject matter, purpose and scope of
the DTA and the MLI, both of which are to be
interpreted in accordance with Arts
31 and 32 of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
, opened for
signature 23 May
1969, 1155 UNTS 331
[1974] ATS 2
(entered into force 27
January 1980) (
Vienna Convention
) (PJ [22]). Pursuant to Art
31(3)(b) of the
Vienna Convention
, subsequent practices in the
application of treaties which establish the agreement of the parties regarding
their interpretation
may be taken into account (PJ [22]).
primary judge then turned to a number of documents issued by the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (
) to which regard may be
had in the interpretation of double taxation agreements modelled on the
Model Convention with Respect to Taxes on Income and on
, and in appreciating their intended operation (PJ [23]). Those
documents include the OECD’s ‘Commentary on Article 25
the Mutual Agreement Procedure’ in
Model Tax Convention on Income and
Capital: Condensed Version
(OECD Publishing, 2017) (the
Explanatory Statement to the MLI
(adopted on 24 November
Explanatory Statement
) and the OECD’s
Making Dispute
Resolution Mechanisms More Effective, Action 14 – 2015 Final Report
(OECD Publishing, 2015) (
Action 14 Report
primary judge considered the following matters arising from the subject matter,
scope and purpose of the DTA and MLI relevant
to the exercise of the
Court’s discretion under s 23 of the FCA Act (PJ
[24]–[46]):
(1) A final judicial determination of whether the payments are royalties within
the meaning of DTA Art 13 would bind the Commissioner
such that it would not be
possible for any MAP outcome by consensus to contradict that determination.
Consequently, refusal of the
stay would have the effect of making the
determination of the royalty question by this Court (or any higher court)
definitive of
Oracle Ireland’s liability to Australian withholding tax and
Oracle Australia’s liability to penalty. If a MAP follows
determination in this proceeding, and the competent authorities do not reach an
agreement, the matter will not proceed
to arbitration under the MAP due to the
reservation in MLI Art 19(12), which precludes an issue from being submitted to
arbitration
if a decision on the issue has been rendered by a court or
administrative tribunal of either contracting state (PJ [25]–[29]).
(2) Refusing the stay “may carry the risk of double taxation”,
because the revenue and judicial authorities of Ireland
and Australia may arrive
at different interpretations of DTA Art 13 (PJ [30]–[32]). However,
that risk would not be eliminated
by granting the stay, because the taxpayers
may choose not to accept the outcome of the MAP negotiations or arbitration, in
case the issues would proceed to determination by the Australian courts in
(3) Both the MAP process in DTA Art 26 and the arbitration process in MLI Art 19
seek to achieve the central purpose of the DTA,
namely, the avoidance of double
taxation (PJ [33]).
(4) Refusing a stay would empower the Commissioner to force taxpayers to choose
between a MAP and pursuing their domestic proceedings
by issuing an objection
decision and thus commencing the 60-day period for the taxpayer to bring
domestic proceedings pursuant to
s 14ZZN of the TAA. Such an outcome would be
inconsistent with textual indications in the DTA and MLI that the taxpayer
able to access
mechanisms and to access MAP
in addition
to any domestic procedures (PJ [34]–[35]). The primary judge
identified the following examples (PJ [35]):
(a) prior to the adoption of the MLI, DTA Art 26(1) provided that a taxpayer may
present their case to the relevant competent authority
“notwithstanding
the remedies provided by the national law of those States”;
(b) DTA Art 26(1) was then modified by MLI Art 16(1), which provides that a
taxpayer may present their case to the relevant competent
authorities
“irrespective of the remedies provided by the domestic law”;
(c) MLI Art 16(2) provides that any agreement reached through the MAP
“shall be implemented notwithstanding any time limits
in the domestic law
of the Contracting States”; and
(d) the taxpayer is not bound by any agreement reached by the competent
authorities under the MAP or the outcome of any arbitration
procedure under MLI
Art 19(4)(b)(i).
(5) Relevant extrinsic materials from the OECD support the position that
taxpayers are to have access to both mechanisms, albeit
that they cannot pursue
them both simultaneously (PJ [36]–[39]). In particular, the primary judge
referred to the OECD’s
Commentary, Explanatory Statement, and Action 14
The primary judge quoted from paragraph 77 of the Commentary, which directly
addresses the intersection of domestic proceedings and
the MAP, and suggests
that the usual position would be to suspend legal remedies pending the outcome
of the MAP involving the arbitration
of the issues the competent authorities are
unable to resolve. Paragraph 17 of the Commentary refers to the MAP being
available as possible”, but paragraph 76(a) of the
Commentary makes it clear that a person should not be allowed to pursue
arbitration by MAP if a domestic court or tribunal has already rendered a
decision, and that the approach adopted by most countries
is that a person
“cannot pursue simultaneously the mutual agreement procedure and domestic
legal remedies”. That paragraph
goes on to state that “[w]here
domestic legal remedies are still available, the competent authorities will
generally either
require that the taxpayer agree to the suspension of these
remedies or, if the taxpayer does not agree, will delay the mutual agreement
procedure until these remedies are exhausted” (PJ [38]).
Importantly, the primary judge concluded (PJ [39]) that the Commentary
“shows that generally, where domestic proceedings are
commenced, a
competent authority in the position of the ATO should seek to suspend the
domestic proceedings”.
(6) The extrinsic materials (the Action 14 Report and the Commentary) also
suggest that it is the taxpayer — not the competent
authority — that
typically chooses whether to proceed by a MAP or by domestic procedures (PJ
[40]). The Action 14 Report states
that choice of remedies should remain with
the taxpayer. Paragraph 44 of the Commentary states that, depending on domestic
procedures,
“the choice of redress is normally that of the taxpayer”
and, in most cases, it is the domestic recourse provisions (eg
appeals or court
proceedings) that are “held in abeyance in favour of the less formal and
bilateral nature of mutual agreement
procedure”.
(7) Although the Commissioner disclaimed that a competent authority could
determine which of domestic proceedings or a MAP is to
proceed, the effect of
the position he adopted by making a decision to disallow the taxpayer’s
objection was to require the
taxpayer to abandon one of the two procedures (PJ
[42]). The primary judge said he was “unpersuaded that this is what the
or the MLI contemplate” (PJ [42]).
(8) The primary judge further observed that nothing in the DTA, the MLI or the
extrinsic materials supports the view that a competent
authority may seek to
force a taxpayer to pursue its domestic remedies by opposing the
taxpayer’s application to stay its own
proceeding (PJ [43]).
(9) The Commentary (at paragraph 25) recognises that time limits in domestic law
may create difficulties by requiring a taxpayer
to choose between domestic
remedies and the MAP remedies and, in this context, again indicates an intention
on the part of the drafters
of the DTA that the taxpayer be the one to choose
whether to proceed by a MAP or by domestic proceedings (PJ [45]–[46]).
primary judge’s consideration of various arguments advanced by the
Commissioner may be passed over, as they have not resurfaced
on the appeal. It
is relevant to observe, however, that in many respects, the primary judge
addressed those arguments by reference
to his Honour’s conclusion that the
DTA and MLI do not contemplate a taxpayer being forced to elect between remedies
light of his Honour’s analysis of the DTA and MLI regime, the primary
judge found that, generally speaking, if a taxpayer
has been forced to commence
domestic proceedings to meet a time limit, proceedings should be stayed to
permit the MAP (including
any arbitration) to proceed, if that is what the
taxpayer wishes (PJ [82]). Refusing a stay in such cases would effectively
in the competent authority being able to force the taxpayer to abandon
one process, a consequence which is not contemplated by the
DTA or the MLI (PJ
[49], [54]).
primary judge then addressed several “non-treaty considerations”
raised by the parties as relevant discretionary considerations.
The primary
judge addressed several matters raised by the Commissioner as supporting the
refusal of a stay, as follows:
(1) The Commissioner submitted that the critical royalty issue at the heart of
the Appellants’ proceedings concerned the construction
and application of
Australian copyright law, which is a matter in which the Federal Court of
Australia has expertise. By contrast,
the Commissioner submitted, an arbitral
tribunal appointed under a MAP would have expertise in international tax
matters. The primary
judge considered the concern to be somewhat overstated in
that the ATO will have the right to appoint one of the arbitrators, and
appoint someone experienced in Australian copyright law and tax. The primary
judge concluded that there was “some risk”
that any arbitral panel
would not have the same expertise as this Court (PJ [61]).
(2) The Commission raised the matter of delay, noting that there could be no
arbitration under the MAP until September 2025 (for
the 2013 year MAP) and
September 2026 (for the other MAP in respect of the 2014 to 2018 years). The
primary judge observed that,
even if a stay were refused, the Appellants’
domestic proceedings would be unlikely to go to trial until 2026, an appeal was
“inevitable” and the matter may go to the High Court, meaning that
the proceedings would likely not be finalised until
2027. The primary judge also
observed that, if the stay were granted and the Appellants rejected the outcome
of the MAP arbitration
and only then proceeded with their domestic litigation,
the matter might not be finalised until 2029. The primary judge regarded
as favouring the refusal of the stay “although not strongly” (PJ
(3) The Commissioner submitted that the MAP was not very far advanced, as the
only step that had been taken was the provision of
the ATO’s position
paper, and the domestic proceedings going ahead would not waste court resources.
The primary judge noted
that, if the MAP progressed and the Appellants rejected
the outcome of arbitration, there would have been wasted time and effort
pursuing the MAP. While this was a function of the treaty machinery, the primary
judge regarded it as relevant and favouring the
refusal of the stay sought,
“although not strongly” (PJ [69]).
is the other discretionary matter raised by the Commissioner that lies at the
heart of this appeal. That matter was explained and
addressed by the primary
judge as follows:
the Commissioner submitted
that a judicial determination by this Court (or,
more likely, any appellate court) will provide guidance both to him and other
. In that regard, Ms Melissa
Spurge, a Deputy Commissioner of Taxation, gave evidence that there were
approximately fifteen other entities whose distribution of software or
related arrangements require consideration of the definition
‘royalty’ for Australian tax purposes
addition to those matters, it is also apparent that the Commissioner’s
approach to what constitutes a royalty for the purpose
of double taxation
treaties has created
friction with the United States
Commissioner’s position on royalties in relation to software distribution
arrangements is the subject of two draft taxation
Income tax:
royalties – character of receipts in respect of software
2021/D4) and its revised version,
Income tax: royalties – character of
payments in respect of software and intellectual property rights
2024/D1). On
, Mr Jose E. Murillo, Deputy Assistant
Secretary (International Tax Affairs) in the Office of Tax Policy within the US
Treasury Department,
wrote to Mr Marty Robinson, First Assistant Secretary
– CBR in the Corporate and International Tax Division of the Australian
Treasury, indicating that the
United States had ‘strong concerns’
also indicated that it would be
inconsistent with United States Treasury
regulations
which provide that payments of the present kind are to be
treated as payments in exchange for services which were not royalties.
, the US Department of the Treasury again wrote to the Australian
urging the ATO to withdraw Draft TR 2024/D1 or to ‘revise it
as it applies to the Australia-U.S. tax treaty to bring it into conformity
with the OECD Model Commentaries’.
taxpayers submitted that these matters should be given little weight and that
the stay should not be refused to allow the Commissioner’s
guidance on the issue: ASR [12]. In that regard, it was
submitted that the
dispute with the United States is a diplomatic issue. Whilst this is no doubt
formally true, it does not gainsay
the fact that it is a diplomatic issue
concerned with the meaning of word the ‘royalty’ in a treaty with
the United States
Further, that word derives from the Model Convention
and appears in a large number of other double taxation agreements which
has made with other members of the OECD. Thus, the
dispute with
the United States is potentially emblematic of a larger dispute within the
distribution arrangements
accept that
any decision by this or an appellate court will provide guidance
to the Commissioner about his draft ruling
. If this guidance were for the
Commissioner alone, I would be disposed to see the force of the
Applicants’ submission. However,
approximately 15 other
whose arrangements raise the principal issue in these
proceedings,
an ongoing dispute with an important trading partner
and, if one accepts the Applicants’ submission about the highly
controversial nature of the Commissioner’s position,
possibly other
similar disputes in the wings.
matters, which it is true do not directly relate to the current taxpayers, are a
powerful discretionary consideration favouring
the refusal of the stay
application.
Under Art 23(1)(c) of the MLI, the decisions of an arbitral
panel have no precedential effect and are not to include ‘a rationale
any other explanation of the decision’
. In the context of 15 other
taxpayers whose circumstances seem to raise similar concerns, a dispute with at
least one significant
trading partner, and the potential for additional disputes
with other contracting states in future,
it would be useful to have a
judicial determination of whether arrangements such as the present do or do not
involve a royalty under
the various double taxation treaties which exist.
series of 15 arbitrations would give no guidance on the correct answer and each
decision would provide no guidance to the Commissioner
as to what he was to do
with the other cases. Indeed, I accept that
there is a risk that the
arbitrations may result in inconsistent outcomes
including in this case
(because there are two mutual agreement procedures on foot which need not be
determined by the same panel).
Nor would any such arbitral decisions provide
guidance in negotiating the dispute with the United States
this may be added another consideration.
The existence of a final appellate
conclusion on whether distribution arrangements such as the present involve
royalties will assist
in the conduct by the IRC and ATO of other mutual
agreement procedure cases and any subsequent arbitrations
. Contrary to the
Applicants’ submissions at AS [30(d)] and ASR [5], such a determination
will clarify, rather than ‘constrain’,
the options available for
resolving the issues in dispute between the ATO and IRC through a mutual
agreement procedure. These last
two matters are powerful considerations in
favour of refusing the present stay application.
(Emphasis added.)
the section of his Honour’s reasons headed “Decision”, the
primary judge returned to the importance of judicial
guidance in the exercise of
the discretion:
Court’s decision of whether to stay the proceedings is discretionary. The
terms of the treaties show that,
generally speaking, in a case where a
taxpayer has been forced to commence domestic proceedings to meet a time limit,
proceedings
should be stayed
to permit the mutual agreement procedure
(including any arbitration) to proceed if that is what the taxpayer wishes. It
is the taxpayer
which, generally speaking, gets to choose whether to pursue
domestic proceedings or to enliven the mutual agreement procedure between
competent authorities. Denying a stay in such cases would effectively result in
the competent authority being able to force the
taxpayer to abandon one process.
Because this is not what the treaties contemplate, this is a powerful
consideration favouring the
grant of the stay sought.
the question of what a royalty is under the various double taxation
agreements and how it is to be applied to 15 different taxpayers
is a question
which subtends the position of the taxpayers in this case, as does the dispute
with the United States
. This larger consideration speaks powerfully to the
need for there to be a final appellate judicial determination of the
Such a determination will provide guidance to the various
competent authorities, to the other taxpayers, to arbitrators and to any
trading partners with whom the Commonwealth is presently in dispute about the
nature of a royalty
. This consideration strongly suggests that one case
should proceed to final appellate determination for
the guidance of all
it not for the position of the 15 other taxpayers and the dispute with the
United States, I would grant the stay sought. The
balance of the other
discretionary matters are outweighed by my impression of how these treaties are
generally to operate in circumstances
such as the present.
the need for a judicial determination of the royalties question for the
benefit of others
persuades me that a stay should not be granted for public
interest reasons.
(Emphasis added.)
his Honour’s reasoning made clear, were it not for the public interest
discerned in the domestic proceedings progressing
to judicial determination and
so providing guidance vis-à-vis the approximately 15 other taxpayers and
the dispute with the
United States, the primary judge would have granted the
stay sought.
CONSIDERATION
was no serious challenge on the appeal to the primary judge’s
characterisation of the nature of the DTA and MLI and, in
particular, his
Honour’s conclusion that those instruments anticipate that a taxpayer will
be able to access both the MAP and
domestic appeal remedies, albeit not
simultaneously. Similarly, it was not seriously argued that the primary judge
was wrong to conclude
that, absent discretionary factors tending in support of a
stay being refused, “generally speaking, in a case where a taxpayer
been forced to commence domestic proceedings to meet a time limit, proceedings
should be stayed to permit the mutual agreement
procedure (including any
arbitration) to proceed if that is what the taxpayer wishes” (PJ [82]).
(The Appellants’ only
quibble with the primary judge’s analysis of
the regime was that the risk of double taxation, if the stay were refused, was
inevitable, not merely possible (cf PJ [30]).)
the extent that any challenge to these conclusions of the primary judge featured
in the appeal, it arose from the terms of the
Commissioner’s Notice of
Contention. But, as is addressed below, the key ground of the Notice of
Contention was abandoned,
several other grounds were said not to require
consideration, and the balance did not articulate any clear challenge to these
conclusions
of the primary judge. The high point of the argument, insofar as it
was maintained, was that it should be remembered that the DTA
and MLI empower
the ATO, as representing the competent authority of Australia, to suspend a MAP,
as it did. The existence of that
power was accepted by both the Appellants and
the primary judge. On the appeal, as it was run, the Commissioner accepted that
power to suspend was itself subject to the Court’s capacity to stay
domestic appeal proceedings. The contention that any such
grant of a stay would
stultify or unduly restrict the Commissioner’s power to suspend a MAP was
agree with the primary judge’s careful and comprehensive analysis of the
DTA and MLI regime, and his Honour’s conclusions
as regards the general
position that arises under them where a taxpayer wishes to invoke a MAP in
addition to keeping alive domestic
appeal rights, and the legislative policy
those matters reveal and which is relevant to consideration of whether a stay of
proceedings should be granted.
is evident from the primary judge’s reasons, it was the public interest in
domestic proceedings giving guidance in respect
of the matters in issue
concerning the approximately 15 other taxpayers and the dispute with
the United States that resulted in the
primary judge being persuaded that the
general position his Honour had identified — which would have seen the
present proceedings
being stayed — should not prevail, and the stay should
be refused.
Appellants’ principal contention on the appeal was that the primary judge
erred in concluding that the stay should be refused
on public interest grounds
on the basis that refusing the stay, and thereby ensuring that the
Appellants’ proceedings would
— unless discontinued — progress
to judgment, and an appeal, would provide guidance in relation to the 15 other
and the dispute with the United States. The Appellants contended that
the evidence did not support the primary judge’s conclusions
the course of the Commissioner’s oral submissions on the appeal, senior
counsel twice confirmed that the Commissioner did
not contend that the other
matters that the primary judge identified as militating against the stay would
be sufficient to warrant
the stay being refused. Those three matters were the
expertise of an arbitral tribunal under the MAP versus the expertise of this
Court in copyright matters, delay and wasted resources (PJ [61],
[68]–[69], set out above at paragraph
). Counsel for the Commissioner stated
explicitly that he did not submit that delay, wasted costs and the point about
expertise “would
independently support the refusal of the stay if your
Honours are against us on the main public interest point”.
“main public interest point”, as it was characterised by counsel for
the Commissioner, is the primary judge’s
conclusion that judicial (and
particularly appellate) determination of the issues in the domestic proceedings
would address the “nature
of a royalty” and so “provide
guidance” that could be applied to the 15 other taxpayers, “the
various competent
authorities”, arbitrators and trading partners with whom
the Commonwealth is in dispute about the nature of a royalty (PJ [83]).
the primary judge referred, in this passage of his Honour’s reasons, to
“trading partners with whom the Commonwealth
is in dispute”, it is
clear from other parts of the reasons that the only evidence of such a
“dispute” concerned
the United States, and that the tension with the
United States was only characterised as being “potentially
emblematic”
of a larger dispute within the OECD (PJ [64]); there was no
evidence of any such wider dispute.
Consequently,
and because we have concluded that the primary judge erred on the facts as the
Appellants contended, it is not necessary
to decide the Appellants’
subsidiary arguments. We will, however, address some of those matters to put
them in context and
explain why it is not necessary to reach a concluded
Preliminary matters
Public interest considerations
strand of the Appellants’ case, albeit not one advanced with great vigour,
was that the matters that led the primary judge
to consider that the stay should
be refused — the guidance said to be afforded in respect of approximately
15 other taxpayers
and the dispute with the United States — were not
matters of “high” public interest, and so were irrelevant. It
The bases on which public interest factors were considered relevant in
Games Inc v Apple Inc
[2021] FCAFC 122
(2021) 286 FCR 105
Pharmaceuticals Pty Ltd v Boots Co (Aust) Pty Ltd
(1992) 34 FCR 287 at 288,
293 do not apply here.
that the appeal has been determined based on the factual matters addressed
above, it is not necessary to dwell on this issue.
However, for completeness, we
note that we do not consider that the matters of “public interest”
to which regard may
be had are confined in the manner for which the Appellants
contended. A public interest can inhere in particular private litigation
different ways. As the Appellants noted, in some cases, the public interest
arises from the characteristics of the subject matter
of the litigation, such as
litigation concerning the protection of consumers (eg the claims made about
product safety and characteristics
Sterling Pharmaceuticals Pty Ltd v
Boots Co (Aust) Pty Ltd
(1992) 34 FCR 287) or the enforcement of competition
law, which affects the economic market for certain segments of consumers
Epic Games Inc v Apple Inc
[2021] FCAFC 122
(2021) 286 FCR 105
) is an example of this kind of case: see, eg the
observations of the Full Court (Middleton, Jagot and Moshinsky JJ) at [97]
and [108]).
, the Full Court identified, as one of its points of departure from
the primary judge, that the primary judge’s position did
with the fact that Epic’s proceeding has the potential to affect the
position of app developers generally who
are subject to the same contractual
regime as Epic”: at [65] (see also at [105] concerning the capacity of
private litigation
to help develop and clarify the law). In our view, the Full
regarded the potential for a particular piece of private
litigation to affect non-parties as an element, albeit only one of many,
public interest considerations that led the Full Court to consider that the
primary judge erred in staying the proceedings
in the Federal Court. Of course,
as is clear from the Full Court’s reasons, the point to which we have
directed attention concerned
developers with the “same” contractual
terms, which is not the situation in the case at hand. But the relevant point
here is that the implications of particular litigation for third parties are not
excluded from the ambit of the public interest considerations
to which the Court
can have regard.
Standard of review
Appellants contended that, if it matters to the result, the decision of the
primary judge is not to be approached on the basis
that an error of the kind
identified in
(1936) 55 CLR 499
needs to be established. Rather, so the Appellants
contended, the correctness standard of review applies. That position was said to
arise on the basis that the permanent effects of a stay being refused are
analogous to the “extreme” consequences of
a permanent stay that
lead the High Court to conclude, in
GLJ v Trustees of the Roman Catholic
Church for the Diocese of Lismore
[2023] HCA 32
(2023) 280 CLR 442
) that the decision in respect of a permanent stay on abuse of
process grounds is not discretionary, but permits only one legally
permissible
at [1], [15]–[17] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler and
Commissioner disagreed, contending that the decision to refuse a temporary stay
was discretionary, such that appellate review
is to be conducted according to
the principles in
. He submitted that there is no relevant
analogy between a decision to refuse a stay and a decision to grant a permanent
the kind considered in
it were necessary to decide, we would reject the contention that the decision to
refuse the stay sought is not discretionary and
is analogous to the decision
under review in
. Temporary stays are usually regarded as
discretionary. There is Full Court authority that temporary stay determinations
are discretionary.
Onslow Salt Pty Ltd v Buurabalayji Thalanyji Aboriginal
Corporation
[2018] FCAFC 118
, which concerned a temporary stay, the Full
Court stated that the power to stay proceedings is discretionary: at [15]
(Besanko, Barker
and Colvin JJ). Additionally, and in any event, the analogy
fails. The plurality in
determined that the
assessment of whether a trial would be so unfair as to be an abuse of process
for the purposes of determining
whether there should be a permanent stay was
evaluative, but admitted of only one correct answer:
at [15] and
[23] (Kiefel CJ, Gagler and Jagot JJ). In this case, a stay was sought to
preserve the Appellants’ domestic rights
while the MAP progressed. The
refusal of a stay required the Appellants to choose whether to proceed with
their domestic proceedings,
thereby effectively terminating the MAP in practice,
or to discontinue their domestic proceedings, thereby foregoing their domestic
appeal rights. That situation is not analogous to the factors leading to the
Impiombato v BHP Group Ltd
[2025] FCAFC 9
(2025) 308 FCR 250
Beach and O’Bryan JJ confirmed
at [193] that: even where
applies, “a discretionary
decision may be set aside if it is based on an error of fact”; in an
appeal against a discretionary
decision, “the appeal is by way of
rehearing in which the Court is required to determine whether the primary
findings of fact involved error”; and where no witnesses
have given oral testimony and there has been no cross-examination,
hearing the appeal is in “as good a position as the primary judge to make
findings of fact on the evidence that was
adduced at the hearing”.
the present case, nothing turns on whether or not the decision below is regarded
as discretionary, so as to attract the principles
because mistaking the facts is one of the errors identified in
and, as set out below, we have concluded that the primary judge erred in
relation to factual matters. Further as there was no cross-examination
oral evidence before the primary judge, this Court is, on the appeal, in as good
a position as the primary judge to make
findings of fact:
The Appellants have established an error of the requisite kind,
whether or not
applies. The Appellants accepted that, if they
succeed on their contentions as to errors of fact, their contention that
does not apply will not arise.
of the grounds of appeal asserted error in the primary judge’s analysis of
where the burden rests. The primary judge rejected
the contention that the
Commissioner bore the onus of demonstrating there is a good reason to refuse the
stay, concluding that, other
things being equal, the burden rests on the moving
party in an interlocutory application (PJ [57]–[58]). The primary judge
went on to observe “I do not think that where the burden lies in this case
matters very much” (PJ [59]). We agree. The
critical issues, and the
issues upon which the disposition of the appeal turns, are the factual errors
concerning the approximately
15 other taxpayers and the dispute with the United
States. We have determined those matters by reference to the evidence, such as
it was, about the approximately 15 other taxpayers and the dispute with the
United States, and the significance of domestic court
proceedings to those
matters. In short, the outcome of this appeal is not informed by the issue of
onus, and it is not necessary
or productive to further address the
parties’ arguments on onus.
The approximately 15 other taxpayers and the dispute with the
United States
is apparent from the reasons of the primary judge, his Honour considered that
the “question” or “principal issue”
that arises in the
present Oracle proceedings also arises in the arrangements of the approximately
15 other taxpayers and the dispute
with the United States (PJ [65], [83]). More
than that, the commonality of the issue was such that the primary judge not only
that determination of Oracle’s domestic proceedings would
provide “guidance” (PJ [62], [65], [66]), but considered
that guidance was of such importance and utility that there was an identified
“need for there to be a final appellate
judicial determination of
”, which determination would provide “guidance to the
various competent authorities, to the other taxpayers, to arbitrators
other trading partners with whom the Commonwealth is presently in dispute about
the nature of a royalty”: (PJ [83],
emphasis added).
may be seen, in the primary judge’s assessment, judicial determination
would provide definitive and reasoned guidance, which
would address an issue
lying at the heart of the affairs of the approximately 15 other taxpayers and
the dispute with the United
States, in a way that binding arbitration under the
MLI would and could not. The primary judge considered that the provision of
to all concerned — not only the other taxpayers, and the United
States’ competent authorities, but also all other competent
authorities,
arbitrators generally, and other trading partners around the world with whom the
Commonwealth may be in dispute concerning
the nature of a royalty — was
such that there was a strong suggestion that “one case should proceed to
final appellate
determination for the
guidance of all
”: (PJ [83],
emphasis added).
the appeal, the Appellants took issue with the primary judge’s factual
findings concerning the nature of the “approximately”
taxpayers’ affairs, their similarity with the controversy arising in the
Appellants’ case, and the extent to
which resolution by this Court of the
Appellants’ proceedings would affect the 15 other taxpayers. (While noting
that the figure
of 15 other taxpayers is an approximate figure and no reasons
explaining the imprecision were proffered, we will refer to them as
“15” other taxpayers for simplicity.)
respect of the 15 other taxpayers, the Appellants point to the paucity of
evidence concerning those other entities and the nature
of their royalty-related
tax issues.
sum total of the evidence on the other 15 taxpayers is a single paragraph in the
affidavit of the Commissioner’s deponent,
Ms Spurge, an Assistant
Commissioner. In her affidavit, Ms Spurge stated as follows:
The ATO is aware of approximately fifteen entities whose arrangements require
consideration of the definition of a “royalty”
for an [sic]
Australian tax purposes in connection with software distribution and related
arrangements for the purposes of their
Australian tax affairs.
was no evidence regarding the nature of the 15 taxpayers’
“arrangements”. Nor was there any evidence regarding
what aspects of
the definition of “royalty” were in dispute, how those disputed
aspects arose in relation to the 15 taxpayers’
“arrangements”,
or whether any of these 15 taxpayers was involved in substantively the same
dispute as another (as was,
eg, the case in respect of the Appellants). While
the Commissioner observed that Ms Spurge’s evidence was not challenged,
is not to the point. A lack of challenge to evidence does not elevate that
evidence; the evidence went no higher and no further than
the single sentence of
Ms Spurge’s affidavit.
on such slender evidentiary foundations, we do not consider that it was open to
the primary judge to conclude that judicial
determination of the Oracle
proceedings
— not “might” — provide
material “guidance” in relation to the 15 other taxpayers.
have emphasised that the primary judge proceeded on the basis that judicial
determination
provide guidance. Moreover, the nature of the
guidance the primary judge perceived would be afforded by the Appellants’
proceedings
advancing to determination was such that his Honour referred to
there being a “need” for there to be “final appellate
determination” on the perceived common principal issue (see paragraphs
above). But what is the basis for that
conclusion? The single paragraph of Ms Spurge’s affidavit simply does
not provide the
necessary factual foundation for the finding. The dispute
between Oracle and the Commissioner is anchored in the very particular
circumstances of the contracts between Oracle Ireland and Oracle Australia. The
Commissioner’s evidence provided no foundation
for the conclusion that the
affairs of the 15 other taxpayers were such that judicial determination of the
Appellants’ proceedings
would quell the controversy with the 15 other
taxpayers, or materially contribute to its resolution by offering
on a common principal issue.
one sense, it is accurate to say that the underlying tax issues of concern to
the Appellants concern the definition of “royalty”
under the DTA. It
is also accurate to say, as the Commissioner did, that the underlying tax
dispute and the Commissioner’s
decisions took place in the “broader
context” of the treatment of payments by software distributors being a
controversial
issue. But those matters do not take one very far. As the
narrative regarding the tax dispute above (at paragraphs
) shows, the definition of
“royalty” under the DTA is not itself the source of the controversy
in the sense of there being
some question of construction of Art 13(3) or
question of law that is exposed for resolution that can be answered in a way
divorced from the specific terms of the arrangement in issue.
the controversy arising in relation to the Appellants’ tax affairs
concerns whether the payments made by Oracle Australia
to Oracle Ireland under
the Distribution Agreements were payments “made as consideration for ...
the use of, or right to use,
any copyright ...”, where the question of
what constitutes “copyright” is determined under domestic law by
. The narrative set out above exposes that
determination of that issue involves an in-depth analysis of: the terms of the
Distribution
Agreements; the particular nature of the rights acquired by Oracle
Australia under those agreements; the arrangements in operation
between Oracle
Australia and Oracle Ireland; how those rights and arrangements are to be
evaluated by reference to the terms of the
; what the fees paid by
Oracle Australia are consideration for; and whether those payments are to be
apportioned in any way.
short, the tax controversy is mired in the facts of the specific arrangements
between Oracle Australia and Oracle Ireland. That
this is the case is to be
expected. As the High Court’s recent decision in
Commissioner of
Taxation v Pepsico Inc
[2025] HCA 30
(2025) 99 ALJR 1211
exposes, the
question of whether payments under particular contractual arrangements are
“consideration for” particular
rights turns on the terms of the
contracts between the parties: at [159] (Gordon, Edelman, Steward and Gleeson
JJ). Similarly,
International Business Machines Corporation v Commissioner of
[2011] FCA 335
(2011) 91 IPR 120
illustrates that determining
whether or not certain payments are royalties is a fact-dependent exercise
involving close analysis
of the terms of the contracts between the parties, and
the nature of their arrangements. That case concerned whether certain payments
made pursuant to a software licensing agreement were “royalties” for
the purposes of Art 12 of the double taxation agreement
between Australia
and the United States.
the present case, there is simply no basis upon which to conclude that
determination of the proceedings brought by the Appellants
by this Court will
shed meaningful light on whether the “arrangements” of 15 other
taxpayers, said by Ms Spurge to involve
“software distribution and related
arrangements”, are or are not royalties for Australian tax purposes. The
evidence relied on by the Commissioner does not include any evidence
distribution and related arrangements”. Nor does the affidavit suggest
that the tax affairs of the other taxpayers
involve the application of a double
taxation agreement.
these reasons, we consider that the primary judge mistook the facts in
concluding that the present proceedings would, if determined
by this Court,
provide material guidance on the correct tax treatment of the arrangements of
the 15 other taxpayers.
conclusion is sufficient to vitiate the primary judge’s determination that
the stay should be refused. What then of the
significance of judicial
determination of the Appellants’ proceedings in this Court to
disagreements between the Commonwealth
and the United States? In our view, and
in any event, the view taken regarding the dispute with the United States
suffers from similar
errors of fact.
evidentiary basis for the dispute with the United States was very limited. The
evidence comprised only two letters, one from a
Deputy Assistant Secretary and
the other from an Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary in the United States
Treasury Department, to the
First Assistant Secretary of the Commonwealth
Treasury. The first letter is dated 23 August 2022 (the
) and the second is dated 5 April 2024 (the
second US letter
). Both letters were produced by the
Commissioner’s deponent, Ms Spurge, without any comment beyond noting
their receipt and
that they related, respectively to the position taken in the
draft tax rulings TD 2021/D4 and TD 2024/D1. The US letters also raised
issue of whether Australia was departing from the international consensus view
regarding the ambit of “royalties”,
as reflected in the
“Commentary to Article 12 (Royalties) of the OECD Model Tax
Convention” (we infer, a reference to
the OECD’s ‘Commentary
on Article 12 Concerning the Taxation of Royalties’ in
Convention on Income and Capital: Condensed Version
(OECD Publishing,
was no evidence of any response to the US letters that may have been sent to the
United States Treasury, although the second
US letter does refer to some
“constructive engagement” having taken place following the first US
to the position in relation to the 15 other taxpayers, it is not apparent that a
resolution by this Court of the fact-specific
controversy concerning the
payments made by Oracle Australia to Oracle Ireland (including their treatment
in light of Australian
domestic legislation (the
)) will provide
“guidance” that will materially contribute to resolving the
disagreement between Australia and the United
States, whatever its precise ambit
may be. While the Commissioner would be bound by the result of judicial
determination of the
Appellants’ domestic proceedings, there is no
identified basis to suppose that the United States Treasury would necessarily
accede to whatever view might be taken by this Court in these proceedings. As
the Appellants point out in their submissions, disagreements
between sovereign
nations concerning international treaties are primarily political questions, to
be determined at the level of the
executive, or parliament. The proposition
that a decision of a domestic court of one national party to an international
disagreement
will resolve, or materially assist in the resolution of, that
disagreement is speculative on the evidence in this matter; yet that
foundation of the primary judge’s finding (see paragraphs
various double taxation agreements to which Australia is a party, including the
double taxation agreement between Australia and
the United States, provide
mechanisms by which taxpayers can be relieved of the burden of double taxation.
Where such double taxation
is not avoided by the provision of credit in one
is to be pursued is through the MAP. Where invoked by a taxpayer, a
MAP involves, in the first instance, the competent authorities
contracting states attempting to “come to an agreement” by which the
double taxation may be relieved. While the
arbitration provisions agreed between
Ireland and Australia provide, as a default, a mechanism whereby no reasons are
given for an
arbitral tribunal’s determination, as set out above at
, it is open to Ireland
and Australia to vary the basis upon which an arbitration is conducted so that
reasons are given. Article
16(3) of the MLI also provides for contracting states
to resolve, by mutual agreement, any “difficulties or doubts arising
the interpretation or application of [the DTA]”. As these provisions show,
if the Commonwealth considers that “guidance”
is desirable on
matters of concern in its relations with other trading partners (such as the
United States), progressing the Appellants’
domestic proceedings to
conclusion is not necessarily the only way in which such guidance may be
procured (cf PJ [66]). Conversely,
and while accepting that an arbitral
tribunal under a MAP may have regard to — in the sense of reading and
taking into account
— a decision of a domestic court of one of the
contracting states, there is no basis on which to assume that domestic judicial
determination of the instant proceedings would form the basis of any arbitral
disposition under a MAP in relation to other taxpayers
or residents of other
these reasons, we do not consider that the evidentiary record, such as it was,
supported the conclusion that there was a “dispute”
Australia and the United States whose resolution would be materially assisted by
the judicial determination by this Court
of the Oracle proceedings. It follows
that, in our view, the primary judge erred in concluding that the
“dispute” with
the United States, together with the position of the
15 other taxpayers, established the existence of a public interest supporting
the refusal of the stay. In the absence of those factors founding the presence
of a “public interest” tending
the grant of a stay,
and given our agreement with the primary judge’s conclusions regarding the
nature of the DTA and MLI processes
generally warranting a stay to avoid a
taxpayer who wishes to preserve domestic appeal rights being effectively
deprived of the opportunity
to have a MAP progress, including to arbitration, it
follows that the stay application should succeed.
have proceeded on the basis that the matters we have addressed concerning the
significance of the judicial resolution of the Appellants’
proceedings to
resolution of Australia’s disagreement with the United States constitute
(or at least include) errors of fact.
If that were not the case, in our view the
error identified with respect to the 15 other taxpayers vitiates the primary
determination to refuse the stay, meaning that it is for this
Court to re-determine that application. As we have just noted, we would
regard the matters raised concerning the dispute with the United States as
exposing such utility in the proceedings continuing
as to warrant the stay being
Notice of Contention
Commissioner filed a Notice of Contention with eight sub-paragraphs
(1(a)–(h)).
1(a)–(d) were cast in terms of matters that the taxpayer had “no
right, or unqualified right” to do (in
substance, to commence and maintain
a MAP and choose whether to proceed by the MAP or domestic proceedings), and,
conversely, matters
that the Commissioner had a “power and a right”
to do (in substance, to suspend a MAP). Ground 1(e) similarly referred
“right” of the taxpayer in respect of a MAP and domestic proceedings
being qualified by the Commissioner’s
“power and right” to
suspend the MAP.
1(f) and (g) set out two propositions that it was contended are “not the
law”. The first of these was the proposition
that, where a taxpayer has
commenced domestic proceedings to comply with a time limit, proceedings should
be stayed to permit the
MAP to proceed, “if that is what the taxpayer
wishes”. The second proposition said to be “not the law” was
that the treaties do not contemplate that the exercise, by a competent
authority, of the power to suspend a MAP will or may result
in a taxpayer
abandoning the MAP in favour of domestic proceedings.
1(h) contended that “to stay the proceedings would stultify, or
alternatively unduly restrict, the Commissioner’s
exercise of his power
and right to suspend the mutual agreement procedure”. Buried in a footnote
to the Commissioner’s
submissions on the appeal, and appearing in small,
single-spaced type face, was the following: “Par 1(h) of the Notice of
is not pressed.” It was inappropriate for an important point
— the abandonment of a ground stated in a Notice of Contention
be buried as such in a footnote.
same footnote also stated that “For more abundant caution these matters
are raised at par. 1(a)–(e) of the Notice
of Contention”. The
matters to which that note refers must be the matters referred to in the
sentence to which that footnote
was attached, which read: “In that
context, as the primary judge observed, the language of ‘rights’ is
or, at least, unhelpful (J[77])”. The Commissioner did not
advance any written or oral submissions in support of grounds 1(a)–(e)
the Notice of Contention. In oral submissions, senior counsel for the
Commissioner described those grounds as “trying to
make the same point as
his Honour was there making, that the language of rights ... is
inapposite”, and also said that there
was no need for the Court to decide
those grounds of the Notice of Contention.
the Appellants’ written submissions were advanced in terms that deployed
the term “right[s]”, it was not
contended that anything turned on
whether that language was, or was not, used. Despite using the language of
(and “power”) in his Notice of Contention, the
Commissioner endorsed the primary judge’s view that the language
“rights” is inapposite or unhelpful. The Appellants also clarified
their position in oral submissions, highlighting
that taxpayers have a right or
power under domestic law to commence the MAP process, but any so called
“right” as regards
the continuation of that process, once commenced,
is qualified by the competent authority’s right or power to suspend that
process. It was not in dispute that this is, in turn, qualified by the power of
the Court to grant or refuse a stay. Accordingly,
none of the issues in dispute
on appeal turn on the use of the language of “rights”.
follows that nothing more needs to be said about grounds 1(a)–(e) of the
Notice of Contention.
Commissioner made written submissions on grounds 1(f) and (g) of the Notice of
Contention. Those submissions were in the following
remains to address two remaining matters raised by the Commissioner’s
Notice of Contention.
: At J[42], [43], [46], [49] and [54] the
primary judge expressed the view that the Irish Treaty (including the MLI) did
not contemplate
that the Commissioner could force a taxpayer to choose between
proceeding by way of a MAP or domestic proceedings. However, as the
the primary judge’s reasoning reveals, where the Commissioner (in
discharge of his statutory duty) makes an objection
decision and the taxpayer
commences domestic proceedings, the power of the Commissioner to suspend a MAP
recognised by Art. 19(2)
of the MLI may be exercised to give effect to the
CA’s view that the public interest requires that the issue should be
in the domestic proceedings and, if that view is sustained by the
Court on a subsequent stay application, the result may be that
the taxpayer
abandons the MAP in favour of the domestic proceedings.
: At J[82] the primary judge expressed the view that where a taxpayer
has been forced to commence domestic proceedings to meet a time
generally speaking
proceedings should be stayed to permit the MAP to
proceed if that is what the taxpayer wishes. The Commissioner submits that the
approach is that the Court in such a stay application should not commence
with any disposition in favour of the proceedings progressing
through one
process or another, but should assess which procedure more appropriately serves
the interests of justice in all the circumstances
of the case, including having
regard to the matters referred to in
present case, such an approach would yield the same conclusion as reached by the
primary judge.
oral submissions, the Commissioner referred to his written submissions on these
grounds and did not advance any further substantive
submissions in support of
those grounds. The Commissioner described these grounds as “slightly
different perspectives”
on the approach the primary judge took on how the
Court “should weigh the various desirability of the domestic proceedings
as opposed to the MAP, and ... whether the exercise of the Commissioner’s
power to suspend could force the taxpayer to pursue
the domestic
proceedings”. The Commissioner further stated that neither ground was
going to have a “definitive operation”
in the appeal. In the absence
of any argument that anything turns on these two grounds of contention, and
where it was not suggested
by the Commissioner that either of these points would
warrant this Court not disturbing the order below if persuaded that the primary
judge erred in relation to the 15 other taxpayers and the dispute with the
United States (see paragraph
above), it is not necessary to address these grounds. Neither ground advances a
coherent basis upon which the stay should still be
refused in light of the
errors we have found.
DISPOSITION
follows from the foregoing that the primary judge’s determination not to
stay the proceedings cannot stand. This Court must
determine the question of
whether there should be a stay.
set out above, the primary judge detailed the features of the MAP under the DTA
and MLI. Subject to the matters noted above concerning
the Notice of Contention,
no party disputed the accuracy of the primary judge’s analysis of the
features of the MAP under the
DTA and MLI, its role relative to the processes
available to taxpayers under the domestic law or that, while the regime
anticipates
that taxpayers will not be free to pursue a MAP and domestic court
or tribunal proceedings
simultaneously
, it anticipates that the choice of
remedy remains with the taxpayer.
agree with the primary judge’s analysis and his Honour’s
observations (at [42]) that the practical effect of the Commissioner’s
approach in issuing the objection decisions and then opposing the grant of a
stay that would prevent the simultaneous pursuit of
a MAP and domestic court
proceedings, was that the taxpayers were required to abandon one of the two
options. The primary judge concluded,
and we agree, that this is not what the
DTA and the MLI contemplate (PJ [42]).
primary judge’s analysis of these matters led his Honour to conclude that,
were it not for the 15 other taxpayers and the
dispute with the United States,
he would have granted the stay sought (PJ [85]).
follows from the Commissioner’s concession (referred to above at paragraph
), and also because we otherwise
agree with the primary judge’s analysis of the DTA and MLI, and his
Honour’s analysis
of the non-treaty considerations favouring a stay, that
the orders to be made should allow the appeals, revoke the primary judge’s
order dismissing the applications to stay each of the three proceedings, and
stay those proceedings until the conclusion of the MAP
processes (including by
any arbitration).
parties are to submit proposed orders giving effect to our reasons, and
addressing costs within seven days of the publication
of these reasons. If the
parties cannot agree on orders, they are to submit their competing proposals for
consideration along with
a submission of no more than two pages within 10 days
of the publication of these reasons. Any responsive submissions, limited to
pages, may be submitted within 13 days of the publication of these reasons,
following which orders will be made on the papers.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
seven (107) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
the Honourable
Justices Hespe, Button and
Dated: 21 October 2025
RTF format (738 KB)
Signed PDF/A format