S and Telecommunication Company [2011] AICmrCN 13 (22 December 2011)
Case citation: S and Telecommunication Company
[2011] AICmrCN 13
December 2011)
Subject heading
to personal information
National Privacy Principle 6.1 and 6.7 in Schedule 3
The complainant had attempted to access their
personal information, held by a telecommunication company, which they believed
correspondence to a law enforcement agency. The telecommunication
company relied on its internal privacy policy in its explanation
of its decision
to deny access. When the complainant pursued the matter, the telecommunication
company quoted exceptions under NPP
NPP 6 provides that an organisation that holds
personal information about an individual must provide the individual with access
that information unless one or more exceptions apply.
NPP 6.1(j) permits an organisation to deny access to an individual when this
would prejudice activities being carried out by, or on
behalf of, an enforcement
body. These activities include the prevention, detection, investigation,
prosecution or punishment of criminal
offences, breaches of a law imposing a
penalty or sanction or breaches of a prescribed law.
NPP 6.7 requires an organisation to give an individual its reasons for
denying access or refusing to correct personal information.
The Commissioner investigated the matter under
section 40(1)
of the Act.
In response to the Commissioner’s investigation, the telecommunication
company searched the majority of its records for the
complainant’s
personal information. It did not search all its records as certain records
included requests for information
from law enforcement agencies in a specific
The telecommunication company relied on NPP 6.1(j) to deny the complainant
access, claiming access would reveal strategy and procedures
employed in law
enforcement.
The Commissioner found that the telecommunication company could rely on the
NPP 6.1(j) exception to deny access. The telecommunication
company was not
obligated to reveal whether it possessed records from a law enforcement agency,
as such actions would prejudice the
law enforcement activities of the agency.
The Commissioner considered if law enforcement processes were revealed to the
complainant
this would prejudice activities carried out by the enforcement
The Commissioner closed the complaint under
section 41(1)(a)
of the Act on
the grounds that the telecommunication company had complied with its NPP 6
obligations.
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
December 2011
RTF format (810 KB)
Signed PDF/A format