Applicant: Chih Ming Chen IRT Reference: V97/01571 #number 13398 [1999] IRTA 13398 (27 January 1999)
IMMIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND
REASONS FOR DECISION
IRT REFERENCE: V97/01571 13398.doc
APPLICANT: Chih Ming CHEN
TRIBUNAL: Rahima BANNERMAN,
Presiding Member
DATE: 27 January 1999
PLACE: Perth
DECISION: The Tribunal affirms the decision under review to refuse Mr Chih Ming
Chen a General (Residence) (Class AS) Subclass 805
Skilled permanent visa.
REASONS FOR DECISION
This is a review of a decision refusing the grant of a permanent visa in the
General (Residence) (Class AS) to Mr Chih Ming Chen
('the Applicant') to enable
him to remain in Australia on a permanent basis.
The Applicant was born in Taiwan on 4 February 1967 and is a citizen of that
country. His parents and two siblings continue to reside
in Taiwan. He is
currently aged 31 years of age. On 28 February 1998 he married a citizen of
Taiwan in Melbourne.
The Applicant arrived in Australia on a Subclass 560 Student visa on 1 January
1991. This visa was extended on a number of occasions,
March 1996. The Applicant initially undertook a one year English language
course at La Trobe University, and
then enrolled in a Bachelor of Arts degree
at Swinburne University of Technology which he successfully completed in
November 1995.
On 13 March 1996 the Applicant lodged a Form 887
Application to Remain
Permanently In Australia
with the Department of Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs ('the Department') seeking to remain in Australia on the
basis of his
skills. The application was supported by his employer United
Travel Corporation (Aust)Pty Ltd ('United Travel') who lodged a Form
Nomination for a Permanent Appointment in Australia: Employer Nomination
Scheme (ENS)
the same day. The Applicant was nominated for the position of
senior tour guide at an annual salary of $18 000.
On 5 December 1996 a decision was made to refuse the nomination on the basis
that it did not satisfy subclauses 5.19(2) (b),(d),(e),
and (f). It was
further found that;
* The position of tour operator did not require the appointment of a "highly
skilled person" as defined in subregulation 5.19(3);
* United Travel had not demonstrated adequate provision of training existing
and future employees;
* United Travel had not carried out labour market testing for the position
* The Applicant's proposed salary was significantly below relevant Australia
standards and awards.
The application was assessed against all the relevant subclasses but the
Applicant was found not to satisfy any of these. On the
same date a decision
to refuse the application. An application for review was made to the Migration
Internal Review Office ('MIRO')
but on 3 September 1997 MIRO affirmed the
decision for the same reasons as the primary decision maker.
On 26 September 1997 an application was received by the Tribunal.
RELEVANT LEGISLATION
The subclasses for a General (Residence)(Class AS) visa are contained in clause
1119 of the Migration Regulations ('the Regulations)
and are as follows;
801 (Prospective Marriage Spouse)
804 (Aged Parent)
805 (Skilled)
806 (Family)
814 (Interdependency)
832 (Close Ties)
The Applicant indicated in the application form that he was applying under
subclass 805 - Skilled. The prescribed criteria for this
Subclass are set out
at Part 805 of Schedule 2 to the Regulations. As the Applicant made no claims
that he met the requirements
of subclause 805.212(6) or (7), he needed to
satisfy the criteria in subclause 805.213(2)(3) or (4). Subparagraph (2)
a nomination for a position in an industry for which there is a
labour agreement and is therefore not relevant to the present matter.
Subparagraphs (3) and (4) of paragraph 805.213(3) provide as follows;
805.213(1) If the applicant is not an applicant who meets the requirements of
subclause 805.212 (6) or (7), the applicant satisfies
the requirements of
subclause (2) (3) or (4).
(3) An applicant meets the requirements of this subclause if:
(a) the applicant has been nominated in accordance with subregulation 5.19 (2)
by an employer in respect of an appointment in the
business of that employer;
(b) the applicant is a highly skilled person within the meaning of regulation
5.19 in relation to that appointment; and
(c) unless the appointment is exceptional, the applicant has not turned 55.
(4) An applicant meets the requirements of this subclause if:
(a) the applicant has been nominated by an employer in respect of an
appointment in the business of that employer; and
(b) in accordance with subregulation 5.19 (4), the appointment is an approved
appointment; and
(c) unless the approved appointment is exceptional, the applicant:
(i) has not turned 45; and
(ii) has functional English; and
(iii) has a diploma (within the meaning of subregulation 2.26 (5)) or higher
qualification that is relevant to that appointment.
805.22 Criteria to be satisfied at time of decision
805.221 If the application is based on satisfaction of the criteria in
subclause 805.213 (2) the appointment referred to in subclause
805.213 (2) (a)
has been approved.
805.222 If the application is based on satisfaction of the criteria in
subclause 805.213 (3) or (4):
(a) the appointment is an approved appointment under regulation 5.19;
(b) the Minister is satisfied that the appointment will provide the employment
referred to in the relevant employer nomination.
805.223 The maximum number of subclass 805 visas granted in the relevant
financial year, as fixed by Gazette Notice, would not be
exceeded if the
application were approved.
805.224 The applicant satisfies public interest criteria 4001, 4002, 4003,
4004, 4005, 4009 and 4010.
805.225 If so requested by the Minister, an assurance of support in relation to
the applicant has been given, and has been accepted
by the Minister.
In this case the application was based upon the Applicant being able to satisfy
subclause 805.213(3) of Part 805. The primary decision
maker and the MIRO
review officer found that the appointment referred to in the Employer
Nomination was not an approved nomination
under regulation 5.19. This
regulation reads as follows;
5.19.(1) A proposed appointment is an approved appointment for the purpose of
these Regulations if it is the subject of an employer
nomination that meets the
requirements of subregulation (2) or (4).
(2) An employer nomination meets the requirements of this subregulation if:
(a) the employer nomination is made by an employer in respect of a need for a
paid employee in a business:
(i) located in Australia; and
(ii) operated by that employer; and
(b) the work to be performed requires the appointment of a highly skilled
person (within the meaning of subregulation (3)); and
(c) the appointment will provide the employee with full-time employment and:
(i) will be permanent; or
(ii) in the case of an appointment to an academic or scientific-research
position in an academic, or scientific research, institution:
(A) will be for a fixed term of at least 3 years; and
(B) will not be subject to an express exclusion of the possibility of renewal
of the appointment for a further fixed term of 3 years;
(d) the Minister is satisfied:
(i) that the employer has made, and continues to make, adequate provision for
training existing employees in work relevant to the
business; or
(ii) if the business is newly established, that the employer is making
adequate provision for future training of employees in work
relevant to the
business; and
(e) the Minister is satisfied that:
(i) an Australian citizen or Australian permanent resident cannot be found who
is suitable for the appointment; or
(ii) in the circumstances of the case, the employer should not be required to
seek a suitable employee in Australia; and
(f) the applicant is to be employed or engaged in Australia in accordance with
the standards for wages and working conditions provided
for under relevant
Australian legislation and awards.
(3) In subregulation (2):
highly skilled person , in relation to a proposed employment appointment, means
a person who has, in respect of work of the kind
to be performed under that
appointment:
(a) completed, over a period of at least 3 years, formal training or
equivalent experience; and
(b) unless the approved appointment is exceptional - been employed in work of
the kind for which he or she was trained, or in which
he or she is experienced,
for at least 3 years:
(i) after completing the training or experience referred to in paragraph (a);
(ii) before making the application; and
(c) acquired competence assessed by the Minister to be at least average for a
person to whom paragraphs (a) and (b) apply.
(4) An employer nomination meets the requirements of this subregulation if:
(a) the employer nomination is made by employer in respect of a need for a
paid employee in a business that is:
(i) located in Australia; and
(ii) operated by that employer; and
(b) the appointment:
(i) will provide the employee with full-time employment; and
(ii) will be for at least 2 years; and
(c) unless the appointment is exceptional, the work to be performed requires
the appointment of a person who has a diploma (within
the meaning of
subregulation 2.26 (5)) or higher qualification;
(d) the applicant is to be employed or engaged in Australia in accordance with
the standards for wages and working conditions provided
for under relevant
Australian legislation and awards;
(e) a body, specified for the purpose of this paragraph by Gazette Notice,
certifies that the employer nomination meets the requirements
subregulation.
A hearing was held in Melbourne on 23 October 1998 at which the Applicant and
his accountant Mr Ty Sam gave sworn oral evidence to
the Tribunal. The
Department's file relating to this application has been made available to the
Tribunal and forms part of the evidence
in this matter.
The Applicant confirmed that he arrived in Australia on 1 January 1991 as the
holder of a student visa and after studying English
for one year he
successfully completed a four year Bachelor of Arts degree at Swinburne
University of Technology in Melbourne; majoring
in Japanese and Korean language
studies in November 1995. In addition to those languages the Applicant is also
fluent in Taiwanese
and Mandarin. In Taiwan he said he completed a 5 year
Diploma in Agriculture and had also undertaken two years military training
On completing his degree the Applicant embarked upon a career in the tourist
industry, and in October 1995 was employed by United
Travel as local tourist
guide on a full-time basis, although in fact he had been working in the
industry as a tourist guide since
1993. Past employers included Australian
Tours Management Pty Ltd, Transglobal Tours Pty Ltd, Asian Connection Tours Pty
Crusader Tours. In a letter dated 15 January 1996 lodged with his
application, his nominator United Travel supported the Applicant's
application
in the following terms;
We are writing to support the application of Chih-Ming CHEN (Jimmy) for the
extension of his visa in Australia.
United Travel Corporation (Aust) Pty Ltd is an inbound tour management company
which founded on 19 October, 1995 by Mr Frank Chou,
former General Manager of
Australian Tours Management. The business of the company focuses on providing
tour design, travel arrangements,
quotations, travel consulting, ticketing and
other services for tour groups and individual travellers from around the
We have engaged Chi-Ming CHEN as a local guide since Oct 1995. He carries out
his assignments efficiently and effectively, and has
proved himself to be a
valuable worker in utilising his language skills in the conduct of guided tours
for overseas tourists. With
the expected growth in tourist arrivals from Asia
in the future, we believe that the demand for local guides with specific
skill such as Jimmy, will continue to grow.
We therefore have no hesitation in recommending Jimmy for an extension in
Australia we believed his contribution in servicing the
specific needs of
overseas tourists will also benefit Australia. We hope that your department
would consider his application favourably.
Letters of reference were also provided by other operators in the tourist
industry including Alders Airport Duty Free, Altman &
Cherny Pty Ltd,
Wildlife Wonderland Tourist Attraction, Phillip Island Tourism Association Inc
and Australian Tours Management Pty
Ltd. The writers of these testimonials
was the were united in their high opinion of the Applicant's personal and
professional qualities,
referring to his integrity, his knowledge of other
languages, his pleasant nature, his capacity for hard work and his overall
experience as a tourist guide. Further recognition of his skills
were demonstrated by the fact that in August 1996 he was one of
two tourist
guides to be accredited by the Inbound Tourism Organisation of Australia Ltd,
scoring 87% in the test he was required
to sit. The Applicant is clearly held
in high esteem within the tourist industry and indeed those qualities were
readily apparent
to the Tribunal.
At the hearing the Applicant advised he was no longer employed by United Travel
and on 23 December 1996 had registered his own inbound
tourist business under
the name Aulia Pty Ltd. He successfully applied for a 'licence for a
'Commercial Use Vehicle' to enable him
to operate a driver/guide service to
small groups of inbound tourists from Asia and Taiwan. Last year he was
granted a second licence
and now has an 8 and a 12 seater bus and is in the
process of applying for a third. He said that apart from himself, the business
had 5 part-time employees. Clients were referred to his company by travel
agents for which he held the relevant industry licence.
The Applicant told the
Tribunal that last year he wrote, translated and published a travel book on
Melbourne in Mandarin, a copy
of which was provided to the Tribunal.
At the conclusion of his evidence the Tribunal pointed out that since he was no
longer employed by United Travel he no longer had
a nominator, an integral part
of the legislative criteria for this particular class of visa, and that an
application for another
class of visa such a Subclass 457 would be more
appropriate in the circumstances. The Applicant advised that in May 1998 he
been granted a Subclass 457 visa valid for 4 years, but still wished to
proceed with his application for permanent residency. The
Tribunal pointed out
to the Applicant that he may wish to make inquires about another class of
permanent visa such as a Subclass
840 Business Owner.
Mr Ty Sam told the Tribunal that he originated from Vietnam and had lived in
Australia for 20 years. He said he was a registered
tax agent and accountant,
having previously been employed by Collins & Melody, Chartered Accountant
and KPMG. Mr Ty said that
he was the Applicant's accountant and had dealt with
the documentation, financial and legal requirements of setting up the
Applicant's
business. He pointed out that the Applicant commenced as a tourist
guide, but through his honesty and professionalism had built
business to the point that his nominator was now making referrals to him.
Because he was fluent in 5 languages the business
did not have to rely upon
interpreters. The business was conducted from the Applicant's home, but he was
currently in the process
of purchasing a 4 bed-roomed unit for $247 000 from
which the business would operate and that he would expand his tourist
to include student activities.
Mr Ty said that he had handled the documentation for the two special vehicle
licences the Applicant had been granted and confirmed
that a third licence had
been applied for. He pointed out that it was extremely difficult to obtain
such licenses in the industry
and that the Applicant had been granted these
plates despite objections having been lodged by larger operators such as Union
and AAT Kings. In respect to the Applicant's travel book, Mr Ty said that
this was the first Chinese travel book published in Melbourne
July/September 1700 copies had been sold with another 3000 copies released for
sale in Taiwan. He said the Applicant was
in the process of writing a similar
book on Sydney.
Mr Ty said that as the Applicant's accountant he prepared his financial
statements and income returns, copies of which were provided
to the Tribunal.
These indicated that the Applicant's business was viable and he was making a
In order to be granted a visa of this class the Applicant must satisfy the
requirements of Part 805. In particular the Applicant
must be nominated by an
employer in respect of an appointment in the business of the employer and
furthermore that he must be a highly
skilled person in relation to that
appointment.
Although the nomination from United Travel remains on foot, the Applicant left
their employ in December 1996 and commenced his own
business under a private
company structure of Aulia Pty Ltd. He did point this out in a submission to
MIRO who correctly commented
that if this was the case it called into question
the whole rationale of his case. As he ceased to be an employee the nomination
by his employer was otiose and there is no need to inquire into whether he
meets the remaining criteria pertaining to 'highly skilled'.
The Tribunal was impressed by the integrity and enterprise of the Applicant
who, consistent with those qualities, has obtained a
Subclass 457 visa which
will enable him to remain in Australia for the next 4 years to consolidate his
tourist operation. Depending
upon the success of that business he may
establish eligibility for a Subclass 840 permanent visa at the end of that
time. If not,
he would in all probability be granted a further temporary visa.
However as was pointed out to him at the hearing because his circumstances
changed dramatically since lodging this application in that he no longer has an
employer, he cannot meet the requirements for
a subclass of visa that is based
upon a nomination from an employer. Accordingly this application must fail.
The Tribunal finds that Mr Chih Ming Chen does not meet the legislative
requirements for a Subclass 805 Skilled visa to enable him
to remain in
Australia on a permanent basis.
_______________
Ms R Bannerman
Presiding Member
I certify that this and the 8 preceding pages are a true copy of the Decision
and Reasons for Decision herein of Ms R Bannerman,
Member of the Tribunal.
for Assistant Registrar
RTF format (49.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format