Uzcateguigaymon v Hospitality Horizons Pty Ltd trading as "Hospitality Horizons" (ACN 003 742 738) [1998] IRCA 34 (15 October 1998)
Uzcateguigaymon v Hospitality Horizons Pty Ltd trading as "Hospitality Horizons" (ACN 003 742 738) [1998] IRCA 34 (15 October 1998)
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT – alleged resignation – alleged
unlawful termination of employment – meaning of casual
employee employed
for a short period - VALID REASON – not satisfied valid reason for
termination of employment established
after finding made that applicant did not
resign – CONDUCT AND PERFORMANCE – No allegation made about conduct
TERMINATION PAY – Award for failure to give required Period of
Notice – REINSTATEMENT – Impractical to reinstate
applicant –
applicant suggests unable to work with former supervisor – applicant still
bears a sense of injustice which
will make reinstatement impracticable –
applicant resides in different state – Funding for former position
– DAMAGES – COMPENSATION – Damages assessed for
period taken to recover salary position in new employment –
PROCEDURE – Advisable to order disclosure of relevant documents at
Directions Hearing – Cost of forensic
examination of application lodged by
applicant not justified in circumstances of case.
Workplace Relations Act
(Cth) 1996 (formerly known as
Industrial Relations Act 1988
) ss 170CC, 170DB,
170DE(1), 170EAA(1)
Industrial Relations Regulations (Cth)
Selvachandran v Peteron Plastics Pty Ltd
(1996) 62 IR
Gibson v Bostik Pty Ltd
(1995) 60 IR 1
Capay Holdings Pty
Ltd t/as Cuddles Long Day Centre) v Maree Slattery,
unreported IRCA Full
Court 11 December 1996 decision no. 601/96
Lachelle Uzcateguigaymon v
Hospitality Horizons
(1996) unreported IRCA decision by McILwaine JR, dated
20November 1996
Hospitality Horizons Lachelle v Uzcateguigaymon
Qantas Airways Pty Ltd v Christie
(1998) HCA 18
LACHELLE UZCATEGUIGAYMON V HOSPITALITY HORIZONS PTY
TRADING AS “HOSPITALITY HORIZONS”
003 742 738)
MCILWAINE JR
IN THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
NEW SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
NI 1153 OF 1996
LACHELLE UZCATEGUIGAYMON
HOSPITALITY HORIZONS PTY LTD
“HOSPITALITY HORIZONS”
(ACN 003 742
JUDICIAL REGISTRAR:
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
MINUTES OF ORDER
1. The applicant was not a casual employee engaged for a
short period by the respondent.
2. The applicant was employed by the
Respondent from 5 July 1995 to 8 January 1996.
3. The respondent has
contravened section 170DB of the act in that wages for one week was not paid in
lieu of the period of notice
required by the Act.
4. The respondent has
contravened Section 170DE(1) of the Act in that it did not have a valid reason
for the termination of the employment
of the Applicant on 8 January
5. It is impractical to reinstate the applicant in any position
with the respondent.
6. It is appropriate to award compensation to the
applicant in the sum of four thousand eight hundred and forty-five dollars
THE COURT ORDERS:
7. The respondent pay to
the applicant within seven days the amount of five hundred and ten dollars
8. The respondent pay to the applicant within twenty-one days the
amount of four thousand eight hundred and forty-five dollars
9. Any sum paid within twenty one days to the Australian
Taxation Office, which the respondent is obliged to pay on behalf of the
applicant or which can lawfully be made on her account, in respect of the sums
ordered in paragraphs 7 & 8 shall be pro tanto
satisfaction of the
obligations of the respondent under Orders 7 &
Kate Benson
Legal Assistant to
Registrar McILwaine
IN THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
NEW SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
NI 1153 OF 1996
UZCATEGUIGAYMON
HOSPITALITY HORIZONS PTY
(ACN 003 742 738)
TRADING AS “HOSPITALITY
JUDICIAL REGISTRAR:
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
APPLICATION
This matter arises out of an application by Lachelle Uzcateguigaymon claiming
unlawful termination of her employment under Division
3, Part VIA, of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
(“The Act”) now the
Relations Act, 1996
against her former employer, Hospitality Horizons Pty
The history and background to this matter is set out in detail in “My
Reasons for Decision” published on 20 November 1996.
Pages 1 to 7 of that
judgment provide an adequate outline of the circumstances of the case and of the
evidence of the applicant
and Ms Carr. It should be read in conjunction with
this decision. After the evidence of the applicant and Ms Carr had been given
the case for the applicant was closed. Mr Britt, advocate for the respondent
then submitted:
“The applicant’s case could not succeed in this
court because the period of employment of the applicant failed to exceed
requirements of regulation 30B(3) of the regulations under the
The proceedings were then adjourned for argument and
decision. In that decision I made the following remarks:
“In this case the termination occurred past the anniversary of the six
month period. However, it occurred during a time in
which the applicant was not
in the employment of the respondent but was engaged to renew her contract of
employment on 11 January
It is sufficient for me to determine that “a period of at least six
months” of employment had not been completed and could
not expire until
after 11 January 1996 when the applicant was due to commence “her next
sequence of periods of employment.”
Had, for instance, the applicant
commenced her employment on 11 January 1996 and the respondent then said on that
day or on 12 or
13 January 1996, “we have a new job club leader and we
want you to leave,” then the applicant would have had the benefit
Act. In the facts as they occurred, the applicant did not and is therefore
excluded from the operation of Division 3 of
of the Act.
Although the evidence is at an early stage, the most appropriate course is
that I dismiss the application now.
I confirm that I remain openminded on whether or not there was a
resignation. The testimony of Ms Carr provides some independent
indirect and circumstantial support for the applicant’s version. Although
the evidence of Ms Carr may be persuasive.
I have to acknowledge that I have
not yet heard the evidence of the respondent on this issue. I do not have to
decide this issue
now and it seems to me I ought not to express any further view
in case there is a review of this decision and the matter may be referred
to me for further hearing. I also make no finding as to the credit of the
applicant on the apparent alteration on the application
The applicant sought a review of my decision
which was determined by Madgwick J as follows:
“My conclusion is that the case seems to have gone off as it did
because the applicant employee did not appreciate the significance
of the nature
of her “engagement”, and consequently her legal representative did
not argue that she had never been “engaged
on a casual basis for a short
period.” It seems to me that this is a very arguable question, and if,
after proper factual
examination of it, the judicial registrar should conclude
that she never was in fact so engaged, then regulation 30B would fail to
her from the operation of the relevant provisions of the Act.
In my opinion, both parties should have the opportunity to place before
the judicial registrar any additional material they wish to
on that issue. In
addition, as the employer was promised by the judicial registrar, the employer
should have the opportunity to
put any additional material before the court on
any other issue that it wishes.
The application for review is upheld. I quash the judicial
registrar’s decision, and I remit the matter to him for further
determination in accordance with these reasons and
otherwise.”
On return of the matter for
hearing it appeared that the applicant having moved to Queensland could not be
present. An offer was
made to investigate the possibility of utilising the
video conference facilities of the court to enable the applicant to participate
in the trial. This arrangement was not sought by her solicitor and the case
continued in her absence.
The case for the applicant, by agreement
between the parties, consisted of the tendering of the evidence, transcript of
the proceedings
and the cross examination of the applicant together with that of
Miss Carr. Other documents were tendered in evidence.
EVIDENCE OF
MANAGING DIRECTOR
Mr Peter Mason then gave evidence as the Managing
Director of the Respondent. He had known the applicant through the work that
had done for his company through her entity: “Sebastian Vocational
Guidance Services.” Under the auspices of this organisation
prepare vocational guidance reports for the respondent on a fee per report
basis. The respondent had stopped using her
service in November allegedly
because of the lack of formal incorporation and arrangements with respect to
matters such as insurance
and workers compensation. Nevertheless he praised her
job club leadership skills and conceded she was obtaining good outcomes at
Petersham. He claimed the applicant was employed as a casual, although he also
admitted it was not the practice of the respondent
to put in writing the terms
of any engagements. Initially arrangements with the Commonwealth of Australia
were being confirmed on
a six months by six months basis, however at the time he
was giving evidence in October 1997 it was then on a quarterly basis. The
original contract had been for a period up to 30 June 1998, however they were
now aware that it was to be closed by 30
November 1997. He added
that the job clubs were conducted for a period of three weeks with a further
week for administration purposes.
He pointed out that the normal terms of the
agreement were that the parties would work at least 30 hours a week although
some persons
would carry out the job on a job-share basis. When they are
engaged it has to be confirmed with Department.
He also suggested that he
had had a number of previous conversations with the applicant. Mr Mason
maintained that during these casual
conversations the applicant maintained that
she wanted to leave the job club and move over towards doing more vocational
assessments
because her training was in psychology and that was where she felt
her skills lay. He recalled being told by Mr Lambert in a brief
conversation in
late December that the applicant had resigned.
EVIDENCE OF
ADMINISTRATOR
Mr Phillip Garfield Lambert also gave evidence as the
Administrator and a Director of the respondent, he commenced with the firm in
March 1993 as a program tutor and then became a Program Co-ordinator. He became
a Director of the Company in November 1994. He
initially interviewed the
applicant in June 1995 and confirmed there was no offer of employment made until
late in that month. He
testified that the applicant was offered the position of
job club Leader at Petersham site although it was not made in writing.
maintained that he had told the applicant that she was casual.
testified that on 20th December 1995 he had a meeting with the applicant:
Well the meeting went for 20 minutes, and we covered, I guess, a
couple of issues but the whole point of the meeting, I guess because
initiated it, was to discuss what she wanted to do with her employment with
Hospitality Horizons. She raised concerns about
being a job club leader and
that she wasn’t really enjoying it, it wasn’t really rewarding her,
and there wasn’t
enough challenge left in it so that was like the basis of
her need to speak with me.”
It should be noted that he does not suggest the applicant used the word
“resign”. He testified that he had mentioned
several other projects
to her but these were difficult because of her disability and her inability to
travel. (The applicant is
a below the knee amputee). Mr Lambert said that he
really wanted to keep Lachelle but he had the feeling that she was,
”, and he wanted to explore as many alternatives as
possible. He then said:
“So I basically said What is
the solution? And she said that she would be happy to remain as a Job Club
Leader at Petersham
until a suitable replacement was
This cannot be construed as a resignation statement by
the applicant as it is more in the nature of a request for a transfer to other
duties within the organisation. He maintained that he had said to her that
there was no shortage of suitable tutors. His version
of the conversation with
Mr Mason was:
“Following the meeting did you have a discussion with Mr Mason? Yes.
When Lachelle actually entered the office I was about
to go into a meeting with
another tutor. That was a booked meeting so really without wanting to push
Lachelle out of the door I
did have another meeting to set up so twenty minutes
was a pretty good time with Lachelle. I quickly put my head in the door so
to speak to Peter’s office to say that “Lachelle’s going to be
leaving us, I’ll talk to you later, and
then went into another
Mr Lambert then testifies:
“Now did you confirm the applicant’s resignation in writing? Did
The applicant’s resignation in writing? I, early in January 1996
issued a letter to Lachelle notifying her that a replacement
had been arranged.
To answer your question it wasn’t in strictly those terms.”
I found Mr Lambert’s evidence vague as to the words said by the applicant
upon which he relied to consider that she had given
him a resignation. After
the termination there was some discussion with the applicant about
reinstatement, but not with the Petersham
Job Club. These approaches were
rejected as the applicant was to be replaced by a person transferring from
another program. Mr
Lambert also maintained that he had no concern with the
applicant’s work as she was “
client focussed.
Lambert was then cross examined by the Solicitor for the Applicant.
After the cross examination had been completed he was again
examined by the advocate for the respondent:
Mr Britt: In relation to her not giving you notice of leaving, she was a
casual employee, was she not?---That’s right, yes.
I take you to the events of 20 December, you were asked some questions by
my friend, you are adamant that she resigned at that meeting,
are you?---The
result of our meeting was a negotiated resignation.
And when would she leave?---That was not determined, like, a fixed date
was not determined, it was determined that she would leave,
she would finish her
job when a suitable replacement was found.
And so you subsequently found a suitable replacement did
you?---That’s right.
And following that, you notified the applicant?---Yes. I sought to give
her as much notice as was practicable, that was possible.”
AGREEMENT WITH COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
There remain three key issues to be determined in this matter:
1. Is the applicant excluded from the benefit of the legislation because she was
“a casual employee engaged for a short period?”
2. Did the applicant resign her position?
3. Was there a valid reason for termination?
With respect to the first issue I take as the starting point the observation of
Madgwick J in paragraph 8 at page 3 of his judgment:
“If, as a matter of ordinary language, and having regard to the object
of the Convention to protect employees against invalid
[that is, unsound or
unjust: see Selvachandran v Peteron Plastics Pty Ltd
(1995) 62 IR 371
v Union Des Assurances De Paris (Industrial Relations Court of Australia,
Madgwick J, 17 December 1996)] reaosns for termination
of their casual
employment, the employee concerned cannot fairly be said to be “engaged on
a casual basis for a short period”,
then, notwithstanding that the
employee may fall within regulation 30B(3), the regulation will simply not take
effect: section 170CC.
For example, in this case, if the applicant had been
engaged to perform work for an indefinite period for six hours per day five
per week, and did so for five and a half months (even with possible short breaks
between the commencement of job clubs), it
may be difficult to say that she was
“engaged on a casual basis for a short period”, even though she
might otherwise
be disqualified by regulation 30B(3) on account of the
requirement that there might be “a sequence of periods of employment
during a period of at least six months”, in the sense that there be
successive periods of employment extending beyond six months
as explained by
Moore J in Andison.”
Exhibit R2 is a document headed:
“PERIOD OF CONTRACT AGREEMENT
The agreement purports to be made on 27 June 1995 between Commonwealth of
Australia (‘the Commonwealth’), acting through
the Department of
Employment, Education and Training (‘the Department’) and
Educational Horizons (‘the organisation’).”
It is not in
dispute that this is an entity controlled by the respondent or its officers.
The purpose of the agreement is “
the provision of services as part of
the Department’s Labour Market Programs,”
by the organisation.
The respondent agreed to provide a maximum of twelve (12) Job Clubs per year
until 30 June 1998 at times and
at venues specified in the agreement.
This document was not in evidence before me at the initial hearing. It is not
possible to determine when the legal representatives
of the applicant first
became aware of the existence of the document. Regrettably, the normal order
for disclosure of relevant documents
does not appear to have been made at the
initial directions hearing. It is clear from this document that in June 1995,
the respondent
did not have in contemplation that the “Job Clubs”
would only be for a short period. The applicant was clearly employed
task of Job Club Leader and she had been nominated to the Department for this
purpose. This was no casual position.
The evidence in this case does not demonstrate that the engagement of the
applicant as job club leader was to be informal irregular
uncertain or not
likely to continue for any length of time. (See
Capay Holdings Pty Ltd t/as
Cuddles Long Day Centre) v Maree Slattery
, unreported IRCA Full Court 11
December 1996 decision no. 601/96). For these reasons there will be a
declaration that the applicant
was not a “casual employee engaged for a
short period” by the respondent.
TERMINATION AT THE INITIATIVE OF THE EMPLOYER. DID THE APPLICANT
A key issue, upon which the applicant bears the onus of proof was whether there
was a termination at the initiative of the employer.
The respondent, through Mr
Lambert asserts that the termination of the employment of the applicant was not
at its initiative as
the applicant resigned in a discussion immediately before
the Christmas leave commenced on Saturday 23 December 1995.
The direct evidence arises out of the context of the discusssions between Mr
Lambert and the applicant. I have sufficiently outlined,
in my earlier remarks,
the version given by Mr Lambert. The applicant and Mr Lambert were able to
provide secondary evidence of
a corroborating or supporting nature as to what
had occurred in their private conversation through the evidence of Ms Carr and
Before considering this issue further it is necessary to deal with a submission
by Mr Britt who asks me to draw an adverse conclusion
Applicant because of an alteration which appears on the application filed by the
applicant in the District
Registry of the court on 12 January 1996. The
inference I am asked to draw is that the applicant falsely suggested 6 June 1995
the start of her employment in order to ensure the period of her employ
exceeded the six months period specified in the Regulations.
The Application
makes a claim that the Applicant first started work on 6 June 1995. There is
clearly an alteration of the month
and possibly the day. It is not as clear with
the day. A close examination of the document from both sides does not enable me
definitively conclude that the numbers were altered in any particular way. As
white correcting fluid was not used it is impossible
to read what was originally
written by looking at the numbers through the reverse side of the document. It
may be possible to more
accurately resolve this issue by a forensic examination
by a handwriting expert. The cost of such an expert report is prohibitive
the circumstances do not justify such a requirement. In an unsigned document
dated 10 January 1996 attached to the application
the applicant also maintains 6
June 1995 as the start of her employment.
“Exhibits “B", “C”, and “F” arose out of
the cross examination of the Applicant by Mr Britt.
These three documents are
loose-leaf pages taken from the Diary or weekly planner of the Applicant. On
the page headed 5-11 June
there is a note in the handwriting of the applicant:
”ring Phil Lambert 2111001”. This is placed in the space allowed
accommodate the entry for Tuesday 6 June 1995 in the weekly planner. This
notation is consistent with the evidence of the Applicant
that there was an
initial telephone conversation. It also raises a contrast with her Application,
which justified the cross-examination.
It is not necessary to draw such an
adverse conclusion against the applicant for the purpose of determining these
proceedings but
I am satisfied that the Applicant did not commence work at the
Job Club, established by the Respondent, until Wednesday 5 July 1995.
exhibit “C” and in particular the heavy arrow in blue pen which
suggests that the reference to “Job Club 373
Parramatta Road."and other
entries should have been recorded under the Wednesday. The hand written
attachment to the main contract
recording the dates of the Job Clubs supports
Exhibit “F” covers the week 18-24 December it is not nearly so
conclusive as to the date of the meeting between the applicant
and Mr Lambert.
On either version 21, 22 or earlier in December is possible. It is also
important to note that a letter (Exhibit
5) dated 17 October 1995 which was
signed by Mr Lambert clearly states that :"The main Office of Hospitality
Horizons will be closed
for the Christmas /New Year period from 23 December 1995
to 7 January 1996. You are advised to ensure that all reports, and other
due to be settled, are submitted or claimed well ahead of this shutdown time to
ensure that everything is settled." It is
most probable that the disputed
conversation occurred either just before or on the day of the Christmas
The entries in her diary for 18-24 clearly reflects the office turmoil which
usually occurs in the last business week before the
Christmas break. The fact
that both the applicant and Mr Lambert are vague and unclear in their
recollection of date and events should
not reflect adversely on either of them.
I am prepared to accept the denial of the applicant that these alterations were
falsify her claim. Although it is not always the case, particularly when
cash payments are made, most respondents are able to prove
starting and
finishing times. If the intention was to falsify the claim it was doomed to
failure from the outset.
Qantas Airways Pty Ltd v Christie
(1998) HCA 18
, McHugh J cites with
approval a decision of the Full court:
“In Mohazab v Dick Smith Electronic Pty Ltd (No.2), the Full Court of
the Industrial Relations Court interpreted the phrase
“Termination of
employment at the initiative of the employer” in accordance with the
general rules of treaty interpretation
found in Arts 31 and 32 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969. The Full Court held that
“Termination of employment
at the initiative of the employer” meant
a termination that was brought about by an employer and to which the employee
not agreed. The Court held that a termination occurs when “the act of
the employer results directly or consequentially in
the termination of the
employment.”
“That is, had the employer not taken the action it did, the employee
would have remained in the employment relationship.”
There is no dispute between the parties that in their telephone conversation of
8 January 1996 the applicant made it quite clear
that she had not resigned.
After he became aware of her view,Mr Lambert should have held proper discussions
with her and the matter
probably could have been resolved satisfactorily. I am
satisfied that had the Respondent taken a different action the applicant
probably would have remained in the employment relationship. On balance I am
prepared to accept the version of the events given
by the applicant. I am
satisfied that there was clearly a termination at the initiative of the
respondent.
WAS THERE A VALID REASON FOR TERMINATION
Under the provisions of the Act, the employer carries the burden of showing that
at termination it had a valid reason or reasons
for bringing the employment to
an end summarily. In his decision in
Selvanchandran v Peteron Plastics Pty
(1996) 62 IR 371
, Northrop J describes the meaning of this phrase in the
following way:
“Section 170DE(1) refers to “a valid reason, or valid
reasons,” but the Act does not give a meaning to those phrases
adjective “valid”. A reference to dictionaries shows that the word
“valid” has a number of different
meanings depending on the context
in which it is used. In the Shorter Oxford Dictionary, the relevant meaning
given is: “2.
Of an argument, assertion, objection, etc. well founded
and applicable, sound, defensible: Effective, having some force, pertinency,
value.” In the Macquarie Dictionary the relevant meaning is “sound,
just, or well founded; a valid reason.”
In its context in s170DE(1), the adjective “valid” should be
given the meaning of sound, defensible or well founded.
A reason which is
capricious, fanciful, spiteful or prejudiced could never be a valid reason for
the purposes of s170DE(1). At
the same time the reason must be valid in the
context of the employee’s capacity or conduct or based upon the
operational requirements
of the employer’s business. Further, in
considering whether a reason is valid, it must be remembered that the
requirement
applies in the practical sphere of the relationship between an
employer and an employee where each has rights and privileges and
obligations conferred and imposed on them. The provisions must “be
applied in a practical, commonsense way to ensure
that “the employer and
employee are each treated fairly, see what was said by Wilcox CJ in Gibson v
Bostik Pty Ltd
(1995) 60 IR 1
, when considering the construction and application
of s170DC.”
The defence of this case by the respondent was strongly argued on the basis that
the applicant had resigned. As I have found against
the respondent on this
issue it follows that the respondent is required to prove that at 8 January 1996
it had a valid reason for
the termination of the applicant. On this date the
applicant made it clear in no uncertain terms that she had not resigned. This
left Mr Lambert in the difficult position of having two people for the one job
club. It is probable that he expected to be able
to terminate the applicant
because of the commonly held view in industry that if you attach the word casual
or designate the position
by that name the employee has virtually no industrial
rights at all. He would expect no consequences to his organisation from such
decision. He was faced with the difficulty that he had arranged to transfer an
other employee to the Petersham Job Club before
confirming with the applicant
her future intentions. I am not satisfied that at 8 January 1996 this could
properly be established
by the respondent as a valid reason for her dismissal.
There was no evidence that he sought to have the new leader reconsider the
matter and defer taking up the offered position to allow the applicant to
complete the January Job Club. There would seem to be
little difficulty with
such an approach as the office was closed until 7 January 1996 and on his own
evidence he could not have made
these arrangements before 20 December 1995.
Such a relatively short period does not give the case for the respondent any
basis for establishing that the decision to terminate the applicant was
sound or well founded. Moreover it was never suggested in
the case for the
respondent that the change had to be made with such haste because it was not the
intention of the applicant to return
to the January 1996 Job Club.
The evidence in this case leads me to the conclusion that there were not just
grounds for the decision to terminate the employment
of the applicant. There
was not a valid reason to terminate the employment of the applicant.
REINSTATEMENT
The type of work the applicant was doing for the respondent is no longer funded
by the government. The applicant does not seek reinstatement
because of her
personal hurt as a result of the nature of her dispute with the representatives
of the respondent. A more compelling
practical reason is that she moved to
Queensland. Reinstatement in this case is impractical.
COMPENSATION
There being this finding and the contravention of the act it follows that it is
necessary to assess the amount of compensation which
should be ordered. In a
forthright way the applicant conceded during her testimony that by 26 February
1996, she had again established
herself at the level of salary she was on with
her employment with the respondent. On one view of the matter after the
on 9 January 1996 it may have been that the applicant would have
agreed to leave at the end of the job club which was to start on
and conclude four weeks later. The difference between the two periods is a
little over two weeks. It is appropriate
that the applicant have the benefit of
the two week period. The evidence from the applicant was that she worked for 30
week at $17.00 per hour being $510 per week gross. There may be some
reservation on the part of the respondent that this is the
correct hourly rate.
In the circumstances this is an appropriate amount to use to assess the
compensation payable. Accordingly
I propose to allow a period of six weeks. In
addition the applicant was without income from 22 December 1995 a period of
a half weeks. The amount of compensation considered to be appropriate
is a total of nine and a half weeks which is four thousand
eight hundred and
forty-five dollars($4,845). In making this assessment I am conscious that I
have not found it necessary to calculate
an amount for the distress caused to
the applicant by her termination.
It can be seen from the findings that there was a termination of the employment
of the applicant by the respondent which has contravened
Section 170DB(2) and an
award of one weeks wages should also be paid to the applicant.
There will be judgment and orders accordingly.
I certify that this and the preceding 11 pages
Is a true copy of the reasons for the decision of
Judicial Registrar McILwaine.
Associate: Kate Benson
Dated: 15 October 1998
APPEARANCES
Solicitor for the Applicant: Mr Angus Harper
Solicitors for the Applicant: Harpers Lawyers
Employers Advocate for the Respondent: Mr Anthony Britt
Employer’s organisation for the Respondent: Australian
Chamber of Manufacturers
Dates of Hearing: 3.7.96, 4,6 & 11.11.96
RTF format (73.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format