Vercorp and Ors and Australian Taxation Office (Freedom of information) [2025] AICmr 176 (24 October 2025)
Vercorp and Ors and Australian Taxation Office
(Freedom of
information)
[2025] AICmr 176 (
Decision and reasons for decision of Justin Lodge, Acting General Manager
Freedom of Information Case Management
Delegate of the
Australian Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Vercorp Pty Ltd as trustee for the Solander Lake Development Unit
Vercorp Pty Ltd as trustee for the Stafford Development Unit Trust;
Hegira Pty Ltd;
QMP Nominees Pty Ltd as trustee for the QFL Agencies Trust;
Bonjour Pty Ltd
Australian Taxation Office
Decision date
Application number
Freedom of Information —
Respondent to process request following removal of practical refusal reason claim
s 55K of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(the FOI Act), I set aside
the decision of the Australian Taxation Office (the ATO) of 17 January 2023. I
substitute my decision
that a practical refusal reason does not exist.
of this decision the ATO
must process the applicant’s request and notify the applicant of its
decision in accordance with s
26 of the FOI Act. The ATO must also advise
whether it has fully implemented my decision.
decision sets aside the ATO’s access refusal decision where the ATO has
reconsidered its decision to refuse the applicant’s
request on the basis
that a practical refusal reason applies in relation to the processing of the
Reasons for decision
Scope of IC review
30 September 2022, the applicants
applied to the ATO for various audit and review documents about the
applicant’s businesses.
21 October 2022, the ATO provided the applicants with a s 24AB notice stating
that it intended to refuse the request under s 24AA(1)(a)(i)
of the FOI Act on
the grounds that a practical refusal reason exists, as processing the request
would substantially and unreasonably
divert the resources of the ATO from its
other operations.
8 December 2022, the applicants revised the scope of their request.
17 January 2023, the ATO refused the applicant’s revised request under
s 24AA(1)(a)(i) on the basis that processing the request
would amount to a
substantial and unreasonable diversion of resources from the ATO’s other
operations.
17 March 2023, the applicant sought IC review of the ATO’s decision under
s 54L of the FOI Act.
an IC review of an access refusal decision, the ATO bears the onus of
establishing that their decision is justified or that I should
give a decision
adverse to the IC review applicant (s 55D(1)).
the course of the IC review, the Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner sought further information from the ATO
and invited the ATO to
reconsider its position. In response, the ATO indicated that it was willing to
process the applicant’s
request and indicated its agreement to the matter
proceeding to a set aside decision under s 55K of the FOI Act.
on the information before me, I am satisfied that the ATO has reconsidered its
decision to refuse the applicant’s request
on the basis that a practical
refusal reason applies in relation to the processing of the request. In an IC
review of an access refusal
decision, the ATO bears the onus of establishing
that their decision is justified or that I should give a decision adverse to the
IC review applicant (s 55D(1)). I am therefore satisfied that a practical
refusal reason does not exist.
ATO must now process the applicant’s request and notify the applicant of
its decision within 30 days of receipt of this
Acting General Manager, Freedom of Information Case
Delegate of the Australian Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Whether a practical refusal reason exists (ss 24 and
Section 24 of the FOI Act
enables an agency or Minister to refuse access to a document where the agency
has undertaken a request consultation
process in accordance with s 24AB of the
FOI Act, and after that process the agency or Minister is satisfied that the
practical refusal
reason still exists.
Subparagraph 24AA(1)(a) of the FOI Act lists the following practical refusal
(1) For the purposes of section 24, a practical refusal reason exists in
relation to a request for a document if either (or both)
of the following
(a) the work involved in processing the request:
(i) in the case of an agency--would substantially and unreasonably divert
the resources of the agency from its other operations;
(ii) in the case of a Minister--would substantially and unreasonably
interfere with the performance of the Minister's functions;
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
Accessing your information
If you would like access to the information that we hold about you, please
FOIDR@oaic.gov.au
information is available on the
information
page on our website.
On the question of the
processing deadlines that now apply, see
Fletcher and Prime Minister of
The applicants’ legal
representative made the FOI request on behalf of the applicants. As set out at
[3.26] of the
, the FOI Act does not prohibit requests being made by groups of
During the processing of the
request, the applicant’s agreed to an extension of time of 30 days. The
ATO notified the OAIC
of the agreement on 13 December 2022. This extended the
statutory timeframe to 17 January 2025
RTF format (22 MB)
Signed PDF/A format