Myers v Medion Australia Pty Ltd (Interlocutory Injunction) [2025] FCA 1409 (14 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Myers v Medion Australia Pty Ltd
(Interlocutory Injunction)
[2025] FCA 1409
File number(s):
VID 1458 of 2025
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– application
for interlocutory injunction – Applicant seeking an order that the
Respondent not block his mobile phone
– Applicant informed his phone
unable to connect to all other mobile networks – whether the
Telecommunications (Emergency Call Service) Determination 2019
requires that a phone be able to connect to all mobile networks to make
emergency services call – whether arguable case
– balance of
convenience strongly tends against granting the injunction – application
Legislation:
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Telecommunications (Consumer Protection and Service Standards) Act
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) r 5.08
Australian Communications and Media Authority (Emergency Call Service
Determination) Direction 2024
Telecommunications (Emergency Call Service) Determination 2019
Cases cited:
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v
[2006] HCA 46
(2006) 227 CLR 57
Davis v Wilson (Costs)
[2025] FCA 666
Martin & Pleasance Pty Ltd v A Nelson & Co Ltd
[2021] FCAFC 80
Northern Territory v Sangare
[2019] HCA 25
(2019) 265 CLR
NWQR v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2021] FCAFC 30
Samsung Electronics Co Ltd v Apple Inc
[2011] FCAFC 156
217 FCR 238
SZRUR v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2013] FCAFC 146
(2013) 216 FCR 445
General Division
National Practice Area:
Other Federal Jurisdiction
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant
The Applicant appeared in person
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms R A Kelly
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Cooper Mills Lawyers
VID 1458 of 2025
MEDION AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Applicant’s application for interlocutory relief is refused.
Applicant pay the Respondent’s costs of the application.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
Applicant has filed an originating application dated 31 October 2025
A declaration
that as per reg 69 of the
Telecommunications (Emergency Call Service)
Determination 2019
TECS Determination 2019
), a carriage
service provider can cease supply of carriage services to a mobile phone only if
it cannot access emergency call services
via at least one carriage service
restraining the Respondent (trading as ALDI Mobile) from ceasing supply of
carriage service to the Applicant’s Samsung
Galaxy J5Pro, for reason of
reg 69 of the TECS Determination 2019.
Applicant is also applying for an order (effectively an interlocutory
injunction) temporarily restraining the Respondent from
blocking the
Applicant’s Samsung Galaxy J5Pro from its network, until the matter is
finally determined by the Court. This application
came before me as the general
duty judge.
the following reasons, the Applicant’s application for interlocutory
relief is refused.
The Applicant relies on an affidavit affirmed by him on 3 November 2025
Applicant affidavit
). The Respondent relies on an affidavit by
Ms Shelley Davis (Head of Customer and Compliance) affirmed on
13 November 2025 (
Davis affidavit
The Applicant uses a Samsung Galaxy J5 Pro phone, also known as SM-J53OY. His
SIM card is provided by ALDI Mobile. On 24 October
2025, he received a
message from ALDI Mobile stating that his device “cannot call 000 on at
least one Australian network”,
and that “[w]e are legally required
to network block such devices on 26/11/2025”. The Applicant says that he
some networks to call 000, but was told by persons from the
Respondent that his phone cannot access the Vodafone network. He sets
affidavit his reasons for wanting to keep the particular model of phone that he
Ms Davis states that the Respondent (
Australian carriage service provider that supplies pre-paid mobile
telecommunications services to retail customers in Australia
under the ALDI
mobile brand.
states that MEDION operates as a “mobile virtual network operator”
on the Telstra Wholesale Mobile Network, meaning
that MEDION obtains wholesale
mobile services from
Limited, which MEDION resells to its
states that, as a mobile virtual network operator, MEDION does not own or
operate any telecommunications infrastructure and
that, in Australia, mobile
telephone networks are operated by Telstra, Optus and Vodafone. The mobile
services that MEDION resells
to its customers under the ALDI Mobile brand are
supplied over the Telstra Wholesale Mobile Network which is owned and operated
Telstra. The operation of that mobile network is carried out and controlled
by Telstra, as the network operator.
Ms Davis states
that MEDION only supplies mobile phone services to its customers, and does not
sell mobile phones. Customers are provided
with an ALDI Mobile SIM card but must
use their own mobile phone. MEDION does not know what make or model of mobile
phone is being
used by a customer unless MEDION is informed by the customer, or
by Telstra as the mobile network operator.
Notifications
of emergency services issues with older Samsung models:
attaches an email from Telstra to MEDION dated 22 October 2025, which
states (among other things):
user’s primary mobile network is unavailable, mobile devices are designed
to automatically connect to another available
mobile network to place an
emergency services call. After some recent testing, Telstra identified some
older Samsung mobile devices
are not correctly connecting to the Vodafone mobile
network when other mobile networks are unavailable. This does not affect a
ability to call emergency services when the customer is
connected to the Telstra Wholesale Mobile Network.
The email stated
that Telstra had identified a cohort of customers who would need to replace
their Samsung devices, and would provide
MEDION with this data. Telstra stated
that blocking of affected Samsung devices from the Telstra Wholesale Mobile
Network would be
implemented on 26 November 2025.
Telstra stated
that MEDION should check its obligations under the TECS Determination 2019, in
particular s 69(2), (3) and (5).
attaches a publication about affected Samsung devices on Telstra’s webpage
on 22 October 2025. The list of Samsung
devices that will need to be
replaced includes the SM-J530Y (Galaxy J5); that is, the Applicant’s
model. There were similar
publications on the MEDION webpage, and on the Optus
website, which both listed the Applicant’s model of phone in the list
affected devices. (I note that the Applicant has provided a screenshot of the
MEDION website page with a different, shorter list,
but the screenshot of the
MEDION website attached to the Davis affidavit includes the Applicant’s
Davis states that Telstra provided MEDION with a list of customers with affected
Samsung devices on 24 October 2025. Ms Davis states
that she is aware that
this list included the Applicant.
LEGISLATION
Act – emergency call determinations:
Telecommunications
(Consumer Protection and Service Standards) Act 1999
) requires the Australian Communications and Media Authority
) to make a written determination imposing requirements on carriers,
carriage service providers and emergency call persons in relation
to emergency
call services (s 147(1)). In making a determination under s 147(1),
ACMA must have regard to the matters listed in s
147(2), which
(a) the objective that a carriage service provider who supplies a standard
telephone service should provide each end-user of that
standard telephone
service with access, free of charge, to an emergency call service, unless the
ACMA considers that it would be
unreasonable for such access to be provided;
(g) the objective that, from the perspective of an ordinary end-user of a
standard telephone service, there appears to be a single
national emergency call
with a s 147 determination is mandatory, and non-compliance can attract
civil penalties (s 148).
Determination 2019, ss 68-69:
The TECS Determination 2019 is made under
s 147 of the TCPSS Act. Sections 68 and 69 of the TECS Determination 2019
impose the following
obligations on “carriage service providers”
(such as MEDION) to identify whether a customer’s mobile phone can
longer access the emergency call service (s 68), and notification
requirements and restrictions on supply in relation to those
68 Requirement to identify whether a current customer’s mobile phone
can no longer access the emergency call service –
carriage service
A carriage service provider must use its best endeavours to promptly identify if
a mobile phone that is accessing, or attempting
to access, the provider’s
own mobile network is, on or after 2 November 2024, no longer configured to
access the emergency
call service using both:
(a) the provider’s own mobile network; and
(b) if the provider’s own mobile network is unavailable,
network of other carriage service providers who provide carriage services to the
69 Notification requirements and restrictions on supply where a current
customer’s mobile phone can no longer access the emergency
call service
– carriage service providers
(1) This section applies if a carriage service provider has identified, on or
after 2 November 2024, that a mobile phone of an end-user
accessing, or attempting to access, the provider’s own mobile network is
no longer configured to be able to access
the emergency call service using both:
(a) the provider’s own mobile network; and
(b) if the provider’s own mobile network is unavailable,
network of other carriage service providers who provide carriage services to the
(2) The carriage service provider must, within 5 business days, notify the
end-user that the mobile phone is no longer configured
to be able to access the
emergency call service and that the carriage service provider will cease supply
of carriage services to
the mobile phone on a date that is between 28 and 35
days from the date of the notification.
(3) The carriage service provider must, before ceasing supply of carriage
services to the mobile phone, send a further two separate
notifications to the
end-user that the mobile phone is no longer configured to be able to access the
emergency call service and the
carriage service provider will cease supply of
carriage services to the mobile phone.
(4) The carriage service provider must cease supply of carriage services to the
mobile phone:
(a) no earlier than 28 days after the notification sent under subsection (2);
(b) no later than 35 days after the notification sent under subsection (2).
(5) In addition to the information included in a notification under subsection
(2) and prior to the ceasing of supply of carriage
services to the mobile phone,
a carriage service provider must also provide information to the end-user about
alternative mobile
phones that are available, including information about
alternative low cost or no cost mobile phones that can access the emergency
service. (emphasis added)
the notification by MEDION for the purposes of s 69(2) occurred on
24 October 2025. That means that, if s 69 applies, MEDION
is required
to cease supply of carriage services to the mobile phone between 21 and
28 November 2025, by reason of s 69(4).
CONSIDERATION
the Applicant procedural fairness:
The Applicant is unrepresented. The Court
has an overriding duty to ensure a fair trial for all parties, which means the
take appropriate steps to ensure that an unrepresented litigant has
sufficient information about the practice and procedure of the
Court, so far as
is reasonably practicable for the purpose of ensuring a fair trial: see
SZRUR v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2013] FCAFC 146
(2013) 216 FCR 445
(Robertson J, with
Allsop CJ and Mortimer J agreeing), and
NWQR v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2021] FCAFC 30
(the Court). However, although the Court may be
lenient in the standard of compliance which it expects from a litigant in
that leniency does not go so far as to confer an advantage on the person
who acts on their own behalf:
Kumar v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship
and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCAFC 79
(the Court).
the Court made orders permitting the Respondent to be served by email on Tuesday
11 November 2025: see
Myers v Medion Australia Pty Ltd (Substituted
[2025] FCA 1380.
Chambers emailed the parties on
12 November 2025, advising that the matter would be listed for case
management on 14 November 2025,
to seek to make timetabling orders to allow
the application for interlocutory relief to be heard in advance of
26 November 2025.
At about 4:30pm on Thursday 13 November 2025, the
Respondent filed and served its materials, being submissions of five pages and
the Davis affidavit (which is 41 pages).
Considerations
of judicial economy greatly favoured dealing with the interlocutory application
at the first case management hearing.
The Court has power to grant relief at a
directions hearing (including the first case management hearing): see
Court Rules 2011
(Cth), r 5.08(a) and (b). However, the Court would not
do so if this would deprive the other party of a reasonable opportunity to
present his or her case. Here, the Applicant was content for the application for
interlocutory relief to proceed at the first case
management hearing.
Interlocutory
injunction – applicable principles:
An applicant for an interlocutory
injunction is required to demonstrate:
first, that he
has a prima facie case or has raised a serious question to be tried in relation
to the relief sought in the proceeding,
such as to justify the grant of
interlocutory relief pending the hearing and determination of the proceeding;
second, that the
balance of convenience favours the grant of the interlocutory relief
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v O’Neill
(2006) 227 CLR 57
(Gleeson CJ and Crennan J), [65]
(Gummow and Hayne JJ).
two requirements involve related inquiries, and each should not be considered in
isolation from the other:
Samsung Electronics
Co Ltd v Apple
[2011] FCAFC 156
; (2011) 217 FCR 238 at
Arguable case?
first issue is whether the Applicant has an arguable case.
the Applicant’s phone connect to Vodafone?
The basis on which the
Respondent will be blocking access to its service is that the Applicant’s
phone cannot connect to all
the three mobile networks in Australia. For the
following reasons, I will proceed on the basis that the Applicant’s model
phone can connect to the Telstra and Optus networks, but not the Vodafone
22 October 2025 email from Telstra states that Samsung SM-J53OY (Galaxy J5)
phones do not automatically connect to the Vodafone
network, but that these
phones can continue to call the Telstra network: see [
] above. The Optus website also states
that the Applicant’s model of phone will need to be replaced. These
documents are admissible
as business records, and should be given weight, as
they are made in order to give effect to statutory obligations.
Applicant’s affidavit states that he believes he can make 000 calls on the
Optus network (and he explains the basis of his
belief), but he does not state
that his phone can connect to the Vodafone network: see [
At the hearing,
the Applicant appeared to accept that in fact his phone cannot connect to the
Vodafone network, but made arguments
such as the problem was with Vodafone, not
his device. He points out that MEDION’s website lists the attributes of
required in a replacement device which (he says) are met by his current
mobile phone. I am not able to rule on these technical questions
of fact at this
stage in the proceeding.
Interpretation
of ss 68, 69:
The Applicant contends that ss 68 and 69 of the TECS
Determination 2019
only require that he be able to access
other mobile network apart from his, not
other networks. This turns
on what is meant by the reference in s 68(b) and 69(1)(b) to a mobile phone
no longer being configured
to be able to access the emergency call service
using, “if the provider’s own mobile network is unavailable, the
carriage service providers who provide carriage
services to the public”.
and purpose:
Several matters suggest that these provisions require that a
mobile phone be able to make calls to the emergency call service using
other mobile networks (when the provider’s own mobile network
is unavailable).
One indication,
albeit not conclusive, is the text. If the Applicant were correct, then one
might expect these provisions to refer
to “another” carriage service
provider, not “other carriage service providers”. It is true (as the
argues) that a reference to the plural may include the singular (cf
Acts Interpretation Act
deliberate use of the plural (“carriage service providers”) favours
the Respondent’s interpretation.
The reference to “mobile
network” (singular) can be explained by the fact that, although carriage
service providers as
a group use more than one mobile network, each carriage
service provider uses a single network.
significantly, the purpose of the provision – to promote reliability of
access to emergency call services – is promoted
by requiring that a
person’s phone be able to connect to all mobile networks. That
interpretation promotes the objectives in
s 147(2)(a) and (g) of the TCPSS
Act. Thus, there is a contrary intention for the purposes of the
Interpretation Act
understanding is confirmed by the Explanatory Statement to the
Telecommunications (Emergency Call Service) Amendment Determination
(No. 1) (which inserted ss 68 and 69), which states at p 2 that
the purpose of the amendments “is to reduce the risk of
an end user using
a mobile phone that is unable to access the [Emergency Call Service]”, and
to “improve the overall
reliability of access to the [Emergency Call
Service] from mobile phone devices”.
Applicant’s
The Applicant contends that it would not make sense to require
that a phone be able to connect with all other mobile networks, and
Parliament may as well mandate that people carry multiple back-up batteries, or
provide free accessible landlines for people
to call emergency services.
However, it is not for the Court to rule on the wisdom of the policy of
ss 68 and 69 of the TECS Determination
2019. These matters do not assist in
the construction of those provisions.
Applicant also refers to a direction made by the Minister (the
Communications and Media Authority (Emergency Call Service Determination)
(Cth)), which was the impetus for the 2024 amendments
that inserted ss 68 and 69 of the TECS Determination 2019.
Section 6(2)
the Direction directs that the TECS Determination 2019 “be amended to give
effect to the following objectives”:
(a) carriage service providers be required to identify if the mobile phone of
an end-user requesting the supply of carriage services
from the provider is able
to access the emergency call service using both:
(i) the provider’s own network; and
(ii) the networks of other carriage service providers who provide carriage
services to the public;
(b) where an end-user’s mobile phone is
unable to access
emergency call service
using either
the provider’s own network
the networks of other carriage service providers who provide carriage
services to the public, the carriage service provider is:
(i) to notify the end-user that the mobile phone is not able to access the
emergency call service;
(ii) not to supply carriage services to the end-user in connection with that
mobile phone;
(iii) to provide the end-user with information about alternative mobile phones
available, including low cost or no cost mobile phones,
which are able to access
the emergency call service; and
(iv) to ensure the carriage service provider’s payment assistance policy
includes avenues for financial hardship customers
to receive assistance to
obtain a low cost or no cost alternative mobile phone which is able to access
the emergency call service;
(c) carriage service providers be required to use best endeavours to promptly
identify if an end-user’s mobile phone to which
carriage services are
being provided is
no longer able to access
the emergency call service
using either
(i) the provider’s own network,
(ii) the networks of other carriage service providers who provide carriage
services to the public;
(d) where an end-user’s mobile phone is no longer able to access the
emergency call service
using either
the provider’s own network,
the networks of other carriage service providers who provide carriage
services to the public, the carriage service provider is to:
(i) within a specified period, notify the end-user that the mobile phone is no
longer able to access the emergency call service;
(ii) at the end of a specified period, cease supplying carriage services to the
end-user in connection with that mobile phone;
(iii) provide the end-user with information about alternative mobile phones
available, including low cost or no cost mobile phones,
which are able to access
the emergency call service; and
(iv) ensure the carriage service provider’s payment assistance policy
includes avenues for financial assistance customers
to receive assistance to
obtain a low cost or no cost alternative mobile phone which is able to access
the emergency call service
[.] (emphasis added)
Applicant contends that
-(d) require only that a person be able to
access the emergency call service using either the provider’s own network,
network of other carriage service providers; that is, it is said the
Direction does not even require a “back up”, and
it is sufficient if
the person can obtain access to the emergency call service through the
provider’s own network. However,
it is necessary to read
identifies the relevant category (identifying whether a
mobile phone can access the emergency call service using
provider’s own network and the networks of other carriage service
providers). In that context,
-(d) should be read as referring,
implicitly, to whether a mobile phone is able to access the emergency call
service through either
the provider’s own network or (
if that network
is not available
) the networks of other carriage service providers.
Otherwise, the operation of
-(d) would be at odds with the
operation of
This interpretation of the Direction is supported
by the Explanatory Statement to the Direction, which states (at p 7):
It is intended mobiles phones should be able to access the emergency call
service using both the network of the provider supplying
carriage services to
and each other network belonging to the other providers supplying
carriage services to the public
. This will ensure, in the event an end user
must use emergency call camp on functionality to access the emergency call
service, the
end user's call will be carried regardless of the network utilised.
(emphasis added)
Accordingly,
the Direction does not assist the Applicant; to the contrary, it supports the
interpretation of the TECS Determination
2019 set out above.
is not necessary to reach a concluded view on the interpretation of ss 68
and 69 of the TECS Determination 2019 for the purposes
of the interlocutory
application. However, the Applicant’s case on this point is weak, at
Balance of convenience
second requirement for an interlocutory injunction is the balance of
convenience.
principles:
Samsung Electronics
, the Full Court said:
assessment of harm to the plaintiff, if there is no injunction, and the
assessment of prejudice or harm to the defendant,
if an injunction is granted,
is at the heart of the basket of discretionary considerations which must be
addressed and weighed as
part of the Court’s consideration of the balance
of convenience and justice”: at [62]; and
exercising that discretion, the Court is required to assess and compare the
prejudice and hardship likely to be suffered
by the defendant, third persons and
the public generally if an injunction is granted, with that which is likely to
be suffered by
the plaintiff if no injunction is granted”: at
These principles were affirmed in
Martin & Pleasance Pty Ltd v
A Nelson & Co Ltd
[2021] FCAFC 80
(the Court).
of convenience strongly tends against injunction:
I accept and adopt the
Respondent’s submissions that the balance of convenience strongly tends
against granting the injunction
sought by the Applicant.
(a) If the Applicant’s device is blocked from the Telstra mobile network
on 26 November 2025, he will continue to be able to
access mobile services via
his ALDI Mobile SIM card. It is true that the SIM card will need to be inserted
into another mobile device;
however, MEDION has previously offered to provide
the Applicant with a compatible device free of charge.
(b) On the other hand, a failure to block the device
would cause MEDION to act contrary to the TECS Determination 2019. It may also
result in the Applicant being unable to call triple zero if the Telstra and
Optus mobile networks are not available.
Applicant desires to keep his current mobile phone, because it allows him to
record calls and more recent models do not allow
this. He states that it is
important to him that he able to do so. This desire is in my view outweighed by
the countervailing considerations
above. The Applicant is still able
to make calls and use the internet on other phones.
MEDION also contends that it would be futile to order interlocutory relief
against it, because Telstra is independently required
by ss 68 and 69 of
the TECS Determination 2019 to block service to the Applicant, because Telstra
is also a “carriage service
provider” in relation to the Applicant.
It is not necessary to rule on that argument.
weighing of the balance of convenience, combined with the weakness of the
Applicant’s arguments, means that this is not
an appropriate case for
granting an interlocutory injunction. The Applicant’s application for
interlocutory relief must therefore
be dismissed.
The usual rule is that costs follow the event. The Applicant stated that the
reason he was required to bring this proceeding is that
MEDION was unable to
explain to the Applicant’s satisfaction why his mobile phone could not
connect to the Vodafone network.
He also stated that he does not have the means
to pay any costs order. Neither of these matters is reason to depart from the
rule on costs; in particular, the fact that a party lacks means (is
“impecunious”) is not a reason (on grounds of futility
or otherwise)
not to make an order for costs against that party: see
Davis v Wilson
[2025] FCA 666
(Shariff J), citing
Territory v Sangare
[2019] HCA 25
(2019) 265 CLR 164
(the Court).
I certify that the preceding thirty-four (34)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 14 November 2025
RTF format (401 KB)
Signed PDF/A format