Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia v Bendel & Anor [2025] HCATrans 68 (14 October 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 068
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Melbourne No M47 of 2025
B e t w e e n
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
STEVEN BENDEL
First Respondent
GLEEWIN INVESTMENTS PTY LTD (ACN 131 785 576)
Second Respondent
BEECH‑JONES
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT CANBERRA ON TUESDAY,
14 OCTOBER 2025, AT 9.59 AM
MR S.P. DONAGHUE, KC
Solicitor‑General of the Commonwealth of Australia
May it please
your Honours, I appear with
MR E.F. WHEELAHAN, KC
MR J.D. PHILLIPS
for the appellant. (instructed by
Australian Government
MR A.J. DE WIJN, SC
the Court pleases, I appear with my learned friends
MR P.L. JEFFREYS
MR T.J. GRAHAM
for both respondents. (instructed by
Arnold Bloch Leibler)
GAGELER CJ:
Mr de Wijn. Mr Solicitor.
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honours, this appeal concerns Division 7A of the
Assessment Act 1936
, which contains anti‑avoidance provisions directed
at in substance distributions of private company profits. The question
whether Division 7A applies in the common situation in which a trustee
resolves to distribute income of a trust to a corporate
beneficiary, with the
result that that corporate beneficiary becomes presently entitled to a share of
the income of the trust, and
therefore subject to tax on that share by reason of
of the Act, but the income is not actually paid to the corporate
beneficiary.
Instead, that beneficiary acquiesces in the trust retaining
and using the fund for general trust purposes. The result of that situation
that the amount of the companies’ profit reflected in the unpaid trust
entitlement is accessed by the trustee, but without
the tax consequences that
would result had the company paid out the amount by way of dividend. The
substance of the situation that
I have just described is exactly the same as it
would have been if the income to which the beneficiary was entitled had actually
been paid to it and the amount had then been lent back to the trustee repayable
GAGELER CJ:
Do you have a finding of acquiescence?
MR DONAGHUE:
There is an issue about that, not in terms.
Mr Wheelahan is going to address the factual part of the case, and can I
leave it to
him to do, but our case is premised on that proposition, that we can
establish acquiescence, yes.
And if you fail on that,
MR DONAGHUE:
On the facts, yes.
On the facts, you would lose it, but you would – sorry, I go
back a stage. So, the first part of your case is construction,
as a matter of
principle, but you need the acquiescence on your
construction.
MR DONAGHUE:
I do, but the constructional
issue is – for reasons I will come to – critically
important independently of the resolution
of that factual issue, because the
Full Court’s construction has limited the meaning of 109D in
circumstances that go far beyond
the unpaid present entitlement‑type
situation that we are in now.
You will be going to
the trustee, I take it, or Mr Wheelahan
MR DONAGHUE:
I will not be, but on the factual part
of the case.
But there was no duty to distribute, was
there? You seem to be assuming that there is an acquiescence in a duty to
distribute. The
resolution gave a power to distribute, but the trustee could
equally have invested the money.
MR DONAGHUE:
trustee had resolved on the facts to distribute the amount.
No, just set aside.
Resolved to set aside the
distribute.
MR DONAGHUE:
As I understand it,
your Honours, there is no dispute that Gleewin Investments, the corporate
beneficiary, had a present entitlement
to the funds.
That is fine. That is right.
MR DONAGHUE:
taxable on that share, but that instead of Gleewin Investments, that money was
then used to be loaned to Mr Bendel. It
was not used to the benefit of the
person who it had been ‑ ‑ ‑
I was going to ask you about that. Is it common ground between the
parties that, of the amount that was not distributed, it was lent
MR DONAGHUE:
Almost all of it, I think, is
the factual situation, although again I am being taken into a territory that
Mr Wheelahan is going
But that loan is
effectively an investment of the funds to which the beneficiary was presently
MR DONAGHUE:
I am not sure we would agree with that,
your Honour. I do not believe that there is – there is, as
your Honour would know,
capacity under Division 7A in
section 109N
, which I can come to in due course, to put the loan on terms
that exclude the operation of Division 7A. So, if you put the loan
terms, you put in writing, there is a benchmark interest rate, there is a term
requirement. If you meet all of those requirements,
then there is no deemed
dividend under 7A.
None of that happened here, and as I understand
it commonly, that is what companies and trustees do in this situation; to avoid
operation of the anti‑avoidance regime, they use the scheme that
Parliament has set. If your Honours would permit me, the
point of greatest
general public importance surrounding this appeal concerns the correct
construction of 109D(3),
is that especially the phrase “financial
accommodation”?
MR DONAGHUE:
Particularly, yes,
your Honour. In our submission, the Full Court’s judgment does great
violence to that part of the definition,
in a way that has much wider
ramifications than the particular situation of unpaid present entitlements to
trust income.
GAGELER CJ:
And before the Full Court, it was
common ground that there was a debtor‑creditor relationship?
It was. Absolutely.
GAGELER CJ:
remain common ground here?
MR DONAGHUE:
As I understand it, it
What does that mean? I mean, there is a trust
here, it is a present entitlement under a trust. A beneficiary is not a
creditor of
a trust unless there is a separate relationship.
I think, your Honour, by reason of this Court’s
judgment in
in certain circumstances where you have both the
resolution and then reflection in the accounts of the company of the entitlement
of the beneficiary of that distribution, then the – as I understand
it, this Court’s authority is that there is a debtor‑creditor
relationship in that situation and I understand that to underpin the common
ground in the Full Court below.
I think it requires
an unconditional present obligation to pay that converts over to a
debtor‑creditor relationship.
MR DONAGHUE:
Which has been
conceded to exist.
No, that would only arise once the
Saunders v Vautier
power is exercised.
MR DONAGHUE:
I understand why your Honours are asking me these questions, but these
questions – and they are important for the resolution
of the appeal,
but it is difficult for me to answer them with the way that I have agreed with
Mr Wheelahan to divide the argument.
concern – and I speak only for myself, Mr Solicitor –
is that the premise from which your argument is proceeding
I am not yet
convinced of. That is, that there is a debtor‑creditor relationship. I
accept that there is a concession made
to that effect, but I do not actually
know what it means in the context of a trust.
It may be that your
argument does not rely on that premise, I do not know, but to the extent that it
does then, for my part, I am
not at all certain. I say that for this reason.
Where I have a trustee who has set aside an amount under a trust deed for a
beneficiary,
then so far as I understand the law of trusts, that does not create
a debtor‑creditor relationship at law in the way that I
understood the
concession was made.
As I understood it, what it does is it leaves in
the hands of the trustee subject to his or her or its obligations as trustee
in terms of investment powers and the like. As a result of that, until the
beneficiary takes some step either exercising the power
or something else to collapse that arrangement – that is,
to remove the obligations imposed on the trustee – there is
pick up the language used by Justice Steward, unconditional present
obligation to pay. So, I raise that only because for
me that – if
that is the premise of the argument then that is – I need to tell you
upfront that is of concern to me.
MR DONAGHUE:
I appreciate
that, your Honour, and that will undoubtedly be important to the ultimate
question of whether or not – even
assuming the correctness of the
construction that I am going to advance in relation to 109D(3) – the
appeal should be allowed.
I accept that, but to get there I need to show an
erroneous construction, because if the Full Court was right that you needed a
payment and an obligation to repay, then I lose before you get to any of those
factual questions.
GAGELER CJ:
Yes. So, your argument in legal
principle is proceeding on the assumption of: one, an unconditional present
obligation to pay, and
two, an acquiescence in the retention of the amount to be
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, that is right, your Honour, and
Mr Wheelahan’s burden will be to address your Honours on those
GAGELER CJ:
are going to effectively deal with the common law side and explain why as a
matter of construction at common law that is right,
and Mr Wheelahan is
then going to try to draw an analogy with the equitable circumstances that we
are in. Is that how it is going
MR DONAGHUE:
not have put it that way, your Honour. As I would prefer to frame it, I am
going to deal with what, in my submission,
is a fairly conventional question of
statutory construction as to what 109D means, having regard to its text and
context. The answer
that I will seek to develop is that – because of
the expansionary effect of the inclusive definition of
– it is not the case, even though as a matter of
ordinary meaning a loan might at its core require payment and repayment, the
expansive definition in 109D(3) does not.
The reasons that the Full
Court gave for overlaying that ordinary meaning and confining the exclusive
definition were wrong, so that
you should give effect to the financial
accommodation limb, at least to the extent that a loan includes the allowance of
pay – a very conventional form of financial
accommodation – and that if I am right about all of that, then the
we lost below are wrong and we get into the factual territory that
your Honours have been raising with me.
Mr Solicitor, I take it that your case is very simply this: there is no
actual loan here, but the definition extends to financial
accommodation.
Prime Wheat
tells us that that includes extending time for pay, and that
is what Parliament intended.
MR DONAGHUE:
And the only thing you then need to deal
with is Subdivision EA, and how it all fits
MR DONAGHUE:
I do propose to deal with that, but
that is the essence of the argument. So, I could probably put it very shortly,
but as we lost
below on this point, I do propose to take your Honours
through some steps, but that is the essence of it.
GAGELER CJ:
So, it is (3)(b), is it?
MR DONAGHUE:
Section (3)(b)
is the core of it, yes. Potentially (3)(d) as well, but (3)(b) is the
core of it.
Can I ask one other question. Is there
any dispute between the parties that financial accommodation extends to any
assistance, whether direct or indirect, both in terms of the
provision of the assistance – as we know, that it includes sometimes
a provision of infrastructure, and then the repayment obligation can sometimes
include a whole range of arrangements, whether it
is payment by commission or
share of profits. Is there any dispute about that? About what financial
accommodation means?
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honour, I
think the answer to that is that there might be at the boundaries, but because
it is the case, as your Honours have
explained, that financial
accommodation is potentially a concept of extremely great wit, we accept that
you need to interpret 109D(3)(b)
in the context of the anti‑avoidance
regime in Division 7A, which is about accessing private company profits
other than by
way of dividend.
So, it might be that some
things – like a guarantee that has not been called upon or a line of
credit that has not been drawn
down, where there is no accessing of the
company’s profits – might, in their statutory context. Even
though they are
capable of being financial accommodations, sometimes in this
regime they might not be, but that does not matter for the purposes
case, because the kind of financial accommodation we are concerned with here is
allowing time to pay.
That, in my submission, on any view of it, is
financial accommodation, and I do not think our friends deny that if they are
in limiting (b) in the way that they seek to do, the financial
accommodation limb would at least
extend ‑ ‑ ‑
ask about financial accommodation. Do you accept that that requires, in this
case, the company to have done something?
MR DONAGHUE:
have acquiesced.
And to beneficiary?
Yes. It has to have acquiesced in the funds being used for
general trust purposes.
Is doing nothing sufficient
for that purpose?
MR DONAGHUE:
With knowledge.
And do we have a finding of knowledge?
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes. I think we do – yes, we do.
it is Mr Bendel ‑ ‑ ‑
Mr Bendel’s – he is the whole
And then the next question is: do you need a
time for payment that is then extended?
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Does that assume that it
is due now?
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, and it is just being allowed to
not be paid now.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Yes. If there was a
future date for payment, you would need a
different ‑ ‑ ‑
That might be different. Certainly, that would prevent there
being a forbearance. It might not prevent there being financial
accommodation,
but we do not have that on the facts. Can I advance the constructional part of
the argument, which I will endeavour
to do efficiently and in the way that has
been adequately summarised.
Mr Donaghue, just
one question from me. Does the constructional argument involve addressing the
counterfactual tax consequences,
or is that a matter for Mr Wheelahan, or
is that agreed or is the subject of findings?
MR DONAGHUE:
not sure I understand exactly what your Honour means by
“counterfactual tax consequences”.
made an observation early in your submissions that without the approach that you
are contending for – on the approach that
has been put by the
taxpayer, you do not have the tax consequences if the amount was paid by way of
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes. Well, that I think is undisputed.
I think on our friends’ construction they say – I hope I am
doing justice
to the argument, but they say a loan requires payment and
repayment, so you are not within Subdivision B. You could potentially
been within Subdivision EA, but you did not assess pursuant to
Subdivision EA, and therefore there is no tax payable under this
arrangement, but our essential point is that
are saying that tax was paid by the beneficiary in year 1 and on the
taxpayer’s analysis the shareholder, not the trustee,
is not assessed to
tax in year 2.
MR DONAGHUE:
That is correct, as I
understand it.
On the same amount.
But the trust itself is taxed in year 2 because it receives a
dividend ‑ ‑ ‑
MR DONAGHUE:
By reason of ‑ ‑ ‑
‑ ‑ ‑ or, if distributed, it will be
the beneficiaries again who will be taxed again.
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, the trust is taxed again by reason of the operation of 109D, but otherwise
not, as I understand it.
Well, it depends on what the
trustee does in the second year with that deemed dividend income.
But there is no deemed dividend income unless 109D deems
there to be such income.
Yes, but you will deal with
this issue of – which the tribunal touch
MR DONAGHUE:
This is the interrelationship
between ‑ ‑ ‑
Not just interrelation with EA but the fact that on your argument the
income – the amount, if I can just use a neutral term,
gets included
in the assessable income of the company in year 1, and tax is paid on it,
and then included in the assessable income
of the trustee in
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, but that, your Honour, in
essence arises because one needs, in a sense, to draw a line under year 1
in that scenario because
the regime we are concerned here with is access to the
profits of the beneficiary company, Gleewin Investments. In a sense, it does
not really matter where the income came from. If the income that is in that
company is then being accessed by shareholders or associates
of shareholders
other than by way of a dividend, that is the mischief to which Division 7A
suppose your point is that it is a bit like the way we used to tax company
dividends before imputation. It is the same profit,
but it gets taxed in the
company and then taxed at the shareholder level, and that is just the way the
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, your Honour.
MR DONAGHUE:
We certainly do not accept
there is an anomaly in the Act working in that way.
understand.
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honours, Division 7A was
introduced back in 1998 by the
Taxation Laws Amendment Act (No. 3)
. The explanatory memorandum for that Act explains its purpose.
Your Honours have the explanatory memorandum in volume 5 of the
book at tab 37. Can I just note a couple of references that support the
purpose being as I have already stated it to be.
When your Honours
have that, if you are using joint book numbering it is on page 656 at the
top of the page, in red. It is Chapter
9 that I am taking
your Honours to. The internal page number is in the bottom‑right
corner, page 129. Paragraph 9.2 states:
The purpose of the amendments is to ensure that private companies will no
longer be able to make tax‑free distributions of
profits to shareholders
(and their associates) in the form of payments or loans.
A couple of
pages on, at paragraph 9.15, in the overview:
The amendments will ensure that all amounts lent or paid and amounts of
debts forgiven by private companies, are treated as dividends
and are assessable
income of the shareholder or associate under
section 44 –
And then, quite a bit later, at
paragraph 119, which is joint book of authorities 679, under a heading
“Specification of policy
objective”, paragraph 9.119:
The purpose of this tax measure is to reduce the scope for tax avoidance by
ensuring that tax is payable on distributions from private
companies which take
the form of loans which are not on commercial terms. Currently, private
companies are, in certain circumstances,
able to make distributions of realised
or unrealised profits that are effectively tax free by structuring them as
payments or loans
to shareholders rather than as taxable
distributions.
So, that was the objective. If your Honours then go
to the Act to Division 7A, and starting with section 109B, there is a
outline of the Division. Your Honours can see in the
This Division treats 3 kinds of amounts as dividends paid by a
private company:
paid by the company to a shareholder or shareholder’s associate (see
section 109C);
lent by the company to a shareholder or shareholder’s associate
That is 109D, our focus here, and:
of debts owed by a shareholder or shareholder’s associate to the company
that the company forgives (see section 109F).
And in each
This treatment makes the amounts assessable income of the
shareholder or associate (under section 44).
And then there is a reference at the bottom of the box to an additional
An amount may also be included in the assessable income of a shareholder or
shareholder’s associate if:
(a) a company has an unpaid present entitlement to income of a trust; and
(b) the trustee makes a payment or loan to, or forgives a debt of, the
shareholder –
So, you have in effect, we would say, direct extraction of company
profits by three different mechanisms dealt with in the primary
provisions – C, D and F – and then you have an
indirect arrangement whereby there is an unpaid present entitlement between
trustee and the corporate beneficiary, but it is indirect because rather than
go – if the trustee then makes a loan directly
to the shareholder or
an associate of the shareholder of the company, then that is also captured.
That is the Subdivision EA point
which I will come to.
Each of the
operative provisions – C, D and F – talks about a
payment to an entity. I will not take your Honours through
definitions, but if I can give you some references. The definitions for this
Subdivision are found in 109ZD. 109ZD defines
“entity” to have,
your Honours go to that
section of the 1997 Act in due course,
you will see in subparagraph (1)(f) that the definition of an entity
includes “a trust”.
So, the scheme of the Division is that a
payment or a loan to a trust – an entity that is a trust –
may trigger a deemed
dividend under these provisions if the trust is either a
shareholder of the private corporation or an associate of the shareholder.
Here, in this appeal on the facts, it was the associate limb. So, the
trustee – the entity that was the trustee – Gleewin
Ltd, is an associate of the shareholder of the corporate beneficiary,
Mr Bendel. So, it was captured in that way.
The focus of our
appeal is of course 109D, but can I briefly direct your Honours’
attention to the other two main operative
provisions. So, 109C is the most
obvious case of the extraction of money from the corporate form; the payment by
the corporate form
to the associate shareholder or shareholder’s
associate, which is not paid as a dividend, but is, by reason of this provision,
deemed to be a dividend. Consistently with its role as an anti‑avoidance
provision, you see a wide definition of “payment”
subsection (3).
And that applies across the whole
of the Division?
MR DONAGHUE:
No, in – sorry,
your Honour, perhaps.
I say that because
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, the reason I said no,
your Honour, is that our friends – for reasons I will come
to – put great weight on this
definition of “payment”,
which they incorporate into 109D. Effectively, their argument is: you
have to have a payment
under 109C(3) that is repaid to be within D, and,
for reasons I will come to, we say that is wrong because 109D does not use
“payment”, relevantly.
Indeed ‑ ‑ ‑
a different question, though. To the extent that it is raised in this Division,
what is in 109C(3) picked up with 109CA,
defines what a payment is.
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, your Honour, by reason
of – as you say – the definition of “payment”
in ZD, but as your Honour has
no doubt noted, we have a wide definition of
“payment” in subsection (3), which includes a transfer of
property, but
in (3A) Parliament has specifically provided that:
a loan to an entity is not a payment to the entity.
So, as we read
that provision, the concepts of a loan and a payment are made mutually exclusive
in terms by the definition. That,
for reasons I will develop, is a significant
obstacle to our friends’ component to attempt to inject payment as a
concept of the operation of the loan provision in D. The other
main operative provision before we come to D is in F –
– and this is forgiven debts. So, there is taken to be a
if all or part of a debt the entity owed . . . is forgiven in
that year –
Again, you have a wide definition of what amounts
to forgiveness in subsection (3), although it is a definition that again
cross‑references
to other places. So, in subsection (3), “When
is a debt forgiven?”:
for the purposes of this Division if –
would be forgiven under section 245‑35 –
relevantly – I will not take your Honours to it, but it is when
it is when:
(a) the debtor’s obligation to pay the debt is released or waived, or is
otherwise extinguished other than by repaying the
debt in full; or
(b) the period within which the creditor is entitled to sue for the recovery of
the debt ends, because of the operation of a statute
of limitations, without the
debt having been paid.
Our point is that both of those are – sorry, before I make
that I will also note subsection (6), your Honours “Debt
forgiveness
by failure to rely on obligation to pay”:
An amount of debt an entity (the
) owes a private company
. . . if a reasonable person
would conclude (having regard to all the circumstances) that the private company
will not insist on
the entity paying the amount or rely on the entity’s
obligation to pay the amount.
All of those are about permanent
forgiveness of the debt. It never has to be paid. That is what engages the
deemed dividend under
109F. Our friends in writing and in their oral
outline refer to this provision as if it is dealing with the situation of the
debts, and we submit that that is a significant error because the reason
for dealing with these matters separately is because there
is a distinction to
be drawn between situations in which the debt will never need to be repaid,
which is equated in effect to a payment,
and situations in which there is only
temporary deferral, and it is in the latter situation that 109D bites, in
our submission.
There is an anti‑overlap provision, which I have
temporarily misplaced but which I will turn up in a moment, which ensures
if a dividend has been deemed under 109D because there has been a deferral
and then there is subsequently a forgiveness of that
debt, you do not get deemed
twice by reason of this. So, there is obviously a possibility that the
company – that the debt
might be deferred a couple of times and then
ultimately forgiven, but the Parliament has expressly turned its mind to that
So, your Honours, can I ask you then to turn
Your overlap tie breaker provision, was
that a reference to 109Y?
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour. I will come to 109Y. It might be G. If
your Honour will give me a moment, I will see if I can find it. Yes,
MR DONAGHUE:
is 109G(3):
A private company is not taken under section 109F to pay a dividend at
the end of a year . . . if, because of the loan, the
company is taken:
(a) under section 109D to pay a dividend at the end of that year –
So, if your Honours go then to 109D(1), you will see
A private company is taken to pay a dividend to an entity –
here, the trust:
at the end of one of the private company’s years of
income . . . if:
(a) the private company makes a loan to the entity during the current year; and
(b) the loan is not fully repaid before the lodgment day for the current
“lodgment day” being defined in subsection (6) of that
section. There are also of course the requirements in (c) and
but they are not important to my – well, no, that is not so.
In (d) you see that the loan has to be to a shareholder:
or an associate of such a shareholder, when the loan is made;
a reasonable person would conclude . . . that the loan is made
they were a shareholder or associate of the shareholder. You will note
that (1)(a) says “makes a loan”. It does not
say: makes a
payment. So, textually there is no hook for our friends to insert the
definition of “payment” that you
have just seen
Is that right, given the fact
that (b) is “the loan is not fully repaid”?
Well, our friends do make something of that, your Honour,
and I accept I need to meet that argument, but I will meet that argument
shortly, if I might defer your Honour’s question, but the short
answer is – well, no, I will not – I will just
I will come to it, I assure your Honour.
The central issue, of
course, on this appeal, is what it means to make a loan for the purposes
of (1)(a), and we are assisted in
determining that by the definition in
subsection (3):
In this Division,
(a) an advance of money; and
(b) a provision of credit or any other form of financial accommodation; and
(c) a payment of an amount for, on account of, on behalf of or at the request
of, an entity, if there is an express or implied obligation
to repay the amount;
(d) a transaction (whatever its terms or form) which in substance effects a
As I have already indicated, our argument focuses particularly
on (3)(b), although, in the alternative, we do rely on (3)(d) as well.
It is, of course, an inclusive definition. In that context, can I remind
your Honours of what the Court has said about how to approach
definitions. I think the most commonly cited authority on the point is probably
Corporate Affairs Commission (South Australia) v Australian Central Credit
[1985] HCA 64
(1985) 157 CLR 201
, which your Honours have in
volume 3, tab 11.
The passage I am about to read was recently
applied by five of your Honours – your Honour the
Chief Justice and Justices Gordon,
Edelman, Steward and
Gleeson – in
Harvey v Minister for Primary Industry
paragraph 76. Going to the original, at the bottom of 206 in
Corporate Affairs Commission
, your Honours see what we submit is a
conventional statement of the principle:
the use of the word “including” indicates . . .
the sub‑section is expansive of what would otherwise be included
notion of –
an offer or invitation . . . That does not, however, mean that
none of the cases which the sub‑section includes would have been
in that notion in any event. The function of such an inclusive
“definition” is commonly both to extend the
ordinary meaning of the
particular word or phrase to include matters which otherwise would not be
encompassed by it and to avoid
possible uncertainty by expressly providing for
the inclusion of particular borderline cases.
We submit that is exactly
what 109D(3) is doing. So, there is no dispute between us that the
ordinary meaning of the word “loan”
does encompass a situation where
there is an anterior payment and an obligation to repay. There are multiple
authorities that point
in that direction, and we are not in dispute about
Do you accept that the expression “makes
a loan” operates to confine the concept of the inclusive definition of
MR DONAGHUE:
I do not, your Honour, no.
In my submission, it is the operative provision that brings in the full ambit of
the term “loan”
as Parliament has defined it.
So, one way of testing the scope of the definition would be to read the
definition into subsection (1)(a).
MR DONAGHUE:
Do you accept that that is a way of testing
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, in my submission, that is how
your Honour should do it. What that means is that if the concept of making
a loan includes
things that do not involve making a payment, they are
nevertheless injected into the operative provision in (1)(a), and to
where I am going to go, “repaid” therefore has to be read
accordingly.
But, nevertheless, whatever a loan is,
it is something that has to be made.
MR DONAGHUE:
be – to pick up the definition of “loan”, it
(a) an advance of money; and
(b) a provision . . .
(c) a payment . . .
(d) a transaction –
So, it has to meet one of those
requirements, yes. There are cases like
Prime Wheat
that discuss the ordinary meaning of the word “loan” as payment and
repayment, and we do not quibble with that.
The error, in our
submission, made by the Full Court was not with respect to an identification of
the ordinary meaning of the word,
but in treating that ordinary meaning as, in
effect, exhausting the meaning of the defined term. You can see that
their Honours
did that, in my submission, in a few places, but particularly
at paragraph 79 in the core appeal book at 109; paragraph 79 of the
Full Court’s reasoning.
Do you accept that
although you say it does not exhaust the meaning, it does influence or affect
the meaning? I think that is what
this Court said in
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, it can. Yes, I am going to
take your Honours to
in a moment. Yes, I accept that it
can, but it does not – and given the conventional approach to an
inclusive definition that
I have just taken your Honours to, it would, in
my submission, be wrong to treat the ordinary meaning as cancelling out the
operation given by the language that Parliament has enacted, and yet
when one ‑ ‑ ‑
There may be a narrower way of looking at it though in the sense that it
is – if you accept, as I understand you do, that financial
accommodation can cover a wide range of arrangements, what underpins even
financial accommodation is the transfer of something between
someone else giving
rise to a payment back; something goes forward and something comes back in
consideration for it.
MR DONAGHUE:
Not always, your Honour,
in my submission, particularly in the case of a sale on deferred payment terms.
Here we say, well, the
trust already had the money. The beneficiary acquiesces
in the payment not being made, allowing the trust to keep the money, but
substance the situation is that the trust has the benefit and use of funds for
whatever period it is allowed to not pay them over
to the person who is
entitled, and that allowance of time is, in my submission, a classic example of
a financial accommodation where
there is not the
two‑way ‑ ‑ ‑
There is the two‑way.
If that is right,
then every bare trust is financial accommodation.
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honour, we do not say that the unpaid – that the present
entitlement by itself is enough to have a loan. We do not
say that. There
needs to be acquiescence. So, if, for example, I am a beneficiary, but I do not
know that, then I cannot be financially
– there has been a
distribution in my favour – I am sorry, to be more precise, I cannot
be financially accommodating
by not calling for the payment because I do not
know that I am entitled to do so. So, our friends attribute to us the
proposition
that any unpaid present entitlement is a loan, but we do not accept
that that is a consequence of our argument.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Just to pick up Justice Edelman’s example, if you have just a bare
trust where you could call for payment – you could,
not – you say that is a form of financial accommodation?
You could call for payment, you know you could call for payment,
but instead you acquiesce in the money being used for the general
purposes of
the trust – then yes, in my submission, that is financial
accommodation.
BEECH‑JONES J:
You have added the reference
to general purpose.
MR DONAGHUE:
BEECH‑JONES J:
If it is just the simplest of bare
trust, saying: I am letting it stay with the trustee because this is how we set
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes – the reason I added the
reference is that there might be complications that I am not particularly keen
to take the Court
into in relation to sub‑trust type setups. So, if the
money was left in the trust but there was a separate sub‑trust
then that might create some different issues, but if we are leaving that aside,
then I think my answer to your Honour stands.
We would say that there is
financial accommodation, because the trust is being allowed – there
is a deferral of the time,
assuming the present entitlement for which the
beneficiary – where the beneficiary is entitled to call for payment,
think was the premise of the question which your Honour has put to
BEECH‑JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
‑ ‑ ‑ then,
But your – the additional element for
you is subjective knowledge, as I understand it, of the beneficiary. That does
appear in any other example that you give. In fact, all the other
examples – which may be compelling, particularly the common
examples – are examples where, objectively, there has been some
deferral, but you do not need to ask what the subjective
understanding of the
party permitting the deferral is.
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour, there are cases like
in this Court, which is
whether a bankrupt has committed
an offence by passing a cheque that is going to
bounce. In that context, the Court did not accept that there was a provision of
credit by acceptance of the cheque without any knowledge that the cheque was
bad. I will make sure I am putting this correctly to
your Honours, so if
you would give me one moment. What Justice Menzies said in
– I am sorry, your Honours, if you give me a
moment I will give you the reference.
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour.
This is not caught up with the
requirement of mens rea, though.
MR DONAGHUE:
No, but it is
recognising that the concept of giving time to pay carries with it the notion
that that is what you are doing. If
the creditor is not aware that that is what
they are doing – if they think that they have been paid immediately
because they
have been given a cheque but, as it turns out, they have not been
paid immediately – then they have not afforded credit, because
did not know that they did not agree to give time to pay.
holds, as I understand it, is that there had not been a provision
of credit in that case, because the person thought that they had
immediately by taking the cheque in payment as part of the transaction. So, you
do need – before you can afford
financial accommodation by allowing
time to pay, you need to be conscious that that is what you are
GAGELER CJ:
But, Mr Solicitor, juridically, what is
going on when there is a financial accommodation? What are the elements of
MR DONAGHUE:
The concept is so wide, your Honour,
that I am not sure that there is a one‑size‑fits‑all answer to
that question,
GAGELER CJ:
case of what you are describing as an acquiescence in the retention
MR DONAGHUE:
allowance of time to pay.
GAGELER CJ:
An allowance of time to
MR DONAGHUE:
What is going on is that somebody is
allowing another person to benefit from the use of their property for such
period of time
as they allow until they call for it to be paid to
GAGELER CJ:
So, there is an existing obligation to pay.
Is the nature of that obligation in any way
MR DONAGHUE:
By the provision, no,
your Honour. There is an existing entitlement to be paid which is not
enforced, thereby allowing another
to benefit from a
non‑payment.
Can I ask you an anterior
question. What do you say is the meaning in (b) of the provision of credit,
bearing in mind that you have
said that a guarantee that is not called for is
not called, and a line of credit that is not drawn down upon is not caught? So,
what does provision of credit in (b) mean, bearing in mind that financial
accommodation is then said to be a form of
MR DONAGHUE:
Can I take that on notice,
your Honour?
Yes, of course.
I am not sure I can give you a definition on my feet, but I will
come back to that after the break, if I might.
I think it might be important, though, given what you said earlier about lines
of credit and guarantees.
MR DONAGHUE:
accepted – what I said, your Honour, is that it might be the
case, given the policy purpose of 7A, that those kinds
of transaction,
which would be financial accommodation in some context, might not be in the
context of this case.
Well, do not answer it now,
this is just ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Solicitor, just to pick up what, I think – in answer to
Justice Edelman’s question – you referenced to
: you said knowledge, but the assent referred to in
I think at 534 and effectively the agreement to extend time referred to by
Justice Menzies, does that need to manifest itself beyond
a simple state of
knowledge of the alleged creditor?
MR DONAGHUE:
certainly Justice Kitto said, in the middle of page 534:
The assent need not be contractual, and it need not be expressed.
you would need to – in our submission, if the assent can be inferred
from the relevant facts ‑ ‑ ‑
This submission is really contrary to your interests. If you had a
situation where one party said: I have allowed this debt to
remain unpaid, but
just because I forgot about it, I never subjectively averted to it –
on your submission, that would not
be affording financial accommodation. That
seems completely contrary to your propositions about the purposes of this
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honour, as I had
understood the authorities, we have accepted that the mere fact of an
entitlement that has not been paid
would not by itself – and without
more – be enough. So, it must follow from that that there are cases
where that entitlement
exists but, for whatever reason, a financial
accommodation has not been granted.
The situation where the person has
just forgotten that the amount is payable – or never knew that the
amount is payable –
are examples that, as I have understood our
position, we accept, fall outside the provision, but in light of what
your Honours have
put to me, I will confirm my instructions on that during
the morning adjournment.
We are looking for a kind
of transaction that is a form of tax avoidance, are we not?
MR DONAGHUE:
That is the general purpose within which you
are construing this. In our submission, one sees it quite readily in the facts
are before the Court, with an entitlement being in the form of a private
company wholly owned by Mr Bendel, and Mr Bendel having
the – or the trust in Mr Bendel having access to the funds.
That is the very kind of thing that we are talking here,
and it is captured in
our submission because the company Gleewin Investments has allowed time to
pay, and that is financial accommodation.
Can I ask your Honours to
turn to a table that I hope you have attached to our three‑page outline
which we provided as, I hope,
an efficient way of dealing with the extrinsic
materials that inform the constructional task that is before you. This
of “loan” that you see in 109D(3) has a long history
in federal tax legislation. It first appeared, we believe, in the
Benefits Tax Act, and you can see in our table – in the first row of
the table – an extract of section 136(1)
with the definition of
“loan”, which is the same as the definition that your Honours
are now construing.
The explanatory memorandum at the time for that
provision, as you can see in the right‑hand column of that row, described
definition as given an extended meaning to the concept of a loan. Since
that point in time, particularly in the context of anti‑avoidance
provisions in the Tax Act, the definitional parts of it, including most
relevantly paragraph (b) language includes:
the provision of credit or any other form of financial
accommodation –
has been used on multiple occasions in the Tax
Act, in 46 C and 46D in the late 1980s, where it was described in the
explanatory memorandum
as making it:
clear that the term is not confined to amounts of borrowings actually
advanced to the borrower –
Then in the late 1990s, over the
page of that table, in 45ZA, again the same language you see in
paragraph (b), and we have extracted
quite a significant part of the
explanatory memorandum to that Act in the right‑hand column. We have
given your Honours the
full documents in the parts of the JBA that you can
see reference there in the table, but that language was described as defining
“loan” broadly:
and thus includes financing arrangements not strictly loans at law, such
• forbearing to collect payment of a debt which has fallen
That is the point. So, a
forbearance need not be a forbearance with knowledge. It is just any objective
conduct which shows that
the debt is not required to be paid
immediately.
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, your Honour. Our
definition – some definitions of “loan”, including the
Prime Wheat
definition, did have a separate paragraph for forbearance,
which we do not have in the context of D(3).
reason why that might also be important is because when you actually look at the
overall structure of the provisions you are taking
to us, they have an objective
inquiry built into them:
a reasonable would conclude (having regard to all the
circumstances) –
MR DONAGHUE:
Many of them do. They
do not all have that, but many of them do.
not, but they recognise that one is looking at an objective inquiry about
whether or not one has this form of financial accommodation,
even on the
extended definition.
MR DONAGHUE:
What your Honours are
putting to me I think suggests a wider concept of “loan” than the
concept for which I am contending,
rather than a narrower one.
It is wider in one respect and narrower in another. It is wider in the
respect that you might not need any subjective understanding
of any of the
parties. It is narrower perhaps in the sense that you need objective conduct
that establishes something between the
parties. You have used the label
“transaction”,
something ‑ ‑ ‑
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, or provision of credit, but in our submission,
Sorry, just
to complete that – every element, that I understand, of financial
accommodation, regardless of its nature, has
that kind of transaction. It does
not have to be money, we know that. It can be a whole range of things flowing
but one way or
the other way, it can be deferred, but there is an underlying
transaction.
MR DONAGHUE:
But in the context, your Honours,
of an allowance of time to pay, the underlying – in a sense, there is
an underlying transaction,
in the sense that there is the thing that gives rise
to the obligation to pay, so in that sense I agree with what your Honour is
putting to me. One is not looking at this in a vacuum. But
GAGELER CJ:
But that is a prior transaction. That is an existing obligation.
That is an existing obligation, and then the provision of the
financial accommodation is not utilising one’s rights that
arise by reason
of that prior transaction but allowing the money to remain somewhere
GAGELER CJ:
And when one does utilise one’s rights,
it is to enforce the prior transaction, is it not?
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, yes, and thus,
GAGELER CJ:
the rights flowing from the prior transaction.
MR DONAGHUE:
Indeed. So, the financial accommodation, in this kind of example, is the
agreement to the deferral and, once that agreement comes
to an end and there is
a call for payment or an insisting on the rights, the financial accommodation is
over at that point in time.
So, to foreshadow where I am going to come
to, for this kind of financial accommodation, we would accept that the
debt – there
has been a repayment of the loan, rather, at the point
there is no longer a provision of financial accommodation, because one has
adjust the meaning of repaying of the loan to take account of the character of
the loan, and “loan” has an extended
definition in the way that we
have been discussing.
It may not be an agreement to
defer, it could be any other unilateral objective conduct which manifests an
intention to defer to
the other party.
MR DONAGHUE:
well be right, your Honour, and it is not inconsistent with my
submissions.
MR DONAGHUE:
it is perhaps inconsistent with the limit that I have placed on my submissions.
It may be that I have sought to limit more
than is necessary the notion of
financial accommodation, but I can accept what your Honour puts to
BEECH‑JONES J:
Just so I can get it, if you had a
simple case of arms‑length parties and a debt was due
on 31 March, and the creditor did
not stump up on 1 April and
say: pay now – there was just no communication at all –
and then, three or four weeks later,
said: please pay – that would
not be the manifestation of a forbearance or an agreement or anything else. It
is equally consistent
with straight‑up neglect, is it not?
Well, it would be, in my submission, the provision of financial
accommodation or the provision of – in the same way that
you my car and you say you will pay me soon, and I do not ask you to pay me for
a month, I have provided credit to you
or financial accommodation over that
BEECH‑JONES J:
With no correspondence –
you could have been in someone else’s car accident, or on
holidays ‑ ‑ ‑
MR DONAGHUE:
There is still credit being provided.
BEECH‑JONES J:
‑ ‑ ‑ or on a desert island, and you just
did not think about it – does not matter – and you did
communicate anything about it.
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honour,
that kind of arrangement will not have any statutory consequences here, because
as long as the repayment has relevantly
occurred before the lodgment date, then
there will be no ramifications under this. So, because of the way the dates
work, there
actually has to be quite a prolonged period of
BEECH‑JONES
I understand.
MR DONAGHUE:
‑ ‑ ‑ before any of these deeming effects would
take place.
I mean, in effect, then, you are saying
that you can provide credit by doing and saying
MR DONAGHUE:
By providing the goods and not
getting paid for them. As I understand it, that is a core way in which credit
is provided. If
I give you what you are buying and do not ask you to pay me for
some period of time, I have a call to credit, and I have provided
So, your Honours, we submit – I will not take
your Honours further, but those passages in the extrinsic material point to
having used this form of words repeatedly, including in
anti‑avoidance contexts, to expressly broaden the concept of a loan
pick up situations where the commercial or an economic substance of a debt
relationship has been regulated by obligations
that do not amount in law to a
debt. So, you will see at
whether Mr de Wijn will disagree that it is broader. It is a question
of how much broader.
MR DONAGHUE:
I agree that that is the
critical question, but it is not just – I am not relying on this just
to say that it is broader,
but that it recognises that things that do not meet
the legal character of a loan are nevertheless to be treated as a loan for the
purposes of these provisions. So, when one then sees the Full Court
saying – and our friend saying – well, there has
payment and a repayment, we say, well, true as a matter of ordinary language,
but not in the context of this.
The difficulty about
relying upon explanatory memorandums for other provisions, is it takes these
things out of their context.
We have a particular context
MR DONAGHUE:
I accept that, your Honour, but the
last three rows in that are all in the 1936 Act, and they are all
anti‑avoidance
understand that. It is a big Act.
MR DONAGHUE:
It is a big
Act. I understand that, your Honour, but it would be, to put it mildly, an
undesirable drafting technique for the
Parliament to adopt to – in an
Act that has a definition of “loan” repeatedly, to reuse the same
words, intending
them to have different meanings in different
anti‑avoidance provisions of the Act. So, we submit that is an unlikely
to attribute to the Parliament.
The next point to be made very
shortly is that to – in the context of an anti‑avoidance
provision, we submit that one
should not readily attribute to the Parliament a
focus on the form of the transaction, as opposed to its substance. The payment
with a repayment reasoning does, in our submission, very much preference the
form of the arrangement, rather than the substance of
it, in circumstances where
one sees repeated references to substance in the text of the provisions that
your Honours are concerned
with. There is some support for that submission
in a case called
Corporate Initiatives
in the Federal Court
that Mr Wheelahan is going to take your Honours to, so I will not
detain you with it now.
GAGELER CJ:
So, you use the word
“arrangement”. Is that another way of saying accommodation? I am
just not sure. Does it need
to be bilateral, or, in your submission, could it
be unilateral?
MR DONAGHUE:
The accommodation could be
unilateral.
GAGELER CJ:
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honours, I am trying to move through our constructional points without
delaying you unduly. There is – in the context
of definitional
provisions – particular importance, in our submission, in not
implying limitations or qualifications that are
not clearly required by the text
or context because of the capacity for doing so to quite dramatically reshape
the operation of the
operative provisions in which those definitional terms are
Justice Edelman mentioned the
case to me, and
I will not ask your Honours to go back to it. Obviously, it is a recent
decision of the Court, but there your Honour
the Chief Justice and
Justices Gordon, Edelman, Gleeson and Beech‑Jones did say, at
paragraph [32]:
the purpose of a definition is to fix or clarify the meaning of the defined
That it is:
of “fundamental importance” –
to that purpose:
that “limitations and qualifications are not read into a statutory
definition unless clearly required by its terms or its context”.
Our friends say they can meet that test in their written submissions.
They say that it is that the qualification or limitations that
they are seeking
to imply – the obligation for a payment and repayment can satisfy
that requirement, but in our submission,
really for the reasons that I am
developing, we deny that that is so. In our submission, the Full Court really
fell well short of
adopting the
‑type approach in its
analysis of the definition.
So, for example, in the core appeal book, if
your Honours could go to page 107, paragraph 70, you can see the
way that the Full Court
dealt with paragraph (b), which was essentially to
look at the surrounding subparagraphs of the definition in 109D(3)(a), (c) and
(d) to say, well, each of them “encapsulate a concept of repayment”,
and most of the paragraph works through justifying
that proposition. Then, in
the last few lines it said:
A transaction effects a loan of money where it in substance effects an
obligation to repay an identifiable sum –
Well, that is the ordinary meaning of the word “loan”, it is
not the paragraph (b) meaning. Then:
It would be consistent with the context of s 109D(3) for
s 109D(3)(b) to also be read as encapsulating a concept of repayment.
In our submission, that reasoning is just not the correct approach to
say, well, it would be consistent with some of the other paragraphs
inclusive definition that is expansionary of the meaning of “loan”
to limit it by reference to other paragraphs
that are expanding or clarifying in
other directions. To say it is consistent with that context is, in my
submission, well short
of saying that it is clearly required by its context to
confine the paragraph in that way.
GAGELER CJ:
It avoids tension
with section 109D(1)(b). I know you are going to come to that,
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes. Well, it perhaps avoids tension with it, your Honour, but at the cost
of effectively reading out part of the expansion that
was provided in (b),
because it really – if you need to have – and indeed, not
just in (b), but in some of the other
paragraphs as well, because if you
need to have payment and repayment, it is difficult to see how one is getting
anywhere wider than
the ordinary meaning of the word. What are the inclusive
limbs doing?
Well, it is inclusive
because – we keep going back to the same concept –
“financial accommodation” is broader.
It encompasses physical
things. We know that because it also includes – the definition
itself picks up “assets”.
I mean, it is recognising there does not
have be a flow of money, it recognises there can be other mechanisms by which
the accommodation
is provided both in terms of the underlying obligation and
also in terms of repayment. That is why, in (b), you have:
the loan is not fully repaid before the
recognising that, when the provision of
credit – which you accept, I think, includes repayment of some
form – that the
other form of a financial accommodation may extend to
include payments and repayments of different kinds, not even limited to
MR DONAGHUE:
But on that view, does not include allowing
a person to keep money to which someone else is entitled for an indefinite
time and to use it for their own purposes.
Well, we are back to the premise. The premise is: has that underlying
transaction been created objectively? That is, is there
a state of facts where
there has been that arrangement or transaction put in place? That is what
Mr Wheelahan is going to deal with?
MR DONAGHUE:
but assuming in our favour, your Honour, that there has – if
your Honour will grant me that premise, that there has
been, then, on the
Full Court’s approach, there is still no loan. That is what I am
endeavouring to establish is wrong, that
if you have the underlying arrangement
that you are talking about such that there is the situation I have been
describing as the
beneficiary allowing the trustee to use the funds for the
benefit of someone
think the premise is the real issue. There is no – I mean, I do not
read the Full Court as saying that if I have made
an advance of money, even on
deferred terms, classic transaction, that is not caught.
do not say that in these reasons.
MR DONAGHUE:
It depends on
what you mean by an advance of money, your Honour, but if the trust has
$1 million, and it resolves to distribute
that $1 million to a single
beneficiary, and that beneficiary then acquiesces in the trust keeping
$1 million and using it for the
benefit of someone else, then in that
situation the Full Court says: no loan.
I do not know
example. Here, we do not have a
distribution, we have a setting aside. They
are fundamentally different concepts in equity.
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honour, our premise in this appeal is the agreed position, accepted in
the Full Court, that there is a debtor‑creditor
relationship established
by what the trust did in respect of, in my
example, $1 million.
Could I ask you a
point of principle which you may wish to think about over the break. If, as a
matter of law, there is no debtor‑creditor
relationship here because of
the terms of the trust resolution and the terms of the trust deed, does the
Commissioner insist –
does the Commissioner say we should decide the
case nonetheless based upon the concession, or should we decide it based upon
we perceive to be the correct legal position subsisting between the parties
as a model litigant?
MR DONAGHUE:
Can I come back to
your Honour after the break?
You know what I am
MR DONAGHUE:
I understand.
Yes, thank you.
Because, in a sense, the
definition of a loan is a debtor‑creditor relationship, and that is the
very thing we are arguing about.
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour, I completely understand where your Honour is coming from
in that regard. The Full Court of course found both
that there was a
debtor‑creditor relationship and that in this statutory context there was
not a loan, and that perhaps highlights
the rather peculiar position in which we
have ended up in terms of the authority about the construction
I thought they set out the concession at
paragraph 92, rather than made a separate finding on the
debtor‑creditor relationship,
but I may have misread it,
Mr Solicitor.
MR DONAGHUE:
Their Honours’
reasoning, having set out the concession at 72, then proceed on the basis
s 109D(3) requires more than the existence of a debtor‑creditor
relationship. It requires an obligation to repay and not merely
an obligation
So, in my submission, you can see in 93 that the operative
reason that the Commissioner lost was this confined definition of D(3),
rather than a rejection or questioning of the concession, but I hear what
your Honours are saying, and I will come back to your Honours
the morning adjournment with an answer to Justice Steward’s
MR DONAGHUE:
our submission, it cannot seriously be contended – and I do not
understand our friends to be suggesting – that it
would be impossible
for a statutory definition to displace the payment‑repayment requirement
that the Full Court read into
this definition that your Honours are now
concerned with.
Indeed, that point was made in a different context by
Justice Hill in his
Stamp Duties
book in 1996, in a passage I will
not take your Honours to, but it is in the materials at volume 5,
tab 33, at page 1845, where there,
construing the same definition that
was in issue in
Prime Wheat
, it was said:
It is clear from the definition of “loan” that it is unnecessary
that money be paid by the lender to the borrower for
there to be a
So, he was making the, in our submission, obvious point
that one has to give effect to the legislative language, and that if the
legislative
language does not require a payment – as it did not there
according to his Honour, and, as we submit, it equally does not
– then the Court should probably just give effect to the
language used rather than confining it by the ordinary meaning of
The requirement to have a payment is supported by our
friends – sorry, your Honours, can I go back one step. The way
our friends have sought to meet our argument that the sale on deferred
terms example shows that the definition of “loan”
must include or is
inconsistent, rather, with the payment and obligation to pay implication, is by
asserting that, in the situation
where something is sold on deferred payment
terms, there is, they say, both a payment and a repayment.
They seek to
get there by importing the definition from 109C(3) into the operation
of 109D. So, they say, in effect, in that kind
of case, because
“payment” is defined in 109C(3) – as your Honours
have seen earlier – to include:
a transfer of property –
They say you import that expanded
definition into the provisions dealing with “loan”, even though you
do not actually
have a word – you have a requirement to make a loan,
not to make a payment – and, having imported it, you have a broad
concept that includes a transfer of property, so that when a sale is made on
deferred payment terms, the passing over of the property
that is sold is a
payment, and then when you pay the purchase price, that is a
That, in our submission, involves a – well, it has
two problems. One, it utilises a definition from 109C to inform the meaning
“loan” in circumstances where Parliament has expressly dealt with
the relationship between those concepts in 109C(3)(a)
by saying they are
mutually exclusive. So, we are unable to see how, as a matter of interpretation
of the text, a loan can require
there to be a payment in circumstances where
Parliament said if there is a loan, there is not a payment. So, that is the
first problem.
The second problem is just the artificiality of it.
Your Honours, if a person buys something from a seller, their obligation is
to pay the seller. In no reasonable use of language does a person who, say,
buys a car repay the person who gives them the car.
Yet our friends’
analysis requires them to say when the car is given by the seller to me, the
seller has paid me, and then
when I give the purchase price, I have repaid them.
It is a distortion that our friends need to embrace in order to accommodate the
strained way in which the Full Court has read down the definitions, but not one
that your Honours should embrace.
Our position, and I can put this
very briefly given the time – the Commissioner’s position is
much more simple. We say,
well, there is a provision of credit or financial
accommodation when there is consent to the deferral of a payment. So, where the
person grants time to pay, there is a consensual arrangement under which payment
is deferred and the provision of financial accommodation.
In our submission,
that being so, it is irrelevant that the vendor has not paid an amount for the
simple reason that the
GAGELER CJ:
it is a bilateral arrangement. I thought you said it could be unilateral
MR DONAGHUE:
I did say that your Honour, and
that is why I paused on the word, but your Honours, what matters, in our
submission, is the position
of the person who is providing the financial
accommodation. So, I maintain my earlier answer,
your Honour.
And their consent is certainly
objective, but you say it could be objective or subjective, do
MR DONAGHUE:
This, I think, returns us to the debate
having earlier that I may have been putting this more narrowly
say: do not pay me for six months – you clearly say that is
financial accommodation, that is an objective
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, indeed.
But if they say nothing at all, then even
MR DONAGHUE:
they knowingly leave the arrangement – well, that is how I have been
putting it. They leave the trustee with the benefit
of the $1 million, to
take my earlier example, but they do not say anything about it, then that is
still a financial accommodation
situation, in my submission.
The position, though, there is, I think, a merger of two transactions:
the sale on deferred terms is a provision for property
from the vendor to the
purchaser. The financial accommodation is a separate arrangement whereby they
have, in effect, lent the money
to the purchaser, which the purchaser will then
defer in terms of payment back.
Now, that is the financial
accommodation, and there is an underlying transaction brought about the fact
that someone has handed over
property and then said in relation to it: I am not
going to demand payment now, I am going to accommodate you, I am going to give
you time to pay, so I have lent you the money, in effect, which you will then
repay in the future. They are still in the transaction
MR DONAGHUE:
But that, your Honour, it is the same
in my analysis; the situation is the underlying transaction – to put
it in the terms
of Your Honour’s question – is the
distribution of the trust income. Of course, there has to be something that
the entitlement to be paid that is then not insisted upon, the allowance
of the time being the financial accommodation. So, I accept
that there are two
stages to it, but if the trustee already has the money and is – I
will go back a step.
There is no question that if the money had been
distributed to the beneficiary and then loaned back, that would obviously be
by this scheme. Our proposition is that, in point of substance, there
is no difference between the money being paid from A to B
and then going back to
A, in circumstances where there was a legal obligation to pay it to B and B
saying: well, you just keep it.
Can I ask you this
question just briefly. If I have possession of your car, and it is your car and
you have a right to the car
and I do not give it to you, and you do not call for
it, is that a form of financial accommodation?
MR DONAGHUE:
I think not, your Honour.
And then, what is the
difference if, instead of a car, it is money? Have a think, maybe.
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, your Honour. Can I come back to
your Honour?
MR DONAGHUE:
It may be that my first answer is not correct. Can I come back,
your Honour?
MR DONAGHUE:
Thank you, your Honours. I note the time.
GAGELER CJ:
will take the morning adjournment.
AT 11.19 AM SHORT
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 11.32
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honours, the answer
to Justice Steward’s question is that we have conducted the case on
the basis of the concession
that was made that there was a debtor‑creditor
relationship, but ultimately we accept that it is appropriate for
your Honours
to decide the case on the basis of your Honours’
analysis of the correct legal position arising from the trust deed and the
events that are apparent.
The factual circumstances are not
controversial as to what resolutions were passed, and so we are content for
your Honours to decide
the matter on that basis, but we have not addressed
that issue in our written submissions because we did not understand it to be
issue that was in contest in this Court and we would, for that reason, be
grateful for the opportunity to provide some supplementary
written submissions
addressed to that topic.
GAGELER CJ:
So, what is the issue?
Whether there was a debtor‑creditor relationship?
As I understand it, yes, that is what I thought
Justice Steward was putting to me: was the concession correct that there
would include also whether by operation of the trust deed there was a separate
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, if that is part of what
your Honour – well, your Honour, there was a finding of
fact in the tribunal that there was
not a separate trust.
Well, that is not a finding of fact. That is a finding of law.
I have seen the findings of
fact, that nothing was done to physically separate the money and nothing was
done in the accounts, but
there is still an anterior question about how the
trust deed operates.
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes. Well, your Honours,
if that is the ambit of the question – is there a
debtor‑creditor relationship and was a
separate trust
established – if they are the factual matters that
your Honours ‑ ‑ ‑
It may be, Mr Solicitor, that the parties are just talking about
different things and the questions from the Court are just concerned
different issue. At least at paragraph 91 of the Full Court’s
reasons, they refer to
Fischer v Nemeske
, which I think is picking
up the point that Justice Gummow made in
Roxborough v Rothmans
that a debtor‑creditor relationship arises and there is a claim for money
had and received that arises once a
Saunders v Vautier
been exercised.
At that point in time, the trust is in effect collapsed
and the trustee is then in a position as a debtor and liable for an action
money had and received to pay money to the beneficiary, but that is not this
MR DONAGHUE:
This goes back
to the questions I asked you at the outset, Mr Solicitor. If we take what
is set out in 91 and what Justice Edelman
put to you, then the
question is: what happened here? They are the very questions I understand
Mr Wheelahan is going to be directed
If you have a setting
aside and not the distribution of the funds in the way which has been described
by the trust deed, and one
has no positive step having been taken by the
beneficiary, unless there is a calling for it and the collapsing of the trust in
way Justice Edelman put to you, then there is no action for money had
and received and no debtor‑creditor relationship at law.
That is the
issue that in effect gives rise to whether or not 92 is right.
Indeed, whether the concession that was made by the respondents
MR DONAGHUE:
am submitting to your Honours is that while that is the basis upon which we
have prepared this appeal – on the basis
that that concession is
right, that it is not an issue in this Court – it is evident from
questions that have fallen from the
Court that your Honours have questions
in your mind about the correctness of that concession, and I am asking for the
opportunity
to advance written submissions directed to the subject of that
concession, but subject to that I am accepting that the Court can
itself the correctness of the legal position that underlies that
concession.
GAGELER CJ:
We will take that on board, and we will
see where we are at the end of the hearing, and we will see what the scope of
any additional
submissions need to be.
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour. Your Honours, can I turn now to the question of
109D(1)(b) and the word “repaid”. Your Honours,
already sufficiently have our point that while that word is used, it is used in
a context where it follows the requirement
in (1)(a); not that a private company
make a payment, but that a private company make a loan in circumstances where
the loan is mutually
exclusive with the making of a payment, and so one needs to
read (1)(b).
In our submission, one cannot safely inject the meaning of
the defined meaning of “payment” from 109C into the concept
repayment under (b). Instead, one needs to construe “repaid”
in its context, having regard to the full breadth of
things that are capable of
being a loan. In that respect, it is instructive to look at 109D(4), which is
concerned with timing in
which year is the loan made, but it says:
For the purposes of this Division, a loan is made to an entity at the time
the amount of the loan is paid to the entity by way of
that is easy enough, that is your ordinary meaning of a loan:
or anything described in subsection (3) is done in relation to the
So, in our submission, subsection (4), the disjunctive
“or” confirms that a loan can be made even if nothing has been
by way of loan to the entity.
You mean nothing
physical has been paid by way of dollars?
MR DONAGHUE:
been no payment that can be repaid, in my submission.
Yes, but there can be a form of financial accommodation where there is no
actual payment, there is just the extension of a financial
accommodation
requiring repayment, i.e., I buy goods and the vendor provides vendor
finance. There is no payment there, but it is
still a form of financial
accommodation requiring repayment.
MR DONAGHUE:
There is no
payment, but it is a form of financial accommodation requiring
repayment – that is our point, your Honour, that
when one looks
at the fact that the definition of “loan” in (3)(b) includes
forms of financial accommodation, it is possible
for there to be a loan even
though there has not been a payment. That is consistent with the way (4)
is drafted, which recognises
that things that are described in (3) may be
done even though they do not involve a payment to the entity.
The language of “financial accommodation” is really the
only source of your contention that the loans include acquiescent
behaviour, and
then you take that concept of acquiescence and then you apply it to extend the
language of “done”, “made”
and “repaid”, do
MR DONAGHUE:
But, your Honour, this point that I
am making does not depend on the acquiescence point. So, let us take a clearer
provision of them.
MR DONAGHUE:
‑ ‑ ‑ where there is an express
recognition that says: you can keep my money until such time as I call for
On the Full Court’s construction, that is not a loan, because
there is no payment and no repayment. What I am endeavouring
to establish is
that that is wrong.
So, I accept that there might be factual issues that
one has to deal with in the acquiescence‑type context, but as a matter
the general structure of this provision, Parliament has clearly included
financial accommodation, financial accommodation clearly
includes allowing time
to pay, and the allowing time to pay, sale on deferred terms, is a situation
which does not conform to the
payment and repayment limit that the Full Court
overlaid onto this definition.
I think, to be fair to
them, at least as I read 93 onwards, it was looking for:
an obligation to repay and not merely an obligation to pay.
repeated in 93; again repeated in 94.
MR DONAGHUE:
what they are – they were looking for an obligation to repay, but
they said that that could happen only where there had
been payment and then
repayment. So, they said repayment requires payment. Our basic
point – as, I think, Justice Steward
earlier – is that we say that is the ordinary meaning of a loan, but
the extended meaning is not limited in that
it is made clear in
Prime Wheat
that a financial accommodation may not be
a loan, and your point is simply: here, the definition includes something which
classically a loan.
MR DONAGHUE:
Indeed, and it
Is that not what is recognised in 79,
when they say:
or any other form of financial accommodation which involves an obligation to
repay an identifiable principal sum –
I mean, they are
recognising that there can be other forms of financial
accommodation.
MR DONAGHUE:
And the next sentence, then:
The creation of an obligation to pay an amount to a private company that does
not result from a transfer of an amount from or at the
direction of the private
company is not a loan –
Well, you can have a direction in the sense of one saying: I am going to extend
to you an amount of money. That is a form
MR DONAGHUE:
am going to leave in your possession an amount of money that you are obliged to
GAGELER CJ:
MR DONAGHUE:
On demand, I am going
GAGELER CJ:
that not a transaction, in itself? Is that not an accommodation, in
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, it is an accommodation, but my
submission is that it is an accommodation but that it is not a
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Solicitor, is the essence of
your problem the word “repay” carrying with it an implication that
there was an earlier
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, precisely.
The reason that we lost is because it was said, well, this cannot be a loan,
because there was not the earlier
payment. That is squarely the case that we
are here to meet and that our friends put against us. So,
GAGELER CJ:
to me – maybe I am making this too simplistic, but there is a
difference between that scenario: you keep the money
to which I am presently
entitled and pay me back later. That seems to me like a
MR DONAGHUE:
GAGELER CJ:
different from simply deferring the existing obligation to pay – the
performance of the existing obligation to pay.
The source of the obligation to
pay the money – call it a repayment in the case of a
loan – is a different transaction,
is it not? Maybe I am making it
too simplistic, Mr Solicitor.
MR DONAGHUE:
appreciated the difference between your Honour’s two situations. In
both of them, the person is keeping the money
to pay it back later, as I
understand what your Honour just put to me.
In my submission, both of
them are a transaction that comfortably meets the description of
“financial accommodation” but
does not meet the
payment‑repayment limit. So, we say that is the very kind of thing that
paragraph (b) includes, even though
it would not otherwise have been
GAGELER CJ:
Paragraph (b) focuses on the loan,
you first have to find the loan, you have to find the financial accommodation or
the provision
of the financial accommodation, and that is the thing that is
being repaid or not by the date that is referred
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, so that if the thing is a
straightforward conventional payment, then that has to be repaid by the relevant
date, but if the
loan is a loan only because of the extended
definition – so, by allowing of the time to pay – then
that extended concept
has to inform the meaning of “repaid”. If the
only reason you have a loan is because you have deferred payment for six
then once you are no longer deferring payment, you no longer have a
So, if you have deferred a payment for a couple of months and it
all happens before the lodgement date, then there will be no loan
purpose of this provision and no deemed dividend, but if you have said: pay me
on demand at some unspecified future point,
whenever that might be –
and that extends over the lodgement date, then the loan, in the extended sense,
is still in force
at the relevant point in time, and there is a deemed dividend,
because you have been allowed to have access to the profits of the
use them for your general trust purposes, and you have done the very thing that
Division 7A is directed at, which is you
have accessed the profits of the
private company other than by way of having them paid to you by way of
That is our short point, so that once one accepts that
Parliament has expressly turned its attention to the breadth of a loan by
inclusive expansionary definition in (3), and in (4) has recognised that that
might either involve payment by way of loan or
the other things that happened
under (3), then there is no warrant for treating the repayment as cancelling out
the expanse of effect
of the definition. You just have to adjust the meaning of
repaid in context to take account of the fact that “loan”
things that it would not include as a matter of ordinary
Just so I understand it – I am not
meaning to simplify it – you need financial accommodation
under (3)(b)?
MR DONAGHUE:
The financial accommodation, which is repaid
under D(1)(b) ‑ ‑ ‑
Has to be the bringing to the end of whatever the financial
accommodation was.
So, it is the financial
accommodation which is repaid under D(1)(b).
MR DONAGHUE:
And you accept that, for the purposes of
financial accommodation, there is a transaction of some kind, bilateral, between
the provider
of the finance and the person who has the benefit of the
accommodation?
MR DONAGHUE:
I have not accepted bilateral,
your Honour. I think I said to the Chief Justice unilateral was
I thought you
GAGELER CJ:
thought we went back on that, Mr Solicitor.
MR DONAGHUE:
think I – I equivocated in an unhelpful way, your Honour, but my
earlier answers were unilateral, and
would like – that, I think, needs to be addressed, because
financial – every other aspect of this structure,
even on your
construction, involves:
(a) an advance of money . . .
(b) a provision of credit –
(d) a transaction . . . which in substance effects a
so, arguably, (d) is the broadest possible category you can have, it
a transaction (whatever its terms or form) –
involving a two‑way arrangement of some kind between somebody –
two parties – but you would have us read:
any other form of financial accommodation –
as a unilateral
arrangement.
MR DONAGHUE:
It may depend exactly what one counts
within the – so that if you have a trustee who has set aside income
of the trust for
the benefit of an identified beneficiary but it has not paid it
out, in one sense that could form one half of a bilateral transaction.
regard that, by itself, as forming part of a bilateral transaction, then I could
accept that it has to be bilateral.
My concern, in the context of an
anti‑avoidance regime, is that if you have that situation and then the
private company beneficiary
– to make it simple, reflecting my answer
to Justice Gleeson – expressly decides, but unilaterally
decides ‑ ‑
does it by deed.
MR DONAGHUE:
You can – that the
money will be left in the trust to be used for general trust purposes, and I
will not require payment
until some specified future time. If it has to be
bilateral, then that deed would not be the provision of financial
accommodation.
But it is bilateral in a loose sense,
in that there is something that is moving from the beneficiary, objectively, to
the trustee,
in that example. So, whether it be a deed, objective conduct,
conduct from which an implication can be drawn, there is something
that is being
said or – in the language of subsection (4) – done by
the beneficiary which gives rise to a transaction
with the trustee, not just
mere subjective knowledge.
MR DONAGHUE:
But if the –
again, to try to smooth out the possible evidentiary complications –
not a deed, but the beneficiary just
records in a board minute of the
beneficiary company: we are not going to call for payment of the amount that
has set aside in the
trust indefinitely – but does not communicate
that to the other side and does not reach an agreement with the trustee that
that is the position but just says that, in our submission, the beneficiary
company is providing financial accommodation.
Because otherwise one can
readily see a situation in which the people trying to structure the arrangements
to avoid the operation
of Division 7 could just have the beneficiary say:
well, I will do that, I am not going to call on the debt – but the
could say: I am not a party to that arrangement, I do not agree
is a sham, then.
MR DONAGHUE:
it is not a sham, then the recording without communication to an external party
is no different from just subjective knowledge.
MR DONAGHUE:
it is – the question in the context of this Division is ultimately
of the private company
other than by way of dividend? The answer is yes, they are. In the arrangement
we are talking about, they
are clearly in that situation being given access to
the profits. So, they should be captured by the anti‑avoidance provision
if that is what they are doing.
Can I ask about that.
Under 109D(1)(d), we have to have the fact “the loan is made”,
including your expanded definition
of loan, or:
a reasonable person would conclude . . . that the loan is
made because the entity has been such a shareholder –
et cetera. Is it not – as I said to you earlier, it is
an objective inquiry in all circumstances.
MR DONAGHUE:
submission, not, your Honour, because in that paragraph, what that
paragraph your Honour just mentions is doing is dealing
with the situation
in which the recipient of the loan is not either the shareholder or an associate
of the shareholder.
So, in a situation where, for example, someone
ceases to be a shareholder just before the loan is made, they could still be
by this – perhaps to avoid the operation of
Subdivision (7), they would still be captured if a reasonable person would
that the loan was made because they were shareholder. It is expanding
the operation of the provision, but it is not confining the
operation of the
provision if you fall within D(1).
Can I just ask one
other question then. How does this intersect with Part IVA?
Your Honour, I cannot answer that
It is an important question because, in
response to Justice Edelman’s question, if it truly is a sham, if it
truly is a scheme
being set up to avoid these kinds of arrangements given the
language, then does Part IVA have a role to play?
Your Honour, I will have to take that on
then ask my question, and you may be coming to it very presently. If the means
chosen by Mr Bendel to enjoy the profits from
his company was to have the
associate of the trust retain the money and that was the means by which the
profits of the company were
distributed, or economically, then why is not
Subdivision EA the correct Parliament’s answer to that
MR DONAGHUE:
I am about to come to that,
your Honour. So, can I defer that for a few
moments ‑ ‑ ‑
I thought you were about to.
MR DONAGHUE:
‑ ‑ ‑ but I am nearly there, on
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Solicitor, can I chime in and just ask you to look at paragraph 79
of the Full Court’s reasons at 109.
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour.
BEECH-JONES J:
I think you have covered the
first sentence. My question is, you do not have any difficulty with the second
sentence, do you?
MR DONAGHUE:
I do not quibble with it, did
your Honour say?
BEECH-JONES J:
I do, your Honour.
BEECH-JONES J:
not just saying, well, if an obligation pay comes into existence, that is not
provision of credit.
MR DONAGHUE:
that does not result from a transfer of an amount from or at the direction of
the private company –
so that if the income of the trust does
not – that sentence would suggest that if the income of the trust
does not result from
a transfer of an amount from the beneficiary –
from or at the direction of the beneficiary – then there cannot be a
My submission is, well, there can be a loan if that amount in the trust
is then allowed to remain there.
BEECH-JONES J:
But you add that
bit. Literally, as I read that sentence on its face, is simply saying if you
did declare an amount owing to the
beneficiary, that would not be a loan, which
I never thought the Commissioner did contend that.
MR DONAGHUE:
The question might be – I read that sentence, your Honour, as
intended to be an exhaustive prescription of the reach of 109D,
so that the
only way that you can have a – or that you can never have a loan
unless – I will just read it again, your
maintain my answer, your Honour. So, the creation of the amount to pay the
private company, which here would be the setting
aside of the income in the
trust, so that is the obligation to pay – it has not resulted from a
transfer of an amount from
or at the direction of the private company, and so
the Full Court is saying it cannot be a loan.
BEECH-JONES J:
thought you said it only became a loan because the investments then indicated
that it did not seek payment.
MR DONAGHUE:
I agree you need
more, but ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
You read that as saying it is not effectively a basis for a loan?
BEECH-JONES J:
understand.
MR DONAGHUE:
You cannot, even with more. If that is
the position, you cannot have a loan. That is how we read that
BEECH-JONES J:
And as for your
unilateral‑bilaterial distinction, is this somehow depending upon what the
nature of the initial obligation
to pay is? So, if all that is left is for the
putative lender to simply call the money in, then a unilateral manifestation or
or even state of mind is enough, but if the nature of the arrangements
is that something bilateral is required, then a bilateral
act may be required.
MR DONAGHUE:
That will be so, your Honour,
BEECH‑JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honours, can I deal extremely briefly with
Prime Wheat
come to Subdivision EA. Can I ask you turn to
Prime Wheat
[1997] NSWSC 546
42 NSWLR 505
, which is in volume 4, tab 27. The relevant
judgment is given by Chief Justice Gleeson. Both the Full Court and
the respondents
rely on this case, and we submit that it does not help them,
essentially for reasons that Justice Steward has already foreshadowed,
which are that the definitions are different.
If your Honours have
that case and could turn to page 509, we are dealing with the operation of
the New South Wales Stamps Act, and
there the Chief Justice set out a
number of the relevant definitions from section 83 of that Act. So, if we
start at the bottom
of the page, there is a definition of “loan” not
in the same terms as 109D. So:
‘Loan’ includes:
(a) an advance of money –
relevantly, and you can see the other categories, (d) is the same as
our (d), but the others are different in some respects. An “advance
of money” is defined a little further up the page, next to
paragraph E, as including:
the provision or obtaining of funds by way of financial
accommodation.
So, it is not the provision of financial accommodation, it
is the provision of funds by way of financial accommodation. If
your Honours
could also note, under that definition there is the definition
of “Debenture” which includes, from the second line, halfway
debt owed by a corporation in respect of money that is, or may be
. . . lent to, the corporation –
Now, what this case
concerned – and you see this on page 511 at
paragraph B – was a transaction under a share sale agreement
with title passing on completion, but the continuing obligation of the purchaser
to pay the balance of the purchase price being secured
by a mortgage over the
So it was, in effect, a payment on deferred terms –
immediate transfer of shares, payment later. The main issue in the case,
you can see on the top of the next page at 512, was – the trial
judge, Justice Dunford, had:
Identified as the main issue . . . whether there was, or was
to be, a debt owing by the purchasers of the shares in NSW Grain
Corporation
And you see, then, the quote:
“that is, or may be, ... lent” to the purchasers.
picking up the definition of “debenture”. So, the main issue was
whether there was a debenture, because of those
That, subject to the fulfilment of the conditions precedent, there was to be
a debt is clear. That the debt was to be part of an
arrangement for financial
accommodation is also clear. But where is the loan?
Chief Justice was quite happy that there was a debt, that there was
financial accommodation, but the question was, was there
a loan, as defined in
these provisions? His Honour notes that:
Not all forms of financial accommodation are loans –
“loan” as defined in this scheme, in section
83 as you have
just seen it. Paragraph (a) was the paragraph about an advance of
Here there was no advance of money. There was, as required by the language
of the definition of advance, financial accommodation,
but that is not
sufficient.
And then, skipping over a few lines:
it did not constitute a form of financial accommodation that involved an
advance of money; what was involved was a granting of time
relevantly for our purposes, this case is a case in which it was accepted that
the granting of time to pay was – and was
clearly, in
his Honour’s view – a provision of financial
accommodation, but it was not a “loan” as defined
because a loan, as
defined by the definition of “advance” – there was no
advance of money and there could have
been an advance of money as defined only
if there was a provision of funds, because that is what the definition said. So
the provision
of time to pay was not sufficient to enliven this set of statutory
definitions.
Far from operating against us, in our submission,
supports the Commissioner’s position in this case that the
provision of time to pay would ordinarily be regarded as financial
accommodation, and in the context of a differently structured set of definitions
where, here, Parliament has added financial accommodation
as one of the
extensions of the ordinary meaning of “loan”, the case not only is
not inconsistent with but is supportive
of the construction we
Can I come then to Subdivision EA, upon which our friends
place great reliance, upon which the tribunal relied but upon which the
Court did not particularly rely, they referred to it only reasonably
peripherally, in our submission. It recorded the submission
against us at
paragraph 83, but the reasoning only really touches on it at 89, and
not in a way that is central. We make three points
which is relevantly section 109XA and XB.
point – indeed, the argument, in effect – is that
Subdivision EA should be regarded as an exclusive code dealing
with unpaid
present entitlements, such that it said that 109D should not be allowed to
cut across the exclusive code provided by
EA. We submit that that argument
fails to account for the fact that the sphere of operation of
Subdivision EA is very much narrower
than that of Subdivision B, which
contains 109D. As I have already said, Subdivision B is about direct
access to private company
profits in a range of different ways –
payments, loans, forgiveness of debts. Subdivision EA concerns indirect
access to those
profits where the access is obtained via a trust.
could go to 109XA, XA effectively defines when the provision applies,
and then the operative provision is XB. But if you
go to XA(2), which
is the part that deals with loans, you see – and our friends
correctly point this out in paragraph 55 of
their submissions –
that there are two criteria or two aspects to engage this provision. So, you
have to have a trustee making
a loan to a shareholder or an associate of the
shareholder. That is the first criteria in (2)(a). Then, in (2)(b),
you have to
have the private company with an unpaid present entitlement to
income of the trust, which you see in the opening words
Now, we accept that there is potential overlap between
the operation of 109D and Subdivision EA, but it is important to
the conditions that need to be satisfied before that overlap will
arise. In my submission, there are four. Condition number one,
be a private company that is the beneficiary of a trust. Condition
number two, that private company must have an unpaid
present entitlement to
income of the trust. Condition number three, the trustee of the trust must
be either the shareholder of the
private company beneficiary or an associate of
the beneficiary.
You need to have all of those conditions necessary,
relevantly, in order for the operation of 109D to overlap with
Subdivision EA.
Then for EA to be engaged you also need to have a trustee
making a loan to either the shareholder or an associate of the shareholder.
it is possible, if all of those four conditions are satisfied, for both parts to
operate. But it should be obvious there are
very many circumstances in which a
private company might make a loan to its shareholders or associates of their
shareholders that
have nothing to do with trusts or unpaid present entitlements
or the satisfaction of the four conditions that I have just given.
So, to take
a common example,
BEECH-JONES J:
ask this – will you be saying that if there is any circumstance that
falls within 109XA, that does not fall within
109D? So, are we talking,
effectively, on our Venn diagram, a subset of the circumstances, or is
there some area where they each
have separate
applications?
MR DONAGHUE:
We are not – sorry,
your Honour. There is very substantial overlap but not a complete subset
because, as I have already
submitted, the existence of an unpaid present
entitlement to trust income is not enough, by itself, to mean that there is a
So, there might be circumstances where those extra elements are not
present but where you still then have the trustee making a loan
shareholder or an associate of the shareholder, so we say it could
Mr Solicitor, all four conditions are
satisfied here?
MR DONAGHUE:
So, which is the provision that stops the Commissioner from assessing
Mr Bendel in addition to the trust?
MR DONAGHUE:
you bear with me for five minutes, your Honour?
All right. I will keep quiet.
MR DONAGHUE:
No, no, I am
to step back or to step away from the facts
of this particular case a little,
because what is involved in the notion that Subdivision EA is relevant to
the constructional task
before your Honours is the proposition that a
Subdivision that deals with one very particular subset of circumstances in
might apply controls the meaning of 109D across the range of
its operations, many of which have nothing whatsoever to do with unpaid
entitlements or trusts.
If we take an example of a private
company – say, a travel agent, but it could be any company that
provides services –
if it chooses to provide services to its
shareholders on the basis that they will pay for them eventually but not with
any specification
of timeframe, then, in my submission, that is a provision on
deferred payment terms.
That is a provision of financial accommodation
of a classic kind, but there is no payment and repayment, so that if the Full
restriction of the definition of “loan” is correct,
then in that kind of classic small company providing services to
shareholders‑type situation without paying for them, Division 7A does
The reason for that, on this limb of the argument, would be
because, in a totally different context involving unpaid present entitlements
and trusts, the wide operation of 109D would overlap with the specific
rules. It could not be a clearer case of the tail wagging
the dog, of a very
specific regime dealing with a particular problem being then allowed to control
the operation of a much wider
regime concerned with a much wider range of
Why would not Subdivision EA control
the operation in relation to trusts only?
MR DONAGHUE:
has happened – maybe one could craft an argument of statutory
construction of that kind, but the argument that I am
meeting is an argument
that you read the definition of “loan” to require, in all
circumstances, payment and repayment
because of the consequences of the overlap
stage. It just makes, in my submission, no sense, as a matter of principle and
construction, to reason in that way.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, you are not meeting a
Minister for Immigration v Nystrom
argument about specific versus general, you are dealing with a different
constructional point.
MR DONAGHUE:
I am dealing with a
different constructional point.
Do you propose to deal
with the specific versus the general? When one sits here and looks at the
scheme and one has, as you identify
under the 109D set of provisions, a set
of all‑encompassing provisions seeking to expand – on your
analysis – a
broad definition of “loan”, one can
understand why one would not read that down.
Over here you have a set of
provisions which, I think on your case, would apply, which is dealing with a
specific topic, addressing
a specific issue – why does that not
govern, in a sense, that set of circumstances? Why does one have resort to the
when the specific is there and is
applicable?
MR DONAGHUE:
You Honour, that would be a
different case. If someone ran an argument like that, I would have to come up
with an argument to
meet that. But in this appeal, what I am seeking to do is
demonstrate that the Full Court construed these provisions wrongly, and
not adopt a specific rather than general approach and say that EA is an
exclusive regime dealing with unpaid present entitlements.
But we have to write a judgment. So, what I am concerned about is that we
have got this specific set of provisions which are directed,
historically, to dealing with this issue.
MR DONAGHUE:
really a question of construction, though.
MR DONAGHUE:
accept that it is a question of construction, but I come back to the proposition
that the provisions that are centrally in issue
in this appeal are the
definition in 109D(3), which, at the moment, the Full Court of the
Federal Court has said will never apply
unless there is a payment and a
What I am putting to your Honours first is that that is
not a result that can be justified by reference to EA, because you cannot
specific regime and use it to control the meaning not just in the area of
overlap but in areas completely unrelated to overlap,
because it has distorted
the meaning of the defiant statutory term. So, that is my first
The second point is the double taxation consequence that
your Honour Justice Steward asked me about, and I think this will also
to some extent with your Honour Justice Gordon’s question,
because we submit that the extent of the overlap or the extent to
double taxation consequence was said to arise has been rather overstated. We
say that principally by reference to the
operation of 109Y of the
Now, just before I take your Honours to that, can I ask you to
note that, first, in 109D, in a provision I do not think I have shown
yet – subsection (1AA) – you see that:
The amount of the dividend taken under subsection (1) to have been paid
is the amount of the loan that has not been repaid before
the lodgment day for
the current year –
you have noted that part:
subject to section 109Y.
And the note tells us:
Section 109Y limits the total amount of dividends taken to have been
paid by a private company . . . to the company’s
distributable
So, that ties into the fact that we are concerned
here with accessing the profits of private companies other than by way of
You have an equivalent provision in Subdivision EA –
relevantly, it is 109XB(2).
MR DONAGHUE:
Section 109XB(2). Again, it is
dealing with the amount:
Subject to section 109Y, the amount that is included under
subsection (1) is the Division 7A amount.
But it is subject
to 109Y. So, what does 109Y tell us? If your Honours could turn
to that, it is headed “Proportional reduction
of dividends so they do not
exceed distributable surplus”, and subsection (1) tells us:
If, apart from this section, the sum of all the dividends a private company
is taken under this Division to pay at the end of the
year of income would be
more than the company’s distributable surplus for that year, the amount of
each of those dividends
is the amount worked out under
subsection (3).
The company’s distributable surplus is
calculated in accordance with the formula you see in subsection (2), and
you will see
that, you start with net assets as defined below, you add
the 7A amounts, and the 7A amounts are defined as the amounts paid
109C or permanently forgiven under 109F – no
reference to loans there. So, net assets plus the 7A amounts, and then you
non‑commercial loans. Now, they are defined over the page as the
(a) any amounts that:
(i) the company is taken
under . . . section 109D . . . to
have paid as dividends in earlier years of income –
(b) any amounts that are included in the assessable income of shareholders, or
associates of shareholders, of the company under section
That is Subdivision EA. So, what you do, in identifying the
distributable surplus, is you have regard both to deemed dividends under
and to Subdivision EA. Now, on its face, in our submission, that looks
very much like Parliament having contemplated the parallel
operation of
both 109D ‑ ‑ ‑
But it is factually possible for the amount of the deemed dividend
under 109D and the EA deemed dividend to be less than the total
distributable surplus as defined.
MR DONAGHUE:
In which case
they are both payable. That is what Parliament is saying at 109Y, in my
submission.
MR DONAGHUE:
if you were going to get to a situation
where ‑ ‑ ‑
is an extreme outcome.
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, what Parliament has
contemplated, in my submission, here is the possibility, by reason of this
formulation, that you have
both dividends payable under the loan provision in D
and under Subdivision EA, and it says where you do that, you count them
together as non‑commercial loans and you subtract them according to
the formula. Then, in (3), you have basically a pro rata‑ing.
So, in the event that you have the situation where both have applied, you
pro rata the dividends as between them so as not to exceed
distributable surplus.
But if, for example, you have a situation
where – our friends, I think, contemplate a situation where you have
a deemed dividend
under the loan provision, under 109D, and then
subsequently you have a deemed dividend under Subdivision EA, but if the
deemed dividend
under 109D has accounted for the distributable surplus so
that if, by reason of the loan provisions, the profits of the private company
have been accessed such that there is no longer a distributable surplus, then
there will be no possibility of being charged under
EA because there is no
surplus left to be distributed under EA. It has already been taken out, by
reason of D.
If they both fall in the same year, then you pro rata
between them, but because the deemed dividends are capped by reason of the
distributable surplus, we submit that the consequences that are attributed to
the parallel operation of these provisions are rather
overstated. That is my
second point.
My third point, your Honour, is that there are at
numerous places in this regime express anti‑overlap provisions that have
been passed by the Parliament. I mentioned one of them earlier to
Justice Steward, it was 109G(3). Can I show you another one,
109T(3). This is a provision about payments through interposed entities. You
see, in 109T(3):
This Division does not operate as described in
subsection (1) . . . if the private company is taken under
Subdivision B . . . to pay
a dividend as a result of the
payment or loan to the first interposed entity.
So, if you have payments
that are going through a chain, if at the first payment, or an earlier payment,
there is a deemed dividend
under 109D, then the operation of the interposed
entity provision stops, and Parliament has dealt with that in terms.
Section 109G
was similar.
If Parliament had wished to produce a
situation in which Subdivision E and 109D do not overlap, and we do
not think they did do that
given what I have just shown you in 109Y, but if
it had wished to do that, it could have done it as in T(3) by saying the
operates first is Subdivision B, and then if that is operated,
none of the other provisions operate. That would have been one
possibility.
Another possibility would have been to say if
Subdivision EA operates, Subdivision B does not. A third possibility,
which seems
to be the one that our friends prefer, is that if
Subdivision EA could have operated, then even if it has not
been – if no
assessment has been made under EA, you cannot
assess under D, so that they produce the situation in this case, where,
because there
was no assessment made against Mr Bendel under EA, none
of the anti‑avoidance provisions can work.
My basic point,
your Honours, is that you see in Subdivision 7A, Parliament having
turned its mind expressly in a number of places
to the relationship between
these parts, excluding one rather than the other, you do not see that with
relation to Subdivision EA,
and you cannot know what answer Parliament
would have chosen as to the intersection of these provisions, which one was to
over the other. That being, in my submission, quintessentially a
legislative choice.
As a matter of interpretation, in my submission, in
the context of this scheme and particularly bearing in mind the way
operates, which does substantially mitigate against any possible
unfairness of the operation of these provisions, your Honours should
give effect to the text. If Parliament does not like the way these provisions
interact, it is for it to decide which takes
priority, rather than –
because they are potentially different taxpayers as well, are liable, so there
is, in my submission,
no safe way to conclude as to the hierarchy between
Although, if your Honours were going to – contrary
to that submission – do anything, in my submission, the lead
in the context of this scheme are clearly those that you find in
Subdivision B.
GAGELER CJ:
So, are you meeting an argument
you say is not being put?
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, I am meeting an
argument – certainly, there is an argument based on EA that is being
put, which seems to be that EA
is a code and you cannot meet D. I am
saying to your Honours that my primary submission is you should not embark
on reading down
either of them, that you should give effect to
Parliament’s language which, in this context – unlike other
parts of the
Subdivision – does not displace one rather than the
other, it just allows both to operate and seems to contemplate that both
I am saying, in the alternative, if your Honours were to
say one excludes the other, it would be appropriate to give effect to the
provisions. If you are giving a harmonious construction to this provision, you
should not so constrain the definition of “loan”
that it does not
include things that are obviously financial accommodation in the normal usage of
the words just because of the overlapping
consequences it might have in the
context of EA.
Finally, your Honours, and I have taken longer
than I should have, our friends make something of, well, they assert that our
construction
is inconsistent with 109F. Can I ask your Honours just to go
and they say that because they assert in paragraphs 51 to 53 of their
submission that this is a regime dealing with the deferral
of debts. Our answer
to that, as I think I have foreshadowed, is that it is not dealing with the
deferral of debts at all. It is
concerned with the permanent forgiveness of
debts, as you can see both from subsections 3 and 6.
submission, these provisions have a complementary operation in that if there is
a temporary deferral of the time for the payment
of the debt that can enliven D,
and that if at some point that temporary deferral becomes a permanent
forgiveness of the debt by
formal waiver or otherwise, then that could
enliven – if – but to the extent that, though that might
produce overlap,
the overlap is dealt within G, which says that the deemed
dividend happens under D and not under F.
If we were wrong about that,
then the rather peculiar situation would result that the permanent forgiveness
of a debt would enliven
a deemed dividend, but that as long as it was always a
temporary deferral, pushed off potentially on an ongoing basis, the deemed
dividend would never crystalise. That would be a strange result in an
anti-avoidance regime.
GAGELER CJ:
Until the limitation period
MR DONAGHUE:
Until the limitation cut in, and then
F would bite at that point. Certainly, the person could have the benefit of the
profits for potentially many years, escaping the operation of the
regime. Your Honours, unless the Court has further questions,
I would ask
you to hear Mr Wheelahan on the balance of our case.
GAGELER CJ:
MR WHEELAHAN:
Your Honours, the Full
court found that there was no loan from Gleewin Investments to the trustee
Gleewin because there was no
payment of an amount by Gleewin Investments to
Gleewin which Gleewin had an obligation to repay. We see that in the Full
reasons at paragraphs 93 to 94. For the reasons the
Solicitor General has explained, the Full Court was, we submit with
Once that limitation is removed, it follows that, on
the facts found, there were loans by Gleewin Investments to Gleewin, within
meaning of section 109D(3) being
either ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
are going tell us exactly what the provision of the financial accommodation was,
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes, your Honour.
The elements of it.
MR WHEELAHAN:
I propose to just
set out the key facts to begin with, because we say that once one has regard to
those facts then objectively
it can be concluded that there was a provision of
financial accommodation by Gleewin Investments to the trust.
Mr Wheelahan, as I understood the case, if your construction is
right, I do not think Mr de Wijn will dispute that you are to win.
may be wrong about that.
MR WHEELAHAN:
No, I believe our
opponents contend that, in any event, there was not a provision of financial
accommodation.
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes, factually.
Yes, I see.
And so, the key facts are as follows. Mr Bendel had both
formal and de facto control of Gleewin Investments, the 2005 trust and
the trustee, Gleewin. Your Honours will see that in the Full Court’s
reasons at paragraph 4 and the tribunal’s reasons
paragraphs 5(a), (c)(ii) and also in
paragraph 26.
Through Mr Bendel, Gleewin Investments had
knowledge of Gleewin’s affairs. Your Honours will find that in the
reasons at paragraph 26. In each of the years
ended 30 June, 2014 to 2016, Gleewin Investments was made
presently entitled to a
share of the income of the 2005 trust, and
Mr Bendel as sole director signed those resolutions. Your Honours
will find those facts
at the Full Court’s reasons paragraph 6
and 10 and the tribunal’s reasons at paragraphs 28
The entitlements were recorded in the financial statements
and accounting records of both Gleewin and Gleewin Investments.
Honours will find that in the Full Court’s reasons,
paragraph 8(2), paragraph 9 of the tribunal’s reasons,
40(d) and 44(d). In particular, Gleewin maintained what was
referred to as a “Gleewin Investments Current Account” to
posted the entitlements. That account appeared in the financial statements in
the liabilities side of the balance sheet
and the balance was included in the
total liabilities for the trust.
Mr Bendel ‑ ‑ ‑
Mr Wheelahan, sorry – I take it there was no expert evidence
MR WHEELAHAN:
No, there was not,
your Honour.
Was the accounting standard
relevant to that entry before the tribunal?
MR WHEELAHAN:
was not, your Honour.
Your Honours will find that at the tribunal’s
reasons, paragraph 40(d). Mr Bendel caused Gleewin to meet only
Gleewin Investments’
tax liabilities and other expenses from time to time,
as opposed to some greater amount – for example, the entire present
entitlement.
So, there was a deliberate decision to apply some of that
entitlement to the payment of Gleewin Investments’ trust
liabilities.
By the trustee.
Well, the trustee did it, so when I say “deliberate
decision”, it was done, and Mr Bendel, being the controller of
the trustee and Gleewin Investments, had knowledge of those affairs. The result
was that Gleewin Investments’ entitlements
which exceeded those amounts
remained outstanding. Your Honours will find that at the tribunal’s
reasons, paragraphs 44(a)
GAGELER CJ:
understand this, do you say that the accounting treatment that you have referred
to informs the common ground that there
was a debtor‑creditor
relationship? It is more than just
MR WHEELAHAN:
Your Honour, we did not come here today to make the argument about the
debtor‑creditor relationship because it had been conceded,
but I believe
that that would have been a factor this relied upon – the fact that
it is recorded in the accounts constitutes
an admission.
I am not sure about that. In the absence of expert evidence to understand
it, that just might be the way the accountant records a
beneficiary‑trustee relationship of this kind.
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes, your Honour. If that is going to be something that this Court
feels that it needs to address – and I think the
Solicitor‑General
has said that the Commissioner is content for the Court
to proceed in that way – that might be a reason why we would need to
potentially file some further submissions to address that
GAGELER CJ:
How does it intersect with the argument you
are now presenting?
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes, your Honour. On one
view, it does not matter whether there is a debtor‑creditor relationship
or not. These facts that
I am describing – and I will come to the
end of them just in a moment – are sufficient, we say, to draw the
that there was a provision of financial
accommodation.
GAGELER CJ:
Well, I think the Solicitor was
saying that his argument, the construction argument, was founded on an
unconditional present entitlement
to pay. Do you say that is not
MR WHEELAHAN:
Your Honour, if there were a
distribution, there would be an unconditional present entitlement to pay. There
is a concession that
the amounts were vested in interest and vested in
possession. That is at paragraph 92 of the Full Court’s
What we say is that these amounts that were set aside for
Gleewin Investments were effectively amounts that belonged to Gleewin
Investments
which were allowed to remain within the trust and, to Gleewin
Investments’ knowledge, were not held on a separate trust solely
benefit of Gleewin Investments but were instead applied for general trust
purposes. So, it is that feature whereby –
and I should just pause
to note ‑ ‑ ‑
How did they belong to Gleewin Investments?
MR WHEELAHAN:
using that word in the sense that they are vested in interest and vested in
possession.
GAGELER CJ:
The beneficial interest?
In those – in the income that was set aside for the
benefit of Gleewin Investments.
But that just means
that the beneficiary is fully entitled.
MR WHEELAHAN:
beneficiary had a present entitlement, in the sense that it could have called
for those funds at any time. So, the conduct
– the relevant
conduct – is not
calling ‑ ‑ ‑
But that is every vested trust.
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes, and the
conduct was not calling for those amounts, and also with the knowledge that the
amounts were not being held on a separate
trust solely for the benefit of
Gleewin Investments but were instead being used for general trust purposes.
thought they were lent to Mr Bendel?
MR WHEELAHAN:
a use, we would
submit ‑ ‑ ‑
general use?
MR WHEELAHAN:
‑ ‑ ‑ of the funds for general trust
An authorised investment?
Yes, I see.
And that – I take your Honour’s point
loans to Mr Bendel are treated as assets of the trust.
And as – given the trustee was authorised to invest the
funds, would the trustee’s right of indemnity continue to apply
relation to those investments, in case there was some loss or
MR WHEELAHAN:
Did your Honour say “given
the trustee was authorised”?
The trustee was
authorised under the trust deed to invest the funds, and it did so in a
particular way.
MR WHEELAHAN:
But whilst the investments were outstanding, was the trustee’s right
of indemnity available in case of some loss or outgoing
that needed to be made
MR WHEELAHAN:
I can see no reason why it would not have
All right, thank you.
That would prevent a distribution. You could not exercise a
Saunders v Vautier
claim while there is a trustee’s indemnity
outstanding.
MR WHEELAHAN:
Your Honour, I do not see this
Saunders v Vautier
claim. It is a present entitlement that
Gleewin Investments can call for those funds that have
Mr Wheelahan, “present entitlement” is the language of the Tax
Act. In equity, though, to call for it he would have
call for the trust to be wound up and the income paid.
Yes – no, I understand the point.
We have moved from all the submissions about common law that the
Solicitor‑General made, now we are moving into equity.
Yes. So, if the amounts were held on a sub‑trust solely
for the benefit of Gleewin Investments, then Gleewin Investments
exercised the
Saunders v Vautier
right and collapsed that and been
paid the amounts, but that is not what occurred here. The amounts were instead
intermingled, if
I can use that word, with general trust funds and used for
general trust purposes,
consistent with the powers of the trustee. That is, that they were authorised
to invest them and they chose an investment.
The difficulty I have
had – and I raised this at the outset with the Solicitor –
is where you have the setting aside
by resolution of an amount for a
beneficiary – and that is all that has happened
MR WHEELAHAN:
‑ ‑ ‑ then,
absent – and here, it is invested, and you have a trustee’s
right of indemnity –
until that beneficiary calls for the exercise of
Saunders v Vautier
power, there is nothing more – there is
nothing there for the beneficiary.
They do not have control of the
amount, they do not have the ability to call for it, unless they have exercised
their power under
Saunders v Vautier
. So, I understood the way it
was going to be put was we can accept that there was a setting aside only, but
there is some other
thing here which gives rise to the
power having been exercised. Do you not have to go that
MR WHEELAHAN:
Your Honour, if the amounts had been set
aside in a separate sub‑trust solely for the benefit of Gleewin
Investments, then
those investments that the trustee was making would also be
for the benefit of Gleewin Investments. So, any income derived on those
investments would be a part of that sub‑trust.
But why is there not a separate trust by operation of law? It does not require
you to actually physically separate the money in
a different place or to account
for it differently. If the trust deed says upon the setting aside of the funds,
there shall be a
separate trust.
It is not a
sub‑trust at all, it is a new trust.
MR WHEELAHAN:
ought to be, but ‑ ‑ ‑
If it were a sub‑trust, it would be the trustee holding assets
for the trustee holding assets on sub‑trust.
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes, it is not a useful description, it is a separate trust, and the point that
I am making is that that is not what occurred here,
BEECH‑JONES J:
What do you mean it did not occur? I mean, there was – do you
accept Justice Steward’s description of the trust deed?
is, 1 is set aside, then I think it is 3(5).
MR WHEELAHAN:
Clause 3(5), yes.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Requires – means that the – not the setting up, it
means that it just is in a new trust.
MR WHEELAHAN:
sure that we do accept that, your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Then what was supposed to happen or did happen when it was set
MR WHEELAHAN:
The tribunal found that such a trust was
not created and that the trustee did not conduct its affairs in that way and it
recorded in the accounts like that. So, that is the finding that we are
basing this submission on.
BEECH‑JONES J:
But that is no
more than – Gleewin did not act as though there was a new trust,
which is a little bit different.
MR WHEELAHAN:
I understand the
point your Honour is making and that might go to whether there in fact was
created a sub‑trust if there
was non‑compliance with the requirement
to create the – I will stop referring to it as a
sub‑trust – separate
trust. What occurred with Gleewin
Investments’ knowledge and Mr Bendel being the controller of both
entities was that the
moneys were not set aside on a separate trust and
accounted for in that way, and they are the findings of the tribunal. We can
that, as they appear in the accounts, they are instead used for general
trust purposes.
Now the Commissioner’s position is, generally, in
the application of this Division, that in cases where a separate trust like
is created and that the amounts are in fact kept separate for the benefit of the
beneficiary, then there will not be a loan.
So, it is a key feature of this
arrangement that that was not done, and that is the finding of the tribunal, and
that Mr Bendel
had knowledge of that and, therefore, Gleewin Investments
had knowledge of that. So that is the financial accommodation that has
BEECH-JONES J:
I am sorry, are you are saying if there
had been a separate trust created and the beneficiary did not call
upon – for the payment
MR WHEELAHAN:
BEECH-JONES J:
MR WHEELAHAN:
No loan. Yes.
That contradicts the submission the Solicitor‑General has made. The
Solicitor‑General’s submission was that if
there is a trust and the
beneficiary subjectively decides not to make a call, not to exercise the
Saunders v Vautier
power, that is financial
accommodation.
MR WHEELAHAN:
I think that is referring to a
situation where the trust is using the fund for its own purposes. So, there is
a difference between
that set of circumstances and where the amounts are held
solely for the benefit of that beneficiary. And so,
cannot say the trust is using it for its own
MR WHEELAHAN:
Sorry – for general
trust purposes is what I meant by that, yes.
trust purposes, yes.
MR WHEELAHAN:
your Honour.
Can I ask you just a slight nuanced
question from what you said. You said where there is a separate trust that is
created and the
assets are separated.
MR WHEELAHAN:
Do you need the second bit? I mean, if all
there is is a bank account into which dividends and interest are being paid, you
not need to have a separate bank account to successfully have a separate
MR WHEELAHAN:
There are different views about that, even
in the authorities in the book, your Honour.
MR WHEELAHAN:
is a good example, where
Your Honours will have seen that the
tribunal took the view that there was
no certainty in the subject matter of the trust because it was merely income,
which I think
that might be something that Justice Gordon might have
adverted to in the
Fischer v Nemeske Case
So, we would
submit that – and again, given that this has been raised in this way,
this can be addressed in further submissions,
but we would suggest that it may
indeed be the case that property needs to be separately set aside from the trust
if you intend to
create a separate trust, and
BEECH-JONES J:
you are at that point, does that mean that what would happen was there was a
setting aside – there was an obligation,
you say, to create a
separate trust for the setting aside of the assets, and that did not happen, but
instead, in breach of the trust
deed, the trustee used the funds?
Your Honour, whether it was in breach of the trust deed or
not – our argument does not depend on whether it was in breach
trust deed or not.
Your argument is, is it not: there
is a setting aside, there is no call for – there is an unpaid present
entitlement, it is
MR WHEELAHAN:
trustee has used the funds available for general purposes by loans to
Mr Bendel ‑ ‑ ‑
‑ ‑ ‑ and that we should somehow assume
or detect – I do not know, infer – that there is financial
accommodation by reason of the failure of the beneficiary to call for a
Saunders v Vautier
exercise of power?
MR WHEELAHAN:
Well, it really just comes down to not calling for the payment of the present
entitlement.
But you cannot call for it, if
you are a beneficiary, without exercising your
Saunders v Vautier
MR WHEELAHAN:
It is the mere fact that Gleewin
Investments, knowing that, by not exercising their
power, the trustee will then apply those funds or continue to apply
those funds for general trust purposes, and for a sustained period
not doing so
such that the trust does obtain that benefit, Gleewin Investments has provided
financial accommodation.
Do we know whether
there was any right of indemnity on behalf of the trustee or not?
I am sure it is in the trust deed, but we have not
turned ‑ ‑ ‑
No, whether as a matter of fact there were any claims for
indemnity that the trustee had.
MR WHEELAHAN:
believe it appears in the facts.
there were, then there would be no
Saunders v Vautier
GAGELER CJ:
Is the way in which you just
articulated the case the way it was put at any stage below?
Yes, I believe that is essentially how it was put
below. There was, of course, in the Full Court, the concession of a
debtor‑creditor
relationship which changed the complexion of the
arguments, but it was – perhaps I will withdraw that,
your Honour. I would
prefer to review the material before answering that
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you. I note the time and
I note the drift to some extent in the argument.
MR WHEELAHAN:
GAGELER CJ:
Where are we going with this case? How much
longer do you have in your submissions?
MR WHEELAHAN:
Your Honour, I believe that I will require
another 10 minutes.
GAGELER CJ:
And then you
want to supplement your submissions with something more in writing. What would
that cover, exactly?
MR WHEELAHAN:
I think it would
need to cover the matters we are
discussing ‑ ‑ ‑
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes. So, it
would need to cover whether there was a debtor‑creditor relationship and,
if there was not, what are the consequences.
includes ‑ ‑ ‑
Which would include consideration of the separate
Saunders v Vautier
point that we have been discussing.
Yes, your Honour.
Mr de Wijn, what is your attitude to these
developments? Are you going to be able to deal with them today?
It is a little bit hard to answer your Honour without
seeing what is in these supplementary submissions. I can certainly, I think,
productive this afternoon.
GAGELER CJ:
MR DE WIJN:
I do not think there is any reason
not to present this afternoon, and perhaps see where we are after
GAGELER CJ:
Very well. We will take the
luncheon adjournment.
AT 12.50 PM LUNCHEON
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 2.15
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, go ahead.
Thank you, your Honour. Your Honours, can
I address the provision of financial accommodation. We put it as follows. We
in a way where it does not necessarily require the Court, in addressing
it at this level, to get into the minutiae of some of the
issues we are taking
benefit of Gleewin Investments,
Gleewin Investments was entitled to take steps
to get those funds.
In not taking those steps, or any steps, knowing
that the funds were being used for general trust purposes, there was a provision
of financial accommodation. That is because the expected and known consequences
of not taking those steps and allowing the trust
to continue to use the funds
for general trust purposes benefited the trust financially.
Does that mean you are arguing that the definition
encapsulates a trustee‑beneficiary relationship? Potentially, if that
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes, yes it
I understand.
It would capture a sub‑trust and a failure to
Saunders v Vautier
power, if that was what was
And a separate trust.
Sorry, I should have said “separate
trust”, your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Would it encompass all circumstances in which one person could call on another
to provide them with funds?
MR WHEELAHAN:
need to answer that question here. I am addressing the facts of this case and
the fact that this is what occurred here.
So, there was a setting aside of
income; Gleewin Investments could have taken steps to get the funds; it did not
take steps; it
knew that the funds were being used by the trustee for general
trust purposes and they were the expected and known consequences of
the trustee would benefit financially.
finding that if it had taken those steps, it would have got the
MR WHEELAHAN:
It is not necessary – it is not
a necessary element.
So, even if an attempt to get a
distribution would have been unsuccessful, you say there is still a financial
accommodation?
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes, your Honour, because the
consequence was that there was a continued use of the funds by the trustee. Can
I take your Honours
to – before I turn to the case, I just
wanted to confirm, in answer to the Chief Justice’s question earlier
this was put below, that is indeed how it was put below, and I will
just refer the Court to paragraph 66 of the tribunal’s
reasons, and
if I could ask the Court to turn to that paragraph. It is tab 3 of the
core appeal book at page 38. The tribunal recorded
oral submissions to the
effect that the Commissioner:
didn’t] dispute the existence of the separate
and obviously the tribunal found that there were no
separate trusts, and that was not challenged by either party at the Full
[T]he parties are in agreement that there were a number of potential rights
and obligations ... which included a right on the part
of Gleewin Investments to
... terminate the sub-trust: ... [a]
Saunders v Vautier
If it had exercised that right, the moneys would have come to it. Perhaps
it’s a little unclear as to the exact juridical basis
on which one then
traces that through. ...
But ... if Gleewin Investments have exercised its rights, the amounts which
remained intermingled in the 2005 Trust would have been
paid to it. And
that the financial accommodation is found in the decision not to exercise that
right with a result that the amounts
remained intermingled in the 2005
Trust. And that’s how the 2005 Trust was financially
accommodated.
Can I just stop there. There is
absolutely nothing there about knowledge.
MR WHEELAHAN:
not, in that
submission ‑ ‑ ‑
So, I am just going through the elements here. The elements are: set
aside, entitled to take steps to get it – which is the
Saunders v Vautier
point in the first paragraph – did not
take steps, knowing that the money was being used by the trustee for general
trust purposes.
Where is that bit to be found in the submissions that were put
MR WHEELAHAN:
Do you mean in that particular extract from
the oral submissions?
Well, I do not – you,
as I understood you, explain that is how the case is put.
Yes – the Commissioner has always relied on the
common control by Mr Bendel of the entities in question.
Is that to ignore
separation of corporate
entities? On what basis am I entitled to take knowledge into account in those
circumstances, where I have
got separate legal entities directed at separate
MR WHEELAHAN:
So, the Commissioner’s position is
that, as I mentioned earlier, if the trustee had kept the amounts on a separate
solely for the benefit of Gleewin Investments, there would not be a loan.
So, if Gleewin Investments allowed the trustee to keep
the funds on the
understanding that that was what was occurring, then we would say there was not
a loan. But in this case, Gleewin
Investments knew that that was not occurring
and that the funds were being applied for general trust purposes. That is the
accommodation that has been given.
submission before the tribunal seems to be predicated on there not being a
separate trust.
MR WHEELAHAN:
No, in fact, that was predicated
on there being a separate trust.
Not the last
paragraph on page 38, where it talks about:
the amounts remained intermingled in the 2005 Trust. And that is how the
2005 Trust was financially accommodated.
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes, so, the opening words
read the opening words, but it sort of changes.
MR WHEELAHAN:
Well, I think it is assuming that there are separate trusts but the funds were
able to be intermingled ‑ ‑ ‑
So, just so I am clear, if it was a separate trust here, there would be
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes, if there was a separate trust
created and the funds were applied solely for the benefit of Gleewin
Investments.
But when you talk about it being applied
for general trust purposes – they are that are impressed with a
trust. So, they might
be purporting to be applied for general trust purposes,
but they have to be applied for the benefit of the
beneficiary.
MR WHEELAHAN:
beneficiary – the only and sole beneficiary of the separate trust is
Gleewin Investments.
MR WHEELAHAN:
So, what we are submitting is that when there was intermingling, the funds were
being applied for general trust purposes and not
– if you were to
apply the funds solely for the benefit of Gleewin Investments, then any income
derived on those funds would
also be solely for the benefit of Gleewin
Investments. It would be compartmentalised, but what was occurring
here – and whether
it be permitted or not we say is not to the
point – Gleewin Investments was aware through the common control that
were being used for general trust purposes, and so that is the
financial accommodation that is being provided to the trustee.
Mr Wheelahan, there are plenty of cases that say, in the case of
fungible assets, you can easily have a trust impressed upon an existing
fungible assets. And
, the case you referred us to, stands for that
proposition – it was the dissenting judge who said you could not do
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes, that is right.
There are lots of authorities in Australia that say you can. There is a case
where a man wrote to his de facto partner: of the
1.2 million shares I hold in a publicly listed company, I hold 220,000
on trust for you. That was held to be a valid trust.
Yes, your Honour. As I said, we are not – our
submission does not depend on there being some breach of the trust
I do not think there was a breach
MR WHEELAHAN:
The point is that that was what was
occurring and ‑ ‑ ‑
So, when you say they are applied for general trust purposes, whether or not
the funds for the separate trust, the 2005 trust, have
invested – that might be a question for the rules of
tracing – but if they have been invested, they have been invested
the benefit of the beneficiaries.
MR WHEELAHAN:
beneficiaries, plural, of the trust.
The beneficiary
of the 2005 trust.
MR WHEELAHAN:
In fact, that is what the trust deed required under that clause. It
Any amount set aside . . . shall cease to form part of
the Trust Fund and upon such setting aside . . . shall
thenceforth be held
by the Trustee on a separate
trust . . . with power to the Trustee pending payment
over . . . to invest or apply or deal with such
Fund . . . in the manner provided for in
Clause 6(5) –
MR WHEELAHAN:
clause 6(5) talks about it being solely for the benefit of Gleewin
Investments, or the beneficiary, if I could go to that.
fit for the benefit of such person –
the powers contained in sub‑clauses (3) and (4) –
are being exercised. So, if that is right and there is a separate trust
with a trustee exercising those powers in accordance with
those provisions,
there is no loan, on your earlier submission.
MR WHEELAHAN:
Sorry, your Honour, I have just found clause 6(5):
where the Trustee holds any amount upon separate trust for any
et cetera, and:
where he or she is not under a legal disability but the amount is left in the
hands of the Trustee invest on behalf of such person
and then, later on:
from time to time in their absolute discretion resort to such amount and the
income thereof and pay apply or deal with the same or
thereof . . . in such manner as the Trustee in its absolute
discretion thinks fit for the benefit of such
Well, that discretion indicates
even less likely that there is present an unconditional obligation to
MR WHEELAHAN:
Your Honour, I am trying to take that
out of the picture because that is something that we hope to be able to address
submissions.
All right. Okay. Then just
deal with it that way.
MR WHEELAHAN:
I am trying to identify the
financial accommodation without getting caught up in – because, just
to take stock of where we
are at, we have framed all our arguments to this Court
on the assumption that the concession that is recorded in paragraph 92 of
the Full Court’s reasons is correct. So, we are now – if that
concession is being reopened, no doubt we would frame
our presentation of the
financial accommodation differently, and what I am trying to do here is address
it at a level that does not
Speaking for myself, I understand the point you are
GAGELER CJ:
Can I just crystallise it for my
own purposes. The financial accommodation lies in the inaction of Gleewin
Investments with knowledge
of the deployment of the funds by the trustee. Is
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes, your Honour. And
could I take your Honours now to the case of
Corporate Initiatives Pty
Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2005] FCAFC 62
(2005) 142 FCR 279
, which is in
volume 4, tab 23.
GAGELER CJ:
that, can I just understand, does that involve any attribution of knowledge or
intent to the trustee, or it entirely
unilateral conduct or absence of conduct
that constitutes the financial accommodation, as you now put it?
It could be unilateral. It
How do you put it?
MR WHEELAHAN:
way I have just put it is unilateral.
GAGELER CJ:
Unilateral.
MR WHEELAHAN:
They are not taking steps, knowing the
expected consequence is that the trust will benefit. The
Initiatives Case
was not concerned with providing a financial accommodation,
but it was concerned with providing a benefit, and the analysis, we say,
still the same.
If I could ask your Honours to turn to
paragraph 23, on page 468, where the court said that – and
I should indicate that circumstances
were similar in that there was
a – different in the sense that it was a distribution, not a setting
aside, but there was in
this case a distribution, and the court noted that, and
a failure to call for it, so, no steps were taken, and the funds were left
within the trust, and the court said:
We therefore think the Tribunal was correct in proceeding on the basis that,
on demand being made by SBS as trustee for CUT, Eldersmede
would have to do
something to arrange funds for that payment, whether by selling, or borrowing
against, available assets, which would
then no longer be available for other
trust purposes. Not having to do this was a benefit. Eldersmade was thus in a
better or more
favourable position than it would have been had it been required
to fund the distributions.
We would say the same would occur here if steps had been taken and the
trust was required to pay the amount set aside to Gleewin Investments,
have been to the detriment of the funds that were otherwise available to the
trust for general trust purposes. Could I
also refer the Court to
paragraphs 29 and 30, and this concerns the word
“provides”, which also appears, we are concerned
with the provision
of financial accommodation. And the court noted that:
not calling on –
the trustee:
to pay the amount of the distribution . . . “provided”
a benefit . . .
The term “provides” is not defined –
And it refers to the dictionary meanings:
Thus without positive action A can allow B to have or take or retain
something which A has the power or right to deny or withdraw.
In the present
case the inaction of SBS was the only means by which Eldersmede gained the
benefit we have identified.
So, your Honours, that is all I wanted
to say about provision of a formal financial accommodation. We also say that
there was a transaction
which in substance effected a loan of money.
arrangements in substance effected a loan of money because Gleewin had the
temporary use of funds to which Gleewin Investments
was beneficially entitled
until such time as Gleewin Investments called for them, and commercially and
economically the arrangements
were, in substance, an at‑call loan. We
have included in the joint book of authorities some dictionary definitions of
word “transaction”. Your Honours will see that it has a
broad meaning. It includes:
that which is transacted; an affair; a piece of business.
the carrying on or completion of an action or course of
a piece of business . . . doings, proceedings,
So, we say that when you look at the whole set of circumstances where you
have got a common controller of the beneficiary, the trustee,
the use of the
funds in the trust in the way that they were, there is a dealing or a course of
action that was in substance an at‑call
In short, Gleewin
Investments not taking steps to be paid amounts set aside for it and the
consequent retention and use of the funds
by Gleewin for trust purposes with
Gleewin Investments’ knowledge comprised a transaction that in substance
effected a loan
of money from Gleewin Investments to Gleewin. And again, I will
refer to the
Corporate Initiatives Case
where the court said –
if your Honours would just bear with me – at paragraph 25,
in the final
sentence ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
What tab is that again, sorry?
It is volume 4,
BEECH‑JONES J:
MR WHEELAHAN:
Paragraph 25:
However it is difficult to see the practical difference between a formally
recorded loan and what happened here. In effect Eldersmede
was the recipient of
a loan repayable on demand and, as stated above, could use the amount of the
loan for trust purposes.
So, I will move
Could you just tell me again what the elements are of the in‑substance
transaction? Are they the same as the earlier one?
No, it is affording somebody else the temporary use
of funds to which Gleewin Investments was beneficially entitled until such
as Gleewin Investments took steps to obtain the funds.
Just so I am clear, there is no knowledge there? No
knowledge element on that substance transaction? Or is it an objective inquiry?
Or is it – affording someone temporary use of funds to which the
investments is beneficially entitled until the beneficiary
took steps to obtain
MR WHEELAHAN:
It was done with Gleewin Investments’
knowledge that the funds were being applied for general trust purposes, and we
that that is a factor.
So that would –
and I am not being difficult, I just want to make sure that is absent other
argument about whether or
MR WHEELAHAN:
was a financial accommodation?
Yes, this is a wholly separate limb to the financial
accommodation limb.
And this is absent other argument
MR WHEELAHAN:
I just have to say that these arguments are formulated on the basis that there
was a concession.
The concession that there was a debtor‑creditor liability
obviously affects whether there
understand. I am just making sure that that is right.
Yes. So, it may be that that argument would be presented
slightly differently once those other matters are fleshed
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Wheelahan, just so I am clear,
given – and I understand you have reframed this as things have
developed at a higher level
of abstraction – you do not accept there
was a separate trust under 3(5)?
MR WHEELAHAN:
just to be clear on that, what matters is that the amounts were used for general
trust purposes. So, whether there was
in fact a separate trust, whether there
needed to be a separate trust, the fact was that the amounts were being used for
trust purposes, and as I
Mr Wheelahan ‑ ‑ ‑
This is my problem,
though ‑ ‑ ‑
do not even understand what that means. I mean, if the amounts are amounts that
are held on trust and they are invested in a particular
way, they are invested
for the purposes of that trust for the benefit of the beneficiary of that trust.
What do you mean by “for
general trust purposes”?
Well, when you say “for the benefit of the
beneficiary” ‑ ‑ ‑
Of the 2005 trust.
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes, but the 2005 trust has
many beneficiaries, many objects, and Gleewin Investments is one of them. Now,
if amounts are set
aside solely for the benefit of Gleewin Investments and
whatever comes by way of return on the application of that property that
been set aside for Gleewin Investments is also for the benefit of Gleewin
Investments, then there is a complete containment and
the Commissioner would not
say that that constitutes a loan.
Mr Wheelahan, when you say “general investment”, the loans that
were made to Mr Bendel were authorised by clause
3(5) where it said
“pending payment . . . to invest”.
So, why is this not just a
particular illustration of an investment authorised by
clause 3(5)?
MR WHEELAHAN:
Your Honour, it is an
investment – it is not a part of our case that there needed to be
some breach of the trustee.
understand.
MR WHEELAHAN:
difficulty is that it is not a breach. My difficulty is clause 6(5) says
if I have set aside an amount on trust for a particular
identified person I am
to invest it “for the benefit”, it says, “of such
person”, being the one we have looked
up earlier in clauses (3) and
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes, Gleewin Investments.
‑ ‑ ‑ in the manner in its absolute
discretion it thinks fit.
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes, and then when it applies those
amounts ‑ ‑ ‑
Well, it has not applied those amounts, it just invests them as it thinks
fit for the benefit of that person.
MR WHEELAHAN:
amounts stayed within the trust, and then the
trust ‑ ‑ ‑
No, they were lent.
They were lent, that was the
MR WHEELAHAN:
Initially – as in, they are not
paid out to Gleewin Investments.
I agree with
that – they were set aside, there was no distribution.
Yes, and then when the trust lends funds to Mr Bendel,
that may well be authorised by the trust deed but the trust is still having
benefit of the funds that were being set aside for Gleewin Investments, in the
sense that it is able to invest them for the benefit
of all of the beneficiaries
of the trust.
No, that is my point. I think that is
where you and I might part company.
MR WHEELAHAN:
Clause 6(5) says I am investing
in its absolute discretion –
by the trustee:
for the benefit of such person –
Not for the general beneficiaries. I, the trustee, in my absolute
discretion think fit for the benefit of such person, being the
person to whom
the amount was set aside.
MR WHEELAHAN:
But the Tribunal found
that there was no actual setting aside, and there was no
recording ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes, there was a resolution to set it aside.
MR WHEELAHAN:
But the trustee did not take any steps to actually set
aside ‑ ‑ ‑
MR WHEELAHAN:
‑ ‑ ‑ and treat that money
separately.
But it does not need
It is money in a bank account.
The investments that the trust makes from that point onwards
are the – or what it does with the corpus of the trust fund
income in future years can be for the benefit of any of the beneficiaries. So,
whatever income comes in can be distributed
to whomever the trustee may
Well, then the trustee would be in breach of
the trust deed if he had purported to do that, because of the way
clause 3(5) and 6(5)
MR WHEELAHAN:
know that there are, in some years, distributions just to Gleewin Investments
and in other years distributions to Gleewin
Investments and Mr Bendel,
Distributions or setting aside?
MR WHEELAHAN:
Setting aside.
Thank you, your Honour. But setting aside income that has been derived by
the trust on the application or investment
of its assets.
In any event, when you said before that if there is a separate trust, there
is no loan, that is no longer the case. I think you said
before what is
important is the investment of the funds by the trustee.
If the separate trusts were set up and accounted for in such a
way as to ensure that the amounts that had been set aside for Gleewin
Investments were invested solely for its benefit and kept separate from the
trust fund, and any income derived on those assets was
also solely for the
benefit of Gleewin Investments, the Commissioner would not say there is a
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Wheelahan, just then to follow up
where I was back a minute ago, what do you say is the legal significance of the
– I think you do not say there was a separate trust. What
then was the legal significance of the resolution setting aside
those moneys for
Gleewin Investments?
MR WHEELAHAN:
It altered the beneficial
entitlements to assets of the trust.
BEECH-JONES J:
MR WHEELAHAN:
In that Gleewin Investments – or
that part of the income that had been set aside for Gleewin Investments, that
Gleewin Investments
had beneficial entitlement to it.
BEECH-JONES
Where did it get that, if it was not under 3(5)?
It is under 3(5).
BEECH-JONES J:
operates under 3(5). It is just that you say Gleewin did not comply
with 3(5). Is that what we get to?
MR WHEELAHAN:
Well, I think this is
where ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
are back into the assumption ‑ ‑ ‑
I am trying to stay above this level of detail because we have
not – this is not the
GAGELER CJ:
the attempt to put the argument at this level of detail is exposing difficulty
with the presentation of the argument today
on the basis of a departure from the
assumption that was adopted in the court below.
MR WHEELAHAN:
That is right, your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
It may be the most
efficient way to proceed to allow you to put in writing the way in which you put
the case in the absence of that
assumption, addressing squarely the operation of
the trust deed.
MR WHEELAHAN:
GAGELER CJ:
And then, in the light of that operation, articulating precisely how you say
paragraphs (b) and (d) are met in the circumstances of
MR WHEELAHAN:
Yes, your Honour, I agree, with
respect, that that is what should occur.
GAGELER CJ:
would seem desirable that occur before Mr de Wijn attempts to answer
the new case.
MR WHEELAHAN:
GAGELER CJ:
Mr de Wijn, what would you say about an adjournment on the basis
of the Commissioner formulating in writing the way the Commissioner
to put the case?
MR DE WIJN:
I think that is right,
your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
You respond to
MR DE WIJN:
see that first before we respond.
GAGELER CJ:
And then we would
re‑list it in December.
MR DE WIJN:
your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
Well, that is the course we will
take. How long do you need, Mr Solicitor, to put the new case in
MR DONAGHUE:
I think we would need at least a
fortnight, your Honour. If there is time to have it ready before December,
which should allow
us a little more than that, then I would be grateful for
that. I have not worked through the dates in my diary,
GAGELER CJ:
fortnight is probably about right, and then a fortnight for Mr de Wijn
after that.
MR DE WIJN:
Yes, your Honour. So, we would
reply, as it were, with written submissions, a
fortnight ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
You would respond, yes.
MR DE WIJN:
Yes, and we will not make any provision for a further reply. I would
expect, or the Court would expect, that any supplementary
oral submissions on
the part of the appellant would be extremely brief at a resumed
MR DONAGHUE:
I understand that, your Honour,
confined to the issues that we would be addressing in the written submissions on
the factual aspects
of the case, rather than the wider legal part of
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, but it needs to address how the provisions
of paragraphs (b) and (d) of the definition of “loan” are
in the circumstances of the case.
MR DONAGHUE:
understand that, your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
We certainly – I understand. We would not propose to
revisit any of the territory that I covered at some length
GAGELER CJ:
The directions we will make are
appellant file further submissions limited to those topics within two
respondent respond to those further submissions within a further two
case will be relisted for argument on a day in the December
MR DONAGHUE:
If the Court
GAGELER CJ:
Very well. The Court will adjourn until
10.00 am tomorrow.
AT 2.48 PM THE MATTER WAS
RTF format (1.65 MB)
Signed PDF/A format