BHP Billiton Mitsui Coal Pty Ltd T/A BHP Mitsui Coal Pty Ltd [2019] FWCA 6455 (18 September 2019)
[2019] FWCA 6455
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Application for approval of a single-enterprise agreement
Billiton Mitsui Coal Pty Ltd T/A BHP Mitsui Coal Pty Ltd
(AG2019/2591)
BHP BILLITON MITSUI COAL PTY LTD POITREL MINE ENTERPRISE AGREEMENT
Coal industry
COMMISSIONER HUNT
BRISBANE, 18 SEPTEMBER 2019
Application for approval of the BHP Billiton Mitsui Coal Pty Ltd Poitrel
Mine Enterprise Agreement 2019.
BHP Billiton Mitsui Coal Pty Ltd T/A BHP Mitsui Coal Pty Ltd (BHP)
has applied for approval of an enterprise agreement known as the
BHP Billiton
Mitsui Coal Pty Ltd Poitrel Mine Enterprise Agreement 2019
(the Agreement).
The application was made pursuant to
Fair Work Act 2009
The Agreement is a single-enterprise agreement.
The Fair Work Commission (the Commission) raised certain concerns
regarding the Agreement with BHP, and as a result, BHP has provided
undertakings. A copy of the undertakings is attached at Annexure A. Pursuant to
of the Act I sought the views of the 23 employee bargaining
representatives and each of the Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining
Energy Union (CFMMEU), the “Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering,
Printing and Kindred Industries Union” known as
the Australian
Manufacturing Workers’ Union (AMWU) and the Communications, Electrical,
Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal,
Plumbing and Allied Services Union of
Australia (CEPU) regarding the undertakings provided by BHP.
Each of the CFMMEU, AMWU and the CEPU wrote to my chambers and
indicated that they had no objections to BHP’s written undertakings.
of the 23 employee bargaining representatives provided a view on BHP’s
written undertakings.
I am satisfied that the undertakings will not cause financial
detriment to any employee covered by the Agreement and that the undertakings
will not result in substantial changes to the Agreement. Pursuant to
the Act, I accept the undertakings. In accordance with
of the Act I
note that the undertakings are taken to be a term of the Agreement.
I have taken into consideration the material filed in the Commission.
Subject to the undertakings referred to above, I am satisfied
that each of the
requirements of
as are relevant to this application for
approval have been met. The Agreement does not cover all of the employees of
the employer,
however, taking into account
and (3A) I am satisfied that
the group of employees was fairly chosen.
Pursuant to
of the Act, the model consultation term
prescribed by the
Fair Work Regulations 2009
(Cth) is attached to the
Agreement and taken to be a term of it.
Pursuant to
of the Act, the model flexibility term
prescribed by the
Fair Work Regulations 2009
(Cth) is attached to the
Agreement and taken to be a term of it.
The Agreement is approved and, in accordance with s.54 of the Act,
will operate from 25 September 2019. The nominal expiry date of
the Agreement is
three years from the date of approval.
COMMISSIONER
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (23.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format