BananaCoast Credit Union Limited v Cross and others [2012] FWAFB 10165 (4 December 2012)
[2012] FWAFB 10165
Download Word Document
The attached document replaces the document previously issued with the above code on 4 December 2012.
Paragraph [4] has been replaced in its entirety.
Rani Tisseverasinghe
Associate to Vice President Watson
Dated: 4 December 2012.
[2012] FWAFB 10165
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Act 2009
- Appeal of decisions
BananaCoast Credit Union Limited
Cross and others
(C2012/5608)
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
COMMISSIONER MCKENNA
SYDNEY, 4 DECEMBER 2012
Appeal against decision
[2012 FWA 7681]
and order [
] of Deputy President Sams at Sydney on 20 September 2012 in matter numbers U2012/1143, U2012/1134 and U2012/1133, extension of
time, permission to appeal, jurisdictional fact,
Fair Work Act
Introduction
This decision concerns an application for permission to appeal, by BananaCoast Credit Union Limited (BananaCoast), against a decision
and order of Deputy President Sams on 20 September 2012 which extended the time for filing the unfair dismissal applications of Rodney
Cross, Karin Thompson and Denis Payne (the respondents).
At the hearing of this matter on 27 November 2012, Mr O. Fagir from Australian Business Lawyers represented BananaCoast and Mr G.
McConville, from the Finance Sector Union of Australia (FSU) represented the respondents.
The respondents were terminated from their employment by BananaCoast on 5 April 2012. At the time it was not disputed that the reason
for the terminations was economically based as a result of a restructure of BananaCoast. The respondents alleged that a month after
being made redundant, they became aware that new staff had been appointed to positions in which they could have been reasonably deployed.
The respondents thereafter suspected that their dismissals were not genuine redundancies.
The respondents made contact with their union, the FSU, on 4 May 2012 and were advised to file unfair dismissal applications with
Fair Work Australia. Ms Thompson and Mr Payne filed their applications on 15 May 2012 and Mr Cross filed his application on 16 May
2012. The applications were therefore respectively filed 40 and 41 days after the dismissal took effect.
As the applications were made outside the 14 day time limit set by
Fair Work Act
(the Act), the respondents sought to have Fair Work Australia extend the time for filing their applications on the basis that exceptional
circumstances were present. The exceptional circumstances relied upon by the respondents were that their redundancies were not genuine
and had they been aware of the information that was subsequently made available to them at the time of the redundancies, they would
have challenged their dismissals sooner.
It was not disputed that the respondents’ applications were filed 11-12 days after they had made contact with the FSU. The FSU
conceded this and submitted that the delay in filing the applications was attributable to the task of gathering more information
redundancies.
The Decision under Appeal
In his decision, the Deputy President addressed each of the factors in
of the Act and formed the conclusion that exceptional circumstances were present to warrant an extension of time.
On the issue of the belief held by the respondents that their redundancies were not genuine, his Honour considered this in the context
s.394(3)(a)
and said that:
... this is a rare and unusual case. I am satisfied that an honestly and reasonably held belief that an earlier redundancy may not
have been genuine, and the belief is based on plausible information, may constitute ‘exceptional circumstances’ for the
purposes of
of the Act. It follows that I reject Ms
submission that a dismissal cannot be unfair based on matters that occur after the dismissal took effect.”
With respect to the consideration of whether the respondents took any action to dispute the dismissals as required by
s.394(3)(c)
, his Honour found that representative error on the part of the FSU caused a delay in filing of the applications after 4 May 2012.
He said at paragraph [56]:
“As I explained to Mr
, the filing of an unfair dismissal application, given the 14 day deadline, is akin to an insurance policy. Further details and information
will necessarily be gathered subsequently. As an aside, I just do not understand why parties choose to wait in such circumstances.
After all, the forms and the application are simple and general in nature and can be readily downloaded from the FWA website. Applications
can always be discontinued, at any stage, if the Union came to the conclusion that the claims were unmeritorious. In any event, I
consider the applicants to be entirely blameless in this regard. Unfortunately, it follows that a finding of representative error,
at least for the 11-12 days after the applicants had contacted the Union, is one which is open to the Tribunal and I find accordingly.
I refer to what I said in
Prowse v Rivalea (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2011] FWA 8497
at paras 13-14 ...”
Nature of the appeal
An appeal under
of the Act in a matter of this nature is determined by reference to the provisions of
of the Act.
Section 400
400 Appeal rights
(1) Despite
subsection 604(2)
, FWA must not grant permission to appeal from a decision made by FWA under this Part unless FWA considers that it is in the public
interest to do so.
(2) Despite
subsection 604(1)
, an appeal from a decision made by FWA in relation to a matter arising under this Part can only, to the extent that it is an appeal
on a question of fact, be made on the ground that the decision involved a significant error of fact.”
A Full Bench in
GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty Ltd v Makin
GlaxoSmithKline
considered the impact of
on the approach to granting permission to appeal. It said:
Appeals have lain on the ground that it is in the public interest that leave should be granted in the predecessors to the Act for
decades. It has not been considered useful or appropriate to define the concept in other than the most general terms and we do not
intend to do so. The expression ‘in the public interest’, when used in a statute, classically imports a discretionary
value judgment to be made to be made by reference to undefined factual matters, confined only by the objects of the legislation in
question. [
Comalco v O’Connor
(1995) 131 AR 657
at p.681 per Wilcox CJ & Keely J, citing
O’Sullivan v Farrer
[1989] HCA 61
(1989) 168 CLR 210]
Although the public interest might be attracted where a matter raises issues of importance and general application, or where there
is a diversity of decisions at first instance so that guidance from an appellate court is required, or where the decision at first
instance manifests an injustice, or the result is counter intuitive, or that the legal principles applied appear disharmonious when
compared with other recent decisions dealing with similar matters, it seems to us that none of those elements is present in this
This case has frequently been quoted by Full Benches as an indication as to how
should be applied.
In a recent decision of a Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia, the requirements of
were described as importing a more stringent test than the previous legislation.
Buchanan J described the public interest test as a discretionary task involving a broad value judgement.
The decision subject to appeal in this matter is properly viewed as a discretionary decision.
The appeal is therefore to be considered in accordance with the principles of
Those principles are expressed in that decision as follows [at 504-505]:
“It is not enough that the judges composing the appellate court consider that, if they had been in the position of the primary
judge, they would have taken a different course. It must appear that some error has been made in exercising the discretion. If the
judge acts upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or irrelevant matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts,
if he does not take into account some material consideration, then his determination should be reviewed and the appellate court may
exercise its own discretion in substitution for his if it has the materials for doing so. It may not appear how the primary judge
has reached the result embodied in his order, but, if upon the facts it is unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may
infer that in some way there has been a failure properly to exercise the discretion which the law reposes in the court of first instance.
In such a case, although the nature of the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is reviewed on the ground
that a substantial wrong has in fact occurred.”
Section 400(2)
modifies the
principles by limiting any review based on a mistake of fact to a significant error of fact.
Section 400
clearly evinces an intention of the legislature that appeals in unfair dismissal matters are more limited than appeals with respect
to other matters under the Act.
We also note that the decision under appeal was a preliminary threshold matter, albeit one of real significance - a determination
of whether to extend the statutory time limit for filing an unfair dismissal application.
Permission to appeal
It is not disputed that as this is an appeal under
of the Act, permission to appeal will be granted only if Fair Work Australia considers that it is in the public interest to do so
and, to the extent that the appeal is on a question of fact, it can only be made on the ground that the decision involved a significant
error of fact.
BananaCoast accepts that the decision under appeal is a discretionary decision and the question the bench needs to determine is not
whether it considers that exceptional circumstances existed but rather whether it was open to the Deputy President to be satisfied
of their existence. BananaCoast submits that an error in reaching satisfaction about the existence of a jurisdictional fact may be
both an error of law and an error of fact, and that the discretion may have miscarried as a result. BananaCoast submits that permission
to appeal should be granted as the Deputy President fell into error by extending the time for filing the applications when he could
not have been satisfied on the evidence before him that exceptional circumstances existed within the meaning of
The FSU submits that permission to appeal should not be granted as BananaCoast has not established any public interest factor warranting
permission being granted. The FSU submits that BananaCoast has failed to indentify an error in the exercise of the Deputy President’s
discretion.
In our view, the decision under appeal properly considers each of the factors required to be considered under
of the Act. The Deputy President considered the representational error in the context of the factor whether the employees took action
to dispute their dismissals - not in relation to the reasons for the delay. We see no error in this approach. The arguments of error
are not strong and essentially amount to disagreement with the consideration of the factors required to be taken into account. We
have not been satisfied that it is in the public interest to grant permission to appeal. Permission is denied and the application
for permission to appeal is determined accordingly.
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
Appearances
for BananaCoast Credit Union.
G. McConville
for the Mr Cross, Ms Thompson and Mr Payne.
Hearing details:
November, 23.
[2010] FWAFB 5343
For instance,
Shortland v The Smiths Snackfood Co
[2011] FWAFB 2303
Gramotnev v Queensland University of Technology
[2011] FWAFB 2306
Paramalat Food Product Pty Ltd v Wililo
[2011] FWAFB 1166
Coal and Allied Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler
[2011] FCAFC 54
per Buchanan J at [34].
Coal and Allied Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler
[2011] FCAFC 54
per Buchanan J at [44]. See also
Hogan v Hinch
[2011] HCA 4
(2011) 85 ALJR 398
O’Sullivan v Farrer
[1989] HCA 61
(1989) 168 CLR 210.
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
[2000] HCA 47
(2000) 203 CLR 194.
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR531921>
No downloadable files available