Singh v Minister for Immigration & Anor [2013] FMCA 222 (3 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SINGH v MINISTER FOR
IMMIGRATION & ANOR
[2013] FMCA 222
MIGRATION – Student visa – review of
Migration Review Tribunal (“Tribunal”) decision.
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – Allegation that the Tribunal’s decision
affected by jurisdictional error by reason that it failed
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – Decision-maker’s failure to make enquiries
– whether a sufficient link to the outcome of the
applicant’s onus of proof.
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations 1994
, reg.1.41, cl.572.223 of sch.2,
cl.5A405 of sch.5A
Plaintiff S157/2002 v Commonwealth
211 CLR 476
Minister for Immigration & Citizenship v SZIAI
[2009] HCA 39
Minister for Immigration & Citizenship
[2012] FCA 982
Minister for Immigration &
Citizenship
[2010] FCA 309
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v
Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
(1986) 162 CLR 24
Minister for Immigration &
Multicultural Affairs v Yusuf
(2001) 206 CLR 323
Singh v Minister for
Immigration & Multicultural Affairs
[2001] FCA 73
(2001) 109 FCR 18
Minister for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCAFC 340
141 FCR 346
VAAD v Minister for Immigration & Multicultural &
Indigenous Affairs
[2005] FCAFC 117
SZEHN v Minister for Immigration
& Multicultural & Indigenous Affairs
[2005] FCA 1389
Pty Ltd v Administrative Appeals Tribunal
[2012] FCAFC 90
(2012) 203 FCR 166
Minister for Immigration & Citizenship
[2009] FCA 1247
(2009) 112 ALD 241
Queen v Australian Broadcasting Tribunal; Ex parte 2HD Pty Ltd
[1979] HCA 62
Minister for Immigration & Citizenship v Li
[2012] FCAFC 74
(2012) 202 FCR
Craig v South Australia
[1995] HCA 58
(1995) 184 CLR 163
GAGANDEEP SINGH
First Respondent:
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP
Second Respondent:
MIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
File Number:
SYG 1402 of 2012
Judgment of:
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors for the
Parish Patience
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Mr P. Knowles
Solicitors for the Respondents:
DLA Piper Australia
(1) The application be
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYG 1402 of 2012
GAGANDEEP SINGH
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION &
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
MIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
applicant, who is a citizen of India, applied for a Student (Temporary) (Class
TU) subclass 572 visa on 28 August 2009. On 14
April 2010 his application
was refused by a delegate of the first respondent (“Minister”) on
the basis that he did not
satisfy the requirements of cl.572.223 of sch.2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
(“Regulations”). The applicant
then applied to the second respondent (“Tribunal”) for a review of
that departmental
decision. The applicant was unsuccessful before the Tribunal
and has applied to this Court for judicial review of the Tribunal’s
these judicial review proceedings the Court’s task is to determine whether
the Tribunal’s decision is affected by jurisdictional
error as that is the
only basis upon which it can be set aside: s.474
Migration Act
Plaintiff S157/2002 v Commonwealth
(2003) 211 CLR 476.
the reasons which follow, the application will be
Relevant legislation
criteria for the grant of a subclass 572 visa are set out in pt.572 of sch.2 to
the Regulations. One of the criteria which the
applicant had to satisfy at the
time the decision was made on his visa application was cl.572.223 which
relevantly provided:
Minister is satisfied that the applicant is a genuine applicant for entry and
stay as a student because the applicant meets
the requirements of subclause
(2) An applicant meets the requirements of this subclause
applicant who is not a person designated under regulation
applicant gives to the Minister evidence, in accordance with the requirements
mentioned in Schedule 5A for Subclass 572
and the assessment level to which the
applicant is subject, in relation to:
financial capacity of the applicant to undertake each of those courses of study
without contravening any condition of the
visa relating to work
4 of sch.5A to the Regulations sets out the evidentiary requirements for
subclass 572 visas. Which clause of pt.4 of sch.5A
applies to a particular
applicant is determined by the assessment level applicable to that applicant.
Applicants for student visas
are allocated assessment levels between one and
five depending on which country’s passport they hold.
1.41 provides the regulatory basis for the specification of assessment levels
and requires that this be done by the Minister
by instrument in writing. At the
time the applicant lodged his visa application the assessment level applicable
to applicants for
subclass 572 visas who held Indian passports was level four.
The relevant specification, instrument IMMI 08/051 (Legislative instrument
F2008C00475) continued thereafter to apply to the applicant’s visa
application.
sch.5A requirements for assessment level four in relation to subclass 572 visas
which were applicable to the applicant’s
application relevantly
5A405 Financial
applicant must give, in accordance with this clause:
(a) evidence
that the applicant has funds from an acceptable source that are sufficient to
meet the following expenses for the first
(ii) living
(iii) school
declaration by the applicant stating that he or she has access to funds from an
acceptable source that are sufficient to meet
course fees, living costs and
school costs for the remainder of the applicant’s proposed stay in
Australia after the first
36 months; and
(c) evidence
that the regular income of any individual (including the applicant) providing
funds to the applicant was sufficient
to accumulate the level of funding being
provided by that individual.
(2) In this
means one or more of the following:
applicant’s parents ...
from an acceptable source
means one or more of the
paragraph (a) does not apply — a money deposit that an acceptable
individual has held for at least the 6 months immediately
before the date of the
application;
from a financial institution that is made to, and held in the name of, an
acceptable individual ...
Background facts
support of his student visa application the applicant provided, amongst other
things, a letter from the State Bank of Patiala dated
3 August 2009 which
stated that the applicant’s father had a balance of Rs.824,555 in his
account. An attached bank statement
for the applicant’s father’s
account from 1 November 2008 until 3 August 2009 showed a closing balance
of Rs.824,555.
15 January 2010 the delegate wrote to the applicant requesting up-to-date
evidence that he had sufficient funds to support himself
during his studies.
Subsequently, the applicant provided a statement of account from the Punjab
& Sind Bank dated 24 February
2010 stating that the balance in his
father’s account was Rs.813,900. An attached statement indicated that the
funds had been
deposited between January 2009 and 19 February 2010.
11 March 2010 the delegate wrote to the applicant inviting him to comment on
information she had received that the bank statement
he had provided in support
of his visa application was not genuine. In response, on 1 March 2010 the
applicant provided a further
statement from the Punjab & Sind Bank dated
17 March 2010 stating that his father’s bank account had a balance of
14 April 2010 the delegate refused to grant the applicant a visa on the basis
that the financial documents he had provided were
not genuine and that, as a
result, he did not meet the sch.5A requirements as to financial
12 December 2011 the Tribunal wrote to the applicant inviting him to
provide evidence of his enrolment, his financial capacity,
a declaration that he
had funds from an acceptable source to meet his school and living costs and
information to show that the regular
income of any individual (including the
applicant) who was providing funds to the applicant was sufficient to accumulate
of funding required.
a written submission dated 10 January 2012, the applicant’s
representatives submitted that the applicant would be obtaining
an education
loan from his father who had three fixed deposits with the Punjab National Bank
totalling approximately Rs.2,350,000
(AU$43,680.83). The applicant’s
representatives also submitted that they would provide evidence of the
applicant’s father’s
income from his farm and evidence that the
applicant’s father had forwarded funds to the applicant to assist with his
and living expenses. On 2 February 2012 the applicant’s
representatives provided the following documents:
letters from the Punjab National Bank dated 30 December 2011 which stated that
the applicant’s father had three fixed
deposit receipt accounts totalling
Rs.2,410,000. The applicant’s representatives submitted that this equated
to AU$45,744.56;
confirmation of deposits from the Punjab National Bank in relation to the three
fixed deposit receipt accounts indicating deposits
copy of a document dated 14 December 2011 setting out details of the
applicant’s father’s land ownership; and
Commonwealth
Bank of Australia statements in the applicant’s name noting money he had
received from his father.
13 February 2012 the Tribunal wrote to the applicant advising him that the
documents he had provided did not establish that the
funds had been held in his
father’s account for six months prior to the date of his student visa
application.
a Tribunal hearing on 5 March 2012 the applicant’s adviser submitted that
the applicant intended to apply for an education
loan to finance his studies.
Subsequently, the applicant submitted loan documents from the Punjab National
Bank dated 26 March 2012
stating that an education loan of Rs2,000,000 had been
granted to the applicant and that his father was the guarantor of the loan.
loan documents stated that the loan had been “fully sanctioned”. In
their covering submissions the applicant’s
representatives submitted that
the loan amount equated to AU$37,684.
a request from the Tribunal to contact the Punjab National Bank and verify the
documents provided by the applicant, the
Minister’s department reported
that a senior manager at the relevant branch of the Punjab National Bank had
advised that his
branch had not approved an education loan to anyone in March
2010, including the applicant, and that the letter provided by the applicant
fraudulent. On 26 April 2012, the Tribunal wrote to the applicant inviting him
to comment on that information. In response,
the applicant’s
representatives provided a letter from the Punjab National Bank dated 10 May
2012 which stated that a loan
of Rs.2,000,000 had been issued to the
applicant’s father on 29 March 2012 but had not been opened until 7 April
2012 because
of the end of the financial year.
The Tribunal’s decision and reasons
Tribunal found that the State Bank of Patiala and the Punjab & Sind Bank
documents which the applicant provided to the delegate
were not genuine and
therefore did not establish that the applicant had funds from an acceptable
source, as defined in cl.5A405(2)
of sch.5A to the Regulations.
Tribunal found that none of the documents which the applicant had provided to it
met the requirements of cl.5A405 either. In
this regard the Tribunal noted
Punjab National Bank documents provided by the applicant on 2 February 2012
showed funds in his father’s account which had
not been in the account for
at least six months prior to his application. The Tribunal noted that although
it had written to the
applicant and explained this issue, it received no
correspondence from him and, from discussions at the hearing, it appeared that
neither he nor his adviser had considered the issue;
made by the department revealed that the loan from the Punjab National Bank
purportedly granted on 26 March 2012 had not
been granted and was not genuine;
relation to the further letter purportedly from the Punjab National Bank dated
10 May 2012, the Tribunal accepted that the financial
year in India began on 1
April each year. However, it did not accept that the senior manager of the
branch would not have checked
the March 2012 records for loan approvals when he
was determining whether the 26 March 2012 loan document was genuine. Further,
the senior manager advised that that document had been checked and was not
genuine. The Tribunal therefore did not accept the explanation
provided by the
applicant or that it overcame the advice provided to the department by the
senior bank manager. In those circumstances,
the Tribunal did not consider it
necessary to undertake any further enquiries in relation to the 10 May 2012
Tribunal concluded that the applicant had not provided evidence in accordance
with the requirements of sch.5A in relation to his
financial capacity and that
he therefore did not satisfy the requirements of
cl.572.223.
Proceedings in this Court
the amended application the applicant alleged:
Tribunal constructively failed to exercise its jurisdiction by failing to make
an obvious inquiry about a critical fact, the
existence of which could have been
easily ascertained.
Particulars
Tribunal had before it a letter from the Applicant’s bank which on its
face contradicted hearsay evidence received through
the Australian High
Commission. The Tribunal could have easily ascertained whether the letter was
genuine by directly contacting
the bank or referring it back to the High
Commission.
Submissions
applicant referred to what the High Court said in
Minister for Immigration
& Citizenship v SZIAI
[2009] HCA 39
(2009) 83 ALJR 1123
decisions in the Federal Court concerned with a failure to make obvious
inquiries have led to references to a “duty
to inquire”, that term
is apt to direct consideration away from the question whether the decision which
is under review is
vitiated by jurisdictional error. The duty imposed upon the
Tribunal by the
Migration Act
is a duty to review. It may be that a
failure to make an obvious inquiry about a critical fact, the existence of which
ascertained, could, in some circumstances, supply a sufficient link to
the outcome to constitute a failure to review. If so, such
a failure could give
rise to jurisdictional error by constructive failure to exercise jurisdiction.
It may be that failure to make
such an inquiry results in a decision being
affected in some other way that manifests itself as jurisdictional error. It is
not necessary
to explore these questions of principle in this case.
(reference omitted)
applicant submitted that the question of the genuineness or accuracy of the bank
letter of 10 May 2012 presented the Tribunal
with an obvious enquiry, which
it should have made, concerning conflicting evidence which was attributed to the
same source. He
submitted that the letter of 10 May 2012 was, on its face,
better evidence than the hearsay report that a senior manager of the Punjab
National Bank had impugned the purported loan documents of 26 March 2012. He
submitted that that the need to weigh the two gave
rise to an obvious
also submitted that it was close to indisputable that such an enquiry concerned
a fact which was critical to the review and that
it could easily have been
ascertained.
further submitted that a “sufficient link” existed between the
failure to make that enquiry and the outcome of the
review. It was said that
the link in question was the possibility that an enquiry into the letter of 10
May 2012 could have produced
evidence supportive of his case.
his written submissions the applicant referred to the information concerning the
senior bank manager’s advice, saying:
from the visa officer was hearsay, which although it is admissible as evidence
in the Tribunal, does not for that reason
cease to be of generally lesser
reliability than direct evidence. In
, Davies J sitting as
President of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal observed that “the
Tribunal does not lightly receive
into evidence challenged evidentiary material
concerning a matter of importance of which there is or should be better
The letter of 10 May was, on its face at least, better evidence
that the report of the visa officer. The need to weigh the two gave
rise, in the
Applicant’s submission, to an obvious enquiry.
(references
applicant also submitted that the documents of 26 March 2012 and 10 May 2012
could be reconciled because they referred to different
dates and to different
names. The implication of this submission was that this indicated that the
Tribunal should have made an enquiry
of the bank in India.
Minister referred, amongst other things, to the statement of Cowdroy J in
Minister for Immigration & Citizenship
[2012] FCA 982
where his Honour said:
statements clearly support the conclusion that once a Tribunal received the
appellant’s comments on the information including
the supplementary
letters that it received from the appellant it was not obliged to go on and
inquire into the authenticity of the
information in the appellant’s
response. Given the Tribunal’s other findings concerning the
appellant’s credibility,
the information it received from the letter
writers via DFAT and the indicia of forgery that it found in the various
letters, any
attempt to obtain further information would have been redundant. If
it were required to check the validity of the new letters and
request the
appellant to comment upon them, the Tribunal would potentially be constrained to
receive further letters from the appellant
in support of the appellant’s
claim of involvement in the JSD and the process would continue ad infinitum.
There is nothing
more that repeat information requests would have obtained that
the Tribunal did not already have. It follows that ground 2 of the
appeal must
be dismissed.
The Minister went on to say by reference
Minister for Immigration & Citizenship
that the Tribunal was not required to check for a second time
whether the loan documents purportedly issued by the Punjab National
fraudulent.
Consideration
Failure to enquire
issue on which this case turns is whether the failure to make the enquiry
identified by the applicant supplied a sufficient link
to the outcome of the
review as to constitute a failure to review. In
no such connection
was found, the plurality saying:
[why it was not necessary to explore the issues of principle referred
to in the quotation appearing above at [21]]
is that there was nothing on the
record to indicate that any further inquiry by the Tribunal, directed to the
authenticity of the
certificates, could have yielded a useful result. There was
nothing before the Federal Magistrates Court or the Federal Court to
what information might be elicited if the Tribunal were to undertake the inquiry
which was said to be critical to the validity
of its decision. The inquiry
suggested was telephone contact with the persons whose mobile telephone numbers
were shown on the certificates.
But the question whether the certificates
contained false statements as to authorship or otherwise would not be able to be
by calls placed to those telephone numbers. If the respondents to the
calls admitted to the Tribunal or its officers that the certificates
false statements, then the grounds for a decision adverse to SZIAI would have
been strengthened. If the respondents said
that the contents were true, it would
have added nothing to the statements effectively conveyed by the certificates
themselves. The
second reason is that the response made by SZIAI’s
solicitors to the Tribunal’s letter of 14 January 2008 itself indicated
the futility of further inquiry. There was nothing that SZIAI or his solicitors
were able to add, beyond a bare denial of what appeared
in the National
Ameer’s letter. For these reasons there is no factual basis for the
conclusion that the failure to inquire
constituted a failure to undertake the
statutory duty of review or that it was otherwise so unreasonable as to support
that the Tribunal’s decision was infected by jurisdictional
(at 1129 [26])
the High Court was saying in
was that no jurisdictional error based
on a failure to enquire will be demonstrated unless the postulated enquiry would
have produced
evidence which might have led the review to an outcome different
from the one it reached. The situation is similar to those cases
Tribunal’s decision is affected by jurisdictional error because it has
failed to consider information material to
its decision. In those cases, if the
Tribunal fails to consider evidence which might have had a bearing on the
outcome of the review,
in that the evidence was not “so insignificant that
the failure to take it into account could not have materially affected
decision”, and where such failure could possibly have deprived the
applicant of a successful outcome to his or her application
for review because
the evidence might have persuaded the Tribunal that it was satisfied that the
applicant met the criteria for the
grant of the visa sought, then that amounts
to a failure to conduct the review in the manner required by the Act and is
characterised as a jurisdictional error:
Minister for Aboriginal
Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
(1986) 162 CLR 24
per Gibbs CJ at 30-31, Mason J
at 40, 44-45 and Dawson J at 71;
Minister for Immigration & Multicultural
Affairs v Yusuf
(2001) 206 CLR 323 at 351 [82];
Singh v Minister for
Immigration & Multicultural Affairs
[2001] FCA 73
(2001) 109 FCR 18
Lu v Minister for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCAFC 340
(2004) 141 FCR 346
per Sackville J, Black CJ and
Sundberg J agreeing;
VAAD v Minister for Immigration & Multicultural
& Indigenous Affairs
[2005] FCAFC 117
SZEHN v Minister
for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous Affairs
[2005] FCA 1389
LVR (WA) Pty Ltd v Administrative Appeals Tribunal
[2012] FCAFC 90
applicant referred to Cowdroy J’s statement in
Khant v Minister for
Immigration & Citizenship
[2009] FCA 1247
(2009) 112 ALD 241
considers that a further inquiry of the appellant would have clarified the key
issue, that being whether or not there were
exceptional circumstances explaining
his non-compliance with condition 8202 of his
However, that passage indicates that his Honour
concluded that a sufficient link to the outcome of the review had been
demonstrated
such that jurisdictional error was proved, although his Honour did
not express it quite in those terms.
alleged that the Tribunal should have made the enquiry he identified, it was
necessary that the applicant make out all the
elements of the
including the “sufficient link” element. In this case, the
applicant submitted that a sufficient link would be
demonstrated if the
postulated enquiry might have produced evidence which might have led to a
different outcome to the review.
implication of that submission was that the Court could make a finding based on
an assessment of what information the enquiry
might have elicited rather than on
what it would have elicited. In most cases it is unlikely that the evidence
will permit the former
course to be taken with the necessary degree of
confidence. So it is on this occasion. To essay that course would, in this
produce only speculative conclusions upon which no reliance could be
applicant adduced no evidence to demonstrate what information the Tribunal would
have gleaned had it made the postulated enquiry.
Consequently, there is no
basis to conclude that such an enquiry would have produced evidence which might
have led the Tribunal
to make a decision different from the one it did
such circumstances, the applicant has not demonstrated that the Tribunal’s
failure to make the enquiry which he said it should
have made supplied a
sufficient link to the outcome of the review to constitute a failure to review
and thus jurisdictional error.
Miscarriage of discretion
noted earlier, the applicant also submitted that the Tribunal should have
decided to make an enquiry because the facts of the case
pointed to the need for
one to be made. This was, in reality, a submission that the Tribunal’s
failure to make the enquiry
amounted to a miscarriage in the exercise of its
discretion whether to initiate an enquiry. The Minister addressed the same sort
of issue when he referred to
Minister for Immigration &
Citizenship
and what he characterised as the futility of the course
advocated by the applicant.
matters which a decision-maker is bound to consider in making a discretionary
decision, and here the relevant discretion is found
in the Tribunal’s
s.359 power to get information, are determined by a construction of the statute
conferring the discretion:
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend
where Mason J said:
context of judicial review on the ground of taking into account irrelevant
considerations, this Court has held that, where
a statute confers a discretion
which in its terms is unconfined, the factors that may be taken into account in
the exercise of the
discretion are similarly unconfined, except in so far as
there may be found in the subject-matter, scope and purpose of the statute
implied limitation on the factors to which the decision-maker may legitimately
have regard...
In making that statement, his
Honour referred to
The Queen v Australian Broadcasting Tribunal; Ex parte 2HD
[1979] HCA 62
(1979) 144 CLR 45
where it was said:
The general rule is that a discretion
expressed without any qualification is unconfined except in so far as it is
affected by limitations
to be derived from the context and scope and purpose of
the statute.
Minister for Immigration & Citizenship v Li
[2012] FCAFC 74
(2012) 202 FCR 387
, Greenwood and Logan JJ held that an unreasonable refusal to adjourn a
Tribunal proceeding would not just deny the applicant in question
a meaningful
appearance but would also mean that the Tribunal had not discharged its core
statutory function of reviewing the primary
decision, a failure amounting to
exercise by the Tribunal
of a particular discretion could be so unreasonable in
the circumstances that it would amount to jurisdictional error.
this case, a failure to enquire would be unreasonable in the relevant sense or
to the relevant degree if the enquiry, had it been
performed, would have
elicited information which might have affected the outcome of the review. This
is because such a failure would
cause the Tribunal to fail to consider relevant
material such that its exercise of power would be affected:
Craig v South
[1995] HCA 58
(1995) 184 CLR 163
at 179 and the cases cited above at [29].
this case the Tribunal’s failure to make the enquiry advocated by the
applicant was not unreasonable in the relevant sense
or to the relevant degree
for two reasons. First, the Tribunal’s decision to not make an enquiry
into the 10 May 2012 letter
was based on its reasoned preference for the
evidence which the department obtained from the senior bank manager over the
documentary
evidence supplied by the applicant. The finding that the
manager’s evidence was to be preferred was open to the Tribunal with
consequence that its decision to not enquire into the letter of 10 May 2012 did
not represent a miscarriage of discretion.
the applicant has not demonstrated that the enquiry he says the Tribunal should
have made might have led to a different
outcome to the review. Consequently,
even if the failure to make further enquiries had amounted to a miscarriage of
discretion,
it would not have been so unreasonable as to amount to
is not necessary to reach a concluded view on the Minister’s submissions
referred to above at [27] and [35] because the Tribunal
did not base its
decision not to make enquiries in relation to the 10 May 2012 letter on such
considerations.
error on the part of the Tribunal has not been demonstrated.
Consequently,
the application will be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding
forty-three (43) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of
Date: 3 April 2013
RTF format (192 KB)
Signed PDF/A format