Health Services Union [2024] FWCD 1076 (20 December 2024)
[2024] FWCD 1076
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
—Alteration of other rules of organisation
Health Services
(R2024/161)
CHRIS ENRIGHT
MELBOURNE, 20 DECEMBER 2024
Alteration of other rules of organisation.
On 23 October 2024 the Health Services Union (HSU) lodged with the
Fair Work Commission (the Commission) a notice and declaration
setting out
particulars of alterations to its rules.
The HSU seeks certification of the alterations under section 159 of
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
On the information contained in the notice and declaration, I am
satisfied the alterations have been made under the rules of the organisation.
The particulars set out alterations to Rules 6 – 8, 10 –
13, 15, 21, 23 – 29, 32, 34, 38, 38A, 43, 46 – 50,
64, 69, 70, 74, 75, 82 – 84, 91, 92, 94 and 95.
The alterations can be grouped into five categories.
The first category makes the rules more inclusive by adopting gender
neutral language and making minor consequential grammar
The second deletes redundant transitional
provisions.
The third rewrites the current shop-stewards rule, so the rule is
consistent with recent amendments to the
Fair Work Act 2009
which deal with Workplace Delegates’
The fourth corrects a typographical error in the current
The final category goes to the internal governance of the HSU and
its branches. Brief explanations of the relevant alterations were
included in
material supplied to the HSU’s National Council before the alterations
were transacted.
consider those explanations an accurate precis of the relevant alterations. I
generally adopt them for the purpose of summarising
this category of
alterations.
These alterations:
• oblige employees and officials of the HSU and its branches to give the
National Secretary any information and documents required
by the National
Secretary to fulfil the union’s reporting and other obligations under the
• update the rules to reflect the fact the office of Branch Trustee does
not exist in several
• make it clear the default notice period required to be given in relation
to a General Meeting of a branch applies to both
Ordinary General Meetings and
Special General
• extend to all HSU branches the capacity to hold any general meeting as a
series of meetings at different locations and using
electronic forms of
communication;
• change the way Workplace Delegates may be appointed in the New South
Wales/Australian Capital Territory/Queensland
changes are said “to mirror changes to the equivalent State registered
• delete references to a national office which no longer
• extend the prohibition on National
Branch Officers
improperly using:
confidential
information,
position, or
from financial management to management of the
union and its branches generally;
• bar an ordinary member of a branch committee of
voting at Branch Committee of Management meetings while they are employed by the
• put in place a process which must be followed where a National
officer of a
reimbursement for expenses they have incurred;
• allow the Finance Committees of the
branch to monitor and examine all expense reimbursement
• place the authority for approval of all expense reimbursement claims in
the hands of the Finance Committees of the NORU and
• require branches to include membership numbers in the operating report
prepared under s.254 of the Act, have those numbers
audited and supply a copy of
the operating report and membership numbers to the National
• require Branch Secretaries and Branch Committees of Management to inform
the National Secretary of specified enquiries and
investigations;
• enable the South Australian Branch to operate more independently in
administering the financial affairs of the
The NORU is
a reporting unit for the purposes of Part 3 of Chapter 8 of the Act. The NORU
comprises the HSU’s National Office
and its South Australia/Northern
Territory Branch (the SA/NT
current rules:
the NORU has full administrative responsibility for the financial
management of the SA/NT
the National Secretary and National Executive exercise the powers and
perform the duties and functions related to the financial responsibility
for⸺and management of⸺the SA/NT
the SA/NT Branch does not maintain a Branch Balance Sheet. Items
including cash at bank and property have been transferred to the
NORU Balance
the NORU is responsible for SA/NT Branch financial
transactions,
the SA/NT Branch does not operate a separate bank
other things.
Under the proposed alterations a degree of independence will be devolved to
the SA/NT Branch, so far as administering the financial
affairs of the NORU in
South Australia and the Northern Territory is concerned. The NORU’s
responsibilities under the Act will
remain with the National
addition, if the SA/NT Branch resolves to become responsible for its financial
reporting under the Act, the National Secretary
must take all steps necessary to
achieve that outcome (including making and prosecuting any applications required
The first four categories of alterations are uncontroversial. They
require no discussion beyond me certifying my opinion under sections
and (b) of the Act. I do so below.
The final category warrants brief discussion.
For the most part these alterations facilitate increased levels of
transparency, probity and accountability, both within the HSU and
between the
HSU and its members. This is liable to promote improved compliance by the HSU
with various elements of the regulatory
scheme imposed by the Act.
However, Rule 74(f)(v) requires particular consideration. The
proposed rule imposes restrictions on members of the HSU, both those
branch committees of management and those who may be desirous of participating
in the management of a branch while earning
an income via employment in the
Branch. Those restrictions are potentially substantial.
Having found the alteration imposes restrictions on HSU members, it
is necessary to ask whether those restrictions are contrary to
section 142(1)(c)
of the Act. An alteration that is contrary to the Act cannot be certified.
Section 142(1)(c) of the Act states:
“(1) The rules of an organisation:
(c) must not impose on applicants for membership, or members, of the
organisation, conditions, obligations or restrictions that, having
Parliament’s intention in enacting this Act (see section 5) and the
objects of this Act and the Fair Work Act, are
oppressive, unreasonable or
Parliament’s
intention in enacting the Act is set out in section 5 of the Act:
“(1) It is Parliament’s intention in enacting this
Act to enhance relations within workplaces between federal system employers
federal system employees and to reduce the adverse effects of industrial
disputation.
(2) Parliament considers that those relations will be enhanced and those
adverse effects will be reduced, if associations of employers
and employees are
required to meet the standards set out in this Act in order to gain the rights
and privileges accorded to associations
under this Act and the Fair Work
(3) The standards set out in this Act:
(a) ensure that employer and employee organisations registered under this Act
are representative of and accountable to their members,
and are able to operate
effectively; and
(b) encourage members to participate in the affairs of organisations to which
they belong; and
(c) encourage the efficient management of organisations and high standards of
accountability of organisations to their members; and
(d) provide for the democratic functioning and control of organisations;
(e) facilitate the registration of a diverse range of employer and employee
organisations.”
There do not appear to be general objects of the Act buoying those
set out in section 5. The objects of the FW Act are set out in
section 3 of that
Act. It is not necessary to reproduce them.
The apparent stated intention behind proposed Rule 74(f)(v) is:
“The amendments provide for new rules... to fully disclose
if an employee sits on a Branch’s BCOM, which constitutes a
conflict of
interest, and concern that if a BCOM member was also an employee, they could not
carry out their duties as an elected
officer as well as see to their obligations
It is not immediately clear how proposed Rule 74(f)(v) is moulded to
its stated end. If that was the only basis for considering the
alteration, I am
not sure I would be satisfied the alteration complies with and was not contrary
to s.142(1)(c) of the Act.
However, the matter does not end there.
The HSU is currently confronted by several internal governance
issues. Those issues are serious in nature. Some of the details of
these issues
are in the public domain. Those issues give rise to circumstances where the HSU
is exposed to:
significant
regulatory risk;
an existing web
of complex, costly litigation; and
potential future
litigation if the current regulatory risks are not mitigated.
In my view, proposed Rule 74(f)(v) is likely to minimise the chance
of the issues continuing to occur⸺or reoccur in future
mitigate attendant regulatory risk.
Given the circumstances and given the requirement for the HSU to
comply with its obligations under the Act, proposed Rule 74(f)(v)
not⸺on balance⸺contrary to s.142(1)(c). On the basis of the
material before me and the material currently in the
public domain, the proposed
alteration, in my view, balances the various parliamentary intentions in a
manner which is not inappropriate.
Consequently, the restrictions imposed by
proposed Rule 74(f)(v) are not oppressive, unreasonable or unjust within the
s.142(1)(c) of the Act.
That is not to say an alteration in similar terms to proposed Rule
74(f)(v) is liable to be certified as a matter of course. This
matter very much
turns on its particular circumstances. As the Full Court of the Federal Court
pointed out in
McLeish v Faure
“What may be a valid rule in one organization does not of
necessity mean that such a rule would be valid for another. Such validity
depend on different circumstances and conditions which may vary not only from
organization to organization but within the same
organization at different
One further matter remains. An alteration to the rules of a
registered organisation takes effect from the day of
certification
– see s.159(3) of the Act.
Section 159(3) of the Act was considered by a Full Bench of the
Commission in
Re: Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy,
Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union of Australia v
Organisations Commission
The Full Bench observed:
“Section 159(3) provides that a rules alteration takes
effect on the day of certification. However that only means that a rules
alteration takes effect according to its terms on that day, not necessarily that
it has an operational effect from that
The terms of proposed Rule 74(f)(v) are not qualified in relation to
their operative effect date. Given s.159(3) the alteration, on
its face, would
have operational effect from the day of certification. Further, the current
circumstances that confront the HSU and
my findings above suggest the HSU intend
the alteration to operate as soon as possible.
I note proposed Rule 74(f)(v) affects an important incident of the
office of branch committee of management member.
The Federal
Court has held that rule alterations that affect incidents of offices do not
always operate immediately they are certified.
Instead, they may be impacted by
the presumption against
retrospectivity.
The presumption against retrospectivity is a rebuttable presumption
that a rule alteration cannot retrospectively alter the incidents
of an office,
during the current term of office. If it applies to proposed Rule 74(f)(v),
current branch committee of management
members could be shielded from the
proposed changes to that rule.
It is unnecessary for me to make findings about the application of
the presumption against retrospectivity to proposed Rule 74(f)(v).
That is not a
matter relevant to my task under section 159 of the Act. If there is a dispute
applies in relation to a particular officer
or officers, that dispute will fall for resolution by the Federal Court under
164 of the Act.
In my opinion, the alterations comply with and are not contrary to
the Act, the FW Act, modern awards and enterprise agreements, are
not otherwise
contrary to law and were made under the rules of the organisation. I certify
accordingly under subsection 159(1) of
DELEGATE OF THE GENERAL MANAGER
See proposed
Rules 6 - 8, 10 - 13, 15, 21, 23 - 29, 32, 34, 38, 38A, 43, 46 - 50, 52 - 57,
64, 69, 70, 74, 75 & 82 - 84.
See proposed
Rules 92 & (existing) Rule 94.
See proposed Rule
See proposed Rule
See Appendix A to
the 23 October declaration of National Secretary Lloyd Williams (Appendix
See proposed Rule
26 and page 18 of Appendix A.
See the proposed
alteration to Rule 53(b) and page 4 of Appendix A.
See the proposed
alteration to Rule 55(c) and page 1 of Appendix A.
See the proposed
alteration to Rule 55(g) and page 1 of Appendix A.
proposed changes to Rule 57.
See page 13 of
Appendix A.
proposed alteration to Rule 69 and page 3 of Appendix A.
See proposed
Rule 74(a) and page 22 of Appendix A.
See proposed
Rule 74(f) and page 22 of Appendix A.
The proposed
rule specifically excludes the paid officers referred to in Rule 40 – see
proposed Rule 74(f)(v).
see proposed
Rule 74(f)(v) and page 22 of Schedule 1A.
See proposed
Rule 74(e).
See proposed
Rule 74(j).
The NORU is a
reporting unit for the purposes of Part 3 of Chapter 8 of the Act. The NORU
comprises the HSU’s National Office
and its South Australia/Northern
Territory Branch - see proposed Rule 95(c). Other than being renumbered, this
rule is unchanged
by the present alterations
See proposed
Rules 75 and page 25 of Appendix A.
See proposed
Rule 74(e) and (j).
See proposed
Rule 91 and page 20 of Appendix A.
See proposed
Rule 94 and page 24 of Appendix A.
proposed alteration to Rule 95 and page 7 of Appendix A.
See proposed
Rule 95(c). Other than being renumbered, this rule is unchanged by the present
alterations.
95(b)(iv) & (e).
95(d), proposed to be renumbered Rule 95(f).
See proposed
Rule 95(n).
See page 22 of
Attachment A.
[1979] FCA 38
(1979) 40 FLR
Other than an
alteration to an eligibility rule, which may take effect on the date consent is
given or some other date – see
s.158(9) of the Act.
Higgins v McGrane & Anor
(1961) 5 FLR 82
(1966) 8 FLR 292
Re Mellor; Re Federated Liquor and Allied
Industries Employees Union of Australia
(1987) 18 IR 350
s.159(1)(a) of the Act.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (612 KB)
Signed PDF/A format