Misheva v Spicers Paper Ltd trading as "Spicers Paper Australia", "Spicers Stationery", "Spicers Paper" and "Spicers Telelink" [1998] IRCA 33 (9 October 1998)
Misheva v Spicers Paper Ltd trading as "Spicers Paper Australia", "Spicers Stationery", "Spicers Paper" and "Spicers Telelink" [1998]
IRCA 33 (9 October 1998)
FOR GENERAL DISTRIBUTION
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT - alleged unlawful termination of
employment - VALID REASON - not satisfied valid reason for termination
employment established after finding made of contract of employment concluded
between applicant and second respondent - EMPLOYMENT
Administrative arrangements made by first respondent with second respondent to
pay wages of applicant - EMPLOYMENT
RELATIONSHIP – whether
employee-employer relationship established between applicant and first
respondent – UNLAWFUL TERMINATION
– Claim of Termination of
Employment on grounds of race and sex not sustained – Employment
unlawfully terminated for
recourse to competent Administrative Authorities over
wage claim - CONDUCT AND PERFORMANCE - OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND - No opportunity
to respond to allegation of satirical invective directed at Manager -
TERMINATION PAY - Award for failure to give required Period
of Notice - PRACTICE
AND PROCEDURE – Listing Judicial Registrar - Attempts made to settle case
before allocation for hearing
not sufficient to require disqualification from
hearing in circumstances of case - SUMMARY DISMISSAL - Applicant terminated for
language not amounting to serious misconduct – applicant
complained to administrative authority seeking increased rate of pay
REINSTATEMENT - Impractical to reinstate applicant – applicant suggests
unable to work with former supervisor - applicant
still bears a sense of
injustice which will make reinstatement impracticable - not convinced physically
fit to continue in position
– DAMAGES - COMPENSATION – Damages
assessed for Distress – Non economic loss caused by unlawful termination
COSTS – question of costs adjourned for further
Workplace Relations Act (Cth) 1996 (formerly known as
Industrial Relations Act 1988
) ss 170DB, 170DC, 170DE(1) 170DF(1)(e),
170DF(1)(f), 170EAA(1),
Selvachandran v Peteron
Plastics Pty Ltd
(1996) 62 IR 371
Gibson v Bostik Pty Ltd
(1995) 60 IR
Perrin v Des Taylor Pty Ltd
(1994) 58 IR 254
Liddell v Lembke
(1994) IRCR 466
at page 487
The Blacktown City Guardian Pty Ltd (1995)(unreported IRCA (Full Court) decision
No.606/96 dated 13 December 1996)
May v Lilyvale Hotel Pty Ltd
Qantas Airways Ltd v Christie
Raymond Drury v BHP Refractories Pty Ltd
(1995) 62 IR
ELENA MISHEVA V SPICERS PAPER LIMITED TRADING AS
“SPICERS PAPER AUSTRALIA”
STATIONERY”,
“SPICERS PAPER”
“SPICERS TELELINK”
NI 1420 OF 1996
IN THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
NEW SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
NI 1420 OF 1996
ELENA MISHEVA
SPICERS PAPER LIMITED TRADING AS
PAPER AUSTRALIA”,
STATIONERY”,
“SPICERS PAPER”
“SPICERS TELELINK”
AND ADIA PERSONNEL PTY LTD
006 253 336)
SECOND RESPONDENT
JUDICIAL REGISTRAR:
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
MINUTES OF ORDER
The Court declares:
1. The applicant was an employee of
the second Respondent between 18 September 1995 and 15 November
2. The applicant was in an employment relationship with the first
Respondent from 18 September 1995 to 15 November 1995.
3. The second
Respondent has contravened section 170 DB of the act in that wages for one week
were not paid in lieu of the period
of notice required by the Act.
second Respondent has contravened Section 170 DC of the Act.
Respondent has contravened Section 170 DE(1) of the Act in that it did not have
a valid reason for the termination of the employment
of the Applicant on 15
November 1995.
6. It is impractical to reinstate the Applicant in any
position with the first or second Respondents.
7. It is appropriate to
award compensation to the Applicant in the sum of seven thousand four hundred
and ten dollars ($7,410.00).
The Court orders:
second Respondent pay to the applicant within seven days the amount of two
hundred and eighty-five dollars ($285.00).
9. The second Respondent pay
to the applicant within twenty-one days the amount of seven thousand four
hundred and ten dollars ($7,410.00).
10. Any sum paid within twenty one
days to the Australian Taxation Office, which the second Respondent is obliged
to pay on behalf
of the applicant or which can lawfully be made on her account,
in respect of the sums ordered in paragraphs 8 & 9 shall be pro
satisfaction of the obligations of the second Respondent under Orders 8 &
11. The question as to whether costs are to be payable is reserved for
further consideration until 10.00 am on 15 October 1998 provided
received by the court and served on other parties by 4.00 pm on 14 October 1998
of any application by the first Respondent
application for costs is not made by 4.00 pm on 14 October 1998 then a further
order will be made: “Each party to
meet their own
Kate Benson
Legal Assistant
Judicial Registrar McIlwaine
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
NEW SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
ELENA MISHEVA
SPICERS PAPER LIMITED TRADING AS
PAPER AUSTRALIA”,
STATIONERY”,
“SPICERS PAPER”
“SPICERS TELELINK”
AND ADIA PERSONEL PTY LTD
(ACN 006 253 336)
JUDICIAL REGISTRAR:
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
APPLICATION
This is an application by Elena Misheva, (“the applicant”),
claiming unlawful termination of her employment under Division
3 Part VIA of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
, (“the Act”), now known as the
Workplace Relations Act, 1996
, against her alleged former employer. The
applicant described the employers name as “Spicers Paper Australia”
application.
The applicant, was 36 years of age, at the time of
her dismissal and in her claim records the work performed for her alleged
as “Telesales and Marketing”. The remedy sought by the
applicant in her application was originally compensation. This
was amended at
the start of the hearing to include a claim for reinstatement.
application was apparently received by the Australian Industrial Relations
Commission on 13 March 1996. The Court has a certificate
issued by Senior
Deputy President Marsh of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission at
Sydney dated 22 April 1996 and filed
in the Registry of the Court on 23 April
1996 in the following terms:
“AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
Industrial Relations Act
s.170ED issue of
certificate
Elena Misheva
Spicers Paper Ltd
(U No. 21189 of 1996)
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT MARSH SYDNEY, 22 APRIL 1996
CERTIFICATE
In accordance with subsection 170ED(1) of the
Industrial Relations Act
, the Commission hereby certifies:
(i) “ that it has been unable to settle this matter by
conciliation,” within a reasonable period, and
(ii) that the parties in this matter, having been invited to elect to
have the matter dealt with by consent arbitration, have not
BY THE COMMISSION:
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
(Seal of NSW
Industrial Relations Commission)”
There was no objection to the certificate made by either party. In addition,
no issue was raised before the court as to the timing
of the lodgment of the
application or the extent of the coverage of the certificate in respect of the
parties. I therefore find
the matter is properly before the Court.
INTERLOCUTORY ISSUES
A difficulty has arisen in these proceedings as to who are the correct parties
to the claim. Originally Ms Pauline Grigg Human Resources
Manager declared in
the Notice of Employer’s Appearance dated 19 March 1996, and filed in the
Registry of the Australian Industrial
Relations Commission that “Spicers
Paper Ltd,” was not the true employer of the applicant. Ms Grigg
specified ‘ADIA
Centacom Hurstville” as the true employer. Where
requested on that form to supply the “Reasons for termination,”
following appears:
Reasons for termination
15. Brief Summary of reason/s given for termination (or attached).
“This does not apply as the applicant was on a temporary assignment from
an employment agency – “Adia Centacom.”
Declaration
*Employer *Solicitor *Employer organisation
All the facts in this notice
are correct and complete
to the best of my
knowledge and belief. Signature Date
Name Position”
Ms Grigg then proceeded to tick employer as the basis for her declaration of
correctness and completeness of the application. Thus
it is readily apparent
that there is an inconsistency between the Declaration and the remarks made
under the heading “Reason
for Termination.” Spicers Paper Limited
will be referred to as Spicers Paper whilst the other entities will be referred
by the particular trading name used in the evidence.
A Notice of Employers Appearance was filed in the registry of the court on 16
May 1996 by the Printing Industries Association of
Australia on behalf of
Spicers Paper Australia. It maintained that this company was the true employer
by ticking “yes”
on the form. The document was signed pursuant to
s. 170JEA of the
Industrial Relations Act, 1988
by an officer of an employer
organisation of which the respondent was a member. It subsequently emerged that
the applicant physically
worked for a joint venture organisation formed by
“Spicers Paper” and “Spicers Stationery” entitled
The applicant commenced her
duties on 18th September 1995, at the premises of Spicers Paper and ceased
working on 15 November 1995.
A directions hearing was set down for May
1996 but was adjourned until 17 June 1996 at the request of the applicant
because she was
convalescing from major surgery. At that hearing the applicant
appeared in person the respondent was represented and Mr Britt sought
intervene in the proceedings. The District Registrar conducted the hearing and
made directions:
Any motion seeking to join additional parties should be made
returnable at trial . Parties to exchange relevant and requested documents
within one month in writing. Onus on both parties to provide relevant
documentation to other parties. Parties liberty to apply
for further directions
- 3 days notice.”
The trial was listed by him for 6 September 1996 as a one day matter.
At a hearing conducted by a Judicial Registrar on 6 September 1996 the
following orders were made:-
1. That leave be given to the applicant to move instanter that Adia
Personnel Pty Ltd (ACN 006 253 336) be joined as the second respondent
proceedings.
2. That Adia Personnel Pty Ltd (ACN 006 253 336) be joined as second
respondent to the proceedings.
3. That the trial not proceed today and be listed for callover before the
District Registrar at 9.30 am on Friday, 13 September, 1996.
4. That if possible, the matter be given priority, and listed for trial
this year, on the basis that the applicant seeks reinstatement
and the matter
was not reached today.
At a further directions hearing before the District Registrar the matter was
listed for a two day hearing on 22 & 23 January 1997.
The trial was heard
over three days commencing on 22 January 1997. There was then a period allowed
for written submissions followed
by oral argument over about a half
After the hearing commenced I became aware of a note made on the
file by the Judicial Registrar on 6 September 1995 to the effect
that I should
not hear the matter. It is regrettable that by agreement between counsel this
notation was not drawn to my attention
before the trial commenced. There is no
record that I engaged in a mediation between the parties. It appears that when
the matter over as Listing Judicial Registrar on 6 September 1996 I made
remarks to the parties about the advisability of settling
the issues between
them. On the morning of the hearing Counsel had agreed between themselves that
there would be no objection made
to my hearing the matter. As the trial had
been commenced and no other Judicial Registrar was apparently available I
to continue the hearing. The circumstances surrounding this issue
are fully set out in pages 47-49 of the transcript.
EVIDENCE OF THE APPLICANT
The applicant had been running her own company for about five years and sold
her share to her partner. The applicant went back to
finish a university course
and obtained consultancy work at a food company. As a result of a back injury
sustained in a fall at
a shopping complex in the Australian Capital Territory
the applicant had been unable to continue working and had resigned her position
as corporate account manager with the Food Company on 11 July 1995. The
applicant had been unemployed since that time although she
continued with her
external studies in Slavonic Languages at Macquarie University during 1995.
The applicant approached the Second Respondent (“Adia
Centacom”) as she was interested in obtaining part-time employment
national sales and marketing and she believed from consulting the “Yellow
Pages” telephone directory that it provided
specialist employment services
which would assist her in that regard. On or about 8 September 1995, the
applicant attended the premises
of Adia Centacom for that reason.
the applicant was interviewed by a Personnel Consultant employed by Adia
Centacom and completed various forms and tests as part
of an assessment
procedure. Subsequently the Personnel Consultant said to the Applicant:
I have found something that may suit you. It’s at Spicers.
I’ve called them up and they would like to see you now.
applicant did not agree to attend the premises of Spicers Telelink immediately,
but she agreed to be interviewed early
the following week.
On or about 12
September 1996, the applicant was interviewed by Mr Chris Dass and Mr Imad
Dannaoui on behalf of Spicers Telelink.
During this interview, the applicant
was offered employment at that company. According to the applicant she was
Everybody has started this way – through ADIA. We will train
you and then after about 6 months you’ll be automatically
made permanent.
Can you start today?”
The applicant did not agree to start immediately but commenced working at Spicer
Telelink on 18 September 1995 as part of the Telesales
group/team headed by Mr
Chris Dass, and was allocated the territory covered by Queensland, South
Australia and Western Australia.
The job of the applicant was to market the
paper and stationery supplied by the Spicers Paper and Spicers Stationery
organisations,
complete the sales contract and then to oversee delivery of the
paper and other goods. The applicant claims she did not receive
any training.
The applicant said she was told that computer training was to be offered to
staff to attend in the evenings at their
own expense. No such training was
actually provided and the applicant claimed that she received no other training.
This claim of
receiving no training is not supportable in view of the evidence
of Mr Dannaoui of his on going support and instruction while he
During her employment the applicant received, by way of wages, $285 per week
paid by direct deposit into an account which
she was required to open at the St
George Bank.
The Telesales team headed by Mr Chris Dass held
meetings each Monday at which the team’s performance against the group
statistical targets were discussed. The applicant testified that at one
meeting, staff were advised that they would receive a bonus
of $1,000, paid in
gift vouchers, if 50 pallets of paper were sold. Subsequently the applicant
received a large order of at least
50 pallets of paper but the bonus was denied
to the Applicant. The explanation given by Mr Dass the Manager of Spicers
was that the sale was not of the specified type of paper.
also discussion about a food basket being provided as a bonus.
applicant testified that Mr Dass was of Greek origin or descent and that he
often referred to her as being Macedonian. The behaviour
of Mr Dass towards the
applicant was believed by her to be in a manner which she regarded as
unnecessarily harassing. Examples of
these incidents were given by her:-
On an occasion when the applicant bought
pastries and cakes to work, Mr Dass asked if the cakes/or pastries were
Macedonian.
Although the applicant arrived after and
left before all other staff, Mr Chris Dass often (about 6 or 7 times) ordered
the applicant
to move her car without any explanation.
Mr Chris Dass often stood at the
Applicant’s desk for prolonged periods listening to her telephone
conversations with clients.
The applicant was excluded from
attending two dinners, (organised by Spicers Telelink as a reward for good
Telesales results) when
they were scheduled by Mr Chris Dass immediately before
the university examinations of the applicant.
The applicant was similarly excluded
from a weekend event at Port Stephens organised by another senior employee of
Spicers Australia.
The applicant was treated less
favourably in relation to terms and conditions of employment than another
similarly engaged employee,
Ms Vicki Kontalis, who is said to be of Greek origin
or descent.
In or about late October/early November 1995, the applicant
was advised by Mr Chris Dass and Mr Imad Dannaoui that her work performance
been the subject of formal assessment by them and her performance was regarded
very favourably.
The applicant testified that she was told by Mr Dass that Mr
Imad Dannaoui was leaving his employment with Spicers and he said:
When Imad leaves, the job is yours.
On or about 2.00 pm on 15 November 1995, the applicant was talking to a
client on the telephone. Mr Chris Dass stood at the applicant’s
throughout this telephone conversation. The applicant testified that when she
concluded the telephone call, Mr Chris Dass indicated
that he wanted to speak
with her in his office. The applicant said she followed Mr Chris Dass into his
office where the following
conversation took place:
You have an attitude problem. I want you to
APPLICANT: “
Do you want me to finish up today?”
No, leave the building now.”
The applicant
immediately left the premises of Spicers Telelink. The fact that she did so is
supported by the evidence of Ms Leah
The applicant had previously
used the services of specialist employment agencies other than Adia Centacom in
connection with obtaining
employment. After the employment of the applicant
with Spicers Telelink was terminated, she attended the premises of Kelly
(Australia) Pty Ltd to look for other work and was advised by an
employee of Kelly Services that they were undertaking a “
promotional
” for Citibank and was told to contact a person at Citibank.
When the applicant made further enquiries at a later time, she
was told that she
would not be employed by Citibank as they had “
received a bad report
from Mr Chris Dass.
The applicant had not been successful in
obtaining other employment. It should not be overlooked that this termination
occurred during
the pre christmas period when employment relocation is usually
EVIDENCE OF NATIONAL GOVERNMENT MANAGER OF SPICERS STATIONERY
Mr Chris Dass, National Government Manager, Spicers Stationery, had been with
the company for the last three years and was in charge
of “Spicers
Telelink” the telephone ordering service, which concentrated on marketing
the products of the company mainly
under government contracts, at a federal,
state or local level. The group had been set up in May 1994, as a joint venture
Spicers Stationery and Spicers Paper with six original assignees who
were working from outside agencies. The appointment of the
first permanent
employee was made later. At the time when the applicant commenced working on 18
September, 1998 there were four
permanent employees and one assignee from Adia
Centacom. The company had had a succession of assignees who had generally
on the same territories then covered by the applicant. Mr Dass
maintained that the authority to hire and fire rested with the Head
Spicers Paper and he had absolutely no authority to offer permanent employment
to the applicant.
The applicant was referred from
Adia Centacom to have an interview, as she seemed to fit that particular role.
He maintained that
the applicant was told that it was a temporary assignment
with a view to testing the viability of the particular area. This claim
be contrasted with the fact that the group had been in operation for about
sixteen months when the applicant was employed
and some employees had been
transferred from the Adia Centacom Payroll to that of Spicers Paper. The
interview with the applicant
took place in their showroom. There he explained
the Spicers Paper organisation to her, and the place of Spicers Telelink within
the telemarketing system as well as the range of products on contract and
detailed what role was involved for her. The applicant
was shown the room where
she would be working. He maintained that he had not asked the applicant about
her nationality or age or
her marital status or her social habits.
He explained to the applicant that normally any contact about her
conditions of employment was through Adia Centacom, who administered
matters. He made it clear to the applicant that it was a temporary appointment
and he stressed he had not given her any undertakings
that after 6 months she
would be made a permanent employee. He confirmed that it was said to her that
it was a temporary assignment through ADIA and that it would be
Asked to amplify the statement he suggested it would be a
day to day assignment.
He agreed the applicant commenced on 18 September
1995 and suggested she was given some additional training as well as a brief
introduction
to the type of contracts, her use of the computer and further
product and pricing advice. Training was on the job under the supervision
Dannaoui with whom he had daily contact.
On the second day, that is
Tuesday 19 September 1995, Mr Dass went to see her and stood near her desk and
noticed that she was on
a personal phone call. He was annoyed because the
applicant continued with her personal phone call despite the fact that he was
standing there. The call was extended longer than a couple of minutes but less
than five minutes.
He agreed that during a conversation in which he was
endeavouring to build up a rapport with her, he asked about her Macedonian
However, he pointed out that he was born in Nyngan, NSW, and was
therefore Australian born. He recalls that the conversation occurred
cakes and pastries were being offered to the staff by the applicant, who
mentioned that her mother had made them. He conceded
that he had probably asked
her about her nationality on that occasion.
He confirmed that he had
asked the applicant to move her vehicle several times because where it had been
parked it was blocking the
entrance to No.2 Dock. He had been asked by the
Operation Manager to have her move the car as the No.2 Dock was in use for
purposes. He had suggested to the applicant that she park up further
where the other staff parked. His answer “yes”
to a question on this
issue was emphasised. Because there was a doorway adjacent to the loading dock
it was probably convenient
and was much closer to the actual location of the
applicant in the office. In the following week in early October, apparently the
applicant parked in the No 2 Dock area and Mr Dass again asked her to move it as
there were numerous other parking spaces available.
He testified that
the applicant was invited to a couple of functions including the farewell on 14
November 1995 at Le Sands Restaurant
for Mr Dannaoui. Also, she was invited to
go to Port Stephens but she did not accept. He denied in a loud, sharp voice
had given her a hard time because she was Macedonian.
is a performance management report of Spicers Paper which was partially
completed by the applicant and bears the date 12 October
1995. Mr Dass admitted
that some of the writing on the form was his. However he denied the document
was intended to be used by
Spicers or that it was subject to any report back to
Adia Centacom. It is not in dispute that the applicant had been successful
the initial approach to the job of selling paper. It is not credible to claim
that the partial completion of the report was for
no useful purpose. There is
clear evidence that the applicant received praise for some of the results which
she achieved. As is
usual in “Sales” type situations reliance is
placed on oral recollection by both sides to the equation rather than placing
evidence the completed written results.
Mr Dannaoui was in regular contact with Aida Centacom about a number of general
issues. He was in touch weekly with that firm about
the progress of the
applicant. He was aware that a representative had pointed out that the
applicant had enquired about the possibility
of an increase in pay. Mr Dass
confirmed he had not agreed to the charge-out rate being increased and
consequently no increase could
be paid to the applicant.
On or prior to 15 November 1995, Nina, one of the other staff members, reported
to him that the applicant had made a successful large
sale. Mr Dass conceded
that he had approached the applicant after she had received this particularly
large order and he had said
Congratulations,
”, the applicant had replied, “
Big fucking
” He responded by saying he did not appreciate that type of
language and behaviour and then left the room. He emphasized that
he had heard
her use those words.
He passed this information on to Liz
Johnson, then a Manager at
Centacom Hurstville, who agreed with his
reaction saying: “Oh that’s lovely!” Ms Johnson also told
him that she
had been speaking with the applicant who had been on the phone
arguing about her rate of pay. He then said to Ms Johnson, “
temporary assignment should be terminated. Elena is not happy.
Johnson replied, “
If she is not happy then she should go.
He replied, “
Well, I will tell her that.
” The following
testimony then occurred:
“Now from that conversation with you, did
you, gain the impression that Ms Johnson was telling you that she should go:
He then went into the telemarketing room and asked the
applicant if he could see her and took her into the showroom. He said he
her that he did not appreciate that type of language and behaviour and
suggested to her that they should part ways. He testified,
don’t we part ways?
” She replied, “
Why don’t you leave now and we will pay you for
With that, the applicant got up and she said
” She went back into the room picked up some personal items
He denied giving any adverse reference to Kelly &
Associates about the applicant. Mr Dass also denied he had made any suggestion
that the applicant would become a permanent employee of Spicers Paper. Mr Dass
was then cross examined by Mr Britt for the second
respondent. This phone
conversation with Ms Johnson was not otherwise disputed. Ms Johnson was not
called to give evidence by either
of the counsel for the respondents although
there was evidence that she had left the employ of Adia Centacom. Mr Dass
stressed that
it was Ms Johnson who suggested the applicant should
Under further cross examination by counsel for the applicant Mr Dass
revealed a key motivation for terminating the employment of the
“Ms Keys: “But it was your evidence that Liz had said to you
on the phone, if she is not happy then she should go, is
right?---Yes.
So why were you saying, I think we should part ways?---I just said that to
Why?---Because she was not happy. With my prior discussions with AIDA,
AIDA mentioned that she had been in – Elena had been
in discussion
regarding her rate of pay and it was her discussions and previous – during
that particular week the issue of
rates of pay had become quite heated with
Elena and ADIA.
And who told you that?---Well after the – well during that
particular discussion with Liz.
So Liz told you about heated discussions?---Yes she did. Elena had a
heated discussion with ADIA that particular day.
That day?---That day of the completion of the assignment.”
FORMER SUPERVISOR OF APPLICANT
Mr Imad Dannaoui former supervisor of the applicant who was now employed as a
sales marketing consultant, gave evidence by way of
sworn affidavit and
supplemented this by oral evidence. Mr Dannaoui was now employed as a sales
marketing co-ordinator with a cleaning
supply company where he had been for
thirteen months. He had been the supervisor of Spicers Telelink for five months
from July 1995
to November 1995. He gave evidence that he and Mr Dass
interviewed the applicant for a temporary assignment on behalf of Adia and
confirmed the evidence of the applicant as to the detail of the assignment. He
also testified that she was told it was a temporary
assignment which could lead
to a permanent position. He denied that it was ever mentioned at the interview
that the position would
become automatically permanent after six months. He
reinforced this testimony saying that such a decision had to be made from Head
Office and was dependent upon the company structure and performance. Mr
Dannaoui swore that he spent the first week of her temporary
assignment training
the applicant. Thereafter there were weekly training sessions about the paper
products although any other training
was left to the employees themselves. This
provides some support for the testimony of the applicant on this issue.
He described the team promotion which involved selling fifty pallets of Georgia
Pacific brand copy paper. If this target was achieved
for the month $1,000 in
gift vouchers would be split between the team members including the applicant.
The target was not achieved,
however the applicant did sell fifty pallets of
another brand of copy paper during this monthly promotion. He testified that
applicant insisted during a weekly meeting that because she sold fifty
pallets of copy paper, even though it was another brand of
paper she should be
entitled to $1,000 bonus individually.
He denies that he had heard Ms Christas or any other staff member refer to the
applicant as Macedonian. He agreed that in about
late October he and Mr Dass
had conducted performance reviews of the staff at Spicers Telelink and they had
an informal discussion
with the applicant.
After the applicant left Spicers Telelink he recalled a telephone conversation
in which she asked him to provide her with a reference.
During the conversation
he suggested the applicant had described Mr Dass as a “bastard”. He
had advised Ms Jodie Wallace
who had rung possibly once or twice a week but at
least once a fortnight that he was satisfied with the perfomance of the
He described the position of employees of Adia Centacom as their tax
paid by Adia Centacom, whilst any problems concerning the job
task were directed
to either him or his supervisor Mr Dass. He denied that he told the applicant
that she could have his job when
he resigned. Mr Britt counsel for the second
respondent cross examined that Mr Dannaoui who confirmed he had spoken to Ms
satisfied with the performance of the applicant. This is reinforced
reference he wrote for her:
IT MAY CONCERN
This is to certify that Elena Misheva was employed by Spicers Paper
Limited in the Telelink division as a Sales Consultant for the
period of 25
August 1995 to 17 November 1995.
I had been Supervising Elena during the above stated period and was in
full comprehension to her health difficulties in the leg and
back areas.
Despite her difficulties she showed tremendous determination and was
diligent in all her tasks and work responsibilities. Elena was
a professionally
work orientated person and continued to maintain that spirit throughout her
employment period.
Best Wishes
........................
Imad Dannaoui
Sales Co-ordinator”
In including this reference I am not
overlooking the evidence of Mr Dannaoui that he was overborne by the persistent
requests for
assistance from the applicant.
EMPLOYEE OF FIRST RESPONDENT
Ms Leah Quinn had been employed by Spicers Telelink for three years and
provided an affidavit dated 16 January 1996 . Ms Quinn maintained
affidavit truly and accurately set out her evidence and it too was supplemented
orally. In paragraph 4 of the affidavit
the following appears:
“At one of our weekly sales meetings a promotion was launched to
sell the Georgia Pacific brand. If the team achieved sales
of 50 pallets of
this particular brand
, a $1,000 bonus of gift vouchers was to be
split amongst the team. This promotion was for a limited time only. The team
achieve this target. Ms Elena Misheva claimed that she should have got
an individual target because she sold a large volume of another
during this promotional period. She argued the point
aggressively at another one of our weekly meetings. This order she received
a repeat, which Spicers Telelink regularly received during the previous twelve
months. The team disagreed against her argument
and her request was
subsequently denied.”
In her strangely worded affidavit Ms Leah Quinn added the
“The team reacted to this individual response and reinforced
clarification Ms Elena Misheva that the promotion was a team effort
and they did
not achieve the target.”
My main reason for not
totally accepting the evidence of Ms Quinn is that I gathered from her oral
testimony that she was very supportive
of Mr Dass and had little positive to say
politely asked
“always treated
“she mentioned that she was not interested in
, paints an unfair picture of the applicant. Her affidavit
which I have quoted above reveals some negative comments about the applicant
which seem unjustified by the circumstances. Accordingly I do not accept her as
being an objective witness. Ms Quinn described what
“What did he say?---Congratulations on your sale.
Yes, was he---?---Well done.
Was there a
response?---Yes.
What was that response?---She said, she turned around, she said, Big
fucking deal and that was it. And then Mr Dass – will
I continue?
Yes please?---Yes, he said, I don’t appreciate that type of language
and he walked out of the room.”
However I do accept that it is
more probable than not that she did overhear a conversation between Mr Dass and
Ms Misheva, and that
this was to the effect that he congratulated the applicant
on achieving “
”. In my view her use of the phrase
is not an accurate record because there would be no need for Mr Dass to
congratulate the
applicant on a sale unless it was of a substantial nature and
this of course is not mentioned in the evidence of Ms Quinn. However
inclined to accept that the applicant did use words such as “Big fucking
deal”, not necessarily in an abusive manner,
but in a retort out of anger
and frustration at her failure to achieve any result out of her claiming an
increase in pay. Mr Britt
counsel for the second respondent did not cross
examine Miss Quinn.
EVIDENCE OF FORMER PERSONNEL CONSULTANT
Ms Jodie Wallace, a personnel consultant in the temporary division had
started with Adia Centacom in August 1995, but prior to that
had worked with
Centacom from April 1993. Ms Wallace placed an advertisement for a Telemarketer
in the local newspaper after being
advised that Spicers Telelink had asked for
such a placement. Soon after placing the advertisement the applicant had
although the applicant denied in her evidence that she had seen
the advertisement. This difference between the two witnesses is
consequence in the overall situation. During the interview on 12 September 1995
she explained to the applicant the details
of the position informing her that it
was a temporary job and that Adia Centacom had agreed to provide Spicers
Telelink with a Telemarketer.
The applicant was told that it was possible that
Spicer’s would offer her a permanent position after she had worked with
for some time or Adia Centacom may have other positions available for her.
Ms Wallace also suggested to the applicant that the assignment
approximately three months. Ms Wallace agreed that she had been provided with a
copy of the resume of the applicant and
that she had completed an Adia Centacom
attitude appraisal. A reference check had also been conducted and the notes
which she had
made on those discussions are included as exhibits.
the evidence of Ms Wallace the applicant became distressed and again left the
room. Her distress continued for some time and
a short adjournment was granted
to allow Ms Keys to speak to her as there was no instructing solicitor
After meeting the applicant Ms Wallace contacted Spicers
Telelink and informed them that she had a person available to start and arranged
an interview for the applicant. Shortly afterward she was advised by Spicers
Telelink that they had agreed the applicant could start.
Ms Wallace confirmed
that the applicant started work on 18
September 1995 and she had
spoken to Spicers on the first day and again at the end of the first week to
receive a report that she
was satisfactory. However in discussion with the
applicant Ms Wallace formed the view she was: “
OK about the position
but not 100% happy”.
After about three weeks into the assignment the
applicant had complained about the hourly rate paid to her. It was explained
this rate was in accordance with the award and Adia’s charges to the
client. Ms Wallace told the applicant she would seek
an increase from Spicers
Telelink however this was not accepted. Ms Wallace suggested to the applicant
that she would take her off
the assignment but this was not acceptable to the
applicant. In her discussion with Mr Dass, he informed her that he wanted to
the applicant because she was doing a good job.
The applicant had
complained to her about a particular contract which she had signed and for which
she believed she had done a great
deal of work for no extra money. There was
also some discussion by Ms Wallace with the applicant about payment of
incentives to
employees, however the applicant was advised that no such payments
were made by Adia Centacom. Ms Wallace had advised the applicant
to hang on in
her position with Spicers Telelink until something better became available. Some
days after this conversation Ms Wallace
received a phone call from Mr Dass who
advised her that he and the applicant had decided to part ways.
EVIDENCE OF THE MANAGER OF ADIA CENTACOM
Ms Nicole Harwick the Branch Manager of Adia Centacom, Hurstville Branch ,
joined the Centacom organisation in May 1994. In November
1995 the company
merged its operations with Adia to become Adia Centacom. Her role in the
company was to oversee the staff recruiting
and training areas, to develop and
implement business plans, as well as marketing, and generally providing support
and assistance
to consultants. Her evidence outlined the procedures used for
registering a candidate for temporary employment:-
Request the candidate to complete the
application form.
Fill in the paperwork for temporary
employment which includes an employment declaration and a banking details
Arrange for appropriate computerised
testing of the candidate
Interview the candidate.
All candidates were given an information
Reference checks are made on them by the
consultant.
A temporary file is established on the
computer system together with a paper file.
When the consultant receives an
assignment from the client, the details of the job are entered into the computer
system which then
matches the skills required against the candidates in the data
The consultant contacts the candidate
selected to discuss details of the assignment.
If a candidate accepts the assignment
the duty of the consultant is to advise them of the pay rate, location of the
assignment and
the name of the person to whom they will be reporting.
It is pointed out that the length of an
engagement can vary.
The job of the consultant is then to
brief run down of
their skills and employment history.
It is part of their quality procedures
that the consultant contacts the client on the first day of the assignment to
temporary is performing satisfactorily and determine whether there
are any remaining issues which the client requires to be dealt
Thereafter there are regular checks to
determine the progress of the employee.
It is stressed to the candidates that
they should contact their Adia Centacom consultant about matters affecting their
of employment and pay.
Ms Harwick first became aware of the
situation with Ms Misheva when the merger of the Adia and Centacom branches at
Hurstville occurred.
She had no prior need to speak with Ms Misheva but she was
aware that she was still registered for temporary work. There is provision
the contract between the client and Adia Centacom that if a client decides to
directly employ an Adia Centacom employee within
six months of the last
assignment of the employee then a standard permanent placement fee will apply.
No such fee had been paid
in respect of the applicant. Spicers Telelink were
routinely invoiced by Adia Centacom for the use of the services of the
Ms Hardwick maintained the applicant was an employee of and paid by
Adia Centacom.
With respects to the specific
incidents raised by the applicant the following conclusions are reached. Mr
Dass admitted to having
a conversation with the applicant in which her
Macedonian nationality was raised. I am not satisfied that this had any
I am satisfied that the applicant felt that she was
being singled out for attention in relation to the parking of her car. This is
confirmed by the evidence of Mr Dass. Ms Quinn and Mr Dannaoui also testified
that the applicant had been asked on at least two
occasions by Mr Dass and on
one occasion by Mr Dannaoui to move the vehicle. This is not as extensive as
the applicant’s claim
of six or seven times, however, for a person who was
part time in the operation it seems to me the difference is not substantial,
nevertheless it becomes a factor in the equation. It is also more probable than
not that the requests to move the car were justified.
I do not accept his
denials or the evidence of Ms Quinn that Mr Dass did not listen in to the
applicant’s telephone conversations.
After Mr Dannaoui left Mr Dass would
have had much more responsibility in relation to supervision of the applicant,
it is understandable
that any supervisior who is required to work closely with a
person who is making sales by the use of a telephone will listen to the
conversation to make an assessment of what is occurring on a day to day basis so
this too could lead to the applicant believing that
she was being
In relation to the invitations to various functions I accept
the evidence of the applicant that she was required to study for or attend
examinations in connection with her university course and for that reason could
not attend. It does not follow that the times were
arranged so as to exclude
the applicant from participation in the events.
There is no evidence
presented to support the allegation that Ms Vicki Kontalis was treated more
favourably than the applicant even
if she were of Greek origin or descent. This
person was not called upon to testify by any party.
I accept that Mr Dass
probably used the words: “
I don’t appreciate that type of
Mr Dass then overreacted to this incident and that this
caused the termination of the applicant’s employment. This was an
employment arrangement where the daily supervision was provided by one person
and the conditions of employment were administered
and regulated by a different
organisation consequently the prospect for a breakdown in communications at the
workplace are enhanced.
The applicant believed she was achieving sales and
sought additional financial reward. Unfortunately those supervisors who were
praising her performance then took refuge from any responsibility by trying to
plead that Adia Centacom was at fault for the failure
to respond adequately.
Despite the refusal to increase the charge out rate for the
This administrative arrangement is in contrast to the
intention behind the
Workplace Relations Act
where the focus is on achieving
good relations at the workplace. The type of administrative arrangement
developed by the two respondents
is not conducive to such a mutual understanding
and “a fair go all round.”
The following findings are also
1. The applicant approached the second respondent for a position as a
result of consulting the advertisement in the “yellow
telephone directory.
2. It was represented to the applicant that there was a
strong possibility of permanent employment with the first
respondent.
3. Training was in the nature of on the job instruction by her
supervisors Mr Dannaoui and Mr Dass together with support from fellow
Contract between First Respondent and Second Respondent
At the conclusion of the hearing late in the evening of 24 January 1997 the
following orders were made:
1. Respondents to provide original terms and conditions of Adia
Employees effective 1 March 1993 known as Exhibit 12 in the Court
2. Second Respondent has search made of Adia’s printouts, disks and any
proper records for matters relevant to these proceedings
– Misheva v
Spicers Paper Australian & Anor - in relation to Adia’s contact with
Ms Misheva and her employment with
Spicers Paper
3. Applicant to provide written submissions by
21.2.97 4.00 pm. Respondents to provide written submissions by 4.00 pm
Written submissions to be provided in reply by 4.00 pm 14.3.97 by
4. The matter is stood over part-heard until 9.30 am – 11.00 am on
Thursday 3.4.97 to address McIlwaine JR on the submissions.”
In accordance with paragraph 1 the contract between the two respondents
was made available and it was evidenced by
The Employment People
8 June 1995 Adia Personnel Pty Ltd
(ACN 006 253
Mr Andrew Price
Spicers Stationery
133 Vanessa Street
KINGSGROVE NSW
Dear Andrew
SUPPLY OF ADIA EMPLOYEES
Please find below the position description, the hourly charge rate and
specific terms and conditions for the supply of ADIA employees
Clerical and Administrative Temporary Employees ADIA Agreement 1994. Under the
conditions of this Agreement, ADIA pay
and charge public holidays, provided the
temporary works the day before and the day after the public holiday. Further,
and charge overtime in accordance with the Agreement. Overtime is due
and payable after eight (8) hours in any one day, (unless
flexible arrangements
have been confirmed in writing) or thirty-eight (38) hours in any given
Reception/Switchboard
Hourly Rate:
This quotation is to be read and accepted in conjunction with the general
conditions on the reverse of this quotation. Please indicate
your acceptance by
signing where indicated on both sides and returning a signed copy to me.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit our quotation which shall remain
valid for six months from the date of issue, unless Award
of Agreement
regulations change, whereby ADIA reserve the right to review rates. Should you
have a requirement for any additional
information please do not hesitate to
Yours sincerely Accepted on behalf of:
ADIA – The Employment People by:
(Signed) Date:
Fiona Gardiner
TEMPORARIES CONTROLLER
Quote Ref: T120/95”
On the reverse of the above page was set out the Terms and Conditions for the
supply of Adia Employees. The important parts of which
“TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR THE SUPPLY OF ADIA
EMPLOYEES EFFECTIVE 1 MARCH 1993
Specific hourly rates to be invoiced by ADIA and particular Terms and
Conditions for the supply of ADIA employees are on the reverse
of this document
and form part of this contract.
GENERAL CONDITIONS
The rates on the reverse are all net and subject to the following details
and conditions;
The customer acknowledges that:-
1. All ADIA employees are assigned under the care, control and supervision
of the customer and the customer is responsible for all
acts, errors and
omissions of ADIA employees be they wilful, negligent or otherwise for the
duration of the assignment.
2. The hourly rates invoiced to the customer by ADIA include allowances
for all applicable statutory charges, eg. Annual Leave, Sick
Pay, Workers
Compensation Insurance, Payroll Taxes, etc. ADIA is responsible for issuance of
Group Certificates.
........................
........................
8. ADIA will pay and invoice on the the basis of the working hours shown
on the ADIA Time Sheet and the customer undertakes to have
each ADIA Time Sheet
authorised by an appropriate person.
9. ADIA will pay employees and invoice the customer four (4) hours or such
other appearance Monies as are designated by the appropriate
Award or Agreement
in the event that an assignment is cancelled or postponed without prior notice
to the employee.
10. ADIA are to be provided with not less than eight (8) hours notice of
cancellation or postponement of any individual ADIA employee’s
assignment.
.....................
14. If the customer seeks to recruit an ADIA employee to their own staff
within six (6) months of the last ADIA assignment by the
employee with the
customer then a standard permanent placement fee will apply and be invoiced to
the customer by ADIA.
......................
TERMS STRICTLY FULL PAYMENT SEVEN (7) DAYS FROM DATE OF
Signed for and on behalf Signed for and on
.......................................
of ADIA by: by its duly authorised representative
Signature: Signature:
Name: Name:
PC No: Designation:
Date: Date:”
No issue was raised between the first and second respondents that this agreement
was not binding between the two of them. It is
important to note that Spicers
Paper by this agreement accepts the care control and supervision of an Adia
Centacom employee being
the applicant in this case. Moreover it takes
responsibility for all acts, errors and omissions of Adia Centacom employees be
wilful negligent or otherwise for the duration of the assignment. This
agreement of itself is sufficient to create the relationship
employee-employer between the Adia Centacom employee under the contract and
Spicers Paper. I am also satisfied based on the evidence
of the witnesses for
the respondents that a great deal of control was exercised over the applicant in
carrying out her tasks. This
is an added factor in creating an employment
relationship between the applicant and Spicers Paper.
There is a further agreement that Adia Centacom are to be “provided with
not less than eight (8) hours notice of cancellation
or postpone or postponement
of any individual Adia’s employees assignment”. This condition also
restricts the right
of Spicers Paper to terminate the employment of the
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS
In her written submissions Ms Keys on
behalf of the applicant submitted:
“The applicant contends that her employment with Spicers Paper was
unlawfully terminated on the following grounds:
(a) Spicers Paper failed to give the Applicant notice of the termination
of her employment pursuant to section 170DB of the
Industrial Relations Act,
(b) Spicers Paper failed to give the applicant an opportunity to defend
herself against the allegations made about her conduct/performance
pursuant to
section 170DC of the
Industrial Relations Act, 1988
(c) Spicers Paper terminated the applicant’s employment without
valid reason which was connected with the applicant’s
capacity or conduct
or based on operational requirements, contrary to section 170DE(1) of the
Industrial Relations Act, 1988(Cth).
(d) Spicers Paper terminated the Applicant’s employment for reasons
which included reasons related to the applicant’s
race, contrary to
section 170DF(1) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
In an alternative submission Ms Keys on behalf of the applicant contended
that her employment with Adia Centacom was unlawfully terminated
acting with the authority of Adia Centacom as the supervisor of the employment
of the applicant, on the following grounds:
(a) the First Respondent, acting with the authority of the Second
Respondent, failed to give the applicant notice of the termination
employment pursuant to section 170DB of the
Industrial Relations Act, 1988
(b) Spicers acting with the authority of Adia Centacom, terminated the
employment of the applicant without valid reason which was
connected with the
Applicant’s capacity or conduct or based on operational requirements,
contrary to section 170DE(1) of the
Industrial Relations Act, 1988
The applicant seeks:
(a) reinstatement pursuant to section 170EE(1) of the
Industrial Relations
(b) compensation pursuant to section 170EE(2) of the
Industrial Relations
(c) damages pursuant to section 170EE(5) of the
Industrial Relations Act,
The first submission is rejected as there was only an
employment relationship established by the applicant with Spicers Paper. The
contract of employment was with Adia Centacom and the remedies of the applicant
ultimately rest with that organisation.
In her written submissions the
applicant also made an application for leave to amend or claim to include a
period of unpaid wages
and payment for study leave. The applicant gave no
indication that she was entitled to payment of study leave in the conditions
her employment. Nor was any evidence given which disputed the date of
termination originally accepted by all the parties. The
application cannot be
Mr Johnson on behalf of Spicers Paper submitted:
The first respondent submits that the ultimate authority over the
applicant rested with the second respondent. In accordance with
the principles
outlined in
Stevens v Brodribb Sawmilling Co. Pty Ltd
(1986) 160 CLR 16.
In the circumstances above, the position of the first respondent was no more
than an agent of the second respondent. The fact that
the applicant was invited
to attend two social occasions (a fact which is disputed by the applicant) does
not create an employee/employer
relationship, nor does a document purporting to
be a staff performance form which sets out in her own glowing terms of what an
she is to any employer create and employer/employee
relationship.”
This submission overlooks the impact of the day
to day control of the activities of the applicant exercised by the Manager Mr
and the supervisor Mr Dannaoui on behalf of Spicers Paper. It also does
not take into account the contractual responsibility for
the applicant imposed
on Spicers Paper by its agreement with Adia Centacom.
Regarding the evidence
of the applicant:
“The first respondent submits that the impression that the court
would gain of this applicant was, at worst deliberately lying
to the court or in
the alternative that she as the applicant is a petulant, manipulative and
egocentric person who believes that
the first and second respondents; (a) cannot
do with her and, (b) if they can do without her they will have to pay for their
to consider her anything less than outstanding.”
Although one conclusion to be drawn from her performance in giving
evidence would support this submission. I do not find that she
deliberately
lied to the court. However on occasions she was less than frank as were other
witnesses for the first respondent.
There is sufficient evidence that the
applicant suffered from a bad back and could not sit for lengthy periods. Also
she had undergone
major surgery which delayed the commencement of the trial and
she was on medication during the trial.
At the end of the second day of
hearing Mr Britt, advocate for the Adia Centacom made a statement as
Second Respondent’s Admissions
(i) The second respondent concedes that it is the employer of the
(ii) The second respondent concedes that if the Court were to make
the following findings of fact and law in these proceedings that:
second respondent is the employer of the applicant;
applicant’s employment was terminated;
(c) the termination was at the
initiative of the employer;
(d) the applicant is not an employee excluded by regulations made under section
170CC of the
Workplace Relations Act
(the “Act”); and
(e) the employee is not guilty of serious misconduct in terms of paragraph (b)
of subsection 170DB(1),
second respondent is in breach of section 170DB(2).
Subsequently he made two further points:
1. That the employment of the
applicant was for a specified task and therefore excluded from the provisions of
the legislation; and,
2. Adia Centacom were excluded from liability on the
basis that the action taken by Spicers Paper had lead to a frustration of
The scope of specified task has been examined by Wilcox CJ in
Raymond Drury v BHP Refractories Pty Ltd
(an unreported IRCA decision
No.276/95 dated 16 June 1995 after referring to the facts of the case and the
argument of counsel he
“I do not think this is correct. The words “for a specified
task” qualify the words “contract of employment.”
contract of employment must be for a specified task; it must be a contract under
which the employee is to carry out a specified
task. The words “for a
specified task” have nothing to do with the employer’s task, or
project. This seems clear
as a matter of grammar and it makes sense in policy
terms. One can understand a view that the protections provided by Division 3
should not be available to people who undertake only a specified task.
Especially after the task is completed, it would be anomalous
to restrict the
employer’s right to terminate the contract of employment. Bearing in mind
that many projects undertaken by
employers continue for many years, while
employees come and go, it would be equally anomalous to exclude relief under
simply because the employee was engaged in connection with a particular
In this case there had been a series of employees employed before the
applicant at Spicers Telelink and the position would continue
for as long as
Spicers Paper believed it to be productive of sales of its products. The
applicant was not employed for a specified
With respect to the
argument that Adia Centacom was entitled to rely on the doctrine of frustration
to escape liability this cannot
be accepted. That doctrine in order to be
effective requires the intervening event to have been without fault of the
parties. In
this case all of the parties contributed not least Adia Centacom by
not exercising its right to insist on a breathing space of eight
hours as it was
entitled to do under its contract with Spicers Paper.
TERMINATION AT
THE INITIATIVE OF THE EMPLOYER
A key issue, upon which the applicant
bears the onus of proof was whether there was a termination at the initiative of
the employer.
Adia Centacom asserts that the termination of the employment of
the applicant was not at its initiative.
There are some differences
between the parties as to how the termination occurred, however, when all the
factors are taken into account,
it seems that the disputed facts between the two
persons is of little consequence. The direct evidence arises out of the context
of the discussions between Mr Dass and the applicant. I have sufficiently
outlined, in my earlier remarks, the way in which the termination
Neither the applicant or Mr Dass were able to provide secondary evidence
of a corroborating or supporting nature as to what had occurred
in their private
conversation after Mr Dass had obtained the concurrence of Ms Johnston to his
proposed course of action. On one
view of the matter Mr Dass can be simply seen
to be passing on a message from Adia Centacom. On balance I am prepared to
the version of the events given by the applicant. I am satisfied that
there was clearly a termination at the initiative of Adia
Qantas Airways Ltd v Christie
(1998) HCA 18
McHugh J cites with
approval a decision of the Full court:
“In Mohazab v Dick Smith Electronic Pty Ltd (No.2), the Full Court of
the Industrial Relations Court interpreted the phrase
“Termination of
employment at the initiative of the employer” in accordance with the
general rules of treaty interpretation
found in Arts 31 and 32 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969. The Full Court held that
“Termination of employment
at the initiative of the employer” meant
a termination that was brought about by an employer and to which the employee
not agreed. The Court held that a termination occurs when “the act of
the employer results directly or consequentially in
the termination of the
employment.”
“That is, had the employer not taken the action it did, the employee
would have remained in the employment
relationship.”
Had Ms Johnson insisted on an eight
hour delay it is likely that proper discussions could have taken place and the
matter resolved
satisfactorily. I am satisfied that had Adia Centacom had taken
a different course the applicant probably would have remained in
the employment
relationship with Spicers Paper.
ALLEGATION OF DISCRIMINATION ON
GROUNDS OF RACE AND SEX –
WAS THERE AN UNLAWFUL
TERMINATION?
There was also a claim made by the applicant that the
respondents terminated her employment by reason of her race and or sex contrary
to section 170DF(1)(f) of the Act.
Milica Stojanovic v The
Commonwealth Club Limited
(unreported, AI267R of 1994, 8 December 1995)
Moore J outlines some of the issues involved in a claim that the applicant was
from her employment on the grounds of her pregnancy. After discussing
the concerns of one witness as to the advisability of the
applicant continuing
to perform the heavy duties of a supervisor at the club rather than an
apparently less physically demanding
job of a secretary. He observed:
“I do not suggest that these concerns did not flow from views genuinely
held and I have no doubt they reflect views shared by
others in the Australian
community. However the legal obligations of the Club derive from the
Parliament has made plain in s 170DF(1)(f) that pregnancy is not a reason
justifying the termination of an employee’s employment
subject to the
qualifying effect of s.170DF(2) which provides:
“Subsection (1) does not prevent a matter referred to in paragraph
(1)(f) from being a reason for terminating employment if
the reason is based on
the inherent requirements of the particular position”
and s 170DF(3) concerning staff at religious institutions.
However the relationship between s 170DE and s 170DF(1)(f) is a matter I
need not consider further nor determine. That is because
the views then held by
at least two members of the committee about the likely effect of the
applicant’s pregnancy on her capacity
to perform her duties were a matter
of speculation and not based on any observed incapacity. Such views are
symptomatic of the type
of conduct to which s170DF(1)(f) was directed. More
importantly they constitute evidence from which it might reasonably be inferred
that at least one reason for the termination of the applicant’s employment
was her pregnancy and the belief that she would,
while pregnant, not be able to
perform her duties or, in doing so, would put at risk her health.
A reason for the termination of the applicant’s employment may have
been a belief, genuinely held, that the applicant’s
behaviour had led to a
significant and material deterioration of the relationship between her and Mr
Stowell in particular. However
there is evidence that points to a further reason
being the applicant’s pregnancy. The Club has not demonstrated it was not.
I am not satisfied that the pregnancy of the applicant was not a reason for the
termination of her employment. Accordingly, having
regard to the combined effect
of s 170DF(1)(f) and s 170EDA(2), I find the termination was in contravention of
a provision of Division
3 of the Act.”
In this case I
am not satisfied race or sex was a factor in the termination.
considering this matter I have taken into account the observations of Northrop J
Johns v Gunns Ltd
(1995) 60 IR 258
, where he examined the scope of the
operation of section 170DF(1)(f) and concluded:
“The respondent has to establish a negative, namely that the reasons
for dismissal did not include the reason that Mr Johns
was temporarily absent
from work because of injury. A mere denial may not be sufficient. All the
facts and circumstances of the
case have to be
considered.”
On this issue Northrop J also cites
with approval a passage appearing at page 268 in
Heidt v Chrysler Australia
(1976) 26 FLR 257
which he observes has equal application where
s170DF(1)(a) of the Act applies:
“The provisions of
of the Act cast an onus of disproving facts,
namely, that the reason for the defendant’s action was not actuated by the
alleged in the charge. It has been held that a defendant need not prove
the reason why he dismissed an employee: Atkins v Kirstall-Repco
The mere proof of a reason for dismissal, other than the reason
alleged in the charge, does not necessarily negate the reason alleged
charge. A mere denial of the reason alleged in the charge may not be sufficient
to satisfy the onus cast upon the defendant.
All the facts and circumstances
leading up to the dismissal must be considered, including any reason expressed
at the time of the
dismissal, as well as any denial of the reason alleged in the
In this case I accept the denials of Mr
Dass that race or sex was not a factor in his decision to terminate her
employment.. Mr Dass
improperly took the recourse the applicant was having to
Adia Centacom over the payments being made to her into his consideration
difficulties which had arisen between them. I have drawn the conclusion that
the main reason for the employment of the applicant
being brought to an end was
concern by Mr Dass about the effect her claims for increased payment was having
on the Spicers Telelink
operation and in particular on staff morale. The phrase
“administrative authorities” is wide enough to encompass the
which Adia Centacom had in the contract of employment. Accordingly, this
decision contravened s170DF(1)(f) of the Act on the
ground of recourse by the
applicant to competent administrative authorities. Normally there would be a
declaration that Spicers
Paper contravened s170DF(1)(f) of the Act on that
ground and possibly Adia Centacom as well. It would be inappropriate to make
a declaration in this case as the point was not taken in the proceedings.
It is sufficient to take it into account in considering
whether there was a
valid reason for the termination of the applicant.
WAS THERE A VALID REASON FOR TERMINATION?
Under the provisions of the Act, the employer, in this case Adia Centacom,
carries the burden of showing that at termination it had
a valid reason or
reasons for bringing the employment to an end summarily. In his decision in
Selvachandran v Peteron Plastics Pty Ltd
(1996) 62 IR 371
, Northrop J
describes the meaning of this phrase in the following way:
“Section 170DE(1) refers to “a valid reason, or valid
reasons”, but the Act does not give a meaning to those phrases
adjective “valid”. A reference to dictionaries shows that the word
“valid” has a number of different
meanings depending on the context
in which it is used. In the Shorter Oxford Dictionary, the relevant meaning
given is: “2.
Of an argument, assertion, objection, etc; well founded and
applicable, sound, defensible: Effective, having some force, pertinency,
value.” In the Macquarie Dictionary the relevant meaning is “sound,
just, or well founded; a valid reason.”
In its context in s170DE(1), the adjective “valid” should be
given the meaning of sound, defensible or well founded.
A reason which is
capricious, fanciful, spiteful or prejudiced could never be a valid reason for
the purposes of s170DE(1). At the
same time the reason must be valid in the
context of the employee’s capacity or conduct or based upon the
operational requirements
of the employer’s business. Further, in
considering whether a reason is valid, it must be remembered that the
requirement
applies in the practical sphere of the relationship between an
employer and an employee where each has rights and privileges and
obligations conferred and imposed on them. The provisions must “be
applied in a practical, commonsense way to ensure
that” the employer and
employee are each treated fairly, see what was said by Wilcox CJ in Gibson v
Bostik Pty Ltd
(1995) 60 IR 1
, when considering the construction and application
of s170DC.”
The defence of this case by Spicers Paper was based on the concept that the
applicant was not an employee of its organisation. Spicers
Paper suggest at
most it was an agent of Adia Centacom. There can be no dispute that there was
an employment relationship between
the applicant and Spicers Paper even though
it fell short of being a Contract of Employment. There was a contract of
between the applicant and Adia Centacom. As there was no Contract of
Employment between the applicant and Spicers Paper it follows
that Adia Centacom
is required to prove that at 15 November 1995 it had a valid reason for the
termination of the applicant. Spicers
Paper maintains through its
representative Mr Dass its reason for dismissing the applicant revolves around
her use of abusive language
to Mr Dass. It is more likely that without a
supervisor he did not need the extra aggravation of a relatively new member of
team disputing the level of salary paid to her. I am satisfied that the
demands of the applicant for an increase in her pay was
the real reason for her
termination. It is easy to see that this became an embarassment to Mr Dass. No
doubt he was convinced that
he was able to dispose of the services of the
applicant easily and without any consequences to his organisation under its
arrangement
with Adia Centacom. This was a section which had employed a series
of persons who had not been satisfactory for one reason or another.
if it were to be accepted that Mr Dass was so offended by the words spoken to
him so that he had no alternative other than to
dispense with the services of
the applicant I am not satisfied that at 15 November 1995 this could properly be
established by Adia
Centacom as a valid reason for her dismissal. There was no
evidence of a review of the incident by any other personnel consultants
Managers of Adia Centacom. Ms Johnson did not seek an eight hour delay to
achieve this purpose. Had the issue been discussed
in a proper way with Ms
Wallace involved perhaps a review period could have been worked out and a
specific level of sales calculated
to give the applicant an incentive to stay on
at the business. The evidence of Mr Dass that he spoke to Ms Liz Johnson and
her concurrence to the dismissal remains unchallenged. This does not
give the case for Adia Centacom any proper basis for establishing
decision to terminate the applicant was sound or well founded.
evidence in this case leads me to the conclusion that there was not well founded
or just grounds for the decision to terminate
the employment of the applicant.
There was not a valid reason to terminate the employment of the
application.
SECTION 170DC: EMPLOYEE OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND
Section 170DC is in the following terms:
“An employer must not terminate an employee’s employment for
reasons related to the employer’s conduct or performance
(a) has been given the opportunity to defend himself or herself against
the allegations made or
(b) the employer could not reasonably be expected to give the employee
that opportunity.”
In this matter Section 170DC(b) certainly
does not need to be considered. Although her language was inappropriate it did
not constitute
‘serious’ misconduct warranting instant dismissal.
Raymond Drury v BHP Refractories Pty Ltd
(1995) 62 IR 467
, Wilcox CJ
mentioned earlier referred to a much more serious use of language and personal
invective directed at a supervisor as follows:
“I agree with Mr Raymond that it did not constitute “serious
misconduct”, warranting instant dismissal. But it
was behaviour that went
beyond even the “give and take” atmostphere of a modern Australian
workplace. It was disruptive
behaviour that called into question the authority
of the person who was in charge of the project. If continued after a clear
it was conduct that constituted a valid reason, connected with
operational requirements of the project, for Mr Drury’s termination:
s.170DE(1) of the Act.”
The applicants conduct in this case is mild when compared to the frequent use of
” word by Mr Drury and his other vivid descriptions of
his supervisor including an insulting reference to an apparent matrimonial
difficulty. I do not see her remarks, sarcastic as they were, as challenging
the authority of Mr Dass.
The applicant was not given the opportunity to defend herself
against the allegations of abusive language. Nor the fact that she
was seeking
recourse to her employer for an increase in pay. At the very least section
170DC required Mr Dass to set out to the
representatives of the second
respondent in some detail his reasons for terminating the employment of the
applicant. The applicant
should have been spoken to by one of the consultants
before the assignment was terminated.
Perrin v Des Taylor Pty
(1994) 58 IR 254
at 256-7, Moore J said the following about the
purpose of section 170DC:
“Its purpose is at least twofold. It is to give the employee the
opportunity to demonstrate that the allegations have no foundation
they should not be viewed as reflecting on the employee’s capacity. In
the present case, the applicant may have
been able to show that the complaints
explanation for their
slow delivery that did not relate to any want of effort on
his behalf.
A second purpose of s170DC is that an employee with whom an allegation has
been raised may be able to persuade the employer that,
while the allegation is
of substance, there are factors that should persuade the employer not to
terminate the employment. They
may be extenuating personal circumstances or
they may involve undertakings about future conduct.”
Despite the fact that the applicant had frequent discussions with the
representatives of Adia Centacom, there was no evidence of
any opportunity
being given to her to respond to the allegations made against her. It appears
that Mr Dass was convinced that he
could rely on his view that the applicant was
not an employee of Spicers Telelink and she was therefore a person who could be
without any opportunity to defend herself. This can be the only
logical conclusion as to why he would act in such a peremptory
In my view, Adia Centacom breached section 170DC of the Act, in that it
should have given the applicant the opportunity of making
representations about
the retention of her job. Ms Liz Johnson concurred with the view of Mr Dass and
improperly did not insist
on the 8 hours notice required under the contract. In
addition, the applicant may have wished to give
“undertakings about
future conduct to”
both respondents including ways in which the
dispute about the level of payment to her could be resolved. In those
circumstances
there will be a finding against the second respondent that there
was a contravention of section 170DC of the act.
REINSTATEMENT : IS IT IMPRACTICAL?
As to whether it is impracticable to reinstate the applicant I refer to the
observations of Wilcox CJ and Keely J in Liddell v Lembke
(1994) IRCR 466
“The precise meaning of impractical in this context should be left
to another day. The question is one of general importance.
It was not fully
argued in this case, but although impractical does not mean impossible, it means
more than inconvenient or difficult.
Imposition of such a stringent limitation
on the court’s power to award compensation rather than order to reinstate
is inconsistent
with the notion that Parliament intended the court have an open
discretion whether to intervene at all.”
This is also supported by Gray J in his judgment in that case at page 495.
“Reinstatement is therefore required if it can be done. If the
employer is still employing or able to employ someone to perform
the same or
similar tasks, then reinstatement will be practicable. Its practicability does
not depend on the existence of grounds
which would have justified termination
but which were not relied on, because unknown to the employer at the time of
termination.”
The only cogent evidence from the first
Respondent that would lead me to consider that it would be impractical to
reinstate the applicant
was given by Mr Dass to the effect that he has lost
confidence in the applicant. He had nothing of a more tangible nature to
to the court. A lack of confidence by a former employer is not a
sufficient ground to prevent reinstatement of the former employee.
applicant acknowledged that she was still emotional about it and felt she could
not give full service to someone such as Mr Dass
who she considered had treated
her so roughly.
I am satisfied that I have only a limited discretion not
to reinstate the applicant where it has been found that there is no valid
for termination of his employment. (See decision of
Liddell v Lemke t/a
Cheryls Unisex Salon
(1994 IRCR 466
Because of the decision which I
have come to on the grounds of the impracticality of reinstatement it is not
necessary to determine
the question as to whether there is power under the
legislation to reinstate the applicant with Spicers Paper.
The applicant
failed to give any positive evidence that would support her claim that
reinstatement is not impractical. During the
trial the applicant often was
visibly distressed and sat with her head bowed during much of the hearing.
Frequently she had to stand
or leave the courtroom because of pain from her
back. I am not satisfied by the physical signs which she exhibited during the
it would be either practical or proper to reinstate here to a position
which requires lengthy periods of sitting.
I am satisfied that at least
one other member of the staff would not welcome her reinstatement. The
impression is easily gained that
the feeling is mutual in so far as the
applicant was concerned. It is impractical on physical grounds to reinstate the
to the position in which she was employed immediately before her
termination by Adia Centacom at Spicers Paper.
There was no other
evidence given as to the possibility of a similar position with another section
of Spicers Paper.
The applicant still bears a sense of injustice. In the
circumstances of this case I am of the view that the discretion should be
against the applicant. Therefore I find that it is impractical to
reinstate the applicant.
The applicant had responded positively to the blandishments of the
representatives of Spicers Paper who had requested she go to them
interview. Her performance had been publicly approved by Mr Dass and also by Mr
Dannaoui. Her termination was carried out
with the concurrence of Ms
I am satisfied that she did suffer distress of the nature
outlined in Burazin v The Blacktown City Guardian Pty Ltd (1995) case
(unreported
IRCA (Full Court) decision No. 606/96 dated 13 December 1996). In
that case the full court, determined that in making an assessment
caused by stress suffered in a termination of employment restraint must be
exercised in the level of damages.
In this matter I assess damages
suffered through distress caused by the method of termination at $1,000 dollars.
I make that assessment
upon my observations of the applicant in giving her
evidence, her description of how she felt at the time of her termination and
reaction which she illustrated in the witness box. I am satisfied that it did
and will have a continuing adverse impact on her.
Those circumstances justify
taking that damage into account.
NON ECONOMIC LOSS CAUSED BY UNLAWFUL TERMINATION ON GROUNDS OF RECOURSE TO
COMPETENT AUTHORITIES
In order for there to be a connection
between a breach of duty and for damages to follow, it is necessary to show that
relied upon was a cause of the loss suffered. The test as to whether
the act or admission was a cause of damage is one of common
sense. Adia
Centacom was obliged to ensure that there was proper discussion about her
claims. In this case, Adia Centacom had a
duty of care to its employee (the
applicant) to protect her from injury caused by the unlawful terminating of her
employment relationship
with Spicers Paper. This is a clear case of a breach of
My assessment of the key witnesses in this case leads me to
conclude that a proper working relationship cannot be re-established.
Nevertheless, I acknowledge that the finding which I have made on the allegation
of an unlawful termination on the ground of recourse
to competent authorities
may in some cases require a declaration reinstating the applicant. However, I
have taken into account the
observations of Kirby J at p.70 in
Qantas Airways
Limited v Christie
(1998) HCA 18
, 19 March 1998:
“But if reinstatement were not ordered, questions of compensation and
damages would remain. By such means a court could vindicate
the provisions of
the Act although in circumstances which took into account the mitigating
factors, including some of those upon
which Qantas
There is extensive discussion of the
assessment of non economic loss in sexual harassment cases such
Bennett & Anor v Everitt & Anor
(1988) EOC 92-244
Tammy Jackson v Riste Ilievskil (
Innes, Com., Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission, 10 February 1997, unreported, decision
Lorelle Dippert v Cliff Luxford and Vrachnas Betabake Pty Ltd
(1996) EOC 92-828
Hall, Oliver and Reid v Sheiban
[1989] FCA 72
(1989) 85 ALR 503
Based on an examination of these cases it is reasonable to conclude that
a range exists from $6,000 to $9,000 for such damages. I
am satisfied, having
reviewed the above cases, that an assessment of $8,000 for the damage suffered
through the failure of the respondent
to protect the applicant from injury
caused by the unlawful termination of her employment relationship with Spicers
COMPENSATION
The circumstances of the termination of the applicant may be compared to
those which applied to the applicant in
May v Lilyvale Hotel Pty Ltd
68 IR 112).
In that case Wilcox CJ, made an assessment of her future
losses based on the difference in terms of the salary which the applicant
likely to receive and that which she would have received in her previous
position in her former employment.
The calculation of that amount led to
the amount of damages being in excess of the maximum amount of compensation
allowed under the
legislation. Accordingly the maximum amount was allowed. In
the present case I do not have the necessary evidence as to future
losses as it
was not led from the applicant. Accordingly there is no evidence on which I can
rely to make such a prediction.
In the circumstances I am limited to
assessment of the damages based on the evidence from the applicant for the
period she was unemployed,
together with the amount for distress and for
non-economic loss caused by the unlawful termination of employment which I have
Alternatively if the three elements of the Contract of
Employment and the employment relationship had a proper discussion about the
issues involved it is likely that the employment of the applicant would have
continued for some time. If Ms Wallace had been allowed
to perform her proper
administrative function; it is likely that the applicant would have stayed in
the job until a more suitable
position became available given the limitations on
her capacity to work as a result of her previous injury. Such assessment needs
to take into account the Christmas/New Year shutdown period in industry. In
these circumstances it is foreseeable that the applicant
would be in that
employment until May or June 1996 at least. A period that coincides with the
maximum amount of compensation allowed
under the legislation.
appropriate to make any deduction for the workers compensation payment as this
was paid to her for a different purpose.
There will be an award of the maximum amount allowed under the
legislation.
It can be seen from the conclusions that have
been reached that Adia Centacom has contravened Section 170DB(2) and an award of
weeks wages should also be paid to the applicant..
I note counsel for Spicers Paper may wish to make submissions about the
question of the payment of the costs of Part of these proceedings
as no formal
orders have been made against them. I propose to give an opportunity of
addressing the Court on that issue if that
is desired by either respondent. The
applicant will, of course, have an opportunity to respond. By 4.00 pm on 14
October 1998 Spicers
Paper may lodge a Notice of Motion, together with an
outline of any claim for costs against either the applicant or Adia Centacom.
That outline is to include an itemised daily claim including disbursements for
counsel. If a claim is made against the applicant
then I will hear at the same
time her response to any claim for costs and whether she would be seeking
reimbursement from the Adia
I observe that a difficulty facing
Spicers Paper in this matter, is that part of the problem was occasioned by the
filing of misleading
and inappropriate Notice of Appearances. Indeed, it would
seem to me that it can be strongly argued that a crucial turning point
case was the admission to the court at the end of the second day of hearing by
Adia Centacom as to its liability in the matter.
Spicers Paper is faced
Section 347
of the Act as the applicable section:
“347(1) A party to a proceeding (including an appeal) in a matter
arising under this Act shall not be ordered to pay costs incurred
by any other
party to the proceeding unless the first-mentioned party instituted the
proceeding vexatiously or without reasonable
347(2) In subsection (1): “costs” includes all legal and
professional costs and disbursements and expenses of
witnesses.”
As this application was filed after 15 January 1996
Section 170EHA is also applicable. Before finally concluding my remarks and to
assist the parties, I note prima facie, that I consider there is currently no
evidence before me, that the Applicant acted in a vexatious
way or without
reasonable cause. The fact that I have not accepted her evidence about what was
said to Mr Dass, in my view, does
not necessarily lead to the conclusion that
she acted vexatiously and that costs should follow.
Contrary to the
directions of the court it was not until the conclusion of the hearing that a
proper copy of the written contract
between the two respondents was made
available to the court and presumably the applicant. For whatever reason it was
only then that
I am satisfied the parties were fully informed of the contractual
position and employment relationship between the respondents.
It would require
additional detailed factual material, in my view, to assist either of the
respondents to establish a case for costs.
In the circumstances I propose to
give both parties an opportunity to further argue the question of costs should
such be needed.
In the event that action is not taken to file a Notice of
Motion by 4.00 pm on 14 October 1998, then in addition to the orders which
have earlier indicated there will be an additional order entered:
party to pay their own costs.
For this purpose I will set the matter down
for a hearing at 10.00 am on 15 October 1998 or, if an argument is required, at
time on that day as is convenient to the parties. If the Notice of
Motion is not lodged by 4.00 pm on 14 October 1998 then I propose
to decide the
issue on the basis that there will be no order for costs and the parties need
not be in attendance.
There will be judgment and orders
accordingly.
I certify that this and the preceding 44
Is a true copy fo the reasons for the decision of
Judicial Registrar
Associate: Kate Benson
Dated: 13 October 1998
APPEARANCES
Counsel for the Applicant: Ms J. Keys
Solicitors for the Applicant: (Counsel for the Applicant
appeared by direct brief.)
Counsel for the First Respondent: Mr Richard
Employer’s organisation for
First Respondent: Ms J.
Printing Industries
Association of Australia
Employers Advocate
for the Second Respondent: Mr Anthony Britt
Employers Organisation
the Second Respondent: Australian Chamber of
Manufacturers
Dates of Hearing: 22.1.97, 23.1.97,
24.1.97, 1.5.97,
RTF format (160 KB)
Signed PDF/A format