Hafda and Secretary, Department of Social Services (Social services second review) [2024] AATA 3604 (11 October 2024)
Hafda and Secretary, Department of Social Services (Social services second
review) [2024] AATA 3604 (11 October 2024)
Division: GENERAL DIVISION
File Number(s):
Zakaria Hafda
Secretary, Department of Social Services
The decision of the Social Services and Child
Support Division of this Tribunal on 7 June 2024, which affirmed a decision of
Australia made on 12 August 2022 to reject a claim by the Applicant for
Disability Support Pension, is affirmed.
...................................[sgd].....................................
Member D Stevens
SOCIAL SECURITY
– compensation affected payment – disability support pension –
lump sum preclusion period –
special circumstances – decision to
retain property not considered a special circumstance – payment of
informal debts
owed to others not considered a special circumstance –
decision under review affirmed
LEGISLATION
Social Security Act
Dranichnikov v Centrelink
[2003] FCAFC 133
(2003) 53 ATR 270
Groth v Secretary, Department of Social Security
[1995] FCA 1708
(1995) 40 ALD 541
Re Beadle and Director-General of Social Security
[1984] AATA 176
Re Ivovic and Director-General of Social Services
[1981] AATA 57
Secretary, Department of Social Security v Smith
[1991] FCA 382
(1991) 30 FCR
SECONDARY MATERIALS
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates,
Senate, 21 June 1995 (Peter Cook, Senator for Western
Australia).
REASONS FOR DECISION
Member D Stevens
Zakaria Hafda (the Applicant) seeks review of a decision of the Social Services
and Child Support Division of this Tribunal (AAT1)
which on 7 June 2023 affirmed
a decision of Services Australia (the Agency) made on 12 August 2022 to reject a
claim by the Applicant
for Disability Support Pension (DSP) (First Review). The
basis for the rejection was that a compensation preclusion period was in
existence, which does not expire until 19 April 2025, and that the
Applicant’s circumstances were not such as to constitute
circumstances for the purposes of
subsection 1184K(1)
Social Security
(Cth) (the Act).
AGREED FACTS
the hearing, the parties agreed that the Applicant:
(a) received compensation for a workplace injury on about 17 April 2021, in the
amount of $437 500;
(b) purchased a property in in south-western Sydney in June – July 2021
for about $390 000; and
(c) applied for DSP on 28 April 2022.
was no dispute that a compensation preclusion period is in existence, which does
not expire until 19 April 2025.
APPLICABLE LAW
the agreement between the parties, I shall set out the law applicable to the
issue in dispute.
of the Act provides:
(a) a person receives or claims a compensation affected payment;
(b) the person receives a lump sum
compensation payment;
the compensation affected payment is not payable to the person in relation to
any day or days in the lump sum preclusion period.
“Compensation
affected payment” is defined to include DSP – paragraph 17(1)(a) of
lump sum exclusion period is calculated with reference to the compensation part
of a lump sum –
section 1170
of the Act provides:
(1) For the purposes of this Part, the Secretary may treat the whole or
part of a compensation payment as:
(a) not having been made; or
(b) not liable to be made;
if the Secretary thinks it is appropriate to do so in the special
circumstances of the case.
the way that the preclusion period is calculated, treating part or whole of a
compensation payment as not having been made will
have the effect of shortening
a preclusion period.
noted by his Doussa J, this discretion and the preclusion period are:
Intended to operate together as a fair balance of the interests of the
recipient of the payment with the competing interests of others
... whose needs
must be met ... from a finite budget allocation for social security
Relevantly,
The compensation recovery provisions of the act protect the social security
system from ‘double dippers’, that is, those
who might receive
social security payments, as well as compensation, for the same
in relation to a discretion to recover monies under the
Social Services Act
(Cth), I note:
In the exercise of the discretion ... the decision-maker must have regard to
whether, by exercising the discretion in a particular
case, he will be achieving
or frustrating ends or objects which are conformable with the scope and purpose
of the [legislation].
phrase “special circumstances” is not defined in the Act. Case law
considers the phrase to refer to matters that are
“unusual, uncommon or
exceptional”; “markedly different from the usual run of
“circumstances
... that take the case out of the
... to take it out of the usual or ordinary
Issues to be decided
the matters that are not in dispute, at the hearing I put to Mr Hafda that my
understanding from his application for review
and the transcript of the First
Review, was that he seeks that the compensation preclusion period be shortened,
so that he can make
a claim for DSP or another benefit now. He agreed that this
is the case. Accordingly, in terms of the applicable law, the issue for
decide is whether pursuant to subsection 1184K(1) of the Act, the compensation
preclusion period can and should be reduced.
This requires that I decided
whether there are any special circumstances.
Hearing and evidence
Hafda represented himself at the hearing on 3 October 2024, and appeared via
telephone link. Ms Donaghy represented the Respondent
and appeared via
videolink. The Applicant gave oral evidence in relation to his circumstances at
hearing on 3 October 2024. I also
have the advantage of the Tribunal Documents
(T-documents) (including the Applicant’s Application for Review, and the
for Decision of the First Review); Supplementary Tribunal Documents
(Supplementary T-documents); a Statement of Financial Circumstances
the Applicant and dated 21 February 2024 (“SOFC”); and the
Respondent’s Statement of Facts and Contentions
(“RSFC”) dated
29 July 2024.
the First Review, at his request, the Applicant was provided with an extension
of time in which to provide a letter from the solicitor
who represented him in
his compensation claim, and to provide a copy of the contract of sale of the
unit he purchased. He did not
do so. I enquired with Mr Hafda at the hearing
whether he intended to produce such documents, and he said that he did not.
the hearing, Mr Hafda agreed that the Respondent had sent him a copy of the
T-documents and that it was in his possession. When
Ms Donaghy sought to take Mr
Hafda to various of those documents, it was not clear to me that Mr Hafda had
them open in front of
him. When I raised this, Mr Hafda insisted that he could
continue. I am satisfied that on each occasion, Ms Donaghy clearly set out
the document was, the information it contained, and fairly put to him the point
she was making and where appropriate the inference
she sought to draw, so that
there was no prejudice to the Applicant.
THE APPLICANT’S CIRCUMSTANCES
i. Physical condition
Hafda gave evidence that because of his disability for which he received a
compensation payment, he is injured, he cannot work,
it is painful to walk, and
he needs help.
ii. Knowledge of the preclusion period
Applicant gave evidence before me that he did not know of the compensation
preclusion period when he purchased the unit.
the hearing for the First Review, Mr Hafda said that his solicitor in his
compensation matter did not tell him of the compensation
preclusion period. As
set out above, Mr Hafda was provided with an extension of time after the hearing
to provide a letter from that
solicitor confirming that this was the case. Mr
Hafda did not provide that letter. In the hearing before me, Mr Hafda confirmed
would not be producing such a letter. The Member in the First Review
concluded that the “most likely explanation for that missing
evidence is
that Mr Hafda’s solicitor did provide that information to Mr Hafda, and I
find accordingly”.
same conclusion.
Donaghy took Mr Hafda to a letter from the Agency to him dated 27 May 2021. Mr
Hafda agreed that he received it. When taken to
the text, he agreed that the
letter set out that the preclusion period was from 18 April 2021 to 19 April
2025, and that the letter
said, “During this period you are unable to
receive income support from us”. It is not clear to me from his responses
that Mr Hafda agreed that he was aware of the preclusion period from 27 May
iii. Current income and funds
his application for the First Review, Mr Hafda stated “I only have $600
and I borrow money to live”.
In the First Review, the Member states that when he asked Mr Hafda how he
intended to support himself, he said “he had planned
on borrowing money
from his mother”.
SOFC, the Applicant said that he had no income; that of the money in his bank
accounts he could only access $812; and that
“I am often borrowing money
from my pensioner mother to get by and this is putting me more in
iv. Property
is agreed between the parties that shortly after receiving his compensation
payment, the Applicant purchased a home unit in south-western
Sydney for around
Hafda’s application for the First Review was accompanied by a document
which included a list of reasons why Mr Hafda is unable
to sell the home
These reasons included
that since his purchase the value of the property had decreased; the cost of
selling the property, including
payment to a real estate agent and solicitor;
that estimated weekly rent of $500 was unaffordable; that he would not be
for a rental property; he cannot afford a removalist; and he needs to
be near his elderly mother in south-western Sydney to assist
cross-examination, Mr Hafda agreed with a current valuation of the property at
property outright with no mortgage.
He agreed that if he sold it, he would be able to afford to pay a real estate
agent, solicitor,
and removalists; pay rent for the preclusion period; have
enough to live on and pay other expenses during the preclusion period;
money left over for a deposit on another unit. He also agreed that with evidence
of a bank balance of several hundred thousand
dollars, he would be approved for
a rental property.
also agreed that if he had not bought the unit, he would have had enough money
to live on, including paying rent, during the whole
of the exclusion
the hearing, Mr Hafda insisted that he would not sell the property. He agreed
that this was his choice. He said that the reasons
he had bought the property
and would not sell it are that money does not last long when you pay rent; he
wanted something that he
knows is his; when you rent you have to pack up and
move all the time, which is difficult with his disability; he wants to stay in
one place; and when he dies the property will go to his children.
v. Money in bank account
his SOFC the Applicant states he has $29,133.77 in a bank account he describes
as “child support”. Bank statements
show the balance has been over
$29,000 since 12 October 2021.
In his evidence, Mr Hafda said the balance is still around $29,000.
Donaghy put to Mr Hafda that $29,000 is about equivalent to the yearly payment
of DSP. Mr Hafda said he had tried to withdraw this
money but that the bank
would not let him as it is "child support garnishee money” and not his. An
amount of $29,133.72 was
withdrawn on 11 October 2021 by telegraphic transfer
and described as “CSA
Garnishee”.
been no similar withdrawals since that time.
vi. Movement of significant amounts of funds
the RFSC the Respondent notes that before receiving the lump sum compensation
payment, the Applicant had over $320,000 in a bank
It was put to the
Applicant in cross-examination that following payment of the lump sum and before
the purchase of the unit, the
Applicant had over $680,000 in a bank
He said that he did not
remember that.
the RFSC the Respondent notes that between July and December 2021 (after the
purchase of the unit and excluding the child support
garnishment), the Applicant
withdrew $256,500 from his bank accounts, including 5 withdrawals over
When asked to explain
these withdrawals at the hearing, the Applicant responded that “I owed
people money, so I gave it to
them”. He agreed that he did not have
details or receipts in relation to these debts. He agreed that at the First
had told the Tribunal that his debts were around $50,000. He added
that in his divorce his wife took all of his money, and that whenever
children he gave them food, games and anything they wanted. He also said that he
“bought all new furniture”
for his unit.
CONSIDERATION
have to decide whether there are special circumstances in respect of the
Applicant which put his case out of the ordinary, such
that I should vary the
preclusion period so that he can apply for DSP earlier than 19 April 2025.
Hafda’s evidence regarding his physical condition means that he is in very
similar circumstances to other people who have
received compensation payments
for workplace injuries. Sadly, his circumstances are not special.
is likely that Mr Hafda was aware of the compensation preclusion period when he
purchased the unit. Even if he was not, that does
not constitute a special
circumstance for the purpose of altering the preclusion period, especially given
that the unit has risen
in value and could be sold at a profit.
main issue for consideration is the Applicant’s overall financial
situation. Mr Hafda’s evidence regarding his financial
circumstances
establishes that he is probably in a better position than some other people who
received compensation payments and
who are in the latter part of their
preclusion period.
am concerned by the scant explanation provided to me by Mr Hafda regarding the
withdrawal of over a quarter of a million dollars
from his bank accounts in a
6-month period in 2021. Mr Hafda sought to explain this by saying he had to pay
debts, but provided no
particulars. I do not know why Mr Hafda would have
incurred significant debts when he had $320,000 in a bank account before payment
of his compensation lump sum. I have no knowledge of the amount of each debt, or
to whom money may have been owed. I only know that
he intended to borrow money
from his “pensioner mother”. I am left with the possibility that Mr
Hafda still has access
to all or some of that money.
I leave his bank accounts to one side and take Mr Hafda’s account of his
circumstances on its face, Mr Hafda is describing
that he has a liquidity
problem. Mr Hafda owns outright a home unit currently valued at $425,000, and so
he has ample assets from
which to support himself more than adequately to the
end of the preclusion period, and beyond. I appreciate that Mr Hafda does not
want to sell his unit. He has expressed this very strongly. However, it was
purchased following the payment of a lump sum in compensation
which was meant to
be used by him to support himself. His purchase of the unit has covered one
need, accommodation, however his assets
must cover all his needs. The fact that
Mr Hafda has tied up his funds in real estate is not a special circumstance
justifying the
expenditure of taxpayer funds on Mr Hafda’s other living
expenses. If I was to decide otherwise, I would be exercising the
discretion in
a way that frustrates the legislative intent that compensation recipients should
not be “double dippers”.
Hafda has about $29,000 in a particular bank account in his own
The Child Support Agency
garnisheed an amount of just over $29 000 for child support payments from that
account in 2021.
Support Agency has not subsequently taken any money from that account. In his
evidence Mr Hafda insisted that the bank
would not allow him to withdraw that
money because it is “child support money”. There was no other
evidence before me
regarding that bank account and this issue. I do not
understand why Mr Hafda cannot access this account. Perhaps the bank staff Mr
Hafda spoke to made a mistake. Perhaps there is a caveat or warning on the
account that should be lifted. In any event, Mr Hafda
should raise this issue
further with the bank and seek some advice. Ms Donaghy notes the amount is
equivalent to a year of DSP payment
– this may suffice to cover Mr
Hafda’s expenditure through the remaining 29 weeks or so of the preclusion
period without
requiring him to sell his unit. This is of course entirely a
matter for the Applicant.
Mr Hafda’s outright ownership of a property valued at $425,000, there is
no special circumstance regarding his financial
situation which would justify
reducing the length of the compensation preclusion period. Neither are there any
other special circumstances.
As a result, I have decided not to shorten the
preclusion period, and its end date remains 19 April 2025.
decision of the Social Services and Child Support Division of this Tribunal on 7
June 2023, which affirmed a decision of Services
Australia made on 12 August
2022 to reject a claim by the Applicant for Disability Support Pension, is
I certify that the preceding 40 (forty) paragraphs are a true copy of
the reasons for the decision herein of Member D Stevens
..................................[sgd]......................................
Dated: 11 October 2024
Date(s) of hearing:
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Ms N Donaghy, Services Australia
Secretary, Department of
Social Security v Smith
[1991] FCA 382
(1991) 30 FCR 56
, 61 (Doussa J).
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, Senate, 21 June 1995 (Peter Cook, Senator for Western
Australia).
Re Ivovic and
Director-General of Social Services
[1981] AATA 57
[45] (Senior Member Hall,
Member Billings and Member Tickle).
Re Beadle and Director-General of Social Security
[1984] AATA 176
[12] (Toohey J, Member Wilkins & Member Billings).
Dranichnikov v Centrelink
[2003] FCAFC 133
(2003) 53 ATR 270
284-285 [66] (Hill J).
Groth v Secretary, Department of Social Security
[1995] FCA 1708
(1995) 40 ALD 541
, 545 (Kiefel J).
RSFC, 9 [70]; ST6, 275.
RSFC, 6 [58]; ST6, 275-278,
282; ST5, 255, 277.
Oral evidence; ST5, p
RTF format (1.56 MB)
Signed PDF/A format