Lift Shop Pty Ltd v Next Level Elevators Pty Ltd (No 3) [2025] FedCFamC2G 1854 (12 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Lift Shop Pty Ltd v Next Level Elevators
Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1854
File number:
SYG 2118 of 2023
Judgment of:
JUDGE MCCABE
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
CONSUMER LAW
– interlocutory
application for further and better discovery and additional discovery –
whether the respondents have already
provided adequate discovery in the
proceeding – whether further discovery would be disproportionate to the
issues remaining
in contention – consideration of the Court’s
overarching purpose – interlocutory application refused.
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Law Act 2010
(Cth) s 18 of sch 2
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General
Federal Law) Rules 2025
Cases cited:
Lift Shop Pty Ltd v Next Level Elevators Pty
[2025] FedCFamC2G 273
Lift Shop Pty Ltd v Next Level Elevators Pty Ltd
[2024] FedCFamC2G
Procter & Gamble Australia Pty Ltd v Medical Research Pty Ltd
[2001] NSWSC 183
Procter v Kalivis
[2009] FCA 1518
(2009) 263 ALR 461
Division 2 General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the applicant:
Mr M Fleming
Solicitor for the applicant:
Gilbert + Tobin
Counsel for the respondents:
Ms F St John
Solicitor for the respondents:
SYG 2118 of 2023
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
LIFT SHOP PTY LTD (ACN 109 724
NEXT LEVEL ELEVATORS PTY LTD (ACN 161 047
First Respondent
MADELINE KATERS
JUDGE MCCABE
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
applicant’s interlocutory application filed 31 July 2025 be refused.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or order to remedy minor
typographic, clerical or grammatical errors (r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit
and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 24.04 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal
Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE MCCABE:
Shop Pty Ltd, the applicant in these long-running proceedings, sought orders for
further and better discovery in relation to
several categories of documents.
Lift Shop also asked for discovery in five additional categories of documents.
By the time the interlocutory
application came on for hearing, Lift Shop's
request was refined down to orders:
(a) requiring Next Level Elevators Pty Ltd, the first respondent, to arrange for
the imaging and review of two mobile phones in the
possession of two named
individuals connected with Next Level. The orders were sought with a view to
determining whether the devices
contained any documents that should have been
discovered; and
(b) requiring the production of five sets of
that were identified in
an aide-mémoire handed up at the commencement of the interlocutory
hearing. Lift Shop says the documents
in categories 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 have not
been disclosed but it infers the documents exist because they are mentioned or
to in other documents that have been disclosed.
Level says it has complied with its obligations under the orders for discovery
originally made on 27 February 2025. Next Level
says requiring it to go further
would be disproportionate given the scale of what remains in dispute in these
proceedings.
Level is right. I am not satisfied "it is appropriate, in the interests of the
administration of justice" to make the further
orders for discovery which have
been sought pursuant to
Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia Act 2021
(Cth). I explain my reasons for that conclusion below.
BACKGROUND TO THESE PROCEEDINGS
summarised the background to these proceedings in
Lift Shop Pty Ltd v Next
Level Elevators Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2025] FedCFamC2G 273.
Those reasons were
directed to a dispute over the scope of discovery that had been ordered by
another judge of this Court on 2 August
2024. I note Judge Bingham had already
been called on to resolve a different dispute arising out of the discovery
process. The costs
orders made in the wake of that dispute were addressed in
Lift Shop Pty Ltd v Next Level Elevators Pty Ltd
[2024] FedCFamC2G 1300.
my earlier reasons for decision, I explained Lift Shop contends staff from Next
Level were engaging in sharp practices like making
dummy calls to Lift Shop to
elicit information about pricing that might be of use as the two firms competed
in the marketplace. Lift
Shop claims Next Level's 'pseudonym conduct' was
misleading or deceptive conduct in contravention of
of sch 2 to the
Competition and Consumer Law Act 2010
Australian Consumer
). Lift Shop also alleges tortious deceit, and there is an allegation
that Next Level contravened an undertaking given in other proceedings.
Level has now conceded the pseudonym conduct occurred, although there is a
dispute over whether (a) the conduct was known to
more senior people at Next
Level, and (b) Lift Shop relied on the conduct. It follows the scope of the
remedies remains an issue.
While it is probably an exaggeration to say (as I did
at the recent interlocutory hearing) that this case is all over bar the
the most contentious aspects of the case appear to have been conceded.
And yet here we are, wrangling once again over discovery.
THE POWER TO ORDER DISCOVERY
explained in my earlier decision that the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia Act 2021
(Cth) (the FCFCOA Act) limits access to some of the
hitherto common Court processes for eliciting information in the course of
litigation.
Those tools can be expensive and time-consuming, and they may be
176(2) of the FCFCOA Act provides that interrogatories and discovery are not
allowed in general federal law matters in this
Court "unless the Court or a
Judge declares that it is appropriate, in the interests of the administration of
justice, to allow the
interrogatories or discovery." The Court's declaration to
that effect is required for a party to access the discovery process which
regulated in
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
(Cth) (the Rules). Section
176(3) of the FCFCOA Act goes on to provide the Court must consider "whether
allowing the interrogatories
or discovery would be likely to contribute to the
fair and expeditious conduct of the proceedings" and any other relevant matters
when deciding whether to make a declaration. The Court's approach to the
exercise of the discretion in s 176(2) is informed by the
objects of the FCFCOA
Act in s 5. Section 5 refers to the achievement of just outcomes, but also to
ensuring "justice is delivered
by federal courts effectively and efficiently".
a declaration has been made under s 176(2) of the FCFCOA Act - as it has been in
this case - the Court is still required to make
orders giving effect to the
process under Part 16 of the Rules. In doing so, the Court must be conscious of
the overarching purpose
of the civil practice and procedure provisions which is
set out in s 190 of the FCFCOA Act. Section 190(1) emphasises the importance
achieving lawful outcomes "as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as
possible" when exercising jurisdiction under the Rules.
Section 190(3) says the
civil practice and procedure provisions (including those found in Part 16 of the
... must be interpreted and applied, and any power conferred or duty imposed by
them (including the power to make Rules of Court)
must be exercised or carried
in the way that best promotes the overarching purpose
. [Emphasis
190(2) of the Act requires the Court to consider several matters when deciding
whether orders for discovery (for example)
promote the overarching purpose. That
sub-section says:
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), the overarching purpose includes the
following objectives:
(a) the just determination of all proceedings before the Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 2);
(b) the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources available
for the purposes of the Court;
(c) the efficient disposal of the Court's overall caseload;
(d) the disposal of all proceedings in a timely manner;
(e) the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the
importance and complexity of the matters in dispute.
factors remain relevant when the Court is called upon to make further orders in
the discovery process - most obviously where
the applicant seeks further and
better discovery. The party seeking further and better discovery must show there
are "reasonable
grounds for being fairly certain that there are other relevant
documents" which have not been disclosed when they should have been
following a
reasonable search:
Procter v Kalivis
[2009] FCA 1518
(2009) 263 ALR 461
per Besanko J.
starting point of the Court's evaluation of the adequacy of the discovery will
usually be the list of documents discovered and
the accompanying affidavit filed
in accordance with rr 16.09 and 16.10 of the Rules although subsequent
affidavits that describe
the search will also be relevant. Where the solicitor
swears the affidavit on behalf of their client, the affidavit will often
incorporate
information provided by the litigant (i.e., statements made 'on
information and belief').
Court is generally reluctant to go behind such affidavits unless deficiencies in
the search conducted (a) are obvious on the face
of the list of documents or the
affidavit, (b) are clearly indicated in other documents which have been
discovered or (c) are apparent
because the existence of an undisclosed document
has already been admitted: see
Procter & Gamble Australia Pty Ltd v
Medical Research Pty Ltd
[2001] NSWSC 183
per Hunter J. But even
where potential gaps in the search or disclosure are identified, the Court is
not obliged to dig deeper or
to require the parties to go further. Even a
conscientious litigant sorting through large numbers of documents held in
diverse locations
may produce a list that may be incomplete in some respects.
One must not lose sight of the fact r 16.07(2) of the Rules does not
require the
litigant undertaking discovery to conduct a perfect and exhaustive search -
merely a reasonable one.
power to order further and better discovery is discretionary. When considering
whether to exercise the discretion to make further
orders, the Court will
consider the precision of the request in accordance with the test set out in
Procter v Kalivis
and revisit the factors that were relevant to the
decision to make the orders for discovery in the first place. The Court will be
particularly conscious of the danger that further investment of time and
resources in discovery may yield diminishing returns. The
Court will also be
conscious that the applicant - the party seeking further orders in this case -
chose to commence their proceedings
in this Court in the certain knowledge that
discovery was the exception rather than the rule. After considering all these
the Court may decide to foreclose further discovery and insist the
parties get on with the trial rather than tarry over questions
The exchange of affidavits and submissions regarding Next
Level's discovery
list of documents was disclosed by Next Level on 21 May 2025. That list was
accompanied by an affidavit of verification. After documents
were produced for
inspection, Lift Shop wrote to Next Level on 20 June 2025 to raise concerns
versions of some of the documents.
That correspondence also called on Next Level to address other supposed
shortcomings. The exchange
of correspondence on this issue is reproduced in
exhibit MJW-8 to the affidavit of Mr Williams sworn on 30 July 2025. An
document - a 'Dropbox log' associated with Ms Katers - was
subsequently referred to in an updated list of documents filed by Next
17 July 2025. Lift Shop was not satisfied with that response, which led to this
application.
Stiel, a partner in the law firm representing Next Level, filed an affidavit
sworn on 5 September 2025 in connection with this
latest application. The
affidavit described the searches carried out by and on behalf of Next Level in
response to the orders which
set out the discovery categories. Ms Stiel
explained KordaMentha, a consulting firm, had already forensically imaged and
the contents of many devices and databases belonging to (or accessed
by) key players in this dispute, including access logs, email
accounts and
iCloud backups. Ms Stiel explained (at [15]) lawyers acting under her
supervision searched those records for documents
that answered the descriptions
in the discovery categories between February and May 2025. The lawyers used a
software application
called 'Nuix Discover' for this purpose. Ms Stiel added (at
[16]) lawyers acting under her supervision also searched hard copies
documents that had been provided by the first respondent. The lawyers also
inspected other repositories of documents that were
not imaged by KordaMentha
but which had been flagged by Next Level officers as potentially relevant.
KordaMentha also provided extracted
Dropbox logs that were reviewed. Ms Stiel
added that several officers (including the two key officers upon whom the
applicant focuses
in this application) carried out searches of their own
devices. Ms Stiel noted those searches were carried out "[u]nder my
instruction":
at [16]. She subsequently opined (at [18]):
As a result of the above, I am confident that a reasonable search has been
undertaken to identify all materials in the Respondents'
control that are
responsive to the Discovery Categories. All identified documents have been
discovered and (subject to claims of
legal professional privilege) copies have
been produced to the Applicant's solicitors. Based on my experience, I consider
that requiring
the Respondents to conduct further searches would be costly and
time consuming with no serious likelihood of identifying any further
responsive to the Discovery Categories that have been ordered. I also consider
it would be disproportionate in circumstances
where the alleged conduct the
subject of the proceeding has been largely admitted by the Respondents and the
documents that have
been discovered do not suggest that any further documents
are missing.
balance of Ms Stiel's affidavit responds to the specific criticisms made of Next
Level's discovery. Those criticisms are summarised
in the affidavit of Mr
Williams sworn on 30 July 2025. As I understand it, Lift Shop has now narrowed
its concerns to focus on the
two mobile phones belonging to the two named
individuals and five categories of documents referred to in the
aide-mémoire.
Those five categories refer to specific documents but also
Dropbox logs and some Outlook archives.
SHOULD ORDERS BE MADE?
will deal with the request in respect of the two mobile phones first. Mr
Fleming, counsel for Lift Shop, explained in oral submissions
that the applicant
was simply asking for the two mobile phones of the named individuals to be
subjected to the same process of independent
review carried out on the other
phones. He said it was not good enough for the individuals to effectively
'self-report' to Ms Stiel
on whether the phones contained any documents that
were discoverable. Mr Fleming added it was important to do this because it would
reveal whether any of the admitted conduct 'went to the top' of the
organisation. That needed to be ascertained because there was
a claim for
aggravated or exemplary damages and express denials in the pleadings that senior
people at Next Level were aware of the
conduct: transcript at pp 30-31.
St John, counsel for Next Level, said those orders should not be made. She
argued there was no reason to go behind Ms Stiel's affidavit
merely because she
relied on self-reports from the two individuals about the outcome of searches
they conducted on their phones.
Ms St John pointed out most affidavits from
solicitors verifying discovery are given on information and belief. Litigation
become prohibitively expensive if solicitors had to conduct every search
themselves rather than relying on clients to undertake at
least part of that
process. Ms St John said there was nothing else to suggest those individuals
were being untruthful, so there is
no justification for requiring Next Level to
is an element of speculation - fishing, even - in Lift Shop's request for
further and better discovery of the two phones. While
further documents might be identified if I made orders, it is
such orders would occasion further expense and delay to Next Level - an
imposition which Next Level says would be disproportionate
given the narrow
scope of the issues that remain to be resolved in these proceedings. Ms St John
noted Next Level had ultimately
agreed to Lift Shop's discovery categories and
had undertaken extensive work at significant cost that was described in Ms
affidavit. I was told that behaviour reflected a good faith effort to
comply which should give me comfort. I agree with Next Level's
argument that
further and better discovery would be disproportionate given the modest scope of
the case that remains. When I have
regard to the overarching purpose and the
matters referred to in s 190(3) of the FCFCOA Act, I am not satisfied the
applicant has
established that further and better discovery should be ordered in
respect of the two mobile phones.
turn next to the remaining categories sought by Lift Shop that were referred to
in the aide-mémoire handed up at the interlocutory
hearing. Lift Shop
referred to documents that were mentioned in the Dropbox logs of Mr Burns
bearing titles that referred to Lift
Shop (category eight). Mr Fleming says
those documents are relevant because they would enable Lift Shop to test other
evidence, and
because they would shed light on the extent of the conduct which
was relevant to damages.
St John argued the materials in question were reviewed by Ms Stiel. Ms Stiel
opined there was nothing disclosable. Ms St John says
Lift Shop is effectively
seeking to go behind the affidavit and scrutinise documents in the hope they
might yield some insights into
the commercial conduct and culture of Next Level.
I agree the request is essentially speculative in nature. When I have regard to
the overarching purpose in s 190 of the FCFCOA Act, I am not satisfied it is
appropriate to go behind Ms Stiel's affidavits given
the extensive and careful
nature of the searches she described. The possibility that further documents
might emerge that might be
useful is not enough to justify the further delay and
expense required.
Shop also wants access to several Dropbox logs (categories nine, ten and
twelve). Mr Fleming points out other Dropbox logs have
already been produced. He
says the production of the additional logs will "complete the picture":
transcript at p 11. But Ms St John
says those logs have already been reviewed by
Ms Stiel. Ms St John says there is no warrant for going back and requiring
production in the circumstances just to "complete the picture", an
inherently speculative process. I am not satisfied it is appropriate
to make the
orders for similar reasons to those I gave in relation to the requests relating
to documents mentioned in categories
seven and eight of the
aide-mémoire.
leaves only the Outlook archives referred to in the Dropbox logs mentioned in
category eleven. Ms St John says these archives
are effectively copies of an
entire email account. She says they add up to about eleven gigabytes of material
that will presumably
have to be reviewed before being disclosed. Ms St John
added that the costs Lift Shop incurred in searching and reviewing that material
would also potentially become costs in the proceedings, depending on the
am not satisfied it is appropriate to go behind the affidavit of Ms Stiel to the
extent she deals with this material. The costs
and delay that are likely to be
incurred will in any event be disproportionate given the scope of the issues
that remain in dispute.
Lift Shop has not persuaded me it would be appropriate
to make orders in relation to those documents given the overarching purpose
190 of the FCFCOA Act.
application for further orders (as amended) is refused.
I certify that the preceding twenty-five (25)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 12 November 2025
Transcript at p 25, lines 6-8,
where counsel for the applicant says the applicant does not press for orders in
respect of categories
1-7 of the documents identified in the
aide-mémoire.
RTF format (330 KB)
Signed PDF/A format