Arcand & Boen [2021] FamCAFC 155 (20 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Arcand & Boen
[2021] FamCAFC 155
Appeal from:
Arcand & Boen
[2021] FCCA 372
Appeal number(s):
SOA 13 of 2021
File number(s):
DGC 3235 of 2020
Judgment of:
WATTS, AUSTIN & BENNETT JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – LEAVE TO
APPEAL – DE FACTO RELATIONSHIPS – Limitation period – Where
the primary judge dismissed
an application pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“The Act”) – Where leave to
appeal is required – Where at least one of the grounds of appeal appeared
to have merit – Leave to appeal granted – Hardship – Where the
Court may grant an extension of time if the applicant
demonstrates hardship
through the deprivation of the chance to bring proceedings for substantive
relief – Whether the primary
judge erred by evaluating the prima facie
merit of the prospective property settlement claim, rather than by considering
the appellant had an arguable case – Where the primary judge erred
by unduly elevating the importance of the appellant’s
inactivity during
the limitation period – Where the error is immaterial as the appellant was
unable to demonstrate his hardship
– Appeal dismissed – No order as
FAMILY LAW – APPLICATION IN AN APPEAL – Where the
respondent seeks to adduce further evidence pursuant to s 93A(2) of
– Where the evidence shows the primary judge was correct to accept that
the appellant will not bear any future liability
under an existing bank loan
– Application granted.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
(3), 93A(2),
Cases cited:
Allesch v Maunz
(2000) 203 CLR 172
Althaus and Althaus
(1982) FLC 91-233
[1979] FamCA 47
Bienstein v Bienstein
(2003) 195 ALR 225
[2003] HCA 7
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
(1996) 186 CLR
[1996] HCA 25
(1998) 197 CLR 172;
[1998] HCA 67
Coghlan and Coghlan
(2005) FLC 93-220
[2005] FamCA 429
Conway v The Queen
(2002) 209 CLR 203
[2002] HCA 2
Edmunds & Edmunds
(2018) FLC 93-847
[2018] FamCAFC 121
Gadzen & Simkin
(2018) FLC 93-871;
[2018] FamCAFC 218
Jackamarra v Krakouer and Anor
(1998) 195 CLR 516
Medlow & Medlow
(2016) FLC 93-692;
[2016] FamCAFC 34
Montano & Kinross
(2014) FLC 93-623
[2014] FamCAFC 231
Norbis v Norbis
(1986) 161 CLR 513
[1986] HCA 17
Slocomb & Hedgewood
(2015) FLC 93-678
[2015] FamCAFC 219
Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd v Maher
(1988) 164 CLR 387
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Heard in Melbourne (via video-link), delivered in
Counsel for the Appellant:
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Davison Family Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Lander & Rogers
DGC 3235 of 2020
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
WATTS, AUSTIN & BENNETT JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. Leave to appeal is granted.
2. The Application in an Appeal filed on 21 July 2021 is granted and the
respondent has leave to adduce as evidence in the appeal
the affidavit of Craig
Douglas Henderson filed on 21 July 2021.
3. The appeal is dismissed.
4. The respondent’s application for costs is dismissed.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Arcand & Boen
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
WATTS, AUSTIN & BENNETT JJ:
1 On 5 March 2021, a judge of the Federal Circuit
Court of Australia dismissed the appellant’s application for leave to
property settlement proceedings against the respondent under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”), from which
dismissal order the appellant appeals, subject to the grant of leave to do
2 For the reasons which follow, leave to appeal is granted, but the appeal is
3 The parties were in a de facto relationship for in
excess of five years, commencing in April 2013 and ending in August 2018 (at
4 Pursuant to the provisions of
of the Act, the appellant had until
29 August 2020 to commence proceedings for property settlement relief under
of the Act.
5 The appellant instituted proceedings before the Federal Circuit Court on 23
September 2020 (not 20 December 2020 as the appealed
orders initially wrongly
recorded), being some 25 days late. Realising the application was filed late,
the appellant sought an interim
order granting him leave
nunc pro tunc
of the Act to prosecute his claim for substantive relief.
6 Even though the Initiating Application did not expressly say so, the
application for such leave was posited exclusively on the basis
the Act, requiring the appellant to satisfy the primary judge that he would
suffer hardship if leave were not granted. The statutory
conditions provide:
Institution of
proceedings
(6) The court may grant the party leave to apply after the end of the standard
application period if the court is satisfied that:
(a) hardship would be caused to the party or
a child if leave were not granted; or
(b) in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the
party—the party’s circumstances were, at the
end of the standard
application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support
himself or herself without an income
tested pension, allowance or
7 The application for leave was listed for discrete hearing before the
primary judge on 18 February 2021 and the hearing proceeded
parties’ counsel making submissions on the foundation of the untested
evidence they each filed. The dismissal order
was made and reasons were
delivered on 5 March 2021.
LEAVE TO APPEAL
8 The appellant requires leave to appeal from the
order dismissing his application under
of the Act (
[2014] FamCAFC 231
(2014) FLC 93-623
Slocomb & Hedgewood
[2015] FamCAFC 219
9 The grant of leave ordinarily requires an applicant to show the decision at
first instance is attended by sufficient doubt to warrant
appellate interference
and, furthermore, that substantial injustice would result if leave were refused,
supposing the decision at
first instance to be wrong (
Medlow & Medlow
(2016) FLC 93-692 at [44]–[57]). However, that guideline does not fetter
the wide statutory discretion.
10 The respondent sought leave to adduce further evidence in the appeal, but
was unable to adduce it unless leave was first granted
to the appellant to bring
the appeal. The respondent asked for the question of leave to appeal to be
determined without reference
to the further evidence she wished to adduce, but
we reject the artificiality of that approach. The answer to the question of
or not leave to appeal should be granted may be influenced by the
perceived merit of the proposed grounds of the appeal and, here,
at least one of
the appellant’s proposed grounds appeared meritorious. We are consequently
inclined to grant the appellant
leave to appeal because it suits both parties.
Despite the respondent’s opposition to the grant of leave, the evidence
seeks to lead in the appeal addresses the merit of the grounds of
11 Grounds 2 and 6 were abandoned by the appellant.
The remaining grounds are addressed in the context of the issues to which they
12 The appellant bore the onus of demonstrating to
the primary judge’s satisfaction that, supposing leave to bring the
settlement claim out of time was denied, the deprivation of his
reasonable chance of success in those prospective proceedings would
occasion him
Gadzen & Simkin
(2018) FLC 93-871
”) at [29]–[31]).
13 In assessing whether the appellant discharged the onus, the primary judge
merely needed to be satisfied the prospective property
settlement claim was
reasonable or arguable, with such assessment made summarily without a detailed
hearing on the merits (
at [33]–[37];
[2018] FamCAFC 121
(2018) FLC 93-847
”) at [16]–[17];
Althaus and Althaus
(1982) FLC 91-233
14 The primary judge found the appellant had not discharged the onus of
demonstrating such hardship, which finding was expressed in
these terms:
41. I do not think, in these circumstances, that it
could be said that the [appellant] has demonstrated a prima facie or arguable
case of substance, having regard to all the circumstances of the
15 The premise for the finding was the primary judge’s conclusion that
the appellant’s overall entitlement to property
and superannuation would
not rise above 15 per cent (at [40]) and, since he was already seized of 18 per
cent of the available property
and superannuation (at [40] and [43]), he would
not suffer hardship if deprived of the right to litigate the claim out of
16 Allowing for some inconsequential discrepancies between the parties’
contentions about the value of their assets, the overall
value approximated $1.1
million. The appellant had superannuation of $180,000 and the respondent had
superannuation of about $120,000
(at [13]–[14]). In aggregation,
therefore, the property and superannuation was worth about $1.4 million, meaning
a 15 per cent
share of it would amount to about $210,000.
17 The appellant conducted the proceedings on the basis of his expectation of
an entitlement to a maximum overall share of 25 per
cent in assets, but an
equalisation of their superannuation entitlements by splitting his
superannuation interest, which would compute
to an overall share of about 30 per
cent, valued at $425,000.
18 The appellant’s property and superannuation, on his own estimation,
approximated $234,000 – being in excess of $210,000,
but well short of
$425,000 in value.
19 However, that calculation does not take account of his joint and several
liability for a bank loan of $250,000 secured by mortgage
over the former family
joint and several liability under
the loan which, at the very least, affects the
overall value of the assets retained by him and the issue which would arise
of the Act about the justice and equity of making any adjustment
order, which the primary judge failed to realise and thereby erred
(Ground 4).
His point was that the primary judge was obliged to assume his notional
attribution with one-half liability for the loan,
meaning the value of his
property was actually $125,000 less. It was therefore contended the primary
judge fell into error by assuming
his property and superannuation had an
aggregate value of about $234,000 instead of only $109,000, which in turn
vitiated the primary
judge’s assessment of the chances of improving his
financial position in the prospective property settlement proceedings. The
point, however, is more imaginary than real.
20 First, although the appellant could theoretically be sued by the bank for
recovery of the entire balance of the loan, it is virtually
certain that would
never occur. The loan of $250,000 is secured by mortgage over real property
owned exclusively by the respondent,
worth not less than $1.3 million, and it is
almost inconceivable the bank would do anything other than call in the security
and exercise
mortgagee’s power of sale over the property to recover the
loan if it was ever in default. The respondent has met the totality
of the loan
repayments since the time of the parties’ separation (at [35]) and intends
to continue doing so, in which case
the primary judge presumed the entire
liability would run with the asset it encumbered.
21 Secondly, without the need for any litigation or attendant cost, the
respondent openly offered to re-finance the mortgaged loan
and remove altogether
the appellant’s contingent liability under the existing loan, which offer
the appellant rejected due
to dissatisfaction with the methodology proposed by
the respondent.
22 In submissions made to the primary judge, the appellant’s counsel
contended there was no evidence to establish the respondent’s
willingness
to re-finance the loan, as this excerpt of the transcript demonstrates:
[COUNSEL FOR THE APPELLANT]: The only other thing I
would say is as to the discharge of mortgage. The assertions made by the
[respondent]
at – in the later paragraphs of her affidavit –
paragraphs 33(a), (b), (c) and (d) – those matters are matters
assertion only. There is no documentary or corroborative proof of any of the
matters that are contained in paragraph 33. And,
in particular, the assertion by
the [respondent] that she is going to refinance and so on, that is not supported
by any evidence
(Transcript 18 February 2021, p.18 lines 26–31)
23 In the reasons for judgment, the primary judge remarked upon the
evidentiary dispute over the proposed loan re-finance and, without
attempting to
resolve it, simply accepted the loan had not yet been re-financed (at [22]).
24 To cure the lacuna, the respondent filed an Application in an Appeal on 21
July 2021 seeking to adduce further evidence in the
appeal to prove both the
bank’s willingness and her desire to re-finance the loan at no cost to the
appellant, if he co-operates
by giving his consent.
25 The application to adduce further evidence was initially posited as one
only made if appealable error was first demonstrated and
discretion was to be
re-exercised (
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
(2000) 203 CLR 172
at 183, 191–192),
but was belatedly converted to an application under s 93A(2) of the Act to help
resist the appeal.
26 Such evidence should be admitted because, even though the documents were
prepared after the hearing and could have been procured
beforehand, they
nevertheless tend to prove the correctness of the primary judge deciding the
application by accepting the appellant
need not bear any future liability at all
under the existing loan (
(1998) 197 CLR 172 at [103], [107] and
[109]). The further evidence permits a strong inference to be drawn that the
bank will permit
the respondent’s re-finance of the loan to remove the
appellant’s liability if he consents, whereas such an inference
strongly available from the evidence presented to the primary judge.
27 Given the appellant could easily and immediately escape any liability
under the existing loan without the need to prosecute a claim
for property
settlement relief under
of the Act, the primary judge was not in error
to decide the application for leave under
of the Act on the basis that
the value of his existing assets was not depreciated by his joint and several
liability under the loan
secured over the respondent’s home.
28 As things stand, the appellant remains hypothetically liable under the
joint bank loan and, upon the conclusion of this appeal,
could continue to
remain so. But that cannot work to his practical disadvantage. The
respondent’s representations in these
proceedings – that she will
willingly bear exclusive liability for the bank loan in the future and not look
to recover from
the appellant any contribution towards it, thereby militating
against his application to bring property settlement proceedings against
– would set up an estoppel precluding her from later suing the appellant
in a state court for contribution to the debt
Waltons Stores (Interstate)
Ltd v Maher
(1988) 164 CLR 387
at 399–406 and 416). Alternatively, any
later contractual claim made by the respondent against the appellant would
a fresh opportunity to make another application for leave under
of the Act to belatedly bring his claim for property settlement relief
because the appealed order is characterised as only an interlocutory
final order (
Bienstein v Bienstein
(2003) 195 ALR 225
29 Returning then to the proposition of the appellant’s existing assets
and superannuation being worth $234,000, the primary
judge correctly observed
such assets and superannuation already exceeded the 15 per cent adjustment
result which his Honour estimated
could eventuate from the prosecution of the
contested property settlement claim.
30 The appellant did not contend in the appeal that the primary judge’s
assessment of his overall entitlement to 15 per cent
of the property and
superannuation was vitiated by error. It would have been a difficult task to do
so, given unchallenged findings
that: the former family home is by far the most
valuable asset (at [15] and [30]); it was purchased by the respondent using the
significantly
greater capital she brought into the marriage only five or six
years before (at [14] and [22]); the parties brought broadly similar
superannuation into the relationship but the respondent brought in capital of
capital of about $20,000 (at
[13]–[14]); during the relationship the appellant made significant
financial contributions but
the respondent was the primary homemaker and
caregiver to the children (at [32]); the appellant now earns well more than
income of the respondent (at [16] and [20]); and the respondent will
continue to shoulder the primary financial burden of maintaining
the children
31 Since the appellant did not assert error in the primary judge’s
summary assessment of his
claim being no more than 15 per cent and
because there was no error demonstrated in finding the appellant already held
superannuation worth in excess of his prospective entitlement, it
must follow that the finding he would not suffer hardship if denied
proceed out of time was open.
32 The appellant did, however, challenge the primary judge’s rigorous
method of assessing his prospective entitlement, asserting
it was more akin to a
hearing on the merits than to a summary hearing (Ground 1), which is a different
species of complaint.
33 In prosecuting this claim, the appellant contended the primary judge erred
by evaluating the
prima facie
merit of his prospective property
settlement claim on a global basis by aggregating the parties’ assets and
superannuation
entitlements, rather than by considering whether he had an
arguable case for the separate assessment of the parties’ entitlements
assets and superannuation in two pools. In contending for that approach, the
appellant was willing to split his larger superannuation
interest to equalise
the respondent’s superannuation interest, meaning he would then
correspondingly increase his proportional
share of the assets. His case was that
it was unjust for him to be left with a larger superannuation interest, which he
unlock for many years, but few assets with which to re-establish
34 As the primary judge recognised (at [11]), in
Court said:
47. As the Full Court pointed out in
[18], “the well-established test is that the applicant must have a prima
facie claim worth pursuing or a ‘real’
probability of success.
Further, leave will not be granted if to do so would not, in the substantive
result, alleviate that hardship”.
48. That involves a consideration, but not a final determination, of the nature
of the applicant’s claim. In doing so,
the Court must weigh the
applicant’s case against that of the respondent’s and form a view as
to whether there is in fact
a prima facie case, or a real probability of
, that would, if leave were granted, alleviate hardship.
(Emphasis added)
35 The primary judge was therefore obliged to weigh the appellant’s
case against the respondent’s case to test it for
the ostensible merit
which the appellant asserted. As the respondent submitted in the appeal, in
order to determine whether the appellant
had an arguable case to mount under
of the Act, the primary judge was obliged to evaluate the strengths and
weaknesses of the appellant’s case and assess the overall
chances of his
claim for relief, for only then would it be known what he would forego if leave
to proceed out of time was denied.
If he foregoes little or nothing from the
denial of leave to proceed out of time, then it was correspondingly difficult
demonstrate hardship.
36 In undertaking that task, the primary judge’s assessment of the
parties’ contributions on a global basis was orthodox
and unexceptional
Norbis v Norbis
[1986] HCA 17
(1986) 161 CLR 513
at 523, 532–533 and 541). Both
parties’ superannuation interests were held in ordinary accumulation
funds, with the appellant’s
interest proportionately exceeding the
respondent’s interest by about one-half at both the commencement of their
relationship
and at the time of hearing (at [13]–[14]), suggesting there
was no demand upon the primary judge to treat the parties’
contributions
to superannuation interests separately from their other contributions
Coghlan and Coghlan
[2005] FamCA 429
(2005) FLC 93-220
at 79,645–79,646). Ground 1
therefore fails.
37 In later deciding to refuse the respondent’s subsequent application
for costs against the appellant, the primary judge remarked
unreasonable for him to have sought leave to bring his claim out of time (at
[50]), which the appellant contended in the
appeal was incongruent and tended to
demonstrate the dismissal order was unreasonable or plainly unjust (Ground 5).
The appellant’s
point was that, if on the one hand it was found reasonable
for him to bring his application, why on the other hand was it found he
to demonstrate a “prima facie or arguable case of substance” (at
[41])? That rhetorical argument has some rudimentary
attraction, but the alleged
incongruity can be satisfactorily explained in this way. The relatively short
period by which the proceedings
were late made the application for the grant of
leave “sufficiently arguable” or “not unreasonable” to
but, upon the appellant being put to proof on the demonstration of
hardship if denied the right of action under
of the Act, he could not
establish to the primary judge’s satisfaction an “arguable case of
substance” taking into
account “all the circumstances of the
Residual discretion
Section 44(6)
of the Act stipulates that the
grant an extension of time if the applicant demonstrates
hardship through deprivation of the chance to bring proceedings for substantive
relief, meaning the application to extend time might still
granted. The onus rests with the applicant to demonstrate why discretion should
be exercised to grant the extension of time; not
with the respondent to
demonstrate why the application should be refused (
Brisbane South Regional
Health Authority v Taylor
[1996] HCA 25
(1996) 186 CLR 541
39 The demonstration of hardship, if deprived of the right to pursue remedy
of the Act, was a threshold issue before the primary judge
at [29]). Having decided it against the appellant, there was no
need for the primary judge to go further, but his Honour nevertheless
proceeding to canvas another issue pertaining to the exercise of discretion: the
delay in bringing the proceedings.
40 Supposing hardship is demonstrated, numerous factors can influence the
exercise of residual discretion, including the length of
the delay, the adequacy
of reasons for the delay, and the prejudice the respondent would suffer if the
application for extension
of time was granted. Here, the primary judge focussed
on the length of the delay and the reasons given for it. Relevantly, the primary
judge found:
44. This brings us finally to the question of delay, and
it is the whole of the delay that is relevant
45. I accept that the [appellant] contemplated taking steps in August to
September of 2019, when he was, of course, well within time,
[respondent] knew this. Nonetheless,
for reasons wholly unexplained, the
[appellant] did nothing until July of the following year. That is a period of
nine months, getting
on for half of the standard limitation period. This, in my
view, is a relevant consideration
46. I am prepared to assume, in the [appellant’s] favour, that
delay from July until September was caused by a combination of dilatory conduct
on the part of his solicitor and COVID-related
and work-related difficulties. I
would not regard that delay, of itself, as being significant
. I also have
regard to the fact that the claim is only some 25 days or thereabouts out of
time. Nonetheless, the fact is that
the [appellant] has delayed, in
circumstances where he was well aware of his entitlement to bring a claim, for
nine months out of
the two-year standard limitation period, and this is a
further factor that militates against the grant of leave.
49. The respondent has sought costs on an indemnity basis in the event that the
claim is dismissed. I would infer that the applicant
would resist it. While
the applicant has, in fact, been ultimately entirely unsuccessful, there are a
number of points to be made.
First of all, in truth,
he was only 25 days out
and it would also seem that it is at least possible that those
25 days were engendered by the incomplete way in which his solicitor
handled the
matter, and I accept that the solicitor’s dilatory conduct should not be
held against the [appellant] himself
(Emphasis added)
41 In respect of those findings, the appellant submitted the primary judge
erred by giving too much weight to his delay in the period
between September
2019 and July 2020 (Ground 3), which complaint was amply established.
, which authority has been repeatedly adopted, Evatt CJ
said (at 77,267) with agreement by Marshall SJ and Strauss J (at 77,269):
The requirement that the applicant under
an explanation of the delay in bringing proceedings in my view
consideration of the whole period from the date of the decree nisi [dissolving
the marriage] to the lodging of the application.
It requires the Court to
whether the [applicant] took all reasonable steps to pursue her
claim or whether, on the other hand, she acted at any time as if she
intention of proceeding or pursuing any claim at all against the
[respondent].
It requires the Court to consider whether it can reach
conclusions as to why the proceedings were started beyond the time lodged
whether those proceedings are attributable to default on the part of the
(Emphasis added)
43 The Full Court was there dealing with an application
by a spouse for leave under
of the Act but an application for leave by a
de facto spouse under
of the Act, as here, operates on the same
principle (
44 As has been recognised (
Brisbane South
at 21–22 per Kirby
A controversy has arisen in the authorities, and in this
case, as to whether, in the exercise of the residual discretion, regard should
be had to the period of time which has elapsed between the expiry of the
limitation period and the date of the application. Or whether
the entire time
from the accrual of the cause of action to the date of the application must be
considered. Some decisions favour
the view that the only time relevant is that
after the limitation period has expired. This opinion is often explained on the
that limitation periods are arbitrary; that they involve acceptance that
some interval of time (however prejudicial to a defendant)
must be tolerated;
and that, accordingly, the attention of the Court should be focussed only upon
the marginal increase in prejudice
occasioned once the normal limitation period
has elapsed. This view of the legislation is also supported by reference to the
that what is under consideration is an extension of the ordinary
limitation period so that the decision maker should consider only
the time of
the extension, not the initial time during which no extension was required. The
contrary argument is that, a broad discretion
being invoked, without relevant
words of limitation, the generality should not be glossed by excluding the
earlier interval which
has elapsed. Its expiry also involved elements of
prejudice which could, and should, be taken into account in judging where the
of the case lies. To some extent the resolution of this controversy
depends upon the language of the Act in question. Thus, where
an Act refers to
"the delay" it may be taken to mean “the delay after the primary
limitation period expired”.
(Citations omitted)
, and the authorities in this jurisdiction which have
followed it, are devotees of the approach which involves attention to the
period” elapsed from the accrual of the cause of action.
46 Applying that principle, the primary judge was required to consider the
“whole period” from the commencement of the
limitation period until
the claim was lodged to see whether or not the applicant took reasonable steps
to pursue his/her claim or
whether he/she acted at any time as if to evince an
intention not to pursue the claim, but that is not necessarily the same thing
examining the evidence for a reasonable explanation as to why the claim was not
brought sooner during that “whole period”.
47 The limitation period under
of the Act did not expire until 29
August 2020. The primary judge was critical of the appellant for failing to
explain why he sat
on his hands for a period of about nine months during the
two-year limitation period, but it was important for the primary judge
appreciated that such unexplained inactivity did not cause or materially
contribute to the expiration of the limitation period,
at least in the
circumstances of this case. The appellant was entitled to file his application
on the very last day of the limitation
period without any need to explain his
inactivity over the preceding two years. The most salient consideration was the
explanation
given for why the proceedings were filed 25 days late on 23
September 2020, for which he had an incontrovertible and compelling reason:
gave his lawyers instructions to commence the proceedings in July 2020, well
before the limitation period expired, but the suit
was not filed within time due
entirely to their default.
48 While there might have been an element of inattention on the
lawyers’ part, their fulfilment of the appellant’s instructions
at least partly frustrated by what the primary judge described innocuously as
“COVID-related and work-related difficulties”
(at [46]). The primary
judge expressly acknowledged that such delay caused by the lawyers between July
2020 and September 2020 was
not significant (at [46]). Besides, the prejudice
which may arise from relatively benign errors of that sort made by lawyers
not usually be visited upon their innocent clients (
Allesch v Maunz
Jackamarra v Krakouer and Anor
(1998) 195 CLR 516
[33], [68] and [70]).
49 The primary judge erred by unduly elevating the importance of the
appellant’s inactivity for a period which amounted to only
cent of the duration of the limitation period and by appearing to expect the
appellant to afford a satisfactory explanation
for why proceedings were not
instituted earlier than they were. While the overall passage of time from the
point at which a cause
of action accrues is relevant to the broader question of
whether or not the residual discretion should be exercised in the
applicant’s
favour, due to the prejudice it may occasion to the
respondent, on the question of delay the applicant only needs to satisfactorily
explain why the claim was brought late – not sooner.
50 In this instance, the parties unsuccessfully tried to negotiate a
settlement of their dispute during the limitation period and,
appellant did allow the dispute to drift unresolved for about nine months, the
evidence did not suggest, nor did the respondent
contend, she was ever led to
believe by the appellant’s conduct or omission that he had abandoned plans
to pursue his claim.
51 Although the exercise of discretion miscarried when considering the
appellant’s delay and the explanation advanced for it,
the error was not
material because, once the appellant was unable to demonstrate his hardship
through deprivation of the opportunity
to press his late claim for property
settlement, the significance of the delay in commencing the proceedings fell
away. Errors of
law will not sustain an appeal if they do not affect the result
and cause no miscarriage of justice (
Conway v The Queen
(2002) 209 CLR
at 207–208, 217, 219–220, 232, and 244).
DISPOSITION
52 The appeal is dismissed.
53 The respondent’s application for costs should be dismissed. The
appeal was unsuccessful but the appellant was able to demonstrate
an error of
law which the respondent refuted and, had the respondent not been given leave to
adduce further evidence in the appeal,
another ground may well have been
sustained and the appeal upheld. In our view, the ordinary rule prescribed
of the Act should prevail.
I certify that the preceding fifty-three (53)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justices
Watts, Austin &
Dated: 20 August 2021
RTF format (430 KB)
Signed PDF/A format