1310376 [2015] RRTA 296 (6 June 2015)
[2015] RRTA 296
(6 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
Afghanistan
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Tony Caravella
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the
direction that the applicant satisfies s.36(2)(a) of the Migration Act.
Statement made on 06 June 2015 at 10:00am
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to
section 431(2)
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration to refuse to grant the applicant
a Protection visa under
Migration Act 1958
applicant who claims to be a citizen of Afghanistan, applied for the visa [in]
November 2012 and the delegate refused to grant
the visa [in] July 2013.
Background and protection claims
a statutory declaration sworn by the applicant on 2 November 2012, the applicant
declares that he is a citizen of Afghanistan and
of Pashtun ethnicity and of
Sunni Islam religion.
declares he was born in [Village 1], Afghanistan and that he is married and with
[children] who currently live in Peshawar, Pakistan.
He claims they live there
because they were in danger in Afghanistan.
claims that his father had land in [Village 1] and that in 2010 the Afghan
government asked that land be donated to build a girls’
school. He claims
his father agreed to donate some land to build the girls’ school. He
claims that his father went to [location]
to sign over the land to the
government, he was shot and killed by Taliban on his way home.
claims that 10 days later they received a letter from the Taliban where they
claimed responsibility for the murder of the applicant’s
applicant claims that he was subsequently required to sign another document to
hand over the land to build the school. He claims
that 10 days after he signed
the document, while he was at home chopping wood, six Taliban arrived, forced
the applicant into a car
and took him away. He claims he was taken to a place
where he was beaten and asked about the land donated for the school. He claims
he was detained by the Taliban for about 8 months in total. He claims one
evening he managed to escape because one of the Taliban
had been killed and the
Taliban went to the funeral.
applicant claim that after escaping, he walked for two days to the Pakistan
border and was able to travel to [Village 2] by taxi
which the border police
permitted him to take.
claims that he stayed about seven months with a friend of his father in [Village
2]. He said he then was able to organise a people
smuggler to get him to
claims after arriving in Australia, his wife and children moved to [Village 2]
and stayed there for about a month and then moved
to Peshawar. He claims it was
not safe for them on in their village in Afghanistan because there are Taliban
there and because of
what had happened to him.
claims he will be killed if he returns to Afghanistan and that it is not safe
anywhere in Afghanistan. He claims the Afghan authorities
would not be able to
protect him and the Taliban network is very organised.
delegate’s decision
the decision record dated [in] July 2013, the delegate found, amongst other
things, that there is no recent country information
to suggest that the Taliban
are targeting those involved in the education of girls in Afghanistan and more
particularly in Paktia
province. The delegate cites country information from a
report in the Sydney Morning Herald, which reports that when the Taliban
outsted in 2001, there were 5000 girls enrolled in schools across the country,
whereas a decade later that number is 2.4 million.
The delegate also found
there is no information indicating returnees have suffered harm due to being
considered supporters of the
west. The delegate concluded by finding the
applicant does not have a continuing profile with the Taliban in view of the
has passed, however the delegate also accepted the applicant may feel
he cannot return to his province. The delegate therefore considered
information on relocation to Kabul, and considered the applicant’s
circumstances, and concluded it would be reasonable
for the applicant to
relocate to Kabul to avoid the harm he fears.
Application for
applicant applied to this Tribunal on 24 July 2013 for a review of the
delegate’s decision to refuse the Protection visa.
A copy of the
delegate’s decision record accompanied the application for review.
6 April 2015, the Tribunal received written submissions which includes extensive
country information on the Taliban attitude to
education, and the
applicant’s risk as a returned landowner. It also cites country
information on the security situation in
Afghanistan. It also makes detailed
submissions on state protection, complementary protection, and the
reasonableness of relocation.
Tribunal hearing
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 15 April 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments. The Tribunal hearing was conducted
with the assistance of an
interpreter in the Pashto and English languages.
applicant was represented in relation to the review by his registered migration
applicant began his sworn oral evidence by saying that he understood the
definition of a refugee and he was familiar with the
criteria for protection
under complementary protection.
said his mother passed away a long time [ago]. He said he has no siblings. His
only sibling [also] passed [away].
told the Tribunal that he married in 1990 and he has [children]. He said his
wife and children are living in Peshawar, Pakistan.
told the Tribunal that he worked as a [occupation] in Afghanistan. He said he
would [travel] from [Village 1] to Kabul and back.
said he departed Afghanistan in approximately 2011. He said he has been working
in Australia since he arrived here. He said he
works doing [occupation]
applicant confirmed he departed for Australia using a false Pakistani passport
to leave Pakistan.
asked whether he had any previous contact with the UNHCR, the applicant said he
had no contact with it either while in Pakistan
or while he was in
Afghanistan.
asked what he fears about returning to Afghanistan, the applicant said he fears
he will be killed by the Taliban. He said how
his father had agreed to give up
some land so that a school for girls could be built. He said the Taliban did
not like. He said
first they threatened and then they murdered his father. The
applicant said this is his main reason for fearing returning to Afghanistan.
applicant told the Tribunal the land that was given for the building of a school
is located about five minutes walking distance
from [Village 1]. He said it
comprised 2 Biswa
land. He said the villagers had petitioned the government as to the need for a
girls’ school, and the government had indicated
it would build it if
someone provided the land. He said it was his father’s wish to have a
girls’ school in the village
and so he donated the land. When asked how
much land is left in the family holding, the applicant said there is a lot of
He said he estimates there is about [number]-[number] Jeribs of land
applicant gave evidence as to his father’s death. He said his father was
going to [location] to sign some documents associated
with the land and on the
way home, his father was shot and killed. The applicant said the Taliban were
responsible.
applicant said that about 10 to 15 days after his father was killed, he went in
to the relevant government office and had to again
sign for the transfer of the
land. The Tribunal put it to the applicant that it was having some difficulty
understanding why he
would have been required to sign the land transfer again
when his father had already signed it. The applicant replied that he was
required to sign because he would have otherwise been the inheritor of the
relevant land. He said that he signed for the land transfer
and also indicated
his father’s wish was for the land to be used for a girls’ school.
The Tribunal asked the applicant
whether he had any documents to evidence this
claimed transfer. He replied that the government has the documents and that he
some copies but he lost those when his house was burned down. He said his
house was burned down while the applicant was [in Australia].
He said he did
not bring any documents with him. He said all he brought when he left for
Australia was a pair of clothes.
Tribunal asked the applicant what date his father signed for the transfer of the
land. He said he could not recall, then he said
that while he could not be
sure, he thinks that it was in the month of Ramadan in 2010.
Tribunal asked the applicant to provide details about his claimed seizure and
detention by the Taliban. The applicant told the
Tribunal that some government
officials attended his father’s funeral. He said about 10 days after his
father’s death,
he received a letter from the Taliban. He said the letter
asked him why he donated the land. He said on that same day as the letter
delivered, 5 or 6 Taliban men came to his door. He said their faces were
covered. He said they took him away. He said the
men put him into the back of
a Ute and covered his eyes and face. He said he could not see where they took
him but it was, he estimates,
two, or two and a half hours’ drive
applicant said that during the time he was detained, he was kept in a room in a
house. He said they asked him if he signed a
document to transfer the land for
the girls’ school. He said he denied signing the document because if he
had admitted to it
he would have been killed.
Tribunal put it to the applicant that it was having some difficulty
understanding why he would be detained for 8 months. The
applicant then said
his captors told him they would release him if he told them the truth. He said
there were other people being
held at the same time as he was held and some had
been detained for over a year. He described how he was locked in a room and
they would be let out but only under guard. He said they would give
them breakfast in the morning and a meal at 4pm.
Tribunal asked the applicant how he managed to escape the detention. He replied
that on the particular day, one of the senior
Taliban members had died and the
guards were occupied by that and so he was able to jump through a window.
Tribunal asked the applicant how he knew 8 months had passed while he was
detained by the Taliban. He replied that his captors
would tell him words to
the effect that “It has been one month, why are you still
denying...”,. He said the following
month his captors would say,
“It has been two months, and why are you still denying...” He said
that he recalled he was
initially captured in the 10
month of 2010.
Tribunal put it to the applicant that the Taliban are well known for being
extreme and ruthless. The Tribunal also put it to
the applicant that if the
Taliban had killed his father as claimed, and if they were serious about wanting
to kill him, it would
not consider they would have detained the applicant for 8
months but would have killed him earlier. The applicant responded by saying
8 months passed because his captors kept asking him whether he had signed the
papers to give the land for the girls’ school.
He said he kept on telling
them that his father signed the papers. The Tribunal put it to the applicant
that its preliminary assessment
was that if his captors believed his explanation
then they would have been likely to release him, but if they did not believe
it considered they would not have detained him for 8 months. When asked
why he thought he was detained for so long, the applicant
said he does not know
their agenda or why they kept him that long. The Tribunal put it to the
applicant that he could not stay in
the same clothes for 8 months. He said his
captors gave him time to pray and gave him clothes and time to wash his clothes.
Tribunal asked the applicant if he is of the same religion and ethnicity as the
Taliban. He agreed that he is of the same Sunni
Islam religion and of the
Pashtun ethnicity, however, he added that they would still kill him for what
they alleged he did, that
is, consenting to the giving of the land to build a
school for girls.
applicant told the Tribunal that while he was detained, he was beaten on the
finger tips with a leather tool which he described
as being about the length of
his forearm.
Tribunal asked the applicant whether he was claiming that a fatwa had been
issued against him. The applicant replied that he
was asked to sign a document
but he refused to sign it.
Tribunal asked the applicant how he was able to escape and make his way to
[Village 2]. He replied that after escaping, he walked
one night and two days.
He said he then saw a Pakistani militia and they gave him directions to get to
[Village 2]. He said he
was not familiar with the area so he asked some people
who were herding some animals how to get to [Village 2]. He said he stayed
[Mr A]. He said he stayed in [Mr A]’s house. He said [Mr A] was aware
that his father had been killed. He said he stayed
there for 7 months and he
did not go anywhere for the entire 7 months. He said after that time he went to
Peshawar in Pakistan and
arranged with [Mr A]’ [son]to travel to
Australia. The applicant said he was able to avoid the Taliban during this time
the Taliban in Afghanistan is different from the Pakistani Taliban and
while in [Village 2] he did not go out at all.
Tribunal asked the applicant why he had not reported his father’s killing
to the police. He replied it was not reported
because the applicant was sure
the police would do nothing about it. The Tribunal put it to the applicant that
it seemed difficult
to believe they would not report it to the police because
the country information indicates Afghanistan has a functioning police
The applicant said that there are Taliban in the police.
Tribunal asked the applicant to confirm his grounds for claiming protection are
as follows:
His imputed
political opinion and a perception that he is anti-Taliban because of the
donation of land for the girls’ school;
For reasons of
being a failed asylum seeker. The applicant confirmed he believes everyone will
know he applied for protection and
word will be passed around and he will be
harmed for this reason;
For reasons of
being a returnee from a Western country. The applicant said that in 2014, some
people who returned were killed. He
said he is more vulnerable;
For reasons of
being a returnee land-owner. The Tribunal referred to the applicant’s
written submissions. He said the main
reason is the fear of the Taliban. He
said his house was burned down and no one is looking after the land now. He
said that his
[relative] has also departed and gone to Pakistan.
applicant confirmed these are the grounds he claims for protection.
Tribunal also referred the applicant to country information which it considered
is adverse to the applicant’s claims for
protection and invited the
applicant to respond to it. The applicant referred to the country information
in the delegate’s
decision record and that the delegate did not find
country information indicating the Taliban target those who support women or
education. It also referred to country information indicating the
mere fact that someone has been absent from Afghanistan and then
returning, does
not give rise to a real chance of serious harm. The Tribunal also referred to
country information indicating that
Afghans being involuntarily returned but
DFAT reports it is not aware of such persons being harmed.
Tribunal also put it to the applicant that country information indicates that
there is some instability and generalised violence
such as bombings in Kabul,
however, it appeared this is something that everyone faces. It invited the
applicant to comment on this.
He replied that there are bombings and suicide
bombings everywhere in Afghanistan. He said that in his case, he has had an
with the Taliban and he escaped and his situation is therefore different.
He said he would not be able to support his wife and children.
respect of relocation, the applicant told the Tribunal he believes that if he
goes to any other part of the country there are a
lot of Taliban spies and
informants and he would be in danger.
a 15 minute natural justice adjournment, the hearing resumed.
applicant’s representative submitted that she is in the process of
preparing another statutory declaration which sets out
the killing of the
applicant’s [relative] some 10 months ago. She said this would be
submitted within 7 days. The agent also
referred to country information set out
in the written pre-hearing submission.
Tribunal asked the agent to explain the relevance of the reference in the
pre-hearing submission to the rise of the Islamic State
(IS) in the area. She
submitted this shows that there is a fluid situation in Afghanistan. She also
submitted that it would be
difficult to predict how the Taliban might react to
IS and whether it might make the Taliban more moderate or more radical. She
submitted that this highlights that the applicant fears harm as a returnee from
a country, namely Australia, which opposes IS.
applicant’s agent also submitted that the applicant will have been in
Australia for three years this July and that there
would be subtle indicators
that he was different to the other population. She referred to the case of
Zainullah Naser (p.18 of the
written submission) where the party was found with
an Australian Driver’s licence in his wallet and this attracted adverse
22 April 2015, the Tribunal received a statutory declaration sworn by the
applicant on 21 April 2015. In this statement, the applicant
declares that
while he was on his way to Australia, his [relative] moved his family to
[Village 2] and from there to Peshawar and
that his family remain there. He
claims that one of his [relative]s was visiting his village to check on his
land, and on the situation
with the applicant’s land, and was shot dead by
unknown people. He claims the incident happened 10 months ago. He declares
believes the Taliban are responsible. He declares the security situation in
Paktia and in [his] district in particular has worsened.
He repeats that he
fears there is nowhere safe in Afghanistan and that people who know him may be
in touch with the Taliban and
that he is seen as someone who is anti-Taliban.
Independent country information
respect of the security situation in Paktia, the UNAMA 2014 annual report,
published in February 2015 records the following attacks
on civilians in Paktia
in November 2014:
On 3 November, Anti-Government Elements placed an
IED close to a restaurant in
the main bazaar of Gardez city, Paktya province. Its detonation caused 26
casualties (four deaths including one boy and 21 injured including four
boys). No party
to the conflict claimed responsibility...
On 3 November, in Gardez city, Paktya province, Anti-Government Elements
an RC-IED inside a tea thermos that subsequently detonated. The attack caused
26 civilian casualties (four deaths, including a child,
and 22 injured including
five children).
DFAT Country Report – Afghanistan - 26 March 2014 states:
2.1 There are
many areas of the country contested by insurgent forces and no part of the
country can be considered totally free from
conflict-related violence. The
situation remains fluid and any categorical assessment on the security in a
particular area could
be rendered quickly inaccurate. Although this list is not
exhaustive, contested areas are mainly in the south (including in parts
Helmand, Kandahar, Uruzgan and Zabul) and east of the country (including in
parts of Ghazni, Paktika, Khost, Paktia, Nangarhar,
Kunar and Nuristan).
Insurgents are also present in areas of western, central and northern
the post hearing submission, attention is drawn to the UNHCR 2013 Guidelines on
Afghanistan, published in August 2013, which confirm
that there has been an
increase, not a decrease, in targeting of Afghan civilians associated with the
government. It cites the following
reported to systematically target civilians who are associated with, or who
are perceived to be supporting the Afghan Government and the
international
community in Afghanistan, including the IMF and international humanitarian
development actors. As noted above, in 2012 this campaign of systematic
intensified, with UNAMA documenting the deaths of 698 civilians and the
wounding of 379 others in incidents of targeted killings or attempted
killings. The first six months of 2013 saw a further 29 increase in
casualties as a result of such attacks compared to the same period in 2012,
312 civilians killed and 131 injured. Among the primary targets of such
attacks are
national and local political leaders, government officials, teachers and
other civil
servants, off-duty police officers, tribal elders, religious leaders, women
public sphere, civilians accused of spying for pro-government forces,
rights activists, humanitarian and development workers, construction workers,
persons supporting the peace process.
UNHCR Guidelines on Afghanistan, published in August 2013, also indicate that
girls’ education facilities are still at risk
from insurgent
“Nevertheless, in 2012 UNAMA verified 74 incidents
of conflict-related violence directly
impacting access to education in all regions of the country. The vast
majority of these
incidents were attributed to AGEs, including the Taliban. These incidents
burning of schools, targeted killings and intimidation of teachers and staff,
IEDs in the
vicinity of schools, rocket attacks against educational facilities, and
closure of schools, particularly girls’
applicant has also submitted the following country information indicating the
Taliban target those involved in girls’ education,
including in Paktia
“Both the UNICEF database and the field assessment
show that the nature of physical
attacks varies from province to province. According to the incidents reported
UNICEF, arson on schools and inventory is the most common form of physical
most provinces. Paktia stands out as the exception with no arson attacks
recorded, but
exhibits a prevalence of attacks on personnel or students (8) and explosions
Explosions are also common in Herat, Khost and Kunar. Attacks on personnel
and students are more prominent in Paktia, Helmand, Paktika
applicant has also submitted that the Afghanistan Analysts Network in relation
to the Taliban’s negotiations with the Ministry
of Education, released in
June 2013 demonstrates that despite public pronouncements to the contrary,
sections of the Taliban remain
implacably opposed to girls’ education. The
AAN research appears to be consistent with the applicant’s
“The Taleban, according to a well-placed MoE source,
were divided over the issue of an
agreement with the MoE. While many Taleban were ready to allow the re-opening
schools based on the conditions listed above, others opposed it in principle
in particular bitterly opposed girls’ schools.
By contrast, according to the MoE source, the ‘foreign Taleban’
opposed the reopening
of the schools in principle and in particular opposed girl’s schools.
the MoE, the most controversial of the ‘Afghan Taleban’ demands
was the request for
curriculum changes. Within the ‘Afghan Taleban’ some has problems
with the reopening of girls schools, while others were
more amenable to the
idea, but only under certain conditions.”
respect of the attitude to girls’ education in Paktia province:
“...On paper, it looks as if female education is alive and
well in Paktia, a southeastern
province of Afghanistan. On closer examination, though, official figures show
that three quarters will drop out around half-way through
their schooling. The
pattern is partly a
reflection of an enduring prejudice against educating women, but sometimes
decision is based on real safety fears in this volatile province. The same is
true of many
other parts of Afghanistan.
Enrolment across Paktia province stands at 40,000 girls, but 31,000 of them
grades one to five of the 12-year school system. This year, there are 120 in
12th grade in the entire province. Only 75 finished high school last year,
and 15 of those went onto higher
respect to the circumstances in Kabul, the DFAT
Thematic Report –
Conditions in Kabul
– 3 October 2014 states, amongst other
2.12 Because of the city’s size and growth, Kabul
offers a greater range of employment opportunities than many other areas of
Afghanistan. Employment growth has been strongest in Kabul’s service
sector, particularly in the construction industry and
in small businesses such
as family-owned markets. Due to the significant military and government presence
in Kabul, there are also
some employment opportunities in the armed forces or
civil service.
2.13 Although there are no reliable statistics, unemployment is widespread in
Kabul and underemployment is also common. The influx
of IDPs and returnees in
the city has put pressure on the local labour market. Those who have foreign
language and computer skills
tend to be best placed to find well-paid employment
in Kabul. New arrivals to Kabul from rural areas tend to be at a disadvantage
due to their lack of skills in demand. Many of these new arrivals also lack a
network of family contacts needed to find employment.
In this situation,
employment may be irregular and often insecure–many work as relatively
poorly paid day labourers who seek
occasional work as it becomes available.
Others are required to beg or work as street-sellers.
3.13 In practice, DFAT assesses that a lack of financial resources and lack
of employment opportunities are the greatest constraints
on successful internal
relocation. This is compounded by Kabul’s relatively high cost of living,
particularly the cost of housing.
3.14 Internal relocation to urban areas is generally more successful for
single men of working age. Unaccompanied women and children
are least likely to
be able to relocate to urban areas without the assistance of family or tribal
RELEVANT LAW
criteria for a protection visa are set out in
of the Act and Schedule 2 to
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). An applicant for the visa must
meet one of the alternative criteria in s.36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c). That is,
the applicant is either a person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the ‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other
‘complementary protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same
family unit as such a person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same
Refugee criterion
36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant
for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the Minister is
satisfied Australia has protection obligations under the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status
of Refugees as amended by the 1967 Protocol relating to
the Status of Refugees (together, the Refugees Convention, or the Convention).
is a party to the Refugees Convention and generally speaking, has protection
obligations in respect of people who are refugees
as defined in Article 1 of the
Convention. Article 1A(2) relevantly defines a refugee as any person
owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group
or political opinion, is
outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is
unwilling to avail himself
of the protection of that country; or who, not having
a nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence,
unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to
91R and 91S of the Act qualify some aspects of Article 1A(2) for the purposes of
the application of the Act and the Regulations
to a particular person.
are four key elements to the Convention definition. First, an applicant must be
outside his or her country.
an applicant must fear persecution. Under s.91R(1) of the Act persecution must
involve ‘serious harm’ to the applicant
(s.91R(1)(b)), and
systematic and discriminatory conduct (s.91R(1)(c)). Examples of ‘serious
harm’ are set out in s.91R(2)
of the Act. The High Court has explained
that persecution may be directed against a person as an individual or as a
member of a group.
The persecution must have an official quality, in the sense
that it is official, or officially tolerated or uncontrollable by the
authorities of the country of nationality. However, the threat of harm need not
be the product of government policy; it may be enough
that the government has
failed or is unable to protect the applicant from persecution.
persecution implies an element of motivation on the part of those who persecute
for the infliction of harm. People are persecuted
for something perceived about
them or attributed to them by their persecutors.
the persecution which the applicant fears must be for one or more of the reasons
enumerated in the Convention definition -
race, religion, nationality,
membership of a particular social group or political opinion. The phrase
‘for reasons of’
serves to identify the motivation for the
infliction of the persecution. The persecution feared need not be
attributable to a Convention reason. However, persecution for multiple
motivations will not satisfy the relevant test unless a Convention
reasons constitute at least the essential and significant motivation for the
persecution feared: s.91R(1)(a) of the Act.
an applicant’s fear of persecution for a Convention reason must be a
‘well-founded’ fear. This adds an objective
requirement to the
requirement that an applicant must in fact hold such a fear. A person has a
‘well-founded fear’ of
persecution under the Convention if they have
genuine fear founded upon a ‘real chance’ of being persecuted for a
stipulated reason. A ‘real chance’ is one that is not
remote or insubstantial or a far-fetched possibility. A person
well-founded fear of persecution even though the possibility of the persecution
occurring is well below 50 per cent.
addition, an applicant must be unable, or unwilling because of his or her fear,
to avail himself or herself of the protection of
his or her country or countries
of nationality or, if stateless, unable, or unwilling because of his or her
fear, to return to his
or her country of former habitual residence. The
expression ‘the protection of that country’ in the second limb of
1A(2) is concerned with external or diplomatic protection extended to
citizens abroad. Internal protection is nevertheless relevant
to the first limb
of the definition, in particular to whether a fear is well-founded and whether
the conduct giving rise to the fear
is persecution.
an applicant is a person in respect of whom Australia has protection obligations
is to be assessed upon the facts as they
exist when the decision is made and
requires a consideration of the matter in relation to the reasonably foreseeable
Complementary protection criterion
a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s.36(2)(a), he or she may
nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant of
a protection visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the
being removed from Australia to a receiving country, there is a real
risk that he or she will suffer significant harm: s.36(2)(aa)
complementary protection criterion’).
‘Significant
harm’ for these purposes is exhaustively defined in s.36(2A): s.5(1). A
person will suffer significant harm
if he or she will be arbitrarily deprived of
their life; or the death penalty will be carried out on the person; or the
person will
be subjected to torture; or to cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment; or to degrading treatment or punishment. ‘Cruel or
treatment or punishment’, ‘degrading treatment or punishment’,
and ‘torture’, are further defined
in s.5(1) of the Act.
are certain circumstances in which there is taken not to be a real risk that an
applicant will suffer significant harm in a
country. These arise where it would
be reasonable for the applicant to relocate to an area of the country where
there would not be
a real risk that the applicant will suffer significant harm;
where the applicant could obtain, from an authority of the country,
such that there would not be a real risk that the applicant will suffer
significant harm; or where the real risk is one
faced by the population of the
country generally and is not faced by the applicant personally: s.36(2B) of the
Section 499 Ministerial Direction
accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the Act, the
Tribunal is required to take account of policy guidelines
prepared by the
Department of Immigration –PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian - Complementary
Protection Guidelines and PAM3 Refugee
and humanitarian - Refugee Law Guidelines
– and any country information assessment prepared by the Department of
Foreign Affairs
and Trade expressly for protection status determination
purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the decision under
consideration.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
issue in this case is whether the applicant faces a real chance of persecution
for one or more of the Convention grounds now or
in the reasonably foreseeable
future if he returns to Afghanistan. If he does not, the issue then becomes
whether he meets the criteria
for complementary protection pursuant to
s.36(2)(aa) of the Act. For the following reasons, the Tribunal has concluded
matter should be remitted for reconsideration.
of reference
regard to the taskera provided to the Department by the applicant, and having
regard to the applicant’s ability to speak
the Pashto language fluently,
the Tribunal accepts the applicant’s identity is as he claims it is. The
Tribunal accepts that
the applicant is a national of Afghanistan.
on the above, the Tribunal finds that the country of reference for the
assessment of refugee claims, and the receiving country
for the assessment of
complementary protection claims, in this case is Afghanistan.
the evidence before it, the Tribunal finds the applicant does not have a present
right to enter and reside in any other country
than Afghanistan. The Tribunal
therefore finds the applicant is not prevented from protection in Australia by
s.36(3) of the Act.
Credibility issues
Tribunal accepts that the mere fact that a person claims fear of persecution for
a particular reason does not establish either
the genuineness of the asserted
fear or that it is “well-founded” or that it is for the reason
claimed. It remains for
the applicant to satisfy the Tribunal that he or she
satisfies all of the required statutory elements. Although the concept of onus
of proof is not appropriate to administrative inquiries and decision-making, the
relevant facts of the individual case will have
to be supplied by the applicant
himself or herself, in as much detail as is necessary to enable the Tribunal to
establish the relevant
facts. A decision-maker is not required to make the
applicant’s case for him or her. Nor is the Tribunal required to accept
uncritically any and all the allegations made by an applicant. (
(1997) 191 CLR 559
Nagalingam v MILGEA
[1992] FCA 470
Prasad v MIEA
[1985] FCA 47
(1985) 6 FCR 155
at 169-70.)
determining whether an applicant is entitled to protection in Australia, the
Tribunal must first make findings of fact on the applicant’s
claims. This
may involve an assessment of the applicant’s credibility and, in doing so,
the Tribunal is aware of the need
and importance of being sensitive to the
difficulties asylum seekers often face. Accordingly, the Tribunal notes that the
of the doubt should be given to asylum seekers who are generally
credible, but unable to substantiate all of their claims.
Tribunal is not required to accept uncritically any or all allegations made by
an applicant. In addition, the Tribunal is not
required to have rebutting
evidence available to it before it can find that a particular factual assertion
by an applicant has not
been established. Nor is the Tribunal obliged to accept
claims that are inconsistent with the independent evidence regarding the
situation in the applicant’s country of nationality (See
[1994] FCA 1253
(1994) 52 FCR 437
at 451, per Beaumont J;
Selvadurai v MIEA &
[1994] FCA 1105
(1994) 34 ALD 347
at 348 per Heerey J and
Kopalapillai v MIMA
[1998] FCA 1126
(1998) 86 FCR 547).
On the other hand, if the Tribunal makes an adverse finding
in relation to a material claim made by an applicant, but is unable
to make that
finding with confidence, it must proceed to assess the claim on the basis that
the claim might possibly be true (See
MIMA v Rajalingam
[1999] FCA 719
(1999) 93 FCR
Tribunal carefully considered the applicant’s written and oral claims and
submissions. It observed he gave clear and detailed
sworn oral evidence at the
hearing. It perceived no evidence of exaggeration, or fabrication of his
claims. It has found the applicant’s
claims to be consistent over the
period of his protection application process. The Tribunal also finds that the
applicant’s
claims are generally supported by credible independent country
information. For these reasons, and having regard to all of the evidence
Tribunal finds the applicant’s evidence to be reliable and
Assessment of protection claims
set out above, the applicant summarised his ground for protection are, in
summary, his imputed political opinion and a perception
that he is anti-Taliban
because of the donation of land for the girls’ school; for reasons of
being a failed asylum seeker;
for reasons of being a returnee from a Western
country; and for reasons of being a returnee land-owner.
Tribunal first considered the applicant’s claim that he will be targeted
because his father donated land for the purpose
of building a girls’
school in his home village. He claimed that this father was murdered by the
Taliban on his way home after
signing the transfer of the land. Having regard
to all of the country information which indicates the extremism of the Taliban,
and in particular the country information cited above in respect of Taliban
attitude to the education of girls, the Tribunal is not
able to dismiss as
implausible, or even remote, the possibility that the Taliban in the
applicant’s part of [location] became
aware of the donation of the land
for the girls’ school, and as a result of its opposition to the education
of girls murdered
the applicant’s father as described by the applicant.
applicant claimed that shortly after his father’s killing, he was required
to attend at the relevant government office and
sign for the transfer of the
land. The Tribunal put it to the applicant that it was having some difficulty
understanding why he
would have been required to sign the land transfer again
when his father had already signed it. The applicant replied that he was
required to sign because he would have otherwise been the inheritor of the
relevant land. He said that he signed for the land transfer
and also indicated
his father’s wish was for the land to be used for a girls’ school.
The applicant advised that any
documents he had to evidence this second signing
were lost when his house was burned down. While the Tribunal had some initial
signing unusual, having considered it further, it finds it
plausible that the
applicant was required to sign documents to finalise the land transfer in view
of his father’s recent murder.
The Tribunal therefore accepts that the
applicant was required to sign documents to finalise the donation of the land
for the purpose
of the girls’ school and that this act became known to the
Taliban in his area.
regard to the power, and influence of the Taliban in Paktia as indicated by
country information cited in this decision record,
and having regard to the
country information about the attitude of the Taliban towards the education of
girls in that area, the Tribunal
considers it is plausible that the applicant
would be seized and detained by the Taliban for his part in the donation of the
as claimed by the applicant. Having regard to the Tribunal’s
assessment of the applicant’s credibility as a truthful
witness, and to
the consistent claims he has made, the Tribunal accepts his claims that after
his father’s funeral he received
a letter from the Taliban and that on
that same day as the letter was delivered, he was taken away and detained for an
extended period
Tribunal accepts the applicant’s explanation of the period of his
detention as plausible and credible. It also accepts
his explanation of how he
managed to escape the detention to save his life.
regard to the Tribunal’s assessment of the credibility of the applicant as
an honest and reliable witness, and having
regard to the country information
cited in this decision, the Tribunal concludes it is satisfied that the
applicant was seriously
harmed for reasons of his father’s, and his
perceived role in the donation of land for use in providing a school for girls
in the applicant’s village in Afghanistan. The Tribunal finds that in
light of the evidence, it is satisfied that the applicant’s
identity is
known to the Taliban in Paktia. It finds that although the land was donated in
2010, having regard to the recent country
information, the Tribunal cannot
dismiss the possibility that the applicant would still be targeted for his role
in the donation
of the land, as fanciful or remote. The Tribunal places
significant weight on the country information from the UNHCR cited above
refers to numerous incidents of conflict-related violence directly impacting
access to education in all regions of the country.
The vast majority of these
incidents were attributed to AGEs, including the Taliban. These incidents
included burning of schools,
targeted killings and intimidation of teachers and
staff, IEDs in the vicinity of schools, rocket attacks against educational
facilities,
and closure of schools, particularly girls’ schools.
regard to this country information, and to the circumstances of the applicant in
being identified as the person who enabled
the donation of the land for the
girls’ school, the Tribunal is satisfied that there is a real chance the
applicant was face
serious harm of a kind contemplated by s.91R(2) and
s.91R(1)(b) now or in the reasonably foreseeable future if he returns to his
village in Afghanistan. The Tribunal is also satisfied that the
applicant’s perceived anti-Taliban or pro-government political
would be the essential and significant motivating reason behind the harm the
applicant would face and that it satisfies s.91R(1)(a).
Finally, the Tribunal
finds that the applicant himself will be the person targeted and the persecution
directed at him will be
systematic and discriminatory and satisfies s.91R(1)(c)
of the Act.
found that the applicant faces a real chance of serious harm for reasons of his
imputed political opinion if he returns to
his village, the Tribunal then
considered relocation to another part of Afghanistan. The ‘internal
was accepted by the Full Federal Court in 1994 in
Randhawa v MILGEA
the basis that ‘[t]he focus of the Convention definition is not upon the
protection that the country of nationality might
be able to provide in some
particular region, but upon a more general notion of protection by that
Chief Justice reasoned that:
If it were otherwise, the anomalous
situation would exist that the international community would be under an
obligation to provide
protection outside the borders of the country of
nationality even though real protection could be found within those
High Court has confirmed as a general proposition that, depending on the
circumstances of the particular case, it may be reasonable
for an applicant to
relocate in their country to a region where, objectively, there is no
appreciable risk of the occurrence of the
persecution.
Similarly, it may be reasonable for an applicant to remain in a place in that
country where he or she will be
in determining whether an applicant is a person in respect of whom Australia has
protection obligations, it may be necessary
to consider whether the applicant
might reasonably relocate to or remain in a region within their country, free of
the risk of persecution.
Tribunal considered the country information as to the conditions in Kabul and
whether it would be reasonable for the applicant
to relocate there. The
Tribunal accepts the applicant is married and has [children]. It accepts his
evidence that he has [done
work] in Afghanistan, but he does not otherwise have
significant qualifications or skills. It finds that he will be under
significant
pressure to provide for his wife and family as they would be
expected to join him in Kabul. The Tribunal finds that the applicant’s
mother and father are deceased, and he has no siblings in Afghanistan. The
Tribunal finds that the applicant has no place to live
in Kabul and no
employment. Having regard to his circumstances, the Tribunal considers there is
a very good chance that he and his
family would end up in an IDP camp in Kabul.
The Tribunal does not accept that such an outcome is reasonable for the
While the country information indicates that the applicant might be
able to benefit from the anonymity offered by Kabul, the Tribunal
does not find
the relocation of the applicant to Kabul would be reasonable in his
circumstances.
the reasons given above, the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant is a
person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the
Refugees Convention. Therefore the applicant satisfies the criterion set out in
s.36(2)(a).
the Tribunal has found the applicant faces a well founded fear of persecution by
the Taliban now or in the reasonably foreseeable
future in Afghanistan for
reasons of his actual or imputed political opinion due to his role in the
donation of land for a girls’
school, it is not necessary for it to
consider the other grounds he has submitted in his protection claims. Further,
it is not necessary
for the Tribunal to consider whether the applicant meets the
criteria for complementary protection.
Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the direction that the
applicant satisfies
Migration Act
Tony Caravella
One Biswa =
Jerib = 10,000m2
UNAMA Afghanistan (February 2015), Annual Report 2014; Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict, pg 44 and
Guidelines, Afghanistan, August 2013, pg
Marit Glad,
Knowledge on Fire: Attacks on Education in Afghanistan; Risks and Measures
Successful Mitigation (CARE/World Bank/Afghan Ministry of Education,
2009),pg 29
Giustozzi and Franco: “The Ongoing Battle for the Schools: Uprisings,
Negotiations and Taleban Tactics” p
http://aan-afghanistan.com/uploads/20130610_AAN_Taleban_and_Schools_FINAL.pdf
Daud Khan, 28th June 2013, “Girls’ education cut short in South East
Afghan Province” Global Voices
https://iwpr.net/global-voices/girls-education-cut-short-southeast-afghan-province
Also known as the ‘internal flight alternative’ and ‘internal
protection alternative’.
[1994] FCA 1253
(1994) 52 FCR 437
[1994] FCA 1253
(2007) 233 CLR 18
SZFDV v MIAC
[2007] HCA 41
(2007) 233 CLR
[2014] HCA 45
(2014) 314 ALR 514.
RTF format (220 KB)
Signed PDF/A format