Gillies & Batt [2025] FedCFamC2F 1130 (19 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Gillies & Batt
[2025] FedCFamC2F
File number(s):
DGC 3268 of 2023
Judgment of:
JUDGE GLASS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PARENTING – Where
the child live with the mother and spend no time with or communicate with the
father – where
the father’s evidence is inconsistent – where
the father’s use of cannabis and family violence poses an unacceptable
risk to the mother and child’s safety
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
Adamson & Adamson
[2014] FamCAFC 232
(2014) FLC 93-622
Bielen & Kozma
[2022] FedCFamC1A 221
(2022) FLC 94-123
Carlson & Fluvium
[2012] FamCA 32
Cizek & Mihov
[2024] FedCFamC1A 151
(2024) FLC 94-206
Darmadi & Binjori
[2023] FedCFamC1A 29
(2023) FLC 94-136
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Keane & Keane & Another
[2021] FamCAFC 1
(2021) 62 Fam LR 190
Kuhl v Zurich Financial Services Australia Limited
[2011] HCA 11
(2011) 243 CLR
Lainhart & Ellinson
[2023] FedCFamC1A 200
(2023) FLC 94-166
Lancaster & Danton
(2024) FLC 94-228
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
5-7 August 2025
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Bramham Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Johnstone and Reimer Lawyers
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Bentleigh Family Lawyers
DGC 3268 of 2023
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
JUDGE GLASS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
previous parenting orders be hereby discharged.
Mother have sole parental responsibility for making decisions in relation to
major long-term issues for the child X born in 2016.
live with the Mother.
not spend time or communicate with the Father.
appointment of the Independent Children's Lawyer be discharged.
extant applications be dismissed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE GLASS
proceedings concern X who is now eight years old.
lives with his mother, Ms Batt, and does not currently spend time with his
father, Mr Gillies.
is agreed that Ms Batt will have sole parental responsibility for X and that X
will continue to live with her.
Gillies proposes that X commence spending professionally supervised time with
him, increasing to a single unsupervised overnight
period each fortnight in
March 2026, and to two nights each alternate weekend in 2027. The particulars of
his proposal are contained
in Exhibit A1.
Batt and the Independent Children’s Lawyer propose that X continue to
spend no time and have no communication with Mr Gillies.
parties rely on the documents identified in their Outlines of Case.
applications fall to be determined by reference to
(Cth). I am guided by the objects of that
X’s best interests are
the paramount consideration.
determining those best interests, I am to consider the matters prescribed by
section 60CC
of the Act.
General Evidentiary Issues
courts generally refrain from making specific adverse credit findings against
parties if the disposition of the case can legitimately
be achieved otherwise.
In parenting proceedings adverse credit findings are only necessary to determine
real issues joined between
Credit findings are apt to
inflame passion rather than quell
controversy.
Regrettably,
two central issues arise for determination in these proceedings that require
general findings of credit to be made. The
first is the extent of Mr
Gillies’ cannabis use and whether it poses an unacceptable risk to
X’s safety. The second is
the extent of Mr Gillies’ use of family
violence and whether it poses an unacceptable risk to X’s safety.
Gillies failed to adduce ordered expert evidence to assist in the determination
of the first issue. He failed to call evidence
from other lay witnesses who
would assist the Court determine both issues. Significantly, he denied extensive
reports made to Victoria
Police and child protection authorities, which would
constitute contemporary materials that would ordinarily form the preferred basis
for judicial findings.
Because the
authors of those documents and the reporters to those authorities did not give
direct evidence, I am left with no alternative
but to reach general conclusions
Gillies’ oral evidence was replete with internal inconsistencies. He was
repeatedly encouraged to think carefully about his
answers before he gave them.
Nevertheless, he commonly gave an initial answer to a question and subsequently
contradicted himself
shortly thereafter.
relation to the first central issue arising for determination, he gave the
following inconsistent evidence:
COUNSEL FOR [MS BATT]: Are there occasions when you take cannabis in the morning
instead of – or during daytime instead of
[MR GILLIES]: No.
COUNSEL FOR [MS BATT]: It’s always night time is it?
[MR GILLIES]: Yes. Unless, like, if I had a really, really stressful day, you
know, then, you know – yes, if I needed to sleep
through the day or if my
pattern was changed or – you know what I mean, or something like that.
That’s about it.
further example was Mr Gillies’ evidence in relation to driving a vehicle.
It included the following:
COUNSEL FOR [MS BATT]: You don’t drive at all?
[MR GILLIES]: No, I don’t drive. No.
COUNSEL FOR [MS BATT]: Not at all?
[MR GILLIES]: No.
COUNSEL FOR [MS BATT]: Okay. And...?
[MR GILLIES]: Especially not with the kids in the car.
HIS HONOUR: Do you drive in general?
[MR GILLIES]: I do drive, yes. I drive a car, yes.
example was when he was asked about a police report of a discussion with his
COUNSEL FOR [MS BATT]: When the police attended, they spoke with your mother.
She stated that the medication was affecting your behaviour
and – and you
were right before, you were drinking, yes?
[MR GILLIES]: What medications are you referring to?
COUNSEL FOR [MS BATT]: I’m just reading it. Yes?
[MR GILLIES]: I wasn’t on any medication in those years anyway.
HIS HONOUR: You weren’t on any medication?
[MR GILLIES]: No, on the years she’s talking about. So I’m...
HIS HONOUR: So that’s another lie from your mother is it?
[MR GILLIES]: The medication my mother reported that I was on back during this
incident; I wasn’t on no medication. I was on
HIS HONOUR: Right. So she was lying?
[MR GILLIES]: Yes. I wasn’t on medication. Yes
COUNSEL FOR [MS BATT]: So she was lying. All right. Okay?
[MR GILLIES]: I could have been – that could have been when I was on
Mirtazapine, possibly, from my doctor because I was on
antidepressants and
things like that, and they had me on mirtazapine. I can’t exactly confirm
When the issue was sought to be further clarified with him, he claimed that he
didn’t know whether he was on medication at
passages are but three of many in which Mr Gillies gave a definitive answer to a
question, was given opportunities to clarify
it, then gave completely
inconsistent evidence. Despite such inconsistencies being pointed out to Mr
Gillies, and him being repeatedly
asked to consider his evidence before giving
it, he continued to give inconsistent oral evidence.
in his written evidence, Mr Gillies was untruthful. Despite being afforded
opportunities to correct that evidence orally, he
failed to correct those
inaccuracies prior to being cross-examined on them.
Gillies deposes: “
I reside in a four-bedroom home in [Town B] with my
partner [Ms C] and our three
Inconsistently, he
gave oral evidence that he lives in a two-bedroom home. He blamed his solicitor
for the error.
Gillies deposes that:
A concern that [the Department of Families, Fairness and Housing] had with me
was that I had been casually using cannabis. I was
using cannabis as a way to
keep my anxiety and poor sleep under control. I completed a significant amount
of drug tests during the
time that they were involved. There were a couple of
tests that I failed due to smoking
He ultimately accepted in oral evidence that there were significantly more than
a couple of tests that he failed. He accepted there
were multiple tests that
were positive for cannabis and that he failed to undertake multiple drug screens
upon request from the Department.
Gillies also deposes that after breaching an Intervention Order in 2018, he has
not been charged with any criminal offences or breaches of an
Intervention Order.
Inconsistently, he gave oral evidence that in 2023 he was charged with the
assault of a police office. He sought to explain the inconsistency
by suggesting
that his evidence related only to criminal offences involving Ms Batt. His
written evidence was clearly not so limited.
the multiple internal inconsistencies in Mr Gillies’ evidence, it is
impossible for me to generally accept it. The deficiencies
are not ameliorated
by his submission that the “
years between aged 16 and 22 are turbulent
for people and they don’t have a perfect memory of what
having a baby in that period is a very
challenging experience for anybody of that age
”. He submits that he
could be forgiven for his failures in memory and those inconsistencies. It is
immaterial to this determination
whether he could be so forgiven. I am required
to decide justiciable disputes by conventional adversarial procedure between
litigants on the available evidence according to
contrast, Ms Batt’s evidence was given carefully and thoughtfully. When
she was challenged on whether particular events occurred,
she gave compelling
evidence of further particulars for each episode. The only inconsistency in her
evidence which she freely admitted
was her affidavit evidence that
[d]uring [the Department of Families, Fairness and Housing]'s
involvement with our family, between 2016 and 2019, I undertook all
assessments,
programs, and counselling recommended by
She accepted
that she was not initially co-operative with the Department, and only became so
subsequently. There was nothing about
the manner in which she gave her evidence
that suggested to me that it was in any way unreliable. No submission was made
to the contrary.
accordingly generally prefer Ms Batt’s evidence to Mr Gillies’.
What arrangements would promote the safety (including safety
from being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, abuse, neglect,
other harm) of X and each person who has care of him (whether or not a person
has parental responsibility for the X)
Gillies has used cannabis from at least the age of 18 years. Ms Batt’s
unchallenged evidence is that she saw him regularly
smoke cannabis during their
relationship and recalls “
rarely seeing him
She also gives
unchallenged evidence that Mr Gillies becomes “
unpredictable, erratic
and violent under the influence of alcohol or
her evidence.
Gillies admits being intoxicated in 2016 at the time of X’s birth. Child
protection authorities then required him to undertake
urine drug screens. His
first test was undertaken in October 2016, detecting “[
h]igh levels of
His test in
October 2016 revealed
“[s]ignificant increase in cannabis use: levels
failed to undertake required testing in October 2016. His next test in October
2016 revealed “
Levels over
January 2019, Mr Gillies attended child protection offices. It is reported
[Mr Gillies] refused to provide voluntary drug screens, although consistently
advised me he was not using substances. [Mr Gillies]
was sighted [in] January at
the office. Multiple staff suspected [Mr Gillies] to be substance effected due
to mumbled speech which
was difficult to understand, red, blood shot and glassy
eyes and a considerable amount of weight lost in the face since the most
court date.
that month, child protection authorities report that “
[in] January that
[Mr Gillies] has requested to purchase Cannabis and MDMA on a Facebook group and
evidence of this has been sent
January and June 2019, child protection authorities made 57 requests of Mr
Gillies to undertake urine drug screens. He failed
or refused to do so on each
occasion. In February 2019, he was observed to dispose of documents from child
protection authorities
to undertake drug screening in the bin at Court. It is
reported that:
To date, [Mr Gillies] has not addressed the protective concerns. [Mr Gillies]
has provided 0 drug screens despite being directed
and screens being sent to [Mr
Gillies] on multiple occasions. [Mr Gillies] stated that the reason for not
completing screens was
due to being "too busy" and has stated that he "doesn't
feel comfortable having old birds looking at his cock" and "doesn't want
year old woman supervising him". [Mr Gillies] stated prior to court on the last
occasion that he would provide 1 screen for
court to which he did not provide,
and has recently stated the same for the upcoming court
Gillies now consumes cannabis. He gave evidence that he does so to help him
sleep. He has prescriptions for cannabis from several
with his conduct during child protection authority involvement, he has failed to
comply with Orders of this Court with
respect to drug screening.
was ordered to undertake hair follicle drug screening forthwith pursuant to
interim consent Orders made 28 July 2025. He failed
to attend the appointment
scheduled for him by the Independent Children’s Lawyer on 4 August 2025. I
accordingly have no forensic
medical evidence of Mr Gillies’ current
consumption of cannabis.
Gillies has undertaken previous hair follicle testing. In November 2023, he
produced a sample which detected cannabinoids, being
more than 90.0 pg / 10mg of
CarboxyTHC. That was 90 times more than the confirmation cut off for the screen.
In September 2024, he
also produced a sample that detected more than 100pg /
10mg of Delta 9 CarboxyTHC. That was 100 times more than the confirmation
December 2024, the Family Report writer, Ms D, opined that:
[Mr Gillies] needs to provide a report from a Melbourne GP who he attends in
regard to his medicinal marijuana. Such a report also
needs to address the
dosage prescribed, then [Mr Gillies] should do a hair follicle test so a
comparison can be made as to the prescribed
quantity compared to the actual
quantity as shown in a hair follicle test result. It would assist the Court for
[Mr Gillies]’
GP to write a brief report as to whether his prescribed
medical marijuana is all the quantity shown in the results of a hair follicle
test. It would also be helpful to have an account as to when the prescribed
marijuana started and the reason for such. In addition,
it would assist if the
GP is able to provide information as to whether [Mr Gillies]’ parenting
capacity would be impacted from
the use of this medicinal marijuana.
[Mr Gillies] must arrange for his GP to write a report to include why [Mr
Gillies] takes medicinal marijuana, as well as the dosage.
[Mr Gillies] must do
a hair follicle test with the results provided to his GP for clarification that
the amount of marijuana shown
on the hair follicle test coincides with the
prescribed dosage.
Gillies has produced no medical reports which seek to compare the levels
detected in his hair follicle tests with his prescribed
cannabis. I am without
evidence as to whether the levels detected are consistent with his prescriptions
7 March 2024, the Court made the following Order:
Within 21 days the father shall file and serve an affidavit annexing a report
from his General Practitioner addressing the following:
medical diagnosis and the reasons for being prescribed with medicinal marijuana;
possible side effects of medicinal marijuana; and
of the medicinal marijuana upon father’s functioning and capacity to
provide care for the child.
Mr Gillies has failed to comply with that Order at any time.
absence of the recommended and ordered medical evidence is significant in light
of Mr Gillies’ oral evidence that he has
recently smoked cannabis. I
am not satisfied, in the sense of feeling an actual
persuasion,
that his use of the
” is consistent with him only using a vaporiser
as he later sought to assert. His evidence in relation to smoking cannabis was
as follows:
HIS HONOUR: You can’t tell the court that is deciding the case about your
son’s best interests when you take cannabis?
[MR GILLIES]: I can’t say I smoked it Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday
and Friday. But I can’t exactly recall every
single day. Your Honour,
I’ve had a lot of things happening
HIS HONOUR: You smoke it too, do you?
[MR GILLIES]: Pardon?
HIS HONOUR: You smoke it too, do you?
[MR GILLIES]: I thought that’s what you said, your Honour. “I smoke
HIS HONOUR: Take cannabis, I said. You said “smoke”. I’m
asking you now. Do you smoke it?
[MR GILLIES]: No, your Honour. I don’t.
HIS HONOUR: Why would you say you can’t tell me when you smoke it?
[MR GILLIES]: I use it in tea. I was – normally people do smoke cannabis.
It’s a referral as I was saying it. Figure
HIS HONOUR: I’m not interested in anybody else, [Mr Gillies]?
[MR GILLIES]: I can understand that.
HIS HONOUR: When did you last smoke cannabis?
[MR GILLIES]: Not yesterday. The day before. I use cannabis in a tea.
HIS HONOUR: When did you last smoke it?
[MR GILLIES]: Smoke cannabis? It’s been a while, your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: When?
[MR GILLIES]: Over six months. 12 months. Six to 12 months.
HIS HONOUR: So during the course of these proceedings you have been smoking
[MR GILLIES]: At home. As prescribed by my doctor, yes. Because I’m
allowed to smoke it in a dry herb vaporiser.
HIS HONOUR: Let me just be really crystal clear. Your doctor has prescribed
cannabis for you to smoke?
[MR GILLIES]: In a dry herb vaporiser. It’s a medical approved device.
can be seen, Mr Gillies initially referred to smoking cannabis. He then denied
smoking it. He then claimed to have smoked it in
a vaporiser as prescribed. The
inconsistencies in those answers leave me with no confidence in his
uncorroborated evidence in relation
to his cannabis use.
Gillies has produced a letter from one of his doctors which reports that he is
prescribed medical cannabis due to his unspecified
chronic medical
report records the following:
The impairment duration of cannabis medications may only apply to THC containing
medications: 6-8 hours for oral or capsulated medications
and 2-4 hours for
inhaled medications.
Regardless of dosages, this patient has been advised not to drive, operate heavy
machinery and/or
care for minors
(emphasis added)
Gillies denied that he had ever been advised not to care for minors while
impaired on cannabis. He gave inconsistent evidence as
to whether or not he had
read the letter attached to his own affidavit.
of the prescriptions cited by the doctor’s report are described as
containing THC. Accordingly, according to that report,
Mr Gillies has been
advised not to care for minors for six to eight hours post ingestion of oral or
capsulated medications which
he claims to be the only ones he currently
Mr Gillies’ own evidence, he consumes cannabis both during the daytime and
at night time, despite asserting that he equally
cares for the three children he
has with his partner. Mr Gillies did not call his partner to give evidence. I
infer that her evidence
would not have assisted
Given my findings in
relation to Mr Gillies’ credibility, I decline to accept his
uncorroborated evidence that he uses cannabis
during the day “
once a month
medical evidence, such as it is, supports the conclusion that Mr Gillies has
been advised not to care for children after consuming
cannabis products. He uses
cannabis both during the day and at night time. His capacity to care for
children is impaired for six
hours thereafter. Mr Gillies proposes no restraint
on him using cannabis or other substances prior to or during any time X were to
spend with him. He makes no proposal for any other person to care for X in the
event he is impaired due to cannabis use during any
time X spends with him.
Child Impact Report writer, Ms E, opines that:
Parents struggling with drug dependencies typically have trouble prioritising
their children’s needs. Their emotional availability
may be reduced, and
their mood and affect may be unstable and inconsistent. Drug dependency can also
be associated with increased
antisocial and criminal behaviour, and lifestyle
factors that present risk to
safety is at unacceptable risk of being neglected in Mr Gillies’ care due
to his cannabis use. I accept Ms Batt’s
submission that while he is
impaired by cannabis, he could cause serious psychological or emotional harm to
Any history of family violence, abuse or neglect involving X
or a person caring for X (whether or not the person had parental responsibility
Batt gives unchallenged evidence that, during their relationship, Mr Gillies
was always quick to get angry at [X] and would yell and swear at him
and throw things
I accept her
2021, X reported to Ms Batt that if he went near to a puddle his father would
X also told Ms
Batt, her mother, and his kindergarten teacher that his father told him
if he jumped in a puddle [Mr Gillies] would punch him in the
Ms Batt was not
challenged on her evidence. I accept the accuracy of X’s reported threats
made to him by his father.
Family Violence towards Ms Batt
Batt’s evidence of Mr Gillies committing family violence towards her was
in large part unchallenged. Mr Gillies’ challenges
to some aspects of that
evidence were ineffectual. Given my findings in relation to Mr Gillies’
evidence generally, I reject
his blanket denial of having perpetrated family
violence other than on those occasions for which he received a criminal
conviction.
I accept Ms Batt’s evidence.
their relationship, Mr Gillies demanded to borrow money from Ms Batt for his
personal expenses and did not repay her. This
often left her without enough
money for her and X’s expenses. He accordingly unreasonably denied the
financial autonomy Ms
Batt would otherwise have had. I am satisfied his conduct
in that respect constitutes economic or financial abuse. I am satisfied
was behaviour that controlled Ms Batt and accordingly amounts to family
Gillies isolated Ms Batt from her family. He told her that it was her mother and
family members’ fault that child protection
authorities had become
involved. He would not permit Ms Batt to see her family members without him
being present as he controlled
her. His behaviour amounts to preventing Ms Batt
from keeping connections with her family and I find it to comprise family
given it involved controlling
Gillies often yelled at Ms Batt, swore at her, and called her names. He called
often got close to her face and screamed at her causing her to feel very scared.
He spat on her face on at least one occasion.
These repeated derogatory taunts
and other behaviour caused fear and constitutes family
Batt repeatedly tried to end her relationship with Mr Gillies. He often
threatened to kill himself if she did not return to him.
If he became upset
while driving, he would drive dangerously over the speed limit with Ms Batt in
the car while screaming at her.
In May 2016, Ms Batt left with the assistance of
police. Afterwards, Mr Gillies smashed her phone. I find such behaviour caused
Batt fear and is accordingly family violence.
Batt deposes that:
In 2016, when I was [...] pregnant with [X], the Father drove away from a petrol
station without paying for the petrol. The [p]olice
found him and pursued him.
The Father drove fast away from them until he hit a bridge which sent the car
out of control and into
Gillies put to Ms Batt that the incident did not take place. She gave compelling
further evidence that:
... it happened. We were in a [motor vehicle] – and we went into a side of
the school, where he proceeded to help me over a
chain link fence so that we
wouldn’t get caught. I told him to leave me in the vehicle, as I thought I
had lost my son.
formed the clear impression that Ms Batt was accurately relaying accurate
details of the event. I accept her evidence.
Batt deposes to Mr Gillies talking “
hurting himself
” at times during the
relationship.
Mr Gillies put to
Ms Batt in cross-examination that he denies ever voicing suicidal thoughts. She
maintained her evidence and gave
unchallenged evidence that:
I have text messages from [Mr Gillies] and messenger messages that would state
So [Mr Gillies] has specified that he would kill himself in regards to –
if something with the [D]epartment hadn’t gone
his way or in regards to
just in general things not going [Mr Gillies]’way.
accept her evidence.
Batt was asked questions about an incident in 2017 when Mr Gillies was very
intoxicated after attending his sister’s father’s
funeral. She
When he returned to his parents' house, he was very upset and went to take a
shower. His mother asked me to follow him to make sure
he did not try to harm
himself. I found him in the shower clutching a photo from the funeral and
visibly very upset. When I tried
to comfort him, he spat in my face. When he
came out of the shower he started demanding car keys from various family
members. He
was frantic and he kept telling me that he wanted to just take [X]
for a drive with him. I was very concerned that the Father was
suicidal, and
that he would hurt [X]. He was clearly not safe to drive in his emotional and
intoxicated state. I was able to hide
the kids away in another room, and his
family members did not allow him to take any of the cars. Ultimately, the police
were called
and deescalated the
questions asked of Ms Batt about the incident did not successfully impugn her
evidence. I accept it. I find that Mr Gillies spat
in Ms Batt’s face on
that occasion.
Batt deposes that in 2016, when she was pregnant with X, Mr Gillies
held a knife to [her] pregnant belly and threatened to cut [X] out and
run away with him.
Batt was asked about Mr Gillies’ denial of the evidence. She gave further
compelling oral evidence, which I accept, that:
[Mr Gillies] was possibly intoxicated, or under the effects of something. He
came into our bedroom at the time, when we were living
at [Ms F]’s, with a
knife and held it underneath my stomach, saying that he would cut my son out
because he thought that I
was going to run with him. And he wasn’t even
the parties’ separation in late 2016, Mr Gillies harassed Ms Batt,
including calling her more than 80 times in an hour.
He smashed her phone twice.
He refused to allow her to take baby items needed for X.
November 2016, Mr Gillies took Ms Batt’s phone during an argument which
left bruising on her arm.
findings in relation to Mr Gillies’ perpetration of family violence
towards Ms Batt are consistent with child protection
authorities substantiating
harm in relation to X, in part, “
due to an incident of family violence
whereby the maternal grandparents had to intervene to protect
from Mr Gillies.
February 2018, Ms Batt and X were at Mr Gillies’ home visiting him. Ms
Batt sought to leave after an argument with Ms Batt’s
mother. She deposes
The Father then became aggressive with me, threatened me, and locked [X] in
another room of the house. As the argument progressed,
he moved to several other
rooms sometimes locking himself in with [X] and sometimes locking [X] in by
himself. [X] became quickly
distressed and was banging on the door to be let out
during this. He was also crying out, trying to get back to me. The Father then
threw a used nappy at me, hitting me in the side of the head, and threatened to
remove me from the property by any means necessary.
The Father also said that he
would not let [X] see me again until our parenting matters went to Court. I
messaged my friend [Ms G]
to come and pick me up, but then I told her not to
come because I was afraid of her being hurt by the Father. When [Ms G] arrived
the Father still would not let me hold [X]. I remember crying and falling to the
ground begging the Father to let [X] come to me.
When he refused I went outside.
A short time later [Ms G] found me in the bushes outside. She told me that she
had picked up [X],
but the Father had taken him away from her by force, and
pushed her to the ground. [Ms G] and I went back into the house after this
told the Father I would not leave him. The Father accepted this answer. When he
went to sleep, I took [X] and [Ms G] drove
[X] and I home. After a short time,
serious bruises appeared on [Ms G]’s
evidence was unchallenged by Mr Gillies. It is corroborated by photographs of
bruising which are in evidence. Ms G applied for
an Intervention Order against
Mr Gillies after the incident.
accept Ms Batt’s evidence. It is consistent with contemporaneous
materials. In March 2018, child protection authorities found
that Mr Gillies
was assessed responsible for actual harm caused as well as a
likelihood of causing harm to [X], harm for exposing [X] to a physical
of family violence, locking him in a bedroom unsupervised and [X] being struck
to the face during the
That report
is inconsistent with Mr Gillies’ evidence that child protection
authorities re-opened their file at that time “
due to concerns about
[Ms Batt’s] mental
early 2018, an Intervention Order was made requiring Mr Gillies to return to Ms
Batt her car, her belongings in her car and some
of X’s things. He failed
March 2018, in breach of an Intervention Order, Mr Gillies posted about Ms Batt
and X on social media.
mid-2018, the parties met to talk in a park. Ms Batt told Mr Gillies she would
not reconcile with him. She deposes that he then
raped her. Ms Batt was asked
compelling evidence that
We had originally met up to talk about [X]. We went to – it was –
it’s like a green area between two courts. I
refer to it as a park half of
the entire time I’ve lived there. We sat by a tree talking. I called him a
yes a “posey”, and he decided that that was
permission to push me back, get on top of me, and insert himself. It
last more than seconds before I got him off me. I’m sorry,
but I can’t accept he has denied that allegation.
Gillies put to Ms Batt the inconsistency between her report of that violent
sexual assault and her advice to Ms E, in February
2024, that Mr Gillies
had not been physically violent towards
Ms Batt gave
evidence of having had COVID at the time of the online meeting with the report
writer. When asked to explain the inconsistency,
she gave evidence
I have post-traumatic stress disorder due to trauma throughout my life.
complex post-traumatic stress disorder due to trauma throughout my life.
Memories of traumas can be very difficult for me to put
down once I pick up. So
I’m sorry if I didn’t go into extreme detail about everything. I
need to preserve my mental health
for my son.
found that evidence to be compelling. I accept it. I find that Mr Gillies raped
Ms Batt in mid-2018.
early 2019, while an Intervention Order was in force protecting Ms Batt from Mr
Gillies, he called her and told her to “
subsequently found a small stuffed toy of the fish Nemo from the movie
Finding Nemo
in her yard. She deposes that:
The Father told me that he had left it there for [X], but this made me scared
because the Father has obviously come to my house to
throw it over the fence. I
knew that he was not allowed to contact me or come to my house because of the
Final [Family Violence Intervention
Gillies’ oral evidence in relation to this issue was remarkable, firstly
for its inherent inconsistencies, but even more
significantly for its lack of
insight into the effect of his behaviour. It was as follows:
COUNSEL FOR THE INDEPENDENT CHILDREN’S LAWYER: Do you recall this
[MR GILLIES]: I remember the breach but I don’t remember the incident,
COUNSEL FOR THE INDEPENDENT CHILDREN’S LAWYER: You didn’t throw a
fish into her backyard?
[MR GILLIES]: That was accused, yes.
HIS HONOUR: You did or you didn’t do it?
[MR GILLIES]: Yes, I did throw it. Not into the backyard, to the front yard.
COUNSEL FOR THE INDEPENDENT CHILDREN’S LAWYER: You threw a fish into her
[MR GILLIES]: No, was a teddy. I put it over the fence. A soft toy, not a
COUNSEL FOR THE INDEPENDENT CHILDREN’S LAWYER: Moments ago when I –
sorry, moments ago when I asked you whether you threw
something into her
backyard, you said that was what was reported...?
[MR GILLIES]: It was reported that I put a...
COUNSEL FOR THE INDEPENDENT CHILDREN’S LAWYER: instead of saying
[MR GILLIES]: toy there, yes.
COUNSEL FOR THE INDEPENDENT CHILDREN’S LAWYER: Why don’t you say I
threw something into her front yard, not her backyard?---
[MR GILLIES]: Because I was answering the question.
COUNSEL FOR THE INDEPENDENT CHILDREN’S LAWYER: Why throw a teddy into her
front yard?
[MR GILLIES]: I think was Christmas.
COUNSEL FOR THE INDEPENDENT CHILDREN’S LAWYER: That’s your way of
giving Christmas gift to her or [X]?
[MR GILLIES]: To [X].
HIS HONOUR: This is a loving gesture towards your son, is it?
[MR GILLIES]: I left him a present.
HIS HONOUR: Is this a loving gesture towards your son?
[MR GILLIES]: I’m not sure what you mean, your Honour. Is what loving
gesture? The fact that I...
HIS HONOUR: Throwing a -?
[MR GILLIES]: gave him a toy?
HIS HONOUR: ...toy in the front yard. Is that a loving gesture?
[MR GILLIES]: Well, popping a toy, not...
HIS HONOUR: Is that a loving...?
[MR GILLIES]: No, it’s not, your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: ...gesture? So why do it?
[MR GILLIES]: I wouldn’t have been – no, obviously not clearly
thinking at that time, your Honour, and I admit my mistake.
Significantly,
this incident took place long after Mr Gillies attended 13 sessions of a
Men’s Behaviour Change Program in 2018.
Mr Gillies’ evidence
demonstrates a complete lack of insight. Insight is, to some degree predictive,
of whether there will
be a repetition of
March 2019, again while an Intervention Order protecting Ms Batt was operative,
Mr Gillies called her and told her he was around
the corner from her house. She
saw him walking past her house, apparently drinking alcohol. Mr Gillies was
unable to give any satisfactory
explanation of his presence anywhere near Ms
Batt’s property. He showed no remorse for having done so.
December 2019, also while an Intervention Order was in place for Ms Batt’s
protection, Mr Gillies approached her at a party
after becoming drunk and
was aggressive towards her. He threatened to damage her car.
Gillies otherwise breached the Intervention Order on many occasions by
her text messages
and swearing at her at court hearings.
Significantly
in light of Mr Gillies’ ongoing use of cannabis, Ms Batt deposes that Mr
Gillies’ abuse of her would worsen
when he was under the influence of
alcohol or cannabis.
Mr Gillies’ violence towards other family members
Gillies reluctantly conceded in oral evidence that he has been abusive towards
other family members. He also conceded that he has
been violent towards other
people and admitted he has been violent or abusive towards his grandmother. He
also conceded that he had
been abusive towards his own mother.
mid-2017, Victoria Police record that:
At approx. 10:40pm [Mr Gillies’ mother] has contacted 000 re [Mr Gillies]
heavily alcohol affected after attending a funeral
for his step father today and
has been punching in the walls of her house and yelling. When police attended,
[Mr Gillies] was sitting
in [his mother’s] vehicle with a friend who was
trying to calm him down, the vehicle was parked in the driveway. [Mr Gillies]
got out of the vehicle very wobbly on feet and was slurring his speech. He
stated he did not know why police were there and that
if [Mr Gillies’
mother] called to speak with her. [Mr Gillies’ mother and brother] have
stated that [Mr Gillies] has
damaged a wall and a door inside the house. They
also stated that [Mr Gillies] has been verbally abusive to [Mr Gillies’
[She] left the house as she was scared that [Mr Gillies] would escalate
the incident further. [Mr Gillies] told members that he might
‘slipped’ and put his foot through a wall when queried again as to
why police were called.
Gillies gave evidence he couldn’t recall the incident. Consistent with the
contemporaneous records and his own general admission
of being violent and
abusive, I find that Mr Gillies was verbally abusive towards his mother in
mid-2017, damaged a wall and a door
inside her house. I find that his conduct
caused her to fear for her safety.
December 2018, Victoria Police report that after receiving a call from Mr
Gillies’ sister, they attended Mr Gillies’
mother’s home. They
record that:
A verbal dispute occurred in regards to [Mr Gillies’ mother] owing [Mr
Gillies] money. [She] has told [him] that she only had
a $50 note and would pay
the money back when she broke the $50. This has angered [Mr Gillies] and the
verbal dispute has continued.
[Mr Gillies] has hit the flyscreen door cause a
minor tear in the flyscreen.
do not accept Mr Gillies’ denial of the incident. He was unable to explain
why his sister would call the police. I find Mr
Gillies to have had a verbal
dispute with his mother and damaged a flyscreen on that occasion.
mid-2019, Mr Gillies gave evidence that he was consuming a gram or two of
cannabis each week, substantially less than he now consumes.
April 2019, Mr Gillies’ sister’s partner called police after Mr
Gillies attended requesting a battery charger and banging
on front windows
demanding it. In May 2019, police were called in relation to another verbal
dispute between Mr Gillies and his mother.
In May 2019, Mr Gillies’
mother called police and reported that Mr Gillies had grabbed a baseball bat and
walked around the
house after she retrieved her mobile phone from him. In June
2019, police report that Mr Gillies became verbally abusive towards
and grandmother after his mother told him to turn his music down. Mr Gillies
denied recalling the incidents. I find the
events to have occurred as
contemporaneously recorded by police.
Police record that in August 2019, Mr Gillies, his mother, her two adolescent
daughters and her 30 year old daughter:
... were at [Mr Gillies’ mother’s] home address when an argument
occurred over [Mr Gillies] using [his mother’s]
computer without her
permission. This argument continued as [Mr Gillies] followed [his mother] in the
laundry. Whilst in the laundry
[Mr Gillies] has picked up an unknown object and
struck [his mother] in the left side of her face with it. [Mr Gillies’] 30
year old sister ran into the room and contacted 000 for Police assistance
causing [Mr Gillies] to flee over the back fence. As a
result of this incident
[Mr Gillies’ mother] has received a laceration to her left eye brow
causing bruising and her left eye
to swell shut. [Mr Gillies’ mother] was
taken to the [...] Hospital by a friend where she received medical treatment for
injuries. Police hold serious concerns for the safety and welfare of [Mr
Gillies’ mother] and believe an Intervention Order
with exclusion
conditions is essential to ensure the safety and welfare of [Mr Gillies’
mother] and the children.
Gillies denied any recollection of the incident . I find that denial to be
fanciful in light of the severity of the recorded incident
and his admission
that he recalled the Intervention Order that was subsequently issued. Mr
Gillies’ mother was present throughout
the final hearing. She was not
called to give evidence. No explanation was given for that failure. I infer her
evidence would not
have assisted Mr Gillies’
Consistent with the
contemporaneous record, I find that in August 2019, Mr Gillies struck his mother
with an object causing laceration
to her face and her left eye to swell
November 2020, Victoria Police record that Mr Gillies’ 11 year old sister
... a verbal argument took place as [Mr Gillies] was jealous about someone
talking to his girlfriend. [Mr Gillies] had walked outside
with a knife as he
was doing something.
do not accept Mr Gillies’ evidence that his sister was lying, even if she
was inaccurately recorded by police as being 11
years old when she was 14. I
find Mr Gillies to have conducted himself as reported.
June 2021, child protection authorities ascertained that Mr Gillies had
a significant history of family violence, and that he had been
recorded for 19 previous incidents between 2012 and 2020, of which
he had been
the respondent (RESP) in 18 of the
with my findings in relation to his perpetration of family violence, Mr Gillies
admitted that this significant history
could have been
previous involvement with [his] mother
July 2021, X told Ms Batt about family violence between Mr Gillies and his
partner, Ms H, including arguments and a physical confrontation.
Ms Batt was not
challenged on her evidence and I accept it.
November 2021, police record that:
[Mr Gillies] was at home in the lounge room saying offensive things about his
mother. His grandmother (...) took offense to the abusive
things he was saying
and took a swing at [Mr Gillies]. [Mr Gillies] turned around and pushed [his
grandmother] across the room. She
fell backwards to the floor and hurt her back
and bottom. [Mr Gillies’ grandmother] states [Mr Gillies] regularly
abuses her and threatens to damage or steal her property. [She] was
visibly shaken and distressed in police
light of his admission that he has been violent towards his grandmother and the
other inconsistencies in his evidence, I reject
Mr Gillies’ denial of the
allegation of pushing his grandmother to the floor. I also reject his attempt to
explain the record
by reference to his grandmother “
struggling with
dementia at the minute
”. I prefer the contemporaneous police record
and find that Mr Gillies regularly verbally abuses his grandmother, and that in
November 2021, he pushed her across the room to the floor causing her
Any family violence order that applies or has applied to X
or a member of his family
late 2016, Ms Batt applied for an Intervention Order against Mr Gillies. She
subsequently withdrew it as a result of pressure from
Mr Gillies. She was too
afraid of him to continue with the process. Child protection authorities
nevertheless continued the application
on X’s behalf, protecting him from
early 2018, police applied for an Intervention Order for the protection of Ms
Batt and X from Mr Gillies. An interim Order was
made in early 2018 and a final
Order made in Mr Gillies’ absence in early 2019 for a period of
twelve months.
Conclusions with respect to safety
the absence of recent convictions for family violence, or involvement by child
protection authorities, I am not satisfied
that Mr Gillies has shown any insight
into his perpetration of family violence. Despite having attended 13 Men’s
Change Program sessions in 2018, he has continued to perpetrate family
violence thereafter. Whatever learnings he now professes to
have acquired in the
program, they did not prevent him continuing to behave violently towards family
July 2024, the single expert witness psychologist, Ms J opined that:
... [Mr Gillies] was observed to justify and minimise his engagement in
unhelpful behaviours. Additionally, he made several comments,
which appeared to
externalise responsibility for past actions. This behaviour may be indicative of
difficulties in accountability,
insight, and
That opinion is consistent with my impression of Mr Gillies. He took no real
responsibility for his conduct. Significantly, he has
failed to undertake any
recommendations made in these proceedings to address his use of family violence.
Gillies’ extensive perpetration of family violence, his lack of insight
into it, together with his continued use of cannabis,
leads me to the conclusion
that X’s safety requires him to spend no time with his father. Put another
way, X spending time
with his father leaves him at unacceptable risk from
exposure to family violence, neglect, and other harm.
Any views expressed by X
and his parents attended upon Ms D in December 2024. She reports that:
When I went to take [X] to have an observation session with [Mr Gillies], [X]
was surprised that he was seeing his father. At that
point, [Ms Batt] said that
she had not informed [X] that this would happen. [Ms Batt] then asked [X] if he
wanted to see [Mr Gillies]
and [X] replied enthusiastically yes. [X] came
willingly to meet up with [Mr Gillies] whom he had not had contact with for two
Overall, [X] appeared to be gentle and calm as well as a sensitive child.
[X] also seemed like a “little
professor”.
also reports that:
When [X] was asked what three wishes he would like he said, “
see my dad again. Wish to have a good life. Wish to be more kind. I am kind but
I want to be more
Ms D agreed with Mr Gillies’ counsel that X’s statements represent a
fairly unequivocal statement from him about his
wish to see his father.
D also reports that:
[X] was asked how he would feel if the adults decided that he could spend some
time with [Mr Gillies] on alternate Saturdays he replied,
that’s what I would like every Saturday.
” [X] was asked how he
would feel seeing [Mr Gillies] with his half-brothers, he replied,
I’d love to be there with my
When [X] was asked if there was anything further, he would like to tell the
Judge, he replied, “
That I would really like to see my dad. That I
would like to come over to his
D facilitated a meeting between X and his father. X is reported as describing
feeling good about meeting with his father that day,
despite saying he was
a little bit scared cause [he hasn’t] seen him for a long
Ms D reports
[X] then came into the room where [Mr Gillies] was. They then verbally greeted
each other which was comfortable. [X] seemed quiet
but comfortable which
appeared to be quite quickly.
D gave oral evidence that X clearly felt okay, he felt comfortable and it
happened quite quickly compared to other children who
sometimes take longer to
be comfortable when they haven’t seen a parent for a long time. She also
gave oral evidence that X
clearly remembered his father and felt comfortable.
Independent Children’s Lawyer spoke to X on 23 July 2024. She reports
... he informed that he missed "dad", "sometimes when he doesn't hurt me, I feel
safe, pushed me in to a puddle, hurt my mum, she
told me". When asked what dad
could do to make things better, safer for him, [X] replied "he could take me out
and not push me into
a puddle". [X] remembered his dad and missed
Independent Children’s Lawyer again spoke to X on 31 July 2025 and reports
he has been consistent with his views, misses dad, wants to see
him, recalls seeing him, ‘it was
The developmental, psychological, emotional and cultural needs
suffers with Autism (level 1) and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. He
also has other mental health needs as a result of
his exposure to early life
trauma. He is engaged with a paediatrician, psychologist, speech therapist and
optometrist. He receives
additional supports at school and at home. X is not
emotionally where he should be at this point and is emotionally stunted.
The capacity of each person who has or is proposed to have
parental responsibility for X to provide for X’s developmental,
psychological,
emotional and cultural needs
Batt has been responsible for meeting X’s developmental, psychological,
emotional and cultural needs. At times, she has been
assisted by her mother in
doing so. It is to their great credit that X is happy, healthy and safe, as well
being very smart, creative
and brilliant.
is no suggestion that Ms Batt is doing anything other than an exemplary job in
attending to X’s needs. She is engaged
with supports necessary for meeting
those needs.
to interim Orders made 7 March 2024, Ms Batt has sole parental responsibility
for X. It is common ground that she will retain
that responsibility for him. Mr
Gillies is accordingly not a person who has or is proposed to have parental
responsibility for X.
The benefit to X of being able to have a relationship with
X’s parents, and other people who are significant to X, where it
is agreed that X will continue to benefit from living primarily in Ms
Batt’s care.
lives with Ms Batt’s other child, K, who is now six years old. Ms Batt has
been K’s primary carer since birth. X has
a close relationship with him. X
also has a close relationship with his maternal grandparents. He will continue
to benefit from those
relationships.
is clear from the terms of the relevant statutory consideration, I am to
consider the benefit to X of having a relationship with
his father only if it is
safe to do so. For reasons previously given, it is not.
Regrettably
the conclusion I have reached about X’s safety means that X will not have
a relationship with his three half-siblings
to Mr Gillies.
Anything else that is relevant to the particular circumstances
has been seen, X has expressed unequivocal views that he wishes to see his
father and have a relationship with him. X met with
Mr Gillies in the presence
of Ms D in December 2024. Regrettably, Mr Gillies has failed, over an extended
period, to take steps that
have been deemed necessary to facilitate X having a
normalised relationship with his father.
2016, child protection authorities, in their protection application, recommended
a condition that Mr Gillies “
must go to a psychologist and or
psychiatrist
assessment and or
the same authorities recommended a condition that Mr Gillies’
psychological or psychiatric treatment was to “
include anger
2018, child protection authorities again recommended a condition that Mr Gillies
go to a psychologist &/or psychiatrist
assessment &
2018, child protection authorities recommended a condition that he must attend
a psychologist for counselling including family violence
counselling
January 2019, child protection authorities made the same recommendation again.
Gillies repeatedly failed to attend visits with X that had been organised by
child protection authorities. He only attended five
out of 21 such sessions from
December 2016 until February 2017, seven out of 24 such sessions from May to
August 2018 and five out
of 34 such sessions from February to June 2019. He
could offer no explanation for his failures. They reflect poorly on his attitude
to spending time with his son and his capacity to provide for his needs.
the repeated recommendations for Mr Gillies to undertake psychological
treatment, the only written evidence he adduces on
the topic is to having
attended eight sessions with a psychologist in late 2018 and early 2019 .
May 2024, Ms J, who’s evidence is unchallenged before me, opined that
[Mr Gillies] requires intensive intervention with an experienced
clinical psychologist over a period of one to two years to address
personality
vulnerabilities
December 2024, Ms D also recommended that Mr Gillies “
start attending a
clinical psychologist for treatment as recommended by [Ms
his affidavit having been executed on 29 July 2025, Mr Gillies gave no evidence
therein of having taken any steps to see a
psychologist in line with Ms
J’s recommendation. He gave oral evidence that he was aware of the
allegation, and said “
well, it was recommended. I – in that
sense, I wasn’t ordered, so I didn’t do it back then to be
Gillies gave oral evidence that he had obtained a mental health care plan in
January 2025 and has attended three of four scheduled
sessions with a
psychologist in the weeks preceding the final hearing. He gave evidence he will
get a total of six sessions with
the psychologist. I took no comfort from his
evidence that he would be able to thereafter afford further sessions which he
cost him $200 each.
Mr Gillies has chosen not to commit himself to undertaking therapeutic
intervention as recommended by child protection authorities
and the experts in
these proceeding. In circumstances where it is opined he needs one to two years
of therapy, I draw no comfort
from the fact he says he has attended three
sessions in the month leading up to the trial. As Ms D opined orally,
he would be nowhere near a stage where it would impact on him - he
would be able to make positive change
is also regrettable that, despite Mr Gillies giving evidence that he could give
up cannabis at any time, he has chosen not to do
so. He offered no satisfactory
explanation for his decision-making in that respect. There is no evidence to
support the proposition
advanced by Mr Gillies in closing address that
arguably using medicinal cannabis is a safer course than using
cannabis on the black market
has been observed that if litigants are genuinely motived to improve their
parenting capacity, they will do so without any order
to regulate their
Mr Gillies failures to
engage in therapeutic intervention or adequately address his cannabis use
reflects poorly, both on his present
parenting capacity and his motivation to
improve it.
Mr Gillies can or will undertake recommended psychological intervention or cease
using cannabis in the future is a matter
for him. I am to take him as I now find
him. It is not my task to make aspirational directions about how he might
improve his parenting
capacity in the hope of enhancing X’s familial
experience.
when it was put to Ms Batt that Mr Gillies was no longer the person he was at
19, 20 or 21, she convincingly gave evidence
I do apologise, I
see nothing to say that he has change in any form or way.
continued to use cannabis and family violence and has demonstrated no insight
into his behaviour.
is not an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander child.
CONCLUSIONS
unfortunate reality in these proceedings is that X’s desire to have a
relationship with his father cannot be safely accommodated.
Mr Gillies has not
demonstrated that he is a person who has the necessary capacity to safely care
oral evidence, Ms D was advised of the evidence that had been adduced in the
proceedings in relation to Mr Gillies’ cannabis
use. He made no objection
to the recitation of that evidence to her. In light of Mr Gillies’
evidence as to his cannabis use,
his failure to undertake drug testing, and
failure to adduce recommended medical evidence, Ms D gave this
Look, under the circumstances that you have described and explained, through his
testing in court, I would have lot of concern about
any unsupervised time. And I
think that then leads into, well, okay, he has supervised time, but then where
does it go from there?
So that then leads back to, well, clearly supervised time
for the long term isn’t an appropriate for [X] to have to live, and
or later [X] would question what was happening. So it really gets back to
whether or not he’s a person who is capable
caring for [X].
information I’ve been provided with today, it doesn’t appear to me
that he is a person who is capable of caring
unsupervised.
that then leads to the question of whether there should be spend time at all,
and goes back to, then, whether he just sends cards,
presents, writes letters
and so on to [X], or whether he just, in the future, spends – I think
it’s five or six times
supervised each year at a children’s contact
centre, so that [X] is able to keep his paternal identity going through his life
and have that contact with his father, and he will then have that opportunity to
understand more about his father as he proceeds
through life. But certainly, at
this point in time, I can’t recommend that spend time progresses.
(emphasis added)
D was thereafter taken through the evidence before the Court in relation to Mr
Gillies’ perpetration of family violence,
not only towards Ms Batt, but
also towards his own family members. Again, Mr Gillies took no objection to the
way in which that evidence
was put to Ms D. She opined that:
... Very serious family violence I’m hearing about. Under those
circumstances, it would actually be difficult to make any recommendation
spends time with [X]. And I think under the circumstances with [Ms Batt],
hearing all that he has done, the serious violence
he has perpetrated, even not
whilst he was with her, to other family members, paternal family members,
that’s a major concern
D was then advised of Mr Gillies’ lack of engagement with recommended
counselling or treatment, again without objection from
Mr Gillies. She opined
Under all of those circumstances, I would be struggling to see what benefit
there could be for [X] to continue to have face-to-face
time, identity time with
his father under all of those circumstances. I think at some stage in the future
[X] will need to have some
support and some therapy to assist him to understand
more about his father. I think, particularly through his teen years, is when
children, mostly males, have difficulty in coming to grips with these sorts of
issues about their father. So I think with [Ms Batt]
clearly knowing all of
these issues and background, the seriousness of his family violence to other
people would clearly not be her
best interest to have to take [X] to spend time
with his family – with his father, sorry.
Gillies’ counsel put to Ms D that there has been a period of a couple of
years in which Mr Gillies has not faced a criminal
charge nor had
involvement with child protection and noted that the parties were very young at
the time X was born. Ms D gave evidence
that those matters had no effect on her
recommendation that X not spend time with his father. Considering X’s
clear wish to
see his father, Ms D opined that:
Now, in light of what I have heard today, it – that has no bearing on what
I recommended. I think that it’s well and
good that a child may appear to
get along well with a parent, but I think the overriding factor is family
violence, and where there
has been serious family violence that takes precedence
over any other information. In addition, there was the doctor’s
information
that, under the influence of marijuana, [Mr Gillies] would not be
able to care appropriately for young children, if I heard that
D ultimately recommended that X spend no time with his father. Whilst I am not
bound by that recommendation, a failure to follow
it requires
explanation.
Mr Gillies’
submissions do not provide such an explanation.
Gillies submits that the matter needs to be looked at through the prism of the
fact that he and Ms Batt had X when they were aged
18 and 19 years and that
nearly 10 years has now elapsed. He submits that he is currently in a settled
relationship and has made
significant changes in his life
He submits that there is no evidence of any behaviour of domestic violence in
recent years. The difficulty with the submission
is that Mr Gillies has taken no
responsibility for his extensive family violence use. As recently as 2022 or
2023, he spat at a police
officer. Further, a significant number of the family
violence incidents to which I have referred occurred after he partially attended
a Men’s Behaviour Change Program. He has not obtained the recommended
therapeutic intervention he needs to address his use
of violence.
is true, as Mr Gillies submits, that he accepts he perpetrated family violence
on those occasions for which he has been convicted.
They are two breaches of an
Intervention Order. They are but a small number of the episodes of violence he
has perpetrated. Similarly,
his concession that Ms Batt retain sole parental
responsibility for X was a relatively minor component of the dispute and is not,
in my view, demonstrative of any significant degree of insight into his past
behaviour as he submits.
Mr Gillies’ acknowledgement that any time would need to commence in a
supervised fashion cannot be taken to be demonstrative
of any significant degree
of insight in the circumstances. He proposes that, regardless of whether such
visits occur, or whether
he continues to use cannabis, X commence spending
unsupervised overnight time with him in March 2026.
accept Mr Gillies’ submission that more than a little weight ought be
afforded to X’s unequivocal views. Nevertheless,
the weight I can afford
to them is far less than the weight I determine to accord to X and his
mother’s safety. On no version
of the evidence before me, and particularly
that of Ms D, ought X have unsupervised time commence without any safeguards at
Mr Gillies does not even propose to be restrained from using cannabis
during X’s time with him.
is no proposal before me for X to spend supervised time with Mr Gillies on an
ongoing basis. Whilst such orders are not prohibited,
they are generally
discouraged as undesirable.
did not ultimately support such an outcome. I have no evidence as to the
availability of an appropriate service or its cost.
I also have an extensive
track record of Mr Gillies failing to attend scheduled supervised visits. I am
not satisfied an order for
X to spend ongoing supervised time with Mr Gillies is
in his best interests.
conclude that X’s best interests are served by spending no time, and
having no communication with, Mr Gillies.
Gillies made no submissions with respect to the further relief he sought. I am
not satisfied it is in X’s best interests
in light of the conclusions
already reached.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
thirty-eight (138) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
Judgment of
Dated: 19 August 2025
Family Law Act 1975
Adamson & Adamson
[2014] FamCAFC 232
(2014) FLC 93-622
quoting with approval
Carlson & Fluvium
[2012] FamCA 32
Cizek & Mihov
[2024] FedCFamC1A 151
(2024) FLC 94-206
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Affidavit of Mr Gillies filed
30 July 2025, paragraph 44.
Affidavit of Mr Gillies filed 30 July 2025, paragraph
Affidavit of Mr Gillies
filed 30 July 2025, paragraph
Lainhart & Ellinson
[2023] FedCFamC1A 200
(2023) FLC 94-166
Lainhart & Ellinson
”) at [28].
Affidavit of Ms Batt filed
8 July 2025, paragraph 19.
Affidavit of Ms Batt filed 8 July 2025, paragraph 24.
Affidavit of Ms Batt filed
8 July 2025, paragraph 29.
Exhibit R4, page 35.
R4, page 35.
Exhibit R4,
Exhibit R4, page
Exhibit R4, page 151.
Exhibit R4, page
Family Report dated 20
December 2024, paragraphs 60 and
Keane & Keane
(2021) Fam LR 190
at [73] and the cases there cited.
Exhibit R1.
Kuhl v Zurich
Financial Services Australia Limited
[2011] HCA 11
(2011) 243 CLR 361
Child Impact Report dated
19 February 2024, paragraph
Affidavit of Ms Batt
filed 8 July 2025, paragraph
Affidavit of Ms Batt
filed 8 July 2025, paragraph
Affidavit of Ms Batt
filed 8 July 2025, paragraph
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Act 1975
Affidavit of Ms Batt
filed 8 July 2025, paragraph
Family Law Act
Affidavit of Ms Batt filed 8 July 2025, paragraph
Affidavit of Ms Batt
filed 8 July 2025, paragraph 21.
Affidavit of Ms Batt filed
8 July 2025, paragraph 22.
Affidavit of Ms Batt filed 8 July 2025, paragraph
Exhibit R4, page
Affidavit of Ms Batt
filed 8 July 2025, paragraph
Exhibit R6, page
Affidavit of Mr Gillies
filed 30 July 2025, paragraph
Child Impact Report, 19
February 2024, paragraph 21.
Affidavit of Ms Batt filed 8 July 2025, paragraph 59.
Affidavit of Ms Batt filed
8 July 2025, paragraph 59.
Darmadi & Binjori
[2023] FedCFamC1A 29
(2023) FLC 94-136
Exhibit R5, page 71.
Exhibit R5, page
Exhibit R5, page
Kuhl v Zurich
Financial Services Australia Ltd
[2011] HCA 11
(2011) 243 CLR 361
Exhibit R5, page
Exhibit R6, page
Exhibit R5, page
Affidavit of Ms J filed
9 July 2024, page 18.
Family Report, paragraph 4.
Family Report, paragraph 44.
Family Report, paragraph 50.
Family Report, paragraph 52.
Family Report, paragraph 43.
Family Report, paragraph 54.
Independent Children’s Lawyer’s Outline of Case filed 1 August 2025,
Independent
Children’s Lawyer’s Outline of Case filed 1 August 2025, page
Exhibit R4, page
Exhibit R4, page
Exhibit R4, page
Exhibit R4, page
Affidavit of Ms J filed
9 July 2024, page 20.
Family Report dated 20 December 2024, paragraph
Lainhart & Ellinson
Lancaster & Danton
(2024) FLC 94-228 at [36] and the cases there
at [36] and the cases there cited;
Bielen & Kozma
[2022] FedCFamC1A 221
and the cases there cited.
RTF format (691 KB)
Signed PDF/A format