Jama v Minister of Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs [2025] FCAFC 149 (24 October 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Jama v Minister of Immigration,
Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] FCAFC 149
Appeal from:
Jama v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2024] FCA 1419
File number:
VID 100 of 2025
Judgment of:
RANGIAH, SNADEN AND WHEATLEY JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– appeal from decision to
dismiss application for judicial review of decision of the respondent
”) to cancel the appellant’s visa –
where Minister had made public statements about his approach to
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) prior to exercising that power – where
Minister conceded that bias rule applied – whether Minister’s
(or related decision not to afford appellant natural justice) affected
by reasonable apprehension of bias – whether Minister’s
statements such that a fair-minded and reasonable lay observer would apprehend
implacable prejudgment – where leave
sought to rely on ground not raised
before primary judge – principles governing exercise of discretion to
grant of leave, including
merit of new ground – whether Minister’s
assessment of expert evidence tainted by misunderstanding or affected by legal
unreasonableness – application to amend notice of appeal dismissed –
appeal dismissed, with costs
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
Cases cited:
CGA15 v Minister for Home Affairs
268 FCR 362
[2019] FCAFC 46
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
(2000) 205 CLR 337
EVA17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] FCAFC 214
Jama v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
(2023) 299 FCR 410
[2023] FCAFC 148
Jama v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2024] FCA 1419
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
185 CLR 259
[1996] HCA 6
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng
(2001) 205 CLR 507;
[2001] HCA 17
NAJT v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
(2005) 147 FCR 51
[2005] FCAFC 135
QYFM v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 279 CLR 148
[2023] HCA 15
Tereva v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
(2022) 294 FCR 270
[2022] FCAFC 142
General Division
National Practice Area:
Administrative and Constitutional Law and Human Rights
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Dr A McBeth with Mr J Barrington
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Farrell Rose Migration Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr R Knowles KC with Mr A Solomon-Bridge
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Sparke Helmore Lawyers
VID 100 of 2025
JAMAAL JAMA
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP AND
MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS
RANGIAH, SNADEN AND WHEATLEY JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appellant’s application for leave to file and rely upon a proposed amended
notice of appeal dated 7 August 2025 be dismissed.
appeal be dismissed.
appellant pay the respondent’s costs of the proceeding, to be assessed in
default of agreement in accordance with the court’s
Costs Practice Note
(GPN-COSTS).
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
appellant, Mr Jama, is a citizen of New Zealand. He came to Australia in
2008 and, in 2014, was issued with a Class TY Subclass
444 Special Category
(Temporary) visa (the “
”). In 2019, he was
convicted of aggravated armed robbery and sentenced to four years’
imprisonment, 12 months of which
he served. Shortly after his incarceration
commenced, his Visa was mandatorily cancelled pursuant to
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) (the “
Jama sought to have that cancellation (the “
Cancellation
”) revoked; initially by a delegate of the first
respondent (the “
”) and, later, by what was then
known as the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (the
”). When those attempts (hereafter and
collectively, the “
Revocation Application
”) failed, he moved
for prerogative relief in this court. That, too, failed at first instance; but
succeeded on appeal:
Jama v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and
Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 299 FCR 410
[2023] FCAFC 148 (Markovic
C Derrington and Feutrill JJ).
Thereafter,
the Revocation Application came back before the Tribunal, which, on
17 May 2024, revoked the Mandatory Cancellation pursuant
s 501CA(4)(b)(ii)
of the Act, with the result that the Mandatory
Cancellation decision was taken not to have been made.
few weeks after that decision (the “
”) was made,
the Minister made a decision of his own under
of the Act to set
aside that Revocation and cancel the Visa (the “
Ministerial
Cancellation
”). The Minister expressed his view that Mr Jama did
not pass the “character test” and that it was in the national
interest that the Visa be cancelled.
Jama then made another application for prerogative relief, this time directed to
the Ministerial Cancellation, which he sought
to portray as a product of
Judicial Review
Application
”) came before a judge of this court, who, on
11 December 2024, dismissed it:
Jama v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCA 1419
30 January 2025, Mr Jama lodged an appeal from the Primary
Judgment. It proceeds upon a single ground; but, at the hearing of
the appeal,
he pressed an application for leave to rely upon a proposed amended notice, by
which he sought to press a second one.
For the reasons that follow, neither the
existing nor the proposed additional ground of appeal has merit. Leave to file
the amended
notice of appeal should (and will) be refused and the appeal should
(and will) otherwise be dismissed. There is no reason not to
make the usual
order for costs.
THE LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
Section 501BA
of the Act relevantly provides (and at the time of the Ministerial Cancellation,
provided) as follows, namely:
501BA Cancellation of visa—setting aside and substitution of non
adverse decision under
section 501CA
(1) This section applies if:
(a) a delegate of the Minister; or
(b) the ART;
makes a decision under
section 501CA
(the original decision) to revoke a
decision under
subsection 501(3A)
to cancel a visa that has been granted to a
Action by Minister—natural justice does not apply
(2) The Minister may set aside the original decision and cancel a visa that has
been granted to the person if:
(a) the Minister is satisfied that the person does not pass the character test
because of the operation of:
(i) paragraph 501(6)(a), on the basis of paragraph 501(7)(a), (b) or (c); or
(ii) paragraph 501(6)(e); and
(b) the Minister is satisfied that the cancellation is in the national interest.
(3) The rules of natural justice do not apply to a decision under subsection
Minister’s exercise of power
(4) The power under subsection (2) may only be exercised by the Minister
personally.
present purposes, it is uncontroversial that:
(1) the Revocation qualified as an “original decision”;
(2) Mr Jama was, for the purposes of
s 501BA(2)(a)
, a person who did
not pass the “character test” for which
provided; and
(3) the Minister did not afford Mr Jama an opportunity to advance evidence
or submissions before making the Ministerial Cancellation.
THE MINISTERIAL CANCELLATION
Ministerial Cancellation was made on Tuesday, 4 June 2024. It was
communicated to Mr Jama under cover of correspondence from
Minister’s Department. Annexed to that correspondence were various
attachments, including a written and signed record
of the Minister’s
decision and a statement of the reasons for which the Ministerial Cancellation
was made. Those reasons (the
Minister’s Reasons
contained a number of passages that it is prudent now to record.
rehearsing some matters of history, the Minister’s Reasons addressed the
nature of the power conferred by
of the Act. As concerns the
of the Act, the Minister’s Reasons recorded as
of the Act, the rules of natural justice do not apply to a
decision under
s 501BA(2).
While this means that I am not required to
apply the rules of natural justice when making a decision under
by giving the affected person an opportunity to be heard before making the
decision, I am aware that
does not prohibit me from affording
such an opportunity.
In this case, I chose to proceed without giving Mr JAMA an opportunity to
be heard before making my decision. I am cognisant that
as a consequence,
Mr JAMA has not had the opportunity to advance reasons why an adverse
decision should not now be made.
I have, however, given consideration to information given by Mr JAMA in
relation to the original request for revocation and as reflected
in the decision
record of the [Tribunal] in revoking the decision to cancel Mr JAMA’s
the heading, “NATIONAL INTEREST”, the Minister’s Reasons
recorded a series of observations about Mr Jama’s
criminal history.
Those observations were organised by subheadings, one of which concerned the
“Risk to the Australian community”.
Under that subheading, the
Minister summarised a series of matters, before recording the following
conclusions:
The Australian government is committed to protecting the Australian community
from harm resulting from criminal activity or other
serious conduct by
non-citizens.
I have found that the nature of Mr JAMA’s conduct is very serious. I
have further found that violent offending has the potential
to cause serious
physical and/or psychological injury to members of the Australian community, if
Mr JAMA provided to the [Tribunal] a report from forensic psychologist
Mr Jeffrey Cummins dated 26 February 2024 (Attachment N4).
Mr Cummins opined that the risk of Mr JAMA committing another violent
offence as low-moderate trending towards low. I place significant
this report and opinion and preferred it over other pieces of evidence before me
referring to Mr JAMA’s low risk
of reoffending, including the comment
of the sentencing judge who described the offence as an aberration. I have
preferred Mr Cummins’[s]
report because that it is the most recent
independent expert report before me and the credentials of Mr Cummins
including having
practised as a clinical and forensic psychologist for
approximately 38 years.
Mr JAMA has committed a very serious violent offence. Should he engage in
similar conduct again, it would be likely to result in
serious psychological
and/or physical harm to members of the community. I consider that this conduct,
and the harm that would be
caused if it were to be repeated, is so serious that
any risk that it could be repeated is unacceptable. Having accepted
Mr Cummins’[s]
opinion, I consider there to be a low to moderate risk
that Mr JAMA will reoffend. I am also particularly concerned by
continued use of drugs whilst in immigration detention,
despite having undertaken rehabilitation relating to drugs and I am not
that Mr JAMA’s drug use has completely resolved.
Considering the nature and seriousness of Mr JAMA’s conduct, the
potential harm to the Australian community should he commit
further offences or
engage in other serious conduct, and taking into account the likelihood of
Mr JAMA reoffending, I consider that
the need to protect the Australian
community from criminal or other serious conduct weighs significantly in favour
of a finding that
it is in the national interest to cancel Mr JAMA’s
the Minister came to consider whether there might be discretionary reasons not
to exercise the power that
of the Act conferred upon him. As
history records, the Minister was ultimately satisfied that that power should be
exercised. Key
to that outcome was the following conclusion:
I have weighed up the above countervailing factors against the national interest
considerations. In doing so, I considered the very
serious nature of the
violent offence Mr JAMA has committed in Australia. Non-citizens such as
Mr JAMA who have a criminal history
of such an offence should not generally
expect to be permitted to remain in Australia.
I find that the Australian community could be exposed to significant harm should
Mr JAMA reoffend in a similar fashion. I have found
there to be a low to
moderate risk that Mr JAMA will reoffend. The Australian community should
not tolerate any risk of further
THE JUDICIAL REVIEW APPLICATION
the Judicial Review Application, Mr Jama contended that the Ministerial
Cancellation—and, collaterally, the Minister’s
decision to exercise
his power under
of the Act without first applying the rules of
natural justice—were each tainted by a reasonable apprehension of bias
for that reason, were each a product of jurisdictional error.
bias that Mr Jama alleged was said to inhere in a series of public remarks
that the Minister had made about the prevalence of
decisions of the Tribunal to
revoke the cancellation of visas held by persons who did not pass the
“character test”.
It is prudent at this juncture to identify those
Wednesday, 29 May 2024, the Minister participated in an interview that
was televised by the Australian Broadcasting Commission.
During the course of
that interview (the “
ABC Interview
”), he was asked and
answered questions concerning a ministerial direction issued pursuant to
of the Act and its impact upon applications made under
Asked whether he conceded that public safety had been adversely impacted by the
application of that direction, the Minister responded:
Well, some of the [Tribunal] decisions are very hard to reconcile with any sense
of the expectations of the Australian community,
nor, frankly, common sense.
These are very concerning. That’s why I’ve also rushed to consider
cancellation submissions
in respect of some of the cases that have been brought
to light. And I’ve already cancelled six visas having done so.
the Minister was asked whether a revised direction would result in
“...zero possibility of any tribunal member granting
or restoring a visa
that you have cancelled?”. The Minister declined to give that guarantee,
following which it was put to
him that there might remain “potential
loopholes” through which some people of “character test”
concern might
retain their visas. The Minister responded:
Well, I am focused in the first instance of ensuring that a person who does not
meet the requirements of the character test and is
in Australia has their visa
cancelled...[A]s you’d be well aware, yesterday we abolished the [the
Tribunal] and are putting
in place a new, truly independent administrative
review tribunal. That is an independent body. We have to give it the clearest
possible guidance to ensure that its members’ decisions meet the
expectations of the Australian community.
Minister also indicated that he had “...instructed [his] department to
advise [him]...within 24 hours” of decisions
made by the Tribunal to
revoke the cancellations of visas held by people who did not pass the
“character test”.
following day (Thursday, 30 May 2024), the Minister participated in an
interview that was televised on the Sky News network.
During the course of that
interview (the “
Sky News Interview
”), the Minister referred
to the Tribunal having made decisions to revoke the cancellation of visas held
by people of “character
test” concern. Some of those decisions, he
said, “...don’t meet the expectations of the Australian community
don’t meet the standard of common sense”.
Minister went on to state that:
...we are, in the first instance, looking at these cases where revocations have
happened. I’ve dealt with eight cases now.
I will deal with the others
as a matter of the utmost urgency.
to particularise those “eight cases”, the Minister said:
Well, these are cases that go to some serious offending, some really serious
offending, that, frankly, where the decision of the
tribunal does not meet my
expectations, I’ve considered them and it’s in the national
interest, in my view, that the
visas continue to be cancelled so that the
community can be kept safe...
the Minister was asked about a further 30 matters that he was understood to be
considering; and, in particular, about whether
or not the visa holders who were
the subjects of those matters “...will be booted”. The Minister
Well, I will consider the cancellation as you’d imagine. I’ve got
to apply the test, but I’m considering these
cancellations as a matter of
the utmost urgency. Submissions are coming up and I will consider them as soon
as they come up and
I will deal with them in accordance with my view about the
national interest and the absolute imperative of community safety.
Monday, 3 June 2024, the Minister’s office issued a press
release that was headed, “30 visas cancelled over the past
week”. That document, which is expressed as though a quote from the
Minister himself, went on to state (errors original):
Over the last week I have cancelled 30 visas of non-citizens with serious
criminal histories, in the national interest.
It is clear that the Administrative Appeals Tribunal’s decision to
reinstate these visas did not meet community expectations,
and Ministerial
Direction 99 has not been working as the Government intended.
The Government is on track to overhaul this regime and put in place a new
Direction before the end of the week.
As the Government has consistently said, community safety is our number one
priority and we will always act in the interest of Australians.
is a matter of record that the Ministerial Cancellation was made the following
day (Tuesday, 4 June 2024).
the primary judge, Mr Jama submitted that the Ministerial Cancellation was
a product of jurisdictional error because it was
attended by a reasonable
apprehension of biased prejudgment. That apprehension was said to arise by
reason of the public remarks
summarised above (hereafter, the
Minister’s Public Remarks
”). Her Honour summarised
Mr Jama’s contention thus (Primary Judgment, [21]):
...the Applicant’s case was advanced on the basis that the
[Minister’s Public Remarks], approached cumulatively, may
fair-minded lay observer to conclude that the Minister would
“inevitably” decide not to afford an applicant natural
justice and
decide to set aside the [Revocation] and cancel the person’s visa. The
Applicant contended that the statements
demonstrated an “implacable
position that the Tribunal decision would be set aside and the applicant’s
visa cancelled”.
the purposes of the hearing of the Judicial Review Application, the Minister
conceded that
of the Act did not operate to exclude the natural
justice “bias rule” (that is to say, the incident of the rules of
justice that holds that decisions should not be attended by any actual
or reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of the decision
to repeat that the primary judge did not accept that the Ministerial
Cancellation could fairly be tainted by any reasonable apprehension
the Minister’s part, it is unnecessary now to traverse her Honour’s
reasons for so concluding. On appeal,
Mr Jama contends that her
Honour’s conclusion was reached in error. Whether or not it was depends
solely upon the nature of
the Minister’s Public Remarks and the extent to
which they might bespeak bias at a level that is apt to impugn the Ministerial
Cancellation in the way that Mr Jama seeks to impugn it.
its original (and present) form, the appeal proceeds upon a single ground,
namely that (emphasis original):
primary judge erred in failing to find that the Minister’s decision under
of the [Act] dated 4 June 2024 to set aside the
[Revocation] and cancel the appellant’s [Visa] (
Cancellation
) is affected by jurisdictional error because a fair-minded lay
observer might reasonably apprehend that the Minister might not have
open mind to:
a. making the Cancellation Decision; and
whether to exercise discretion to afford the appellant natural
to the hearing of the appeal, Mr Jama’s representatives gave notice
of his intention to seek leave to advance an additional
ground—one that
was not advanced before the primary judge—namely that (emphasis
Minister fell into jurisdictional error by misunderstanding the psychological
report of Mr Jeffrey Cummins dated 26 February 2024
), or otherwise reasoning illogically, irrationally or unreasonably in
relation to the Cummins Report, and the primary judge erred
in failing so to
Particulars
(a) The Minister chose to assess the appellant's risk of committing a further
serious violent offence as a substantial part of the
Minister's assessment of
whether it was in the "national interest" to cancel the appellant's visa.
(b) In purported reliance on the Cummins Report, the Minister concluded that
there was a "low to moderate risk" that the appellant
will reoffend in a similar
manner to the offence of aggravated armed robbery.
(c) In reaching the conclusion at [38], the Minister misunderstood the Cummins
Report on which he purported to rely, or alternatively,
reasoned illogically,
irrationally or unreasonably.
is convenient to address each ground separately. We will begin with the second
(proposed) ground.
GROUND TWO: THE CUMMINS REPORT
addressing the substance of the proposed new ground, something should be said
of contentions on appeal that
were not pressed at first instance.
is uncontroversial to observe that an appeal court “...has a discretion to
permit an appellant to argue a new issue on appeal
where it considers that it is
expedient in the interests of justice to entertain the issue”:
Minister for Home Affairs
(2019) 268 FCR 362
[2019] FCAFC 46
(Murphy, Mortimer and O’Callaghan JJ). That discretion is more
likely to be exercised in an appellant’s favour
where a proposed new
ground could not have been met at first instance by the adducing of additional
evidence but, rather, turns solely
upon a question of law.
it is expedient in the interests of justice to permit the agitation on appeal of
a contention not raised at first instance
turns upon a number of considerations,
including the merits of the proposed ground, any explanation that might be given
wasn’t agitated at first instance, and any prejudice that its
agitation might visit upon a respondent:
NAJT v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
(2005) 147 FCR 51
[2005] FCAFC 135
[166] (Madgwick J, with whom Conti J agreed); cited with approval in
EVA17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2018) 262 FCR
[2018] FCAFC 214
, 312 [33] (Perry, Derrington and Wheelahan JJ).
Often—and the present ground is a good example—it turns principally
(or almost exclusively) upon whether or not the ground has merit.
(and notwithstanding the observation just made), the Minister invites the court
to take account of the absence of evidence
from Mr Jama as to why the point
that he now seeks to press was not pressed below. Before the primary judge,
Mr Jama was represented
by experienced senior and junior counsel; and the
Minister theorises that they were no less capable of identifying and pursuing
ground than Mr Jama’s new counsel. The court can, he says, have
no confidence that the reason that the point was not advanced
was that it was
not identified. It is, he suggests, no less likely that Mr Jama’s
then counsel made a forensic decision not
to pursue it.
that is or is not so is not a matter upon which we consider it necessary to
speculate. Ultimately, the likelihood that the
non-pressing of the point below
was a product of forensic advocacy is very likely tied to whether or not the
point has any merit.
It is, we think, both prudent and convenient to focus upon
that aspect of the inquiry.
understand the appellant’s proposed new ground, it is necessary to
rehearse the content of the “Cummins Report”.
It is to be recalled
that, for the purposes of assessing the level of risk that Mr Jama might
pose to the Australian community,
the Minister was minded to consider the report
of a forensic psychologist, Mr Jeffrey Cummins, dated
26 February 2024. That report
”) had been provided to the Tribunal for the purposes of
assisting with its determination of the Revocation Application.
other things, the Cummins Report contained statements of Mr Cummins’s
opinion about the likelihood that Mr Jama might
engage in further criminal
conduct. Under the heading “
RISK ASSESSMENT
” (at [52]-[58]),
Mr Cummins recorded as follows:
[53] Given all of the information currently available to me concerning
Mr Jama and also taking into consideration the risk factors
as assessed by
the HCR-20 V3, I concluded his risk for committing a further offence of violence
was Low-Moderate and trending towards
Low (where the risk category ratings are
Low, Low-Moderate, Moderate, Moderate-High and High).
[54] I would have assessed his risk for committing a further offence of violence
as Low if he had participated in a comprehensive
offence specific treatment
program such as an anger management program or a Men's Behaviour Change
and by way of conclusion, the Cummins Report stated:
[72] In my opinion he presents as being significantly rehabilitated since
committing the aggravated armed robbery. As indicated
above, I would have
assessed his level of risk for committing a further offence of violence as Low
rather than Low-Moderate if he
had completed a comprehensive anger management
program and/or a Men's Behaviour Change Program.
[73] In my opinion the current risk for him committing another serious violent
offence is Low. In contrast, I assessed his risk
for general reoffending as
Low-Moderate and trending towards Low.
the reasons published in support of the Ministerial Cancellation, the Minister
noted that Mr Cummins had assessed the likelihood
that Mr Jama would
commit another violent offence as “low-moderate trending towards
low”: see above, [
Minister considered that Mr Jama’s criminal history involved
“...a very serious violent offence” that was
such that “...any
risk that it could be repeated is unacceptable”. He went on to observe
that there was “...a
low to moderate risk” that Mr Jama would
proposed new appeal ground is advanced in two ways.
it is said that the Minister wrongly attributed to Mr Cummins the view that
there was a “low-moderate trending towards
low” risk that
Mr Jama would engage in serious violent offending. In fact, so the
contention continues, Mr Cummins opined
that there was a “low”
risk that Mr Jama would engage in “another serious violent
offence”. That being so,
it is said that there was no evidential basis to
support the Minister’s conclusion that there was “a low to moderate
risk” that Mr Jama might partake of “a very serious violent
offence”. That reasoning, it is said, proceeded upon
a misunderstanding
of the evidence or was otherwise illogical, irrational or unreasonable to a
point bespeaking jurisdictional error.
it is said that the Minister wrongly equated the concept of
“low-moderate” risk (as Mr Cummins described the likelihood
Mr Jama’s reoffending, including by means of violence) with a level
of risk that was “low to moderate” (being
the terminology that the
Minister employed). Again, it is said that there was no evidential basis
capable of supporting the Minister’s
conception of the relevant risk, such
that his reasoning can be impugned either as having been premised upon a
misunderstanding of
the evidence, or otherwise as illogical, irrational or
unreasonable to a point bespeaking jurisdictional error.
Respectfully,
neither incantation of the ground has merit.
first is a paradigm example of a contention that rests upon a reading of the
Minister’s Reasons with “...an eye keenly
attuned to the perception
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan
(1996) 185 CLR 259
[1996] HCA 6
, 272 (Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh
and Gummow JJ). It involves an ungainly parsing of the words that
Mr Cummins used and an extreme—and,
contorted—equating of them with what the Minister’s Reasons
conveyed. It is clear beyond doubt that the Minister
approached the risk that
Mr Jama might engage in violent offending consistently with the manner in
which Mr Cummins assessed it:
that is to say, as “low-moderate
trending towards low”. It is equally clear that the Minister considered
risk”—whether “low-moderate” or
“low” or otherwise—that Mr Jama might engage in conduct
similar to that in respect of which he was imprisoned was
“unacceptable”. His reasoning in that regard was orthodox
is no occasion now to undertake the kind of miniscule dissecting upon which this
variant of the proposed ground proceeds.
The Minister’s Reasons reflect a
proper appreciation of the views that were expressed in the Cummins Report and
are completely
removed from the illogicality by which Mr Jama sought to
impugn them.
second incantation of the proposed new ground is even more ambitious. Distilled
to its essence, it proceeds upon the suggestion
that no decision maker in the
position in which the Minister here found himself could reasonably equate a
level of risk described
as “low-moderate” with a level of risk that
was “low to moderate”. Respectfully, that suggestion is
unsustainable;
perhaps self-evidently so.
was at pains to point out that Mr Cummins’s assessment was based on a
five-point scale, by which risk was rated as “low”,
“low-moderate”, “moderate”, “moderate-high”
or “high”. A “low-moderate”
rating, he said, was
quantitatively different to a “moderate” rating; and, by describing
his risk of reoffending as “low
to moderate” (and, therefore, as
incorporating a potentially “moderate” level of risk), the Minister
understood to have misunderstood Mr Cummins’s
evidence—and, thereby or otherwise, to have reasoned irrationally or
illogically
to a point reflective of jurisdictional error.
obvious difficulty with that contention is that the five-point rating scale that
Mr Cummins used was not one that permitted of
precise quantification. The
assessment of risk—at least in the present context—is an inherently
inexact science. There
is no bright line that mathematically distinguishes a
level of risk that is “low-moderate” from a level of risk that
“moderate”.
is also of no moment that the Minister’s description of the risk
pertaining in Mr Jama’s case differed linguistically
description that Mr Cummins offered. The Minister was entitled to express
his reasons in his own terms. At issue is whether
his reasoning might be
impugned as being so obviously disconnected from what the evidence disclosed as
to remove his conclusion beyond
what was authorised under the Act.
Appreciating, as we have said, the inherent imprecision that attends terminology
like “moderate”,
“low-moderate” and “low to
moderate”, that is a hurdle that cannot be cleared.
proposed ground is without merit. In saying so, we should not wish to visit any
undue criticism. It is not uncommon—particularly
in matters of migration
law—for the court to be treated to innovative, sometimes adventurous
advocacy. We do not suggest that
the contention advanced here was advanced
inappropriately.
to press the proposed new ground on appeal is refused.
GROUND ONE: BIAS
principles of law that govern the actionable apprehension of bias are well
settled. Although there are exceptions, a decision
of the kind to which they
apply will be attended by a reasonable apprehension of bias if it may be said
that a fair-minded and reasonable
lay observer might have cause to think that
the decision maker might decide the matter otherwise than on its merits:
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
(2000) 205 CLR 337
[2000] HCA 63
344 [6] (Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ);
QYFM v Minister
for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 279 CLR 148
[2023] HCA 15
, 163 [37] (Kiefel CJ and Gageler J).
Generally, the identification of the apprehension involves, first, the
identification of some
circumstance or attribute peculiar to the decision maker
that is capable of giving rise to the perception; and, second, the giving
explanation as to why that circumstance or attribute reasonably might lead the
proverbial lay observer to conclude that the
decision maker is predisposed to
making a decision otherwise than on its merits.
the hearing of the appeal, there was some debate about whether or not the
Minister’s concession about the operation of
was especially “courageous or unwise” (to engage the vernacular of
senior counsel). It was made clear that
the concession—namely, that
of the Act does not operate to relieve the Minister of an
obligation to make decisions under that section free from any actual or
apprehended bias—was a forensic one made only “for present
primary judge determined the Judicial Review Application on that basis and there
is at least some authority that is supportive
Tereva v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
294 FCR 270
[2022] FCAFC 142
, 278-9 [35] (Mortimer J, in
with whom Bromwich J agreed; Thomas J agreeing in the result).
might be said (although, for reasons to which attention will shortly turn, it is
not here said) that it is difficult to conceive
of how the power conferred by
of the Act could be exercised in circumstances that did
permit of a reasonable apprehension of bias. Its exercise will often
(though, admittedly, not always) come on the heels of a proceeding
Tribunal to which the Minister was party. Moreover, the Minister will, in every
such case, have been the
party. But for
would be an obvious reason why the subsequent exercise of a related power by a
disappointed litigant might be open to question.
By inoculating the exercise of
that power from the requirements of natural justice—which include, on any
view, the requirement
that decisions not be made in circumstances that
reasonably bespeak of a possibility of implacable prejudgment unrelated to
Parliament must be understood to empower what would otherwise
routinely be vulnerable.
being so, the Minister’s concession before the primary judge might well
have been “courageous or unwise”.
Be that as it may, it is not
resiled from and there is no occasion now for the court to resolve the issue.
We should not be understood
to endorse or reject what little the authorities say
of the Act.
it suffices to answer the question consistently with the way that the appellant
posed it: namely, were the Minister’s
Public Remarks such as might
warrant a proverbially fair-minded lay observer reasonably to conclude that the
Ministerial Cancellation
might have been the product of implacable prejudgment
based otherwise than on merit?
Minister’s statement during the ABC Interview that visa holders who do not
satisfy “the requirements [sic] of the
character test” should have
their visas cancelled is properly to be understood as a high-level statement of
political principle.
As the primary judge observed (Primary Judgment, [38]), it
might well give rise to a reasonable apprehension that visa holders who
that description should expect that their visas will likely be cancelled, but
not that they will be cancelled without due
consideration of their relevant
circumstances, or of the merits that might attend the available or apparent
arguments to the contrary.
A reasonable apprehension of defeat is not the same
as a reasonable apprehension that a decision will be made otherwise than on
primary judge, quoting from the judgment of Gleeson CJ and Gummow J in
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng
205 CLR 507;
[2001] HCA 17
, 531-2 [72], was moved to conclude in the following
terms (Primary Judgment, [45]):
The Minister’s statements were made within the realm of the
Minister’s political role and indicated views about the importance
community safety that he would be applying in approaching consideration of
cancellation decisions of the cohort in question...Ministers
are not required to
reassess and reformulate standards every time a decision comes before him or
her. The Minister’s statements
are not statements that might cause the
fair-minded lay observer to think that the Minister’s mind may be closed
would inevitably set aside the Tribunal’s decision and would
decide to cancel the Applicant’s visa, or would inevitably
decide not to
afford the Applicant natural justice. The Minister’s statements did not
indicate that he had prejudged any particular
case that was before him, or would
be coming before him. His statements would not have indicated to a fair-minded
lay observer that
his mind may be “so committed to a conclusion already
formed as to be incapable of alteration, whatever evidence or arguments
presented”...
Respectfully,
those observations are unimpeachable and we adopt them as though our own.
Ministerial Cancellation and the antecedent decision to effect it without first
affording Mr Jama natural justice were not decisions
that the Minister made
in circumstances that bespoke any reasonable apprehension of bias. With
respect, the primary judge was correct
so to conclude. Appeal ground one is not
DISPOSITION
appellant’s application for leave to agitate the proposed second ground of
appeal should be dismissed, as should the appeal
itself. There is no reason why
the usual order for costs ought not to be made and there will be orders
accordingly.
I certify that the preceding sixty-one (61)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justices
Rangiah, Snaden and
Dated: 24 October 2025
RTF format (397 KB)
Signed PDF/A format