Michalakas v Stuttgart Pty Ltd & Ors [2013] FMCA 225 (3 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
MICHALAKAS v STUTTGART
PTY LTD & ORS
[2013] FMCA 225
BANKRUPTCY – Review of Registrar’s
decision – three joint creditors – one creditor a company –
solicitors for joint creditors were properly instructed to issue
bankruptcy notice and creditor’s petition – whether
resolution of
all Directors necessary for such instructions to be given – capacity of
Managing Director to give instructions
on behalf of the company – whether
Managing Director’s action properly ratified by the company –
sequestration
order confirmed.
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Commonwealth of Australia Construction Act
Corporations Act 2001
Magistrates Act 1999
Federal Magistrates Court
(Bankruptcy) Rules 2006
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
(Cth) r.4.06 & 20.03
Totev v Sfar
[2008] FCAFC 35
(2008) 167 FCR
Boutros v Santa Sabino College Ltd
[2011] FCA 477
Workers Union & Ors v Bowen
[1946] HCA 24
(1946) 72 CLR 575
[2009] FMCA 991
Dudzinski v Kellow
[2003] FCAFC
Scook v Sims Construction Pty Ltd
(2004) 3 ABC (NS) 43;
Presentaciones Musicales SA v Secunda & Anor
(1994) Ch 271
Inglis v Moore
(1979) 25 ALR
Northside Developments Pty Ltd v Registrar-General
[1990] HCA 32
(1990) 8 ACLC
Brick and Pike Industries Ltd v Occidental Life Nominees Pty Ltd
[1992] VicRp 68
(1992) 10 ACLC 253
Hely-Hutchinson v Brayhead Ltd
[1968] 1 QB
Corporate Affairs Commission (NSW) v Transphere Pty Ltd (No.2)
(1985) 9 ACLR 1005
Richmond v Branson & Son
[1914] 1 Ch 968
JAMES MICHALAKAS
First Respondent:
STUTTGART PTY LTD
Second Respondent:
RAYMOND ROGER GATT
Third Respondent:
DAVID PAUL STEICKE
File Number:
ADG 283 of 2012
Judgment of:
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
8 and 28 March 2013, 3 April 2013
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
At different times Mr A Dal Cin, Mr G Dart, Mr J Wemmer and Mr
Strawbridge
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Uma Mahadeva Lawyer
Counsel for the first, second & third
Respondents:
At different times Mr Roberts and Mr M Livesey QC
Solicitors for the first, second & third
Respondents:
Randle & Taylor Solicitors
Counsel for first supporting creditor:
Ms L Amabili
Solicitors for first supporting creditor:
Ouwens Lawyers
Counsel for an interested party:
Mr N Strawbridge
Solicitors for an interested party:
Neil Strawbridge
Counsel for the second supporting creditor:
Mr L Rowley
Solicitors for the second supporting creditor:
Madsen Rowley
Counsel for the Trustee in Bankruptcy:
Solicitors for the Trustee in Bankruptcy:
O’Loughlins Lawyers
(1) The application for review filed on 11 January 2013
is dismissed.
(2) The sequestration order of Registrar Christie of 21 December 2012 is
(3) The respondents’ costs are to be taxed pursuant to Order 62 of the
Federal Court Rules and paid from the bankrupt estate
of the applicant debtor in
accordance with the
Bankruptcy Act 1966
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
JAMES MICHALAKAS
STUTTGART PTY LTD
First Respondent
RAYMOND ROGER GATT
Second Respondent
DAVID PAUL STEICKE
Third Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
the purposes of clarity throughout these reasons, I will refer to Mr James
Michalakas as the applicant and Stuttgart Pty Ltd,
Raymond Roger Gatt and David
Paul Steicke as the respondents.
these reasons, a statement of fact is to be treated as a finding of fact
established to my satisfaction on the balance of probabilities
from the evidence
provided by the parties and after a careful consideration of the submissions
have before me an application for review of a decision of Registrar Christie
made on 21 December 2012. The applicant was respondent
to a creditor’s
petition filed by the respondents on 15 November 2012. The Registrar made the
following orders:
“1. A sequestration order be made against
the estate of James Michalakas.
applicant creditor’s costs be fixed at $6,724.00 and be paid from the
estate of the respondent debtor in accordance with
Bankruptcy Act
costs of the supporting creditor Cardiff Capital Pty Ltd be fixed in the amount
of $1,000.00.
costs of the supporting creditor Dean Henry Stone and Carole Julie Stone as
trustees of the Stone Superannuation Fund be fixed
in the amount of
Federal Magistrates Act 1999
Act”) provides that a party to a proceeding in which a Registrar has
exercised any of the powers of the Federal Magistrates
Court under s.102(2), or
under a delegation under s.103(1), may apply to the Federal Magistrates Court
for review of that exercise
of power. Under s.104(3), the Federal Magistrates
Court may, on an application under s.104(2), or on its own initiative, review
exercise of power by a Registrar under s.102(2) or pursuant to a delegation
under s.103(1) and may make any order or orders it
thinks fit in relation to the
matter in respect of which the power was exercised.
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
(Cth).(“FMC
Rules”) provides that the review of an exercise of power by a Registrar
shall proceed by way of hearing
. The current application is
therefore not an appeal from the Registrar’s decision in the strict sense
but is a complete re-hearing
of the matter, but this time before a justice
within the meaning of Chapter III of the
Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution Act 1900
(Cth). Emmett J clarified the true nature of the
Totev v Sfar
(2008) 167 FCR
approval by Nicholas J in
Boutros v Santa Sabina College Ltd
hearing de novo is different from an appeal stricto sensu and is different from
an appeal by way of rehearing. In the case
of an appeal stricto sensu, the
question would be whether, upon the material before the registrar, the
conclusion reached by the
registrar was correct. In an appeal by way of
rehearing, the appellate court would rehear the matter as at the date of the
but on the evidence called before the registrar, subject to a power to
receive further evidence where appropriate: the rights of
the parties would be
determined by reference to the circumstances, including the law, as they existed
at the time of rehearing (Harris
v Caladine 172 CLR at 125). In each case any
question concerning the exercise of discretion would be subject to the
restrictions
imposed on an appellate court in reviewing the exercise of a
discretion (see House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
case of a hearing de novo, however, the judge reviewing the order begins afresh
and exercises for himself or herself
any discretion exercised by the registrar.
The parties commence the proceeding again, subject to any rules concerning the
evidence adduced before the registrar. The hearing de novo involves the
exercise of the original jurisdiction and the petitioner,
in the case of a
bankruptcy petition, must start again, call witnesses and make out the
petitioner's case (Harris v Caladine 172
CLR at 124).
[14] Because
the hearing of an application for review of a sequestration order is a hearing
de novo, it would not be sufficient for
the reviewing judge to be satisfied that
the registrar made no error and simply to dismiss the application for review.
who hears the review application must hear the petition afresh and
must be satisfied as to the matters referred to in
Bankruptcy Act
Thus, the reviewing judge must herself or himself be satisfied with the proof
the matters
stated in the petition;
the service
of the petition; and
the fact that
the debt or debts on which the petitioning creditor relies is or are still
reviewing judge must also exercise afresh the discretions conferred by
particular, unless the Bankruptcy Rules are waived, the judge must have the
affidavits referred to in r 4.06 of the Bankruptcy
Rules, which must be sworn
shortly before the hearing. Except in the case of a review on the same day as
the sequestration order
was made, affidavits relied upon before the registrar
would not satisfy r 4.06. In the absence of fresh affidavits, it would be
that compliance with the Bankruptcy Rules be
Bankruptcy Act 1966
(Cth) (“the Act”) provides
that at the hearing of a Creditor’s Petition the court must have proof
matters stated in the petition;
of the petition; and
fact that the debt or debts on which the petitioning creditor relies is or are
still owing.
If the Court is satisfied with the proof of
those matters, it may make a sequestration order against the estate of the
debtor. However,
under s.52(2), if the Court is not satisfied with the proof of
any of those matters, it may dismiss the petition. In addition, the
dismiss the petition if it is satisfied by the debtor that:
she is able to pay his or her debts; or
any other sufficient cause a sequestration order ought not to be
addition to the matters referred to in s.52(1), the Court also has to be
satisfied that the requirements of r4.06(3) of the
Federal Magistrates Court
(Bankruptcy) Rules 2006
(“the Bankruptcy Rules”) has been
complied with. Rule 4.06 relevantly provides:
Additional affidavits to be filed before hearing
the hearing of a creditor’s petition, the applicant creditor must file the
affidavits required by this rule.
applicant creditor must file an affidavit that:
that the documents required to be served under rule 4.05 have been served and
when and how they were served; and
attached to it a copy of the documents that were served and proof of service in
relation to the documents.
applicant creditor must file an affidavit of a person who has searched, or
caused a search to be made, in the National Personal
Insolvency Index no earlier
than the day before the hearing date for the petition that:
out the details of any references in the Index to the debtor; and
that there were no details of a debt agreement, about the debt on which the
applicant creditor relies, in the Index:
day when the petition was presented; and
(ii) on the
day when the search was made; and
attached to it a copy of the relevant extract of the Index.
applicant creditor must file an affidavit of a person who knows the relevant
facts that:
sworn as soon as practicable before the hearing date for the petition;
that each debt on which the applicant creditor relies is still
applicant creditor must file a search affidavit if the debt stated in the
petition is an amount payable to the applicant
creditor under a judgment of a
court that ordered the amount to be paid into the
The hearing
the hearing the respondents relied on the following documents:
of Leslie Raymond Bowyer sworn on 21 February and filed on 22 February
further affidavit of Leslie Raymond Bowyer sworn and filed on 21 December
of John Russell Jamison sworn on 19 February and filed on 22 February
of Nicholas Gerard McCabe sworn and filed on 22 February 2013;
of Sarah Debattista sworn on 11 October and filed on 15 November 2012;
of Rebecca Louise Plenty sworn on 11 October and filed on 15 November 2012;
of Jarrad Francis Curry sworn on 12 October and filed on 15 November 2012;
further affidavit of Jarrad Francis Curry sworn on 30 November and filed on 4
December 2012;
further affidavit of Jarrad Francis Curry sworn and filed on 19 December
of Christopher James Venus sworn on 4 and filed on 6 December 2012;
of Willem Ouwens sworn and filed on 18 December 2012;
of Luke John Charleton Rowley sworn on 19 and filed on 20 December
of John Charles Taylor sworn on 19 and filed on 21 December 2012;
further affidavit of John Charles Taylor sworn and filed on 21 December
further affidavit of John Charles Taylor sworn and filed on 21 December
further affidavit of John Charles Taylor sworn and filed on 21 December
further affidavit of John Charles Taylor sworn and filed on 17 December
further affidavit of John Charles Taylor sworn on 8 March 2013;
further affidavit of John Charles Taylor sworn on 8 March 2013;
further affidavit of John Charles Taylor sworn on 8 March 2013; and
further affidavit of John Charles Taylor sworn on 8 March 2013;
applicant relied upon the following documents:
of Elizabeth Steicke sworn and filed on 20 December 2012;
affidavit of Elizabeth Steicke sworn and filed on 23 January 2013;
affidavit of Elizabeth Steicke sworn and filed on 7 March 2013;
a result of the sequestration order being made by the Registrar, Anthony
Christopher Matthews was appointed Trustee of the applicant’s
estate. The
Trustee appeared on the hearing of the review and tendered an affidavit being
the Trustee’s report to date. The
report indicated that the applicant had
debts exceeding $20 million.
supporting creditor, Dean Henry Stone and Carole Julia Stone as trustees of the
Stone Superannuation Fund, appeared by counsel.
An affidavit of Willem Ouwens
sworn and filed on 22 February 2013 was tendered on behalf of this supporting
was no application to cross-examine any of the deponents to affidavits
notwithstanding some conflict on the evidence.
the evidence before me, I am satisfied that the matters referred to
Bankruptcy Act
and Part 4 of the
Bankruptcy Rules
established. The applicant has not argued otherwise.
applicant has not attempted to convince the Court that he comes within
s.52(2)(a) of the Act by submitting that he can pay his
debts. On the evidence
before me it is clear that he cannot. The remaining issue therefore is whether
there is any other sufficient
cause within the meaning of that expression
contained in s.52(2)(b) why a sequestration order should not be made.
applicant submits that one of the respondent creditors, namely Stuttgart Pty Ltd
(“Stuttgart”) did not make the corporate
decisions necessary to
instruct solicitors to issue a bankruptcy notice and, later, a petition for
bankruptcy. He says that the
result of this is that the bankruptcy notice and
the petition are both invalid. It was submitted that where, as here, there are
joint creditors it is essential that all joint creditors join in the issue of a
bankruptcy notice and later the petition for bankruptcy.
They must act
was submitted on behalf of the applicant that for Stuttgart to instruct
solicitors to commence bankruptcy proceedings against the
applicant, there
needed to be a resolution of the Directors to do so. It is further submitted
that Mrs Steicke was a Director of
Stuttgart, but received no notice of a
Director’s meeting to pass a resolution authorising the issue of a
bankruptcy notice
and a creditor’s petition. It is submitted that she
never voted for, or approved a resolution for the company to take this
Background facts
background facts are as follows:
third respondent, Mr Steicke, has been the sole shareholder and the Managing
Director of Stuttgart since its incorporation in
South Australia on 22 July
2005, Mr Steicke has lived in Hong Kong.
is trustee of the Steicke Trust (“Trust”);
Trust has property and shares in the sum of approximately $9,600,317.00 which
are managed by Mr Steicke;
Steicke married Elizabeth Steicke in January 1994. The marriage ceased in about
January 2005. The parties continue to be involved
in lengthy and acrimonious
legal proceedings in the Family Court in Adelaide;
Steicke became an Associate Director of Stuttgart on 18 April 1994. She was
given power to counter-sign documents but no right
to vote. She ceased being an
Associate Director on 20 May 1997;
January 1999, Mrs Steicke and Mr Les Bowyer, an accountant resident in Adelaide
each became Directors of Stuttgart;
Managing Director of Stuttgart, Mr Steicke has managed the company exclusively
without the need to refer matters to other board
members. The board has never
formally met and only act as a board for the purpose of conducting formal
matters such as approving
financial statements. Mr Steicke has managed and
operated the assets held by Stuttgart without reference to other board members.
These activities include:
the share portfolio of the Trust;
the company’s organic farm at Wistow in South Australia;
the Trust’s real estate at Somerton and Burnside in South Australia;
the Trust’s other investments and loans.
development of Fernleigh Gardens Retirement Village
situated at 177 Pimpala
Road, Woodcroft;
managing the business of Stuttgart, Mr Steicke has had occasion to frequently
engage solicitors. He has done so in the course
of his capacity as Managing
Director of the company. Since 1992, Mr Steicke has regularly engaged Mr John
Jamison, a solicitor in
South Australia, to act for Stuttgart. These
instructions have included instructions to commence litigation on behalf of the
against the applicant and more recently to seek a sequestration order
against the applicant;
Steicke has never played, nor even expressed to Mr Steicke an indication that
she wanted to play a role in the management of the
company. At no time prior to
the filing of her affidavits in these proceedings did Mrs Steicke indicate to Mr
Steicke that she disputed
his authority to manage the affairs of
2007, with the consent of the second respondent, Raymond Roger Gatt, proceedings
were commenced by the respondents in the District
Court of South Australia being
Action No. 619 of 2007. The proceedings sought to recover the debt that the
applicant owed in relation
to his real estate development. Mr Steicke gave
instructions to the solicitor for these proceedings to be commenced and
and did so in accordance with the performance of his role as Managing
Director of the Company.
Steicke was aware that the District Court proceedings had been commenced against
the applicant and others as Mr Steicke had informed
her of this soon after the
proceedings were commenced. Mrs Steicke regularly asked Mr Steicke about the
activities of the Trust.
At no stage did she express to Mrs Steicke any
objection to the District Court proceedings having been commenced. I note that
Steicke says that the proceedings were brought to her attention by her
barrister in her Family Court proceedings. She does not say
when this was.
the first day of trial of the District Court proceedings, the applicant
consented to a judgment in the sum of $2.1 million.
Steicke says in one of her affidavits that an agreement was reached between her
and Mr Steicke that the applicant would be given
an extension of time to pay the
judgment debt. This is denied by Mr Steicke. In the absence of
cross-examination it is difficult
for this Court to make a finding about who is
telling the truth on this issue. The proceedings can however be determined
a finding on this disputed fact.
15 February 2013, Mr Steicke, as sole shareholder of Stuttgart, passed a
resolution of Stuttgart pursuant to
Corporations Act
resolution stated:
David Paul Steicke, sole share holder of Stuttgart Pty Ltd hereby ratify my
actions as the Managing Director in instructing
solicitors to issue the
Bankruptcy Notice 5087 dated 16 August 2012 and causing the issuing of the
proceedings in the Federal Magistrates
Court against Mr James Michalakas to
obtain a sequestration order.”
meeting of Stuttgart was called and held on 20 February 2013. It was held at
294 Payneham Road, Payneham. Mr Steicke attended
by telephone. Mr Les Bowyer
was present in person. Neither Mrs Steicke nor her lawyer attended. A minute
of the board meeting
of Stuttgart signed by Mr Steicke and Mr Bowyer reads as
“It is acknowledged that David Steicke has been Managing Director of
the Company since 1992 and that he has had the authority
to instruct solicitors
on behalf of the Company and to commence legal proceedings. Further, it is
acknowledged in relation to the
claim against Mr Michalakas that the Directors
have been kept informed as to the issuing of the bankruptcy notice.
Notwithstanding
this, an issue has arisen in relation to the bankruptcy notice
and to avoid any doubt, the Directors ratify the Managing Director’s
authority to act in the manner he has acted and it is hereby resolved
unanimously that we ratify the actions of the Managing Director
in instructing
solicitors to issue Bankruptcy Notice 5087 dated 16 August 2012 and causing the
issuing of the proceedings in the
Federal Magistrate’s Court against Mr
James Michalakas and to obtain a sequestration
is clear on the authorities that for a bankruptcy notice to be issued in a
situation where there are joint judgment creditors that
the bankruptcy notice
has to be issued with the authority of all judgment creditors (see
Workers Union & Ors v Bowen
[1946] HCA 24
(1946) 72 CLR 575
at 583 and 590;
[2009] FMCA 991
Dudzinski v Kellow
[2003] FCAFC 207
Scook v Sims Construction Pty Ltd
(2004) 3 ABC (NS) 43;
[2004] FCAFC
issue has arisen in these proceedings as one of the joint creditors is a
company. The applicant disputes that the company properly
instructed its
solicitors to take the legal action that it did as no proper resolution had been
passed by the Directors. One of
the Directors, namely Ms Steicke, says that she
did not participate in a decision of the Board to instruct lawyers to have a
notice issued or to file a petition for bankruptcy.
respondents say that as Mr Steicke was Managing Director of Stuttgart, he had
authority to instruct solicitors to take the action
that they did. The
applicant retorts that there is no proper evidence that Mr Steicke is Managing
Director of Stuttgart. They say
that Stuttgart could have, but did not, put
evidence before the Court about the company’s affairs including the
constitution
of the company. They ask where the power is to appoint a director
as managing director. They also ask where the evidence is that
Mr Steicke was
appointed managing director.
respondents say that the directors of Stuttgart ratified the action taken by Mr
Steicke purportedly on behalf of the company Stuttgart.
were two meetings that the respondents’ rely upon to prove that Mr
Steicke’s actions were ratified. The first meeting
was a meeting of
members. Mr Steicke is the sole member that the company. The second meeting
was a meeting of directors.
the applicant submits that it is not possible for a company to ratify a decision
to instruct solicitors to issue a bankruptcy
notice and achieve the position of
an otherwise invalid bankruptcy notice becoming valid. Counsel for the
applicant submits that
unlike other situations where ratification can be
effective, in these proceedings, the proceedings before Registrar Christie are
now functus officio as she adjudicated on them. They submit that it is now too
late to attempt to ratify. They rely on the case
Presentaciones Musicales
SA v Secunda & Anor
(1994) 2 ALL ER 737
(1994) Ch 271
Respondent’s Submissions
respondents submit that there are a number of reasons why the sequestration
order made by Registrar Christie should be confirmed
and that any one of those
reasons is sufficient for their purposes.
they point out that a solicitor, Mr Jamison, has given sworn evidence that he
was given instructions by the respondents,
including Stuttgart, to proceed with
the bankruptcy application. They submit that
Bankruptcy Act
provides for the usual rule concerning agency.
Section 308
provides as
Representation of corporation etc.
this Act, for the purposes of this Act:
corporation may act by any person duly authorized in that behalf by the
corporation;
person may act by his or her agent duly authorized in that
submit that the evidence of Mr Jamison is sufficient to prove the authority of
the solicitors to bring the proceedings and rely
on the case of
Dudzinski v
at para 44.
the respondents submit that if a person wishes to challenge the authority of a
solicitor to bring proceedings, a substantive
application to the court should be
made to determine that issue. They say that the authority of the solicitor for
the respondents
to bring the proceedings is not a matter that should be put at
the hearing of an application for review. They rely on the case of
Moore (No.2)
at 464 but see also
Richmond v Branson
[1914] 1 Ch 968.
the respondents say that the evidence discloses that Mr Steicke is the Managing
Director of Stuttgart and as such is responsible
for the day-to-day management
of Stuttgart. They submit that Mr Steicke is authorised to issue court
proceedings to recover debts
owing to the company.
they submit that the instructions to the solicitor to commence the bankruptcy
proceedings was authorised by the sole member
of the company Stuttgart, namely
Mr Steicke. They submit that the proceedings are authorised as an act of
Stuttgart under the doctrine
of unanimous accent.
the respondents submit that the actions of Mr Steicke in giving instructions to
solicitors for the issue of the bankruptcy
notice and the petition have since
been ratified by Stuttgart, firstly by formal resolution of Mr Steicke as the
sole member of Stuttgart,
and secondly by resolution of the board of
the reasons that follow, it is my opinion that solicitors for the respondents
were properly instructed by the respondents to have
a bankruptcy notice issued
and a petition for a sequestration order filed.
officer or agent of a company only binds the company to contracts with outsiders
if he or she exercises the powers and performs
the duties customarily exercised
or performed by an officer or agent of a similar company. The constitution or
replaceable rules
of a company usually confer power of management on the
directors collectively as a board.
individual directors may be given power to take certain specified action. An
individual director does not generally have
customary authority to bind the
company in contracts with outsiders. As Dawson J said in
Developments Pty Ltd v Registrar-General
[1990] HCA 32
position of Director does not carry with it an ostensible authority to act on
behalf of the company. Directors can act
only collectively as a board and the
function of an individual Director is to participate in decisions of the board.
In the absence
of some representation made by the company, a Director has no
ostensible authority to bind it.”
customary authority of individual directors is limited, they will nevertheless
bind their company, if they have actual
authority, or been held out as having
greater authority than is customary for individual directors. This may often
arise, as here,
in the case of small proprietary companies where management is
effectively conducted by a particular director with the acquiescence
other director or directors.
the case of
Brick and Pike Industries Ltd v Occidental Life Nominees Pty Ltd
[1992] VicRp 68
10 ACLC 253
, a dominant Director was taken to represent the mind and
will of the company and have the authority of a Managing Director where
other directors acquiesced to this and did not involve themselves in
transactions entered into by the dominant director. In
the joint judgment of
McGarvie, Marks and Beach JJ, they said at pp 263-264:
may be accepted, as was explained by Dawson J in Northside, that persons merely
holding the office of Director are not
thereby authorised to commit the company
to contracts. At ACLC page 645; C.L.R. page 205 Dawson J observed that an
ordinary individual
Director of a company does not have ostensible authority to
bind the company. However the decision of the learned judge rested on
finding that Goldberg was more than an ordinary Director. By virtue of his
control of Arnsberg which owned all the shares in
Brick and Pipe, Goldberg
assumed the role of Managing Director with the acquiesces of the members of the
board of Directors who regarded
him as the “owner” of Brick and
The learned
judge found:
discussion at the Goldberg Group’s office, on 12 January took place in the
presence of Brick and Pipe’s controlling
shareholder or more precisely the
person who unmistakably controlled that shareholder, Arnsberg Pty Ltd and each
of its holding companies.
Whatever else is unclear in this litigation, it is
abundantly clear that Mr Goldberg not only had actual control, but also
asserted control over each of the companies within his Group,
including the plaintiff company. Throughout the dealings of the Occidental
Group, Mr Goldberg had been known as the alter ego of each of the Goldberg Group
of companies. Up to that time, and indeed until
the transactions were
concluded, he had made all the relevant decisions. Nothing had occurred to
indicate that he found it necessary
to refer to any Board, nor had any Board
(member) attempted to interfere ...nevertheless it was well known that Mr
Goldberg had taken
over Brick and Pipe and the company was now a holy owned
subsidiary of a company within the group, namely Arnsberg. There could
doubt that Mr Goldberg spoke on behalf of each of the companies, even though on
paper he was merely a member of the Board.
Negotiations had proceeded for about
a month at the time the document came to be executed on 12 January 1990 and
settlement was
completed on 16 January 1990 and there had been no indication
that Mr Goldberg was unable to speak for the plaintiff company. In
circumstances, it would be remarkable if that company could now say that Mr
Goldberg was not a person who could hold out on its
behalf that a particular
held a position in that company.
Needless to
say, this finding was not challenged and there was ample evidence to support it.
It included evidence that on numerous
occasions after the Goldberg take over,
Goldberg obtained board approval of transactions to which he had already
committed Brick
and Pipe without first seeking authorisation of its Board.
Individual Directors in evidence confirmed the acquiescence of Board
the activity of Goldberg which culminated in completed transactions for which
they gave no prior authorisation. In most,
if not all cases, the transactions
committed assets of Brick and Pipe, or its subsidiaries, as security for
borrowings by other Goldberg
opinion, what was said by the learned Judge amounted to a finding that Goldberg
had actual authority to manage the business
of Brick and Pipe and to hold out
that Furst was the Secretary of that company. There was ample justification for
that finding in
application of the principle of Hely-Hutchinson v Brayhead Ltd
(1968) 1 QB 549.
Corporate Affairs Commission (NSW) v Transphere Pty Ltd (No.
(1985) 9 ACLR 1005.
find that the third respondent, David Paul Steicke, had actual authority to
manage the business of the first respondent, Stuttgart
and that this management
included being able to instruct solicitors to have a bankruptcy notice issued
and to file a petition for
a sequestration order in the event that the
bankruptcy notice was not complied with. I find that Mr Steicke is Managing
of Stuttgart and has been Managing Director since the company was
incorporated on 22 July 1992.
finding that Mr Steicke has and had actual authority to speak on behalf of
Stuttgart and to engage solicitors to commence bankruptcy
proceedings makes it
unnecessary for me to address the other arguments that have been presented on
behalf of the respondents. Whilst
I would normally nevertheless address all the
submissions that have been put, I have decided that in this case, it is more
a decision be made promptly. The fact that I have not addressed all
submissions that have been put does not mean that I consider
them to be without
find that there is no other sufficient cause within the meaning of section 52
why a sequestration order should not be made and therefore
dismiss the
application for review.
affirm the sequestration order of Registrar Christie made on 21 December 2012.
make the orders to be found at the beginning of these reasons.
will hear the parties and others about any further consequential orders that are
I certify that the preceding forty (40) paragraphs are a
true copy of the reasons for judgment of Simpson FM
Date: 3 April 2013
Paragraphs 21-22.
RTF format (195 KB)
Signed PDF/A format