URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1969/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Car Owners' Mutual Insurance Company Limited v The Commonwealth Treasurer [1969] UKPCHCA 1; (1969) 117 CLR 320 (17 March 1969)
PRIVY COUNCIL
CAR OWNERS' MUTUAL INSURANCE CO. LTD. v. COMMONWEALTH TREASURER
[1969] UKPCHCA 1
(1969) 117 CLR
Privy Council
Lord Gardiner(1), Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest(1), Lord Pearce(1),
Lord Wilberforce(1), Lord Pearson(1) JJ.
Insurance - Insurance companies - Deposits - Company becoming beneficial
owner of shares of another - Exemption of subsidiary company
from maintaining
deposit - "if the Treasurer . . . so certifies" - No discretion conferred on
Treasurer - Insurance Act 1932-1965
(Cth), s. 14 (1) (2)*.
1969, January 15, 16; March 17. 17:3:1969
APPEAL from the High Court of Australia.
LORD WILBERFORCE delivered the judgment of their Lordships as follows: -
The appellant moved the High Court of Australia to make absolute an order
directing him to issue a certificate in accordance with
the Insurance Act
1932-1965 (Cth), s. 14. The motion was refused by the High Court and the
present appeal is against that refusal.
2. The proceedings arose out of the admitted fact that the appellant, Car
Owners' Mutual Insurance Company Limited is a wholly owned
subsidiary of Fire
and All Risks Insurance Company Limited. Each of these companies was
incorporated under the Companies Act (N.S.W.)
and each at all material times
carried on the business of insurance within the Commonwealth of Australia.
Each company made and maintained
with the Treasurer a deposit as required by
the Insurance Act, and it is admitted that Fire and All Risks Insurance
Company Limited
(the parent company) maintained a deposit equal to the value
of the deposit which would be required under the Act if it carried on
business of the appellant in addition to its own business. The object of the
proceedings was and is to obtain the return of the
deposit maintained by the
appellant. (at p321)
3. The section dealing with this matter, upon the construction of which this
appeal turns, is s. 14 of the Insurance Act. For the
present it is sufficient
to quote sub-ss. (1) and (2) (a) and (b).
"14. (1) Where the Treasurer is satisfied that a company
(in this section referred to as 'the parent company') has
become the beneficial owner of the shares of another company
(in this section referred to as 'the subsidiary company'), a
deposit made and maintained by the parent company of a
value equal to the value of the deposit that would be required
by this Act to be made and maintained by the parent company
if it carried on the business of the subsidiary company in
addition to its own business is, if the Treasurer, by writing
under his hand, so certifies, a sufficient compliance by the
subsidiary company with the requirements of this Act, and,
where the parent company makes and maintains such a deposit,
a deposit is not required to be made and maintained by the
subsidiary company.
(2) Where the parent company has made and maintains a
deposit that, by virtue of the last preceding sub-section, is a
sufficient compliance by the subsidiary company with the
requirements of this Act -
(a) the Treasurer shall return to the subsidiary company any
money or approved securities previously deposited by that
company in accordance with this Act;
(b) the insurance business carried on in the Commonwealth
by the subsidiary company shall, for the purposes of
sub-section (4) of section sixteen of this Act, be deemed
to be insurance business carried on by the parent company;"
It will be seen that sub-s. (1) requires two initial conditions to be
fulfilled. First, the Treasurer must be satisfied, in effect,
subsidiary should have become the wholly owned subsidiary of the parent
company: there is no difficulty and no dispute about
this in the present case.
Secondly, it must be shown that the parent company has made and maintained a
deposit of such an amount
as would be required if it carried on the business
of the subsidiary as well as its own business. This may involve decisions as
two matters. The amount of the deposit is, under the Act, based on the
amount of premium income, and any question as to premium income
decided by the Treasurer, subject to appeal to the Court (s. 17). Then, the
value of the deposit made by the parent company
may have to be determined.
This too is a matter for the Treasurer, subject, again, to appeal to the Court
(s. 24). In the present
case there is no dispute that the deposit made and
maintained by the parent company was, on this formula, sufficient in amount.
each of the initial conditions was satisfied. (at p322)
4. The question for decision arises out of the words which follow the
statement of the two conditions "is, if the Treasurer, by
writing under his
hand, so certifies, a sufficient compliance by the subsidiary company with the
requirements of this Act". Do these
words, as the Treasurer contends,
introduce a third requirement, namely a certificate by the Treasurer which the
Treasurer is entitled,
at his discretion, to withhold, or which at least he is
not bound to give, or, on the contrary, is the Treasurer bound to give the
certificate once he is satisfied (as admittedly he is) as to the two
previously stated matters. (at p322)
5. The argument for a third requirement was accepted by the majority of the
High Court of Australia. Menzies J. rested his conclusion
that the Treasurer
might refuse a certificate, notwithstanding that the two stated conditions
were complied with, principally upon
the grammatical construction of sub-s.
(1) and upon the interpolation of the qualifying provision between the words
"is" and "a sufficient
compliance". (at p322)
6. He was further of opinion that the policy of the Act was to maintain the
protection of the policy holders, and that a reduction
of the deposit should
not happen automatically but should be safeguarded by a discretion conferred
on the Treasurer. His opinion
was concurred in by McTiernan J. (at p322)
7. Sir Garfield Barwick C.J. took the opposite view. He could find no reason
in the Act for bringing the sufficiency of the deposit
within the Treasurer's
discretion. He considered that all that the Treasurer was called upon or
entitled to certify was the amount
of the deposit; this was not a matter of
opinion, but a fact which, under the Act, he was qualified to appreciate. If
the Treasurer
had a discretion, there were no considerations indicated by the
Act or to be inferred from it within which he should confine himself
exercise: but no indication could be found in the Act that an absolute
discretion in this particular matter only should be
conferred upon him. The
Chief Justice would have made absolute the order nisi for mandamus. (at p323)
8. Their Lordships are in agreement with the judgment of Sir Garfield Barwick
C.J. There are two main arguments, based upon the
scheme and structure of the
Act, which they regard as convincing. (at p323)
9. In the first place, accepting, as it is right to accept, that it is the
policy of this Act to provide some statutory protection
of the interest of
insurance policy holders, it appears that the method which has been chosen to
achieve this is through the compulsory
deposit of money with the Treasurer.
The amount of the deposits is fixed rigidly by the Act according to a number
of formulae adapted
to particular situations. The general obligation to lodge
a deposit is created by s. 9; s. 11 fixes the deposit in the normal case
value of 1,000 Pounds for each 5,000 Pounds of annual premium income subject
to a maximum of 80,000 Pounds or in the case of
a foreign company of 100,000
Pounds. Sections 12, 13 and 13B deal with special cases of companies which
commenced business after
the commencement of the Act. The amounts required to
be lodged vary, according to the stated criteria, but the Treasurer has no
or discretion to fix, increase or dispense with their amount: his
functions are of a purely supervisory or policing character. Apart
provisions and apart from the special case which is dealt with in s. 20A (to
which their Lordships will return) there
is no further mechanism established
for the protection of policy holders: the lodging of a deposit, related to
premium income, is
judged to be sufficient. (at p323)
10. In connexion with the special case of parent or subsidiary it is
significant that s. 14 itself incorporates a specific and additional
of a somewhat elaborate character. In sub-s. (2) after a provision (c) dealing
with the case where the subsidiary carries
on business outside the
Commonwealth, it is provided (d) that if a policy owner obtains a judgment
against the subsidiary which is
not satisfied, the parent company's deposit is
to be a security for preferential payment of the debt and (under s. 22) is to
be available
to satisfy the judgment: there are further special provisions to
deal with the event of liquidation. These provisions are followed
by one which
requires the parent forthwith to make a deposit up to the full amount which
would have been required to be made by both
companies and any other subsidiary
of the same parent but for the provisions of s. 14 (1). This both demonstrates
that the legislature
had clearly in mind that s. 14 (1) might in certain
circumstances require to be supplemented by a requirement for further deposit,
and confirms that the policy and scheme of the Act is to protect policy
holders by specifically stated deposits quantified by the
Act itself and not
fixed by the discretion of any administrative authority. (at p324)
11. The second argument relates more particularly to the drafting of s. 14
itself. Sub-section (2) (a) lays down in imperative terms
that, if the parent
company has made and maintains a deposit which is a sufficient compliance by
the subsidiary company with the
requirements of the Act, the Treasurer shall
return the subsidiary company's deposit. This sub-section is to be compared
20A (this is the special case abovementioned) which deals with the
situation where there has been an appreciation in the value of
securities. There the Treasurer is directed to return any surplus, subject to
the qualification that he is not required
so to do if he "is not satisfied
that that person (the depositor) has made adequate provision to meet his
liabilities (including
contingent liabilities) to policy owners in the
Commonwealth". This provision, and the absence of anything comparable from s.
becomes the more significant when it is seen that s. 20A was introduced in
1960 when s. 14 was itself amended by, inter alia, the
addition of sub-s. (2).
The omission in s. 14 to insert any power or duty on the part of the Treasurer
to satisfy himself as to the
liabilities of the subsidiary must be deliberate,
and it becomes impossible to read anything of this character into s. 14. (at
12. The Treasurer, in fact, in his letter of 17th May 1966 based his refusal
to return the deposit in the first place on s. 20A:
"it is essential," he
stated, "that the Treasurer be assured that the group has made adequate
provision to meet its liabilities (including
contingent liabilities) to policy
owners in the Commonwealth - vide section 20A (2) (c)". The letter then
proceeded to require a
complete investigation into the affairs both of the
subsidiary and of the parent company by an accountant selected by the
13. In their Lordships' opinion this was a misconception. There are no
grounds upon which the Treasurer could claim to introduce
the discretionary
powers of s. 20A into s. 14: nor, having regard to the scheme of the Act as
already analysed, can any basis be
found in the Act for conferring upon the
Treasurer any other discretionary power, in the supposed interest of policy
holders, to
control the application of the section. Indeed, unless the
Treasurer's discretion is to be governed by the considerations expressed
20A (2) (which for the reasons given cannot be accepted) there is no other
standard or principle to be found in or implied
from the Act upon which any
discretion could be exercised. But in a statutory framework it is impossible
to conceive of a discretion
not controlled by any standard or consideration
stated, or to be elicited from, the terms of the Act. (at p325)
14. Their Lordships, with the majority of the High Court, appreciate that s.
14 (1) is not free from linguistic difficulty: but
the latter is not so great
as to compel a conclusion which would run counter to the whole scheme of the
Act. No doubt the issue of
a certificate by the Treasurer is essential in
order to establish, or to frank, the subsidiary company's exemption from the
to maintain a deposit, and no doubt too the Treasurer is entrusted,
under s. 14, with responsibility for verifying compliance with
the two stated
conditions. But the word "if" does not introduce any further condition or
requirement: the certificate of the Treasurer
is to relate to, and only to,
the value of the deposit, and if this is sufficient, and the Treasurer is
satisfied as to the beneficial
ownership of the shares, he has no residuary
discretion to refuse the certificate or consequentially to withhold the
subsidiary company's
deposit. (at p325)
The appellant was in their Lordships' judgment entitled to the order of
mandamus for which it asked and they will humbly advise
Her Majesty that the
cause be remitted to the High Court for action accordingly. The respondent
must pay the costs of the appeal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter