Chever & Kalysta [2025] FedCFamC1F 565 (11 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Chever & Kalysta
[2025] FedCFamC1F
File number:
SYC 5768 of 2024
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– Application by respondent for adjournment of hearing as to whether an
agreement is enforceable
as a binding financial agreement – Where the
respondent’s lawyers were granted leave to withdraw – Order under
the s 102NA cross-examination scheme – Failure to attend previous
hearings – Failure to comply with directions –
Prejudice to
applicant if proceedings delayed – Effect of adjournment on other
litigants awaiting court dates – Application
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the
Ms Abdelraheem
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Guardian Family Law
The Respondent:
Litigant in person
SYC 5768 of 2024
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Wong of counsel and Sydney Triumph Lawyers have leave to withdraw from the
respondent’s oral application for an adjournment is refused.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Chever & Kalysta
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
ALDRIDGE J:
is an application by the respondent for an adjournment of the hearing listed for
two days commencing today.
the outset, Ms Wong of counsel instructed by a firm of solicitors appeared for
the respondent and said difficulties had arisen
between her and her client such
that neither her nor her instructing solicitor could continue to act for the
respondent. They sought
and were given leave to withdraw.
their withdrawal, the respondent herself sought an adjournment to enable her to
arrange legal representation. The matter is listed
today for a separate hearing
of whether an agreement entered into between the parties is enforceable as an
agreement under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the
Act”). Accordingly, I do not see any difficulty arising as the respondent
would be, in those circumstances,
unlikely to be required to cross-examine the
matter was fixed for hearing by orders made by Campton J on 14 May
2025. One of the orders required each party to file a case
outline identifying
the material to be relied on, a brief chronology and a summary of the
submissions sought to be made on or before
5 August 2025. No case outline
document has been filed on behalf of the respondent.
matter came before me on 4 June 2025 for issues in relation to subpoenas.
There was no appearance by either the respondent or
lawyers on that date,
although the respondent suggests she later turned up at court. The matter
further came before me on 21 July
2025 for a compliance and readiness
hearing where, once again, there was no appearance by the respondent.
Nonetheless,
it is clear that for a significant period of time the respondent has had the
benefit of lawyers, B Lawyers, who, for
example, assisted the respondent in
filing an affidavit on her behalf with that affidavit having been sworn or
affirmed on 9 July
2025. Those solicitors filed a Notice of Ceasing to Act
on 21 July 2025. I have no correspondence or anything from them that
why they filed a Notice of Ceasing to Act. The respondent says it is
because they were unable to continue to act for her. I note
that B Lawyers were
lawyers appointed by Legal Aid to represent the respondent because orders had
previously been made under s 102NA
of the Act prohibiting the respondent
from directly cross-examining the applicant.
thereafter Mr Algalele of Sydney Triumph Lawyers was appointed as the solicitor
for the respondent.
respondent has tendered a bundle of correspondence with Mr Algalele including an
email of 4 August 2025 saying, “Please
check and advise what’s
the next step. We running out of time” (Exhibit 1). On 7 August
2025 she wrote and said:
Further to your call, I appreciate that you have met with the barrister.
However, given how close the hearing is, I urgently request
written confirmation
today that the barrister is confirmed at the hearing.
Additionally, new evidence has recently come [to] light and had being reported
to police last night, please let me know if you will
be seeking an adjournment
or if you plan to raise the new information at the hearing.
(Exhibit 1)
email was followed up by a further email sent four hours later saying the
respondent was “extremely anxious” that
no case outline had been
prepared and sent for review and again asked for confirmation that the barrister
was briefed. As I understand
it, the barrister had been briefed on 6 August
2025. I am not quite sure why they did not continue to be available.
11.15 pm on 9 August 2025 a letter was again written asking for
confirmation of the barrister, that the barrister had read the
material and that
there would be a conference before court.
affidavit, which apparently the respondent wishes to rely on, is an affidavit
asserting that she has located a tracking device
on her car and also such
devices on her daughter’s car and son’s work vehicle and family car.
I do not understand the
relevance of that to the hearing listed today.
seems therefore that the respondent has had the benefit of lawyers for some
time. The lawyers did not appear today to seek an adjournment
on the basis that
they were not prepared to run the respondent’s case but rather sought to
withdraw on the basis difficulties
had arisen between them and their
accept that if the matter is not adjourned the respondent will have to represent
herself but that must be seen in the light that
she has had the benefit of two
sets of solicitors and at least two barristers recently, each of whom has
withdrawn from the matter
for reasons rather unknown (in the case of the first
solicitors) or because of the difficulties that arose between them and their
client (in the second instance).
also take into account the history of failing to comply with
Campton J’s directions and the failure to attend in a timely
on at least two occasions. Importantly, there would only be a point in
adjourning the proceedings if there was some comfort
in the knowledge that on
the next occasion we would be in a different position and the respondent would
attend with representation
that was prepared to stay. Sadly, I am not persuaded
that is the case.
is, of course, a two way street. The applicant is here ready to proceed with his
proceedings and whilst there remains the
possibility of an indemnity costs
order, that does not completely deal with the prejudice that would arise from
having to wait for
yet another hearing date which if it were to take place in
front of me would take place next year. That is a most undesirable delay.
court is also entitled to take into account the effect of any adjournment on
other litigants, particularly to litigants who are
patiently waiting their day
am not persuaded that the interests of justice favour an adjournment and the
application is refused.
I certify that the preceding seventeen (17)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the ex tempore Reasons for Judgment of
the Honourable
Dated: 19 August 2025
RTF format (314 KB)
Signed PDF/A format