URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1992/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mabo v Queensland (No 2) ("Mabo case") [1992] HCA 23; (1992) 175 CLR 1 (3 June 1992)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
MABO AND OTHERS v. QUEENSLAND (No. 2)
[1992] HCA 23
; (1992) 175 CLR 1
F.C. 92/014
Aborigines - Constitutional Law - Real Property
High Court of Australia
Mason C.J.(1), Brennan(2), Deane(3), Dawson(4), Toohey(5), Gaudron(3) and
McHugh(1) JJ.
Aborigines - Native title to land - Whether extinguished by annexation by
Crown - Reception of common law in Australia - Effect
on native title - Terra
nulius - Whether doctrine applicable in Australia.
Constitutional Law (Q.) - Reception of common law in settled colony - Effect
on title of indigenous people - Annexation of territory
by colony - Terra
nullius - Whether doctrine applicable in Australia - Power of Parliament of
Qeensland to extinguish native title.
Real Property - Tenures and estates - Application on settlement of New South
Wales - Effect on native title - Land over which native
title exists - Whether
Crown land - Land Act 1962 (Q.), s. 5 - "Crown land."
Canberra, 1991, May 28-31; 1992, June 3. 3:6:1992
MASON C.J. AND McHUGH J. We agree with the reasons for judgment of Brennan J.
and with the declaration which he proposes.
2. In the result, six members of the Court (Dawson J. dissenting) are in
agreement that the common law of this country recognizes
a form of native
title which, in the cases where it has not been extinguished, reflects the
entitlement of the indigenous inhabitants,
in accordance with their laws or
customs, to their traditional lands and that, subject to the effect of some
particular Crown leases,
the land entitlement of the Murray Islanders in
accordance with their laws or customs is preserved, as native title, under the
of Queensland. The main difference between those members of the Court who
constitute the majority is that, subject to the operation
Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth), neither of us nor Brennan J. agrees with the
conclusion to be drawn from the judgments of Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ.
at least in the absence of clear and unambiguous statutory provision to
the contrary, extinguishment of native title by the Crown
by inconsistent
grant is wrongful and gives rise to a claim for compensatory damages. We note
that the judgment of Dawson J. supports
the conclusion of Brennan J. and
ourselves on that aspect of the case since his Honour considers that native
title, where it exists,
is a form of permissive occupancy at the will of the
3. We are authorized to say that the other members of the Court agree with
what is said in the preceding paragraph about the outcome
of the case.
4. The formal order to be made by the Court accords with the declaration
proposed by Brennan J. but is cast in a form which will
not give rise to any
possible implication affecting the status of land which is not the subject of
the declaration in par.2 of the
formal order.
BRENNAN J. The Murray Islands lie in the Torres Strait, at about 10 degrees
S. Latitude and 144 degrees E. Longitude. They are the
easternmost of the
Eastern Islands of the Strait. Their total land area is of the order of 9
square kilometres. The biggest is
Mer (known also as Murray Island), oval in
shape about 2.79 kms long and about 1.65 kms across. A channel about 900 m.
wide separates
Mer from the other two islands, Dauar and Waier, which lie
closely adjacent to each other to the south of Mer. The Islands are
for the most part by fringing reefs. The people who were in
occupation of these Islands before first European contact and who have
continued to occupy those Islands to the present day are known as the Meriam
people. Although outsiders, relatively few in number,
have lived on the Murray
Islands from time to time and worked as missionaries, government officials, or
fishermen, there has not
been a permanent immigrant population.
Anthropological records and research show that the present inhabitants of the
Islands are
descended from the people described in early European reports. The
component of foreign ancestry among the present population is
small compared
with most communities living in the Torres Strait. The Meriam people of today
retain a strong sense of affiliation
with their forbears and with the society
and culture of earlier times. They have a strong sense of identity with their
The plaintiffs are members of the Meriam people. In this case, the
legal rights of the members of the Meriam people to the land
of the Murray
Islands are in question.
Early contact with Europeans
2. The Meriam people were in occupation of the Islands for generations before
the first European contact. They are a Melanesian
people (perhaps an
integration of differing groups) who probably came to the Murray Islands from
Papua New Guinea. Their numbers
have fluctuated, probably no more than 1000,
no less than 400.
3. Some of the features of life in the Murray Islands at the time of first
European contact, at the end of the 18th century, are
described by Moynihan J.
in his findings in the present case:
" Communal life based on group membership seems to have
been the predominant feature of life. Many of the
activities of daily life were social activities which took
place in the context of group activities of a ceremonial
or ritualistic nature. Behaviour was regulated in the
interest of the community by social pressures. ...
The people lived in groups of huts strung along the
foreshore or strand immediately behind the sandy beach.
They still do although there has been a contraction of
the villages and the huts are increasingly houses. The
cultivated garden land was and is in the higher central
portion of the island. There seems however in recent times
a trend for cultivation to be in more close proximity with
habitation.
The groups of houses were and are organised in named
villages. It is far from obvious to the uninitiated, but
is patent to an islander, that one is moving from one
village to another. The area occupied by an individual
village is, even having regard to the confined area on a
fairly small island which is in any event available for
'village land', quite small.
Garden land is identified by reference to a named
locality coupled with the name of relevant individuals if
further differentiation is necessary. The Islands are not
surveyed and boundaries are in terms of known land marks
such as specific trees or mounds of rocks.
Gardening was of the most profound importance to the
inhabitants of Murray Island at and prior to European
fishing ...
Gardening was important not only from the point of view
of subsistence but to provide produce for consumption
or exchange during the various rituals associated with
different aspects of community life. Marriage and adoption
involved the provision or exchange of considerable quantity
of produce. Surplus produce was also required for the
rituals associated with the various cults at least to
sustain those who engaged in them and in connection with
the various activities associated with death.
Prestige depended on gardening prowess both in terms
of the production of a sufficient surplus for the social
purposes such as those to which I have referred and to be
manifest in the show gardens and the cultivation of yams
to a huge size. Considerable ritual was associated with
gardening and gardening techniques were passed on and
preserved by these rituals. Boys in particular worked with
their fathers and by observations and imitations reinforced
by the rituals and other aspects of the social fabric
gardening practices were passed on."
" It seems that before European contact social cohesion
was sought by the combined operation of a number of
factors. Children were inculcated from a very early
age with knowledge of their relationships in terms of
social groupings and what was expected of them by a
constant pattern of example, imitation and repetition
with reinforcing behaviour. It was part of their
environment - the way in which they lived. ... Initiation
and other group activities reinforced these patterns. A
sense of shame was the outcome of a failure to observe.
It could be reinforced by group pressures leading to
retribution. Ultimately force might be resorted to by
those who had access to the means of exerting it.
Sorcery, magic and taboo were obviously important
cohesive factors and a source of sanction."
The findings show that Meriam society was regulated more by custom than by
4. Contacts with Europeans were initially few and sporadic. There were
occasional visits by passing ships in the early 19th century.
In 1834, two
young British castaways were rescued and they stayed on Mer until a ship
called there 2 years later. The ship's captain,
Captain Lewis, recorded that
the natives "acknowledge no chief each family being distinct and independent
of each other. Quarrels
frequently take place which, after a fight are
generally followed by a speedy reconciliation." The London Missionary Society
to the Murray Islands in about 1871 and moved its Torres Strait
headquarters to Mer in 1877. It was a significant influence in keeping
peace among the Meriam people and in modifying some of their customs. It
appears that, prior to the arrival of the London Missionary
Society, elaborate
funeral ceremonies and the collection and preservation of human heads were
features of life in the Murray Islands.
5. Although the Murray Islands, prior to their annexation to Queensland in
1879, were not part of her Majesty's dominions, Imperial
and Colonial
authorities were concerned for the maintenance of order in, and the protection
of the indigenous inhabitants of, those
Islands and other islands in the
Western Pacific. "Blackbirding" was being practised and in the 1860s the
Murray Islands were raided,
women seized and some of the Meriam people
murdered. The Pacific Islanders Protection Acts of 1872 and 1875 (Imp) (1) 35
Vict c 19 (P9/579); 38 and 39 Vict c 51. were enacted to stamp out
blackbirding (2) See O'Connell and Riordan, Opinions on Imperial
Constitutional Law, (1971), pp 100-103 and to confer on a High Commissioner's
Court jurisdiction over British subjects in the islands
of the Western
Pacific. However, the 1875 Act expressly disavowed "any claim or title
whatsoever to dominion or sovereignty over
any such islands or places" and any
intention "to derogate from the rights of the tribes or people inhabiting such
islands or places,
or of chiefs or rulers thereof, to such sovereignty or
6. Nevertheless, it appears that the Queensland authorities exercised some de
facto control in the 1870s over islands in the Torres
Strait which were not
part of that Colony's territory. When a proposal to expand the maritime
boundaries of Queensland to include
these islands was under consideration,
CommandER Heath, R.N., the Portmaster at Brisbane, reported to the Colonial
Treasurer on 11
December 1877:
"Where any lodgment of Islanders or others for questionable
purposes had been made on the islands beyond our
the police have been obliged to act as though these islands
did belong to Queensland, the Police Magistrate wisely
considering it a lesser evil to exceed his authority in
this matter than to allow any attempt at settlement on
these islands for improper purposes."
7. The proposal to annex coastal islands that were not already part of
Queensland found favour with the Executive Council. The
Hon. John Douglas,
then Premier of the Colony, sent the Governor of Queensland a memorandum dated
27 December 1877 containing the
"A sort of police surveillance is even now exercised over
some of the islands outside our limits, but it is certainly
desirable that we should possess a real authority to deal
with the somewhat doubtful characters who are occasionally
found to act in a very independent way. It does not at
all follow that we should form settlements. They will
be frequented by pearl-shellers, and probably eventually
by more permanent settlers. They ought to be visited
occasionally by the Resident Magistrate at Thursday Island,
but it would not be necessary to do more than this at
present, and I do not think that we should have to increase
our expenditure on that account."
8. In July 1878, as Moynihan J. found -
"H.M. Chester the Police Magistrate at Thursday Island
... visited Murray. He advised the people to select a
chief and submit to his authority which, if properly
exercised, would be supported. Harry (Ari) Buzire was
designated. The name Mamoose came to be applied to the
holders of such office throughout the Straits. ... The
reasons for Ari's selection are obscure. He had apparently
no important ritual office or any particular claim to
elevation to central authority which was itself the
creature of Chester's intervention. Ari was provided with
executive capacity in the form of some designated
constables and a boat."
9. The Mamoose, as Moynihan J. found, became "something of an executive arm
to the mission".
Annexation of the Murray Islands
10. Ultimately, the proposal to extend the maritime boundaries of Queensland
to include the Murray and Darnley Islands was adopted
by the Colonial Office
and, on 10 October 1878 at Westminster, Queen Victoria passed Letters Patent
"for the rectification of the
Maritime Boundary of the Colony of Queensland,
and for the annexation to that Colony of (certain) Islands lying in Torres
and between Australia and New Guinea". The Murray Islands lay within
the maritime boundary mentioned in the Letters Patent.
11. The Letters Patent authorized the Governor of Queensland by Proclamation
"to declare that, from and after a day to be therein
mentioned, the said Islands shall be annexed to and form
part of Our said Colony. Provided always that Our said
Governor issues no such Proclamation as aforesaid until the
Legislature of Our said Colony of Queensland shall have
passed a law providing that the said Islands shall, on the
day aforesaid, become part of Our said Colony, and subject
to the laws in force therein. Provided also that the
application of the said laws to the said Islands may be
modified either by such Proclamation as aforesaid, or by
any law or laws to be from time to time passed by the
Legislature of Our said Colony for the government of the
said Islands so annexed."
The Queensland Legislature passed the requisite law (The Queensland Coast
Islands Act of 1879) and, on 21 July 1879 at Brisbane, the
Governor of
Queensland by Proclamation declared -
"that from and after the first day of August, in the year
of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine,
the Islands described in the Schedule (which followed the
Letters Patent and the Act) shall be annexed to and become
part of the Colony of Queensland, and shall be and become
subject to the laws in force therein."
The "most dominant" of the purposes for which the Torres Strait islands were
annexed were found by Moynihan J. to have been:
"(a) command of Torres Strait and the sea lane to India;
(b) control of the fishery industry in Torres Strait
including the pearl-shell industry; (c) the protection
of shipping and ship-wrecked crews; (d) the extension
of jurisdiction to non-British subjects and the native
inhabitants of the islands; (e) the protection of the
native inhabitants of the islands".
And, in Wacando v. The Commonwealth (3)
[1981] HCA 60
; (1981) 148 CLR 1, at p 10, Gibbs C.J.
noted Professor Cumbrae-Stewart's view
that the occasion
for the passing of
the Letters Patent
was that the inhabitants of some of the islands had no
protection against
violence and that
the islands provided bases for those
intent on evading Queensland's revenue and immigration laws. The acquisition
of beneficial ownership
of land by the Crown does not
appear to have been
among the purposes of the annexation entertained by either
the Queensland or
Imperial Government.
12. In September 1879, Captain Pennefather on the instructions of H.M.
Chester visited the Murray Islands where (as he reported)
he "mustered the
natives" and informed them "that they would be held amenable to British law
now the island was annexed". He also
"The Chief acts as magistrate, he has a staff of 10 or 12
men as policemen, they have built a church and courthouse
of which they are very proud, there is also a very good
house belonging to the London Missionary Society this
island being the headquarters for the mission in these
The system of local administration, established prior to annexation, proved to
be tyrannous in its operation and, in October 1882,
Captain Pennefather
reported that he had dismantled it. (It appears from later history, however,
that Harry, the Mamoose, continued
to exercise considerable authority.) At
the same time, he reported:
"The natives are very tenacious of their ownership of the
land and the island is divided into small properties which
have been handed down from father to son from generation
to generation, they absolutely refuse to sell their land
at any price, but rent small portions to the beche-de-mer
men and others. These natives, though lazy like all
Polynesians on their islands, build good houses and
cultivate gardens, they are a powerful intelligent race and
a white man is as safe if not safer residing amongst them,
as in Brisbane."
Moynihan J. found that there was apparently no concept of public or general
community ownership among the people of Murray Island,
all the land of Murray
Island being regarded as belonging to individuals or groups.
13. In about February 1882, the Queensland Government "reserved" Murray
Island for native inhabitants. In the same year, a special
lease of 2 acres
on Mer was granted by the Queensland Government to the London Missionary
Society, which had assumed some responsibility
for law and order and for the
peaceful resolution of disputes. Shortly after the Reserve was created, the
Queensland authorities,
at the request of the Meriam people, "removed a number
of trespassers" from the Islands.
14. In 1885, the Hon. John Douglas, by then Government Resident at Thursday
Island, went to the Murray Islands to arrange for the
eviction of "intruders"
(South Sea Islanders) in order to ensure that "the Murray Islanders will have
Murray Island to themselves".
He successfully negotiated the departure of the
intruders. He found Harry, "the Chief or primate of Murray Island", to be a
despot ... (whose) position is respected."
15. In 1886, the Acting Government Resident at Thursday Island reported to
the Chief Secretary of Queensland on the application
of Queensland law:
"I do not see how it will be possible to administer these
islands under the present laws of Queensland, more
especially as touching the land question, and the tenure
under which the native races are to be allowed to hold the
land they own. There is no doubt that if every acre has
not a reputed owner (and I am inclined to think every acre
has) but every grove or single tree of any value has its
proper and legitimate hereditary owner. To disturb these
rights, great care would have to be exercised and the
natives recompensed for any loss that they might suffer
through deprivation."
16. By 1891 the headquarters of the London Missionary Society had been moved
from the Murray Islands. Later, Douglas, in a report
on a visit to the Murray
Islands, described the system of government then in place:
"The secular government is conducted by 'Harry', the
recognised chief or headman who is assisted in his
administration by four officers, or 'policemen' so called.
They are recognised by me, and they assist to keep the
peace when it is necessary that their authority should be
invoked, which is not often.
They receive a small annual honorarium, and they are
privileged to wear a uniform. 'Harry' has a whaleboat,
presented to him by the Government, the 'policemen' man
this boat. 'William' a native of New Zealand, is the head
of the spiritual or theocratic government."
Douglas recommended that a teacher and adviser be appointed to reside on the
Islands. John Stuart Bruce took up an appointment to
that office in October
1892 and remained there until January 1934.
17. The "system of self-government ... as instituted by the late Hon. John
Douglas, C.M.G." was described by the Chief Protector
of Aboriginals in
Queensland in his Annual Report for 1907 as follows:
"The Governing body consists of the native chief or
'mamoose', assisted and advised by the councillors or
elders of the village, with a staff of native police
to uphold his authority and to keep order among the
inhabitants or visitors.
The European school teacher acts as clerk and treasurer of
the native court, assisting with suggestion or advice when
requested, but otherwise has no authority to interfere in
the internal management of affairs.
The mamoose acts as a police magistrate and governor, with
power to deal summarily with offences and breaches of local
regulations, and is directly responsible for the behaviour
and cleanliness of his village to the Government Resident
and Police Magistrate at Thursday Island. He may inflict
punishment by fine or imprisonment upon minor offences, but
misdemeanours and serious offences must be reserved for
the bench at Thursday Island. The councillors attend at
courthouse to assist the mamoose with advice and, in order
of seniority, may act on his behalf during his absence.
They also meet to confer monthly with the mamoose upon any
questions concerning the conduct of affairs.
The native island police, under a native sergeant, are
responsible to the mamoose for the good behaviour of the
inhabitants, etc., and may arrest and lock up offenders till
the next meeting of court. They have also to inspect and
see that each householder keeps his premises and grounds
clean, and that the portion of the public road adjacent to
his residence is kept in good repair and order; also that
the public properties (coconut-trees, fish-traps, etc.), and
buildings (court-house, lock-up, school-house, etc.) are not
damaged or destroyed.
The European teacher resident upon the island acts as clerk
of the court and registrar of births, marriages, and
deaths, keeping all books and records, and also as
treasurer, keeping an account and taking charge of all
collections from fines, taxes upon dogs, etc., the mamoose
having authority to expend all such collections upon public
improvements, repairs, etc."
18. It appears from reports by Mr Bruce that, from the end of the 19th
century, the Mamoose's court entertained cases arising from
disputes over land
or land boundaries.
19. When an anthropological expedition from Cambridge visited the Islands in
1898 they found that -
"Queensland has not affected native land tenure which is
upheld in the Court of the Island. In a few instances it
is not impossible that English ideas, especially of
inheritance are making themselves felt. There is no common
land and each makes his own garden on his own land at his
own convenience."
The Island Court, according to Moynihan J., sought "to achieve a consistent
application of certain basic principles" although his
Honour went on to say
"the role of the Court was to maintain social harmony by
accommodating peoples wishes as far as possible and doing
what seemed to be right in the circumstances."
Although there was a clear insistence on exclusive possession by the "owners"
of particular blocks of land and a general expectation
that land would be
passed on patrilineally, his Honour thought that:
"The ultimate determining factor in terms of the control and
disposition of land was simply what was acceptable in terms
of social harmony and the capacity of an individual to
impose his (it seems almost (always) to have been a him)
will on the community. This was easier done if the claim
had the appearance of certain expected characteristics."
It would not be surprising to find that land disputes in a small community
were settled by a consensus which is arrived at aftER consideration
variety of factors. Strict legal rules might have been disruptive of
community life.
20. Without pausing to enquire into the legal support for the "system of
self-government" instituted by Douglas or for the jurisdiction
of the Island
Court, it appears that the Meriam people came peacefully to accept a large
measure of control by Queensland authorities
and that officials of the
Queensland Government became accustomed to exercise administrative authority
over the Murray Islands.
Formal annexation had been followed by an effective
exercise of administrative power by the Government of Queensland.
21. In 1894, some doubts had arisen in the Colonial Office as to the legality
of the annexation of the islands included in the 1879
Letters Patent to
Queensland. Queensland had been separated from New South Wales and erected
into a Colony pursuant to The New South
Constitution
Act, 1855 (Imp) (4)
18 and 19 Vict c 54 by Letters Patent of 6 June 1859 and an Order in Council
of the same day. The boundaries
of the new colony were fixed, the Colony was
granted a constitution with representative institutions and the laws of New
South Wales
became the laws of Queensland on separation. The doubts which
arose in the Colonial Office related to the legality of incorporating
territory into a colony with representative institutions once the boundaries
of the colony were fixed by or under Imperial legislation.
To settle these
doubts, the Colonial Boundaries Act 1895 (Imp) (5) 58 and 59 Vict c 34 was
enacted. As this Court held in Wacando,
Queensland Coast Islands Act
did not suffice to effect the incorporation of the Murray Islands into
Queensland (either
by its own force or by satisfying a condition
bringing the
Letters Patent of 1879 into operation), the requisite Imperial legislative
authority could be found in the Colonial
Boundaries Act.
22. With this brief conspectus of the history of the Murray Islands, we may
now turn to an examination of the effect of annexation
on the legal rights of
the members of the Meriam people to the land of the Murray Islands.
The theory of universal and absolute Crown ownership
23. It may be assumed that on 1 August 1879 the Meriam people knew nothing of
the events in Westminster and in Brisbane that effected
the annexation of the
Murray Islands and their incorporation into Queensland and that, had the
Meriam people been told of the Proclamation
made in Brisbane on 21 July 1879,
they would not have appreciated its significance. The legal consequences of
these events are in
issue in this case. Oversimplified, the chief question in
this case is whether these transactions had the effect on 1 August 1879
vesting in the Crown absolute ownership of, legal possession of and exclusive
power to confer title to, all land in the Murray
Islands. The defendant
submits that that was the legal consequence of the Letters Patent and of the
events which brought them into
effect. If that submission be right, the Queen
took the land occupied by Meriam people on 1 August 1879 without their knowing
the expropriation; they were no longer entitled without the consent of the
Crown to continue to occupy the land they had occupied
for centuries past.
24. The defendant's submission is founded on propositions that were stated in
cases arising from the acquisition of othER colonial
territory by the Imperial
Crown. Although there are differences which might be said to distinguish the
Murray Islands and the Meriam
people of 1879 from other colonial territories
and their indigenous inhabitants when those territories respectively became
colonies, the propositions on which the defendant seeks to rely have
been expressed to apply universally to all colonial territories
"settled" by
British subjects. Assuming that the Murray Islands were acquired as a
"settled" colony (for sovereignty was not acquired
by the Crown either by
conquest or by cession), the validity of the propositions in the defendant's
chain of argument cannot be determined
by reference to circumstances unique to
the Murray Islands; they are advanced as general propositions of law
applicable to all settled
colonies. Nor can the circumstances which might be
thought to differentiate the Murray Islands from other parts of Australia be
invoked as an acceptable ground for distinguishing the entitlement of the
Meriam people from the entitlement of other indigenous
inhabitants to the use
and enjoyment of their traditional lands. As we shall see, such a ground of
distinction discriminates on the
basis of race or ethnic origin for it denies
the capacity of some categories of indigenous inhabitants to have any rights
or interests
in land. It will be necessary to consider presently the racial
or ethnic basis of the law stated in earlier cases relating to the
entitlement
of indigenous people to land in settled colonies.
25. On analysis, the defendant's argument is that, when the territory of a
settled colony became part of the Crown's dominions,
the law of England so far
as applicable to colonial conditions became the law of the colony and, by that
law, the Crown acquired
the absolute beneficial ownership of all land in the
territory so that the colony became the Crown's demesne and no right or
in any land in the territory could thereafter be possessed by any
other person unless granted by the Crown. Perhaps the clearest
statement of
these propositions is to be found in Attorney-General v. Brown (6) (1847) 1
Legge 312, at p 316, when the Supreme Court
of New South Wales rejected a
challenge to the Crown's title to and possession of the land in the Colony.
Stephen C.J. stated the
law to be -
"that the waste lands of this Colony are, and ever have
been, from the time of its first settlement in 1788, in
the Crown; that they are, and ever have been, from that
date (in point of legal intendment), without office found,
in the Sovereign's possession; and that, as his or her
property, they have been and may now be effectually granted
to subjects of the Crown".
The reasons for this conclusion were stated (7): ibid., at pp 317-318
"The territory of New South Wales, and eventually the whole
of the vast island of which it forms a part, have been
taken possession of by British subjects in the name of the
Sovereign. They belong, therefore, to the British Crown.
... The fact of the settlement of New South Wales in
that manner, and that it forms a portion of the Queen's
Dominions, and is subject to and governed by British laws,
may be learned from public colonial records, and from Acts
of Parliament. New South Wales is termed in the statute
54 GEO III, c.15, and in the 59 GEO III, c.122, His
Majesty's Colony; not the colony of the people, not even
the colony of the empire. It was maintained that this
supposed property in the Crown was a fiction. Doubtless,
in one sense, it was so. The right of the people of
England to their property, does not in fact depend on
any royal grant, and the principle that all lands are
holden mediately or immediately of the Crown flows from
the adoption of the feudal system merely (Co Lit 1, and
ibid.191, a, Mr. Butler's note 6; Bac Ab Prerog B.;
Vin Ab same title K.A. 19). That principle, however, is
universal in the law of England, and we can see no reason
why it shall be said not to be equally in operation here.
The Sovereign, by that law is (as it is termed) universal
occupant. All property is supposed to have been,
originally, in him. Though this be generally a fiction,
it is one "adopted by the
Constitution
to answer the ends
of government, for the good of the people." (Bac Ab ubi
supra, marginal note.) But, in a newly-discovered country,
settled by British subjects, the occupancy of the Crown
with respect to the waste lands of that country, is no
fiction. If, in one sense, those lands be the patrimony of
the nation, the Sovereign is the representative, and the
executive authority of the nation, the 'moral personality'
(as Vattel calls him, Law of Nations, book 1, chap 4),
by whom the nation acts, and in whom for such purposes
its power resides. Here is a property, depending for its
support on no feudal notions or principle. But if the
feudal system of tenures be, as we take it to be, part of
the universal law of the parent state, on what shall it be
said not to be law, in New South Wales? At the moment of
its settlement the colonists brought the common law of
England with them."
So conceiving the common law, his Honour understood a statutory reference to
"the waste lands of the Crown" to mean "all the waste
and unoccupied lands of
the colony; for, at any rate, there is no other proprietor of such lands".
(8) ibid., at p 319.
26. This judgment has formidable support. It was described as "notable" by
Windeyer J. (9) In Wade v. New South Wales Rutile Mining
Co. Pty. Ltd.
[1969] HCA 28
121 CLR 177, at p 194 who followed its doctrine in Randwick Corporation v.
Rutledge (10)
; (1959) 102 CLR 54,
" On the first settlement of New South Wales (then
comprising the whole of eastern Australia), all the land
in the colony became in law vested in the Crown. The
early Governors had express powers under their commissions
to make grants of land. The principles of English real
property law, with socage tenure as the basis, were
introduced into the colony from the beginning - all lands
of the territory lying in the grant of the Crown, and
until granted forming a royal demesne. The colonial Act,
6 Wm IV No. 16 (1836), recited in its preamble that the
Governors by their commissions under the Great Seal had
authority 'to grant and dispose of the waste lands' - the
purpose of the Act being simply to validate grants which
had been made in the names of the Governors instead of
in the name of the Sovereign. And when in 1847 a bold
argument, which then had a political flavour, challenged
the right of the Crown, that was to say of the Home
Government, to dispose of land in the colony, it was as
a legal proposition firmly and finally disposed of by
Sir Alfred Stephen C.J.: The Attorney-General v.
Brown (11) (1847) 1 Legge, at pp 317-320."
27. The doctrine of exclusive Crown ownership of all land in the Australian
colonies was again affirmed by Stephen J. in New South
Wales v. The
Commonwealth ("the Seas and Submerged Lands Case") (12)
[1975] HCA 58
; (1975) 135 CLR 337, at
pp 438-439:
" That originally the waste lands in the colonies were
owned by the British Crown is not in doubt. Such ownership
may perhaps be regarded as springing from a prerogative
right, proprietary in nature, such as is described by
Dr. Evatt in his unpublished work on the subject ... the
prerogatives of the Crown were a part of the common law
which the settlers brought with them on settlement
(R. v. Kidman, per Griffith C.J. (13)
[1915] HCA 58
; (1915) 20 CLR 425,
at pp 435-436); 'the prerogative
of the Queen, when it has not been expressly limited by
local law or statute, is as extensive in Her Majesty's
colonial possessions as in Great Britain' (per Lord Watson
speaking for their Lordships in Liquidators of Maritime
Bank of Canada v. Receiver-General (New Brunswick) (14)
(1892) AC 437, at p 441);
cited by Isaacs J. in The Commonwealth v. New South
[1923] HCA 34
; (1923) 33 CLR 1, at p 37. On the other hand
that ownership may be
described as a consequence of the feudal principle which,
on first settlement in Australia, was 'extended to the
lands oversea', so that all colonial land belonged 'to the
Crown until the Crown chose to grant it' (per Isaacs J. in
Williams' Case (16) Williams v. Attorney-General for New South
[1913] HCA 33
; (1913) 16 CLR 404, at p 439). In either event the
consequence is
the same, the lands of Australia became the property of the
King of England (Attorney-General v. Brown (17) (1847) 1
Legge, at pp 317-320)."
Dawson J., following this line of authority in Mabo v. Queensland (18) (1988)
166 CLR 186, at p 236, said that "colonial
remained unalienated
were owned by the British Crown".
28. The proposition that, when the Crown assumed sovereignty ovER an
Australian colony, it became the universal and absolute beneficial
all the land therein, invites critical examination. If the conclusion at
which Stephen C.J. arrived in Attorney-General
v. Brown be right, the
interests of indigenous inhabitants in colonial land were extinguished so soon
as British subjects settled
in a colony, though the indigenous inhabitants had
neither ceded their lands to the Crown nor suffered them to be taken as the
of conquest. According to the cases, the common law itself took from
indigenous inhabitants any right to occupy their traditional
land, exposed
them to deprivation of the religious, cultural and economic sustenance which
the land provides, vested the land effectively
in the control of the Imperial
authorities without any right to compensation and made the indigenous
inhabitants intruders in their
own homes and mendicants for a place to live.
Judged by any civilized standard, such a law is unjust and its claim to be
the common law to be applied in contemporary Australia must be
questioned. This Court must now determine whether, by the common
law of this
country, the rights and interests of the Meriam people of today are to be
determined on the footing that their ancestors
lost their traditional rights
and interests in the land of the Murray Islands on 1 August 1879.
29. In discharging its duty to declare the common law of Australia, this
Court is not free to adopt rules that accord with contemporary
justice and human rights if their adoption would fracture the skeleton of
principle which gives the body of our law its
shape and internal consistency.
Australian law is not only the historical successor of, but is an organic
development from, the law
of England. Although our law is the prisoner of its
history, it is not now bound by decisions of courts in the hierarchy of an
then concerned with the development of its colonies. It is not
immaterial to the resolution of the present problem that, since the
(Cth) came into operation, the law of this country is entirely free
of Imperial control. The law which governs Australia is Australian
Privy Council itself held that the common law of this country might
legitimately develop independently of English precedent
(19) See Australian
Consolidated Press Ltd. v. Uren
[1967] UKPCHCA 2
; (1967) 117 CLR 221, at pp 238, 241; (1969) AC
590, at pp 641,
644. Increasingly
since 1968 (20) See the
Privy Council
(Limitation of Appeals) Act 1968
(Cth) and see the Privy Council (Appeals from
the High Court) Act 1975 (Cth), the common law of Australia has been
substantially
in the hands of this Court. Here rests the ultimate
responsibility of declaring the law of the nation. Although this Court is free
to depart from English precedent which was earlier followed as stating the
common law of this country (21) Cook v. Cook
; (1986) 162
CLR 376, at pp 390,
394; Viro v. The Queen
[1978] HCA 9
; (1978) 141 CLR 88, at pp 93, 120-121, 132, 135,
166, 174, it cannot do so where
the departure would fracture what I
called the skeleton of principle. The Court is even more
reluctant to
depart from earliER
decisions of its own (22) Jones v. The
Commonwealth (1987)
61 ALJR 348, at p 349; 71 ALR 497, at
pp 498-499; John v. Federal Commissioner
of Taxation
[1989] HCA 5
; (1989) 166 CLR 417, at pp 438-439, 451-452; McKinney v. The Queen
[1991] HCA 6
; (1991) 171 CLR 468, at pp 481-482. The peace and order
of Australian society
is built on the legal system. It can
be modified
to bring it into conformity
with contemporary notions of
justice and human rights, but it cannot be
destroyed. It is
not possible,
a priori, to distinguish between cases that
skeletal principle and those which do not, but no case can command
unquestioning
adherence if the rule it expresses seriously offends
of justice and human rights (especially equality before
aspirations of the contemporary Australian
legal system. If a postulated rule
of the common law expressed in
earlier cases
seriously offends those
contemporary values, the
question arises whether the rule should be maintained
and applied.
Whenever such
a question arises, it is necessary to assess
the particular rule is an essential doctrine of our legal system
if the rule were to be overturned, the disturbance
to be apprehended
would be disproportionate to the benefit flowing
from the overturning.
30. In the present case, the defendant's chain of argument contains several
links, each of which must be separately considered although,
as we shall see,
a common theme or thread runs through them. Some of these links are
unchallenged. We start with the proposition
that the Imperial Crown acquired
sovereignty over the Murray Islands on 1 August 1879 and that the laws of
Queensland (including
the common law) became the law of the Murray Islands on
that day - or, if it be necessary to rely on the Colonial Boundaries Act
is deemed to have become the law of the Murray Islands on that day. Next, by
the common law, the Crown acquired a radical
or ultimate title to the Murray
Islands. The plaintiffs accept these propositions but challenge the final
link in the chain, namely,
that the Crown also acquired absolute beneficial
ownership of the land in the Murray Islands when the Crown acquired
sovereignty
31. As the passages cited from the judgments in Attorney-General v. Brown and
the Seas and Submerged Lands Case show, the proposition
that, by the common
law, the Sovereign acquired absolute beneficial ownership of all land in the
Murray Islands rests on a number
of bases. In the first place, it is said
that the Crown is absolute owner because "there is no othER proprietor". This
basis denies
that the indigenous inhabitants possessed a proprietary interest.
The negative basis is then buttressed by three positive bases to
show why it
is necessary to attribute absolute beneficial ownership to the Crown. One
basis is that, when English law was brought
to Australia with and by British
colonists, the common law to be applied in the colonies included the feudal
doctrine of tenure.
Just as the Crown acquired or is deemed to have acquired
universal ownership of all land in England, so the Crown became the owner
all land in the Australian colonies. We may call this the feudal basis.
Another basis is that all land in a colony is "the patrimony
of the nation"
and, on this basis, the Crown acquired ownership of the patrimony on behalf of
the nation. A third basis is the prerogative
basis mentioned by Stephen J. in
the Seas and Submerged Lands Case. In order to determine whether, on any or
all of these bases,
the Crown acquired beneficial ownership of the land in the
Murray Islands when the Crown acquired sovereignty over them, we must
review the legal theories relating to the acquisition of sovereignty and the
introduction of the common law.
The acquisition of sovereignty
"The acquisition of territory by a sovereign state for the
first time is an act of state which cannot be challenged,
controlled or interfered with by the courts of that state."
This principle, stated by Gibbs J. in the Seas and Submerged Lands Case (23)
New South Wales v. The Commonwealth (1975) 135 CLR, at
p 388, precludes any
contest between the executive and the judicial branches of government as to
whether a territory is or is not
within the Crown's Dominions. The Murray
Islands were annexed by an exercise of the prerogative evidenced by the
Letters Patent;
a mode of acquisition recognized by the common law as a valid
means of acquiring sovereignty ovER foreign territory. The recognition
accorded simply on the footing that such a prerogative act is an act of State
the validity of which is not justiciable in the
municipal courts (24) Sobhuza
II. v. Miller (1926) AC 518, at p 525; The Fagernes (1927) P 311; Reg. v. Kent
Justices; Ex parte Lye
(1967) 2 QB 153, at pp 176-177, 181-182; Ffrost v.
[1937] HCA 41
; (1937) 58 CLR 528, at pp 565-566; A Raptis and Son v.
[1977] HCA 36
; (1977) 138 CLR 346, at p 360; cf. Bonser v. La Macchia
[1969] HCA 31
; (1969) 122
CLR 177, at pp
193, 217, where the meaning of a constitutional
term was in
issue. In Post Office v. Estuary Radio Ltd.,
Diplock L.J. said (25) (1968)
QB 740, at p 753:
" It still lies within the prerogative power of the Crown
to extend its sovereignty and jurisdiction to areas of
land or sea over which it has not previously claimed or
exercised sovereignty or jurisdiction. For such extension
the authority of Parliament is not required."
This proposition was approved by Gibbs J. in the Seas and Submerged Lands Case
and, in Wacando, Gibbs C.J. and Mason J. accepted that
an annexation of
territory by exercise of the prerogative is an act of State (26) (1981) 148
CLR, per Gibbs C.J. at p 11; per Mason
J. at p 21. See also Coe v. The
Commonwealth
[1979] HCA 68
; (1979) 53 ALJR 403, per Jacobs J. at p 410.
32. Although the question whether a territory has been acquired by the Crown
is not justiciable before municipal courts, those courts
have jurisdiction to
determine the consequences of an acquisition under municipal law.
Accordingly, the municipal courts must determine
the body of law which is in
force in the new territory. By the common law, the law in force in a
newly-acquired territory depends
on the manner of its acquisition by the
Crown. Although the manner in which a sovereign state might acquire new
territory is a matter
for international law, the common law has had to march
in step with international law in order to provide the body of law to apply
a territory newly acquired by the Crown.
33. International law recognized conquest, cession, and occupation of
territory that was terra nullius as three of the effective
ways of acquiring
sovereignty. No other way is presently relevant (27) See E. Evatt, "The
Acquisition of Territory in Australia and
New Zealand" in (1968) Grotian
Society Papers, p 16, who mentions only cession and occupation as relevant to
the Australasian colonies.
The great voyages of European discovery opened to
European nations the prospect of occupying new and valuable territories that
already inhabited. As among themselves, the European nations parcelled
out the territories newly discovered to the sovereigns of
the respective
discoverers (28) Worcester v. Georgia
[1832] USSC 39
; (1832) 6 Pet 515, at pp 543-544 (31 US
350, at p 369), provided the discovery
was confirmed by occupation and
provided the indigenous
inhabitants were not organized in a society that was
united permanently for
political action (29) Lindley, The Acquisition and
of Backward Territory in International Law, (1926), Chs III and IV.
To these territories the European colonial nations applied the
relating to acquisition of territory that was terra nullius.
They recognized
the sovereignty of the respective European
nations over the territory of
"backward peoples" and, by State practice,
permitted the acquisition of
sovereignty of such territory
by occupation rather than by conquest (30) See
Lindley, ibid., p 47.
Various justifications for the acquisition of
sovereignty over
the territory of "backward peoples" were advanced. The
benefits of
Christianity and European civilization had been seen as a
justification from mediaeval times (31) See Williams, The American
Indian in Western Legal Thought, (1990), pp 78ff; and Johnson
v. McIntosh
[1823] USSC 22
; (1823) 8 Wheat 543, at p 573 (21 US 240, at p 253). Another
justification for
the application of the theory of terra nullius to
inhabited territory - a
justification first advanced by Vattel
at the end of the 18th century - was
that new territories could be
claimed by occupation if the land were
uncultivated, for Europeans
had a right to bring lands into production if they
were left uncultivated
by the indigenous inhabitants (32) Vattel, The Law of
(1797), Bk I, pp 100-101. See Castles, An Australian Legal History,
(1982), pp 16-17. It may be doubted whether, even if these
justifications
were accepted, the facts would have sufficed to permit
acquisition of the
Murray Islands as though the Islands were
terra nullius. The Meriam people
were, as Moynihan J. found, devoted
gardeners. In 1879, having accepted the
influence of the London
Missionary Society, they were living peacefully in a
society under some sort of governance by the Mamoose and the London
Missionary Society. However that may be, it is not for this
Court to canvass
the validity of the Crown's acquisition of sovereignty
over the Islands which,
in any event, was consolidated by
uninterrupted control of the Islands by
Queensland authorities (33) 10
Encyclopaedia of Public International Law,
(1987), p 500;
cf. J. Crawford, "The Criteria for Statehood in International
Law", (1977)
48 The British Year Book of International Law 93, at p
34. The enlarging of the concept of terra nullius by international law to
justify the acquisition of inhabited territory by occupation
on behalf of the
acquiring sovereign raised some difficulties in the expounding of the common
law doctrines as to the law to be applied
when inhabited territories were
acquired by occupation (or "settlement", to use the term of the common law).
Although Blackstone
commended the practice of "sending colonies (of settlers)
to find out new habitations", he wrote (34) Commentaries on the Laws of
England, 17th ed. (1830), Bk II, ch 1, p 7-
"so long as it was confined to the stocking and cultivation
of desert uninhabited countries, it kept strictly within
the limits of the law of nature. But how far the seising
on countries already peopled, and driving out or massacring
the innocent and defenceless natives, merely because
they differed from their invaders in language, in religion,
in customs, in government, or in colour; how far such
a conduct was consonant to nature, to reason, or to
christianity, deserved well to be considered by those,
who have rendered their names immortal by thus civilizing
As we shall see, Blackstone's misgivings found a resonance in international
law after two centuries (35) Advisory Opinion on Western
Sahara (1975) 1 ICJR
12. But he was unable to declare any rule by which the laws of England became
the laws of a territory which
was not a "desert uninhabited" country when the
Crown acquired sovereignty over that territory by discovery and occupation as
nullius. As the British acquisition of sovereignty over the Colony of
New South Wales was regarded as dependent upon the settlement
of territory
that was terra nullius consequent on discovery (36) See E. Evatt, op cit, at p
25; Cooper v. Stuart (1889) 14 App Cas
286, and as the law of New South Wales
is the source of the law applicable to the Murray Islands, we must next
examine the basis
on which the common law was received as the law of the
Colony of New South Wales.
Reception of the common law
35. The means by which the municipal laws of England, including the common
law, became the law of a country that had been outside
the King's dominions
were stated by Blackstone (37) Commentaries, Bk I, ch.4, pp 106-108; accord:
Forbes v. Cochrane (1824) 2 B and
C 448, at p 463
[1824] EngR 93
; (107 ER 450, at p 456) as
"Plantations or colonies, in distant countries, are either
such where the lands are claimed by right of occupancy
only, by finding them desert and uncultivated, and peopling
them from the mother-country; or where, when already
cultivated, they have been either gained by conquest, or
ceded to us by treaties. And both these rights are founded
upon the law of nature, or at least upon that of nations.
But there is a difference between these two species of
colonies, with respect to the laws by which they are bound.
For it hath been held, that if an uninhabited country be
discovered and planted by English subjects, all the English
laws then in being, which are the birthright of every
subject, are immediately there in force. But this must be
understood with very many and very great restrictions.
Such colonists carry with them only so much of the English
law, as is applicable to their own situation and the
condition of an infant colony; ... What shall be admitted
and what rejected, at what times, and under what
restrictions, must, in case of dispute, be decided in
the first instance by their own provincial judicature,
subject to the revision and control of the king in council:
the whole of their constitution being also liable to be
new-modelled and reformed by the general superintending
power of the legislature in the mother-country. But in
conquered or ceded countries, that have already laws of
their own, the king may indeed alter and change those laws;
but, till he does actually change them, the ancient laws
of the country remain, unless such as are against the law
of God, as in the case of an infidel country. Our American
plantations are principally of this latter sort, being
obtained in the last century either by right of conquest
and driving out the natives (with what natural justice
I shall not at present inquire) or by treaties. And
therefore the common law of England, as such, has no
allowance or authority there; they being no part of the
mother-country, but distinct (though dependent) dominions.
They are subject, however, to the control of the
parliament".
According to Blackstone, English law would become the law of a country outside
England either upon first settlement by English colonists
of a "desert
uninhabited" country or by the exercise of the Sovereign's legislative power
over a conquered or ceded country. Blackstone
did not contemplate other ways
by which sovereignty might be acquired. In the case of a conquered country,
the general rule was
that the laws of the country continued after the conquest
until those laws were altered by the conqueror (38) Blankard v. Galdy
[1738] EngR 444
Holt KB 341 (90 ER 1089); Campbell v. Hall (1774) Lofft 655, at p 741 (98 ER
848, at pp 895-896); Beaumont v. Barrett
[1836] EngR 841
; (1836) 1 Moo
PC 59 (12 ER 733). The
Crown had a prerogative power to make new laws for a conquered country
although that power was
laws enacted by the Imperial Parliament
(39) Campbell v. Hall, (1774) Lofft, at pp 741, 742 (98 ER, at pp 895, 896).
applied to ceded colonies, though the prerogative may have been
limited by the treaty of cession (40) See the discussion
in Roberts-Wray,
Commonwealth and Colonial Law, (1966), pp 214ff; Sammut v. Strickland (1938)
AC 678; Blankard v. Galdy
[1795] EngR 570
; (1693) 2 Salk 411 (91 ER 356);
Buchanan v. The
Commonwealth (1913) 16 CLR 315, at p 334. When "desert uninhabited countries"
were colonized by English
however, they brought with them "so much
of the English law as (was) applicable to their own
situation and the
of an infant
colony" (41) Commentaries, Bk I, ch 4, p 107; State
Government Insurance Commission v. Trigwell
[1979] HCA 40
142 CLR 617, at pp 625,
English colonists were, in the eye of the common law, entitled to live
under the common law
which Blackstone described
"birthright" (42) Commentaries, Bk I, ch 4, p 107. And see Sabally and N'Jie
Attorney-General
(1965) 1 QB 273,
at p 294. That law was not amenable
to alteration by exercise of the prerogative (43) Sammut v.
Strickland (1938)
AC, at p 701. The
tender concern of the common law of England for British
settlers in foreign parts led to the
recognition that such
settlers should
regarded as living under the law of England if the local law was unsuitable
for Christian
Europeans (44) Ruding
v. Smith (1821)
2 Hag.Con.371 (161 ER
774); Freeman v. Fairlie (1828) 1 Moo Ind App 306, at pp 323-325, aff
[1828] EngR 63
; (18 ER 117, at
pp 127-128, 137);
cf. Campbell v. Hall (1774) Lofft, at p 741
(98 ER, at pp 895,896). See also Yeap Cheah Neo v.
Ong Cheng Neo (1875)
p 393; cf. Reg. v. Willans (1858) 3 Kyshe 16, at pp 20-25; and see Re
Loh Toh Met
(1961) 27 MLJ 234
, at pp 237-243; Khoo Hooi Leong
v. Khoo Chong
Yeok (1930) AC 346, at p 355. This rule was applied even to English residents
countries which were not under
British sovereignty (45) The "Indian
[1799] EngR 782
; (1801) 3 C Rob 12, at pp 28-29 (165 ER 367, at pp 373-374).
36. When British colonists went out to other inhabited parts of the world,
including New South Wales, and settled there undER the
protection of the
forces of the Crown, so that the Crown acquired sovereignty recognized by the
European family of nations under
the enlarged notion of terra nullius, it was
necessary for the common law to prescribe a doctrine relating to the law to be
in such colonies, for sovereignty imports supreme internal legal
authority (46) See A. James, Sovereign Statehood, (1986), pp 3ff.,
The view was taken that, when sovereignty of a territory could be acquired
under the enlarged notion of terra nullius, for
the purposes of the municipal
law that territory (though inhabited) could be treated as a "desert
uninhabited" country. The hypothesis
being that there was no local law
already in existence in the territory (47) Lyons (Mayor of) v. East India Co.
[1836] EngR 1155
; (1836) 1 Moo PC 175,
at pp 272-273
[1836] EngR 1155
; (12 ER 782, at p 818); Cooper v. Stuart
(1889) 14 App Cas ; The Lauderdale Peerage (1885) 10 App Cas 692, at pp
[1842] EngR 593
; (1842) 4 Moo PC 63, at pp 84-85
[1842] EngR 593
; (13 ER 225, at p
233), the law of England became the law of the territory (and
not merely the
personal law of the colonists). Colonies
of this kind were called "settled
colonies". Ex hypothesi, the indigenous
inhabitants of a settled colony had
no recognized sovereign,
else the territory could have been acquired only by
conquest or cession.
The indigenous people of a settled colony were thus
to be without laws, without a sovereign and primitive in their social
organization. In Advocate-General of Bengal v. Ranee Surnomoye
Dossee (48)
(1863) 2 Moo N S 22, at p 59
[1863] EngR 761
; (15 ER 811, at p 824); 9
Moo Ind App 391, at p
[1863] EngR 767
; (19 ER 786, at p 800) Lord Kingsdown used the term "barbarous" to describe
the native state of a settled
" Where Englishmen establish themselves in an uninhabited
or barbarous country, they carry with them not only the
laws, but the sovereignty of their own State; and those who
live amongst them and become members of their community
become also partakers of, and subject to the same laws."
In Campbell v. Hall Lord Mansfield suggested that Jamaica should be regarded
as a settled colony because the English colonists arrived
after the Spaniards
had left (49) His Lordship may have wrongly appreciated the history of
Jamaica: see Roberts-Wray, op cit, pp
46-47, 851-852, the negro inhabitants
presumably being of no significance (50) See (1774) Lofft, at p 745 (98 ER, at
p 898). In Cooper
v. Stuart Lord Watson proffered the absence of "settled
inhabitants" and "settled law" as a criterion for determining whether
territory had been acquired by "settlement" under English law (51)
(1889) 14 App Cas, at p 291:
" The extent to which English law is introduced into a
British Colony, and the manner of its introduction, must
necessarily vary according to circumstances. There is a
great difference between the case of a Colony acquired
by conquest or cession, in which there is an established
system of law, and that of a Colony which consisted of a
tract of territory practically unoccupied, without settled
inhabitants or settled law, at the time when it was
peacefully annexed to the British dominions. The Colony
of New South Wales belongs to the latter class. In the
case of such a Colony the Crown may by ordinance, and the
Imperial Parliament, or its own legislature when it comes
to possess one, may by statute declare what parts of the
common and statute law of England shall have effect within
its limits. But, when that is not done, the law of England
must (subject to well-established exceptions) become from
the outset the law of the Colony, and be administered by
its tribunals. In so far as it is reasonably applicable
to the circumstances of the Colony, the law of England
must prevail, until it is abrogated or modified, either by
ordinance or statute."
As the settlement of an inhabited territory is equated with settlement of an
uninhabited territory in ascertaining the law of the
territory on
colonization, the common law which the English settlers brought with them to
New South Wales could not have been altered
or amended by the prerogative -
only by the Imperial Parliament or by the local legislature (52) Holdsworth, A
History of English
Law, 3rd ed., vol.ix, (1944), p 84; Sammut v. Strickland
(1938) AC, at p 701; Kielley v. Carson (1843) 4 Moo PC, at pp 84-85 (13
p 233); Falkland Islands Co. v. The Queen
[1863] EngR 782
; (1863) 2 Moo PC (NS) 266, at p 273
[1863] EngR 782
; (15 ER 902, at p 905); Sabally and N'Jie v. H.M.
Attorney-General (1965) 1 QB
, at p 294. (This principle raises some doubts about
the validity of the
exercise of legislative power
by the Governor of New South Wales before a
Legislative Council was established
in 1823, but we need not pause to consider
that question
(53) See the discussion by Windeyer, Lectures on Legal History,
(1949), pp 332-333; H.V. Evatt, "The Legal Foundations of
Wales", (1938) 11 Australian Law Journal 409, at pp 417-422;
Campbell, "Prerogative Rule in New South Wales, 1788-1823",
(1964) 50 Royal
Australian Historical Society 161) In a settled
colony in inhabited territory,
the law of England was not merely
the personal law of the English colonists;
it became the law of
the land, protecting and binding colonists and indigenous
inhabitants
alike and equally. Thus the theory which underpins the application
of English law to the Colony of New South Wales is that English
brought with them the law of England and that, as the indigenous
inhabitants
were regarded as barbarous or unsettled and
without a settled law, the law of
England including the common law became
the law of the Colony (so far as it
was locally applicable)
as though New South Wales were "an uninhabited country
... discovered
and planted by English subjects" (54) See per Lord Watson in
Cooper v. Stuart (1889) 14 App Cas, at p 291; and cf. Roberts-Wray,
540. The common law thus became the common law of
all subjects within the
Colony who were equally entitled to the law's
protection as subjects of the
Crown (55) As the subjects of
a conquered territory (Calvin's Case (1608) 7 Co
Rep 1a, at p 6a (77
ER 377, at p 384)); Campbell v. Hall (1774) Lofft, at p
(98 ER, at p 895) and of a ceded territory (Donegani v. Donegani (1835)
Knapp 63, at p 85 (12 ER 571, at p 580)) became British
subjects (Lyons (Mayor
of) v. East India Co. (1836) 1 Moo PC, at pp 286-287
(12 ER, at p 823); 1 Moo
Ind App 175, at pp 286-187 (18
ER 66, at pp 108-109)), a fortiori the subjects
of a settled territory must
have acquired that status. And see Reg. v. Wedge
1 NSWLR 581, at p 585. Its introduction to New South Wales was
by s.24 of the Australian Courts Act 1828 (Imp) (56) 9
GEO IV c.83.
As the laws of New South Wales became the laws of Queensland
on separation of
the two Colonies in 1859 (57) Letters
Patent of 6 June 1859: see p 11 above
and, by the terms of the
Queensland Coast Islands Act 1879
and the Governor's
Proclamation,
the Murray Islands on annexation became subject to the laws in
force in Queensland, the common law
became the basic law of the Murray
Islands. Thus the Meriam people in 1879, like Australian Aborigines in
earlier times, became
British subjects owing allegiance to
the Imperial
Sovereign entitled to such rights and privileges and subject to such
liabilities
as the common law and applicable statutes
provided. And this is so
irrespective of the fact that, in 1879, the Meriam people were
their land, the gardens were being
tilled, the Mamoose and the London
Missionary Society were keeping the peace and a
form of justice was being
administered.
The basis of the theory of universal and absolute Crown ownership
37. It is one thing for our contemporary law to accept that the laws of
England, so far as applicable, became the laws of New South
Wales and of the
other Australian colonies. It is anothER thing for our contemporary law to
accept that, when the common law of
England became the common law of the
several colonies, the theory which was advanced to support the introduction of
the common law
of England accords with our present knowledge and appreciation
of the facts. When it was sought to apply Lord Watson's assumption
v. Stuart that the colony of New South Wales was "without settled inhabitants
or settled law" to Aboriginal society in
the Northern Territory, the
assumption proved false. In Milirrpum v. Nabalco Pty. Ltd. Blackburn J. said
(58) (1971) 17 FLR 141,
"The evidence shows a subtle and elaborate system highly
adapted to the country in which the people led their lives,
which provided a stable order of society and was remarkably
free from the vagaries of personal whim or influence. If
ever a system could be called 'a government of laws, and
not of men', it is that shown in the evidence before me."
Faced with a contradiction between the authority of the Privy Council and the
evidence, his Honour held that the class to which a
colony belonged was a
question of law, not of fact (59) ibid., at p 244; McNeil, Common Law
Aboriginal Title, (1989), p 292, fn.207;
Lester, The Territorial Rights of the
Inuit of the Canadian Northwest Territories: A Legal Argument, (unpublished
doctoral thesis
(1981)), pp 100-107, 155-157:
"Whether or not the Australian aboriginals living in any
part of New South Wales had in 1788 a system of law which
was beyond the powers of the settlers at that time to
perceive or comprehend, it is beyond the power of this
Court to decide otherwise than that New South Wales came
into the category of a settled or occupied colony."
38. The facts as we know them today do not fit the "absence of law" or
"barbarian" theory underpinning the colonial reception of
the common law of
England. That being so, there is no warrant for applying in these times rules
of the English common law which
were the product of that theory. It would be
a curious doctrine to propound today that, when the benefit of the common law
extended to Her Majesty's indigenous subjects in the Antipodes, its
first fruits were to strip them of their right to occupy their
lands. Yet the supposedly barbarian nature of indigenous people provided the
common law of England with the justification
for denying them their
traditional rights and interests in land, as Lord SumnER speaking for the
Privy Council said in In re Southern
Rhodesia (60) (1919) AC 211, at pp
" The estimation of the rights of aboriginal tribes is
always inherently difficult. Some tribes are so low in
the scale of social organization that their usages and
conceptions of rights and duties are not to be reconciled
with the institutions or the legal ideas of civilized
society. Such a gulf cannot be bridged. It would be idle
to impute to such people some shadow of the rights known
to our law and then to transmute it into the substance of
transferable rights of property as we know them."
39. As the indigenous inhabitants of a settled colony were regarded as "low
in the scale of social organization", they and their
occupancy of colonial
land were ignored in considering the title to land in a settled colony.
Ignoring those rights and interests,
the Crown's sovereignty over a territory
which had been acquired under the enlarged notion of terra nullius was equated
ownership of the lands therein, because, as Stephen C.J. said,
there was "no other proprietor of such lands". Thus, a Select Committee
Aborigines reported in 1837 to the House of Commons that the state of
Australian Aborigines was "barbarous" and "so entirely destitute
rudest forms of civil polity, that their claims, whether as sovereigns or
proprietors of the soil, have been utterly disregarded"
(61) Cited by Lindley,
op cit, at p 41. The theory that the indigenous inhabitants of a "settled"
colony had no proprietary interest
in the land thus depended on a
discriminatory denigration of indigenous inhabitants, their social
organization and customs. As the
basis of the theory is false in fact and
unacceptable in our society, there is a choice of legal principle to be made
in the present
case. This Court can either apply the existing authorities and
proceed to inquire whether the Meriam people are higher "in the scale
social organization" than the Australian Aborigines whose claims were "utterly
disregarded" by the existing authorities or the
Court can overrule the
existing authorities, discarding the distinction between inhabited colonies
that were terra nullius and those
which were not.
40. The theory of terra nullius has been critically examined in recent times
by the International Court of Justice in its Advisory
Opinion on Western
Sahara (62) (1975) ICJR, at p 39. There the majority judgment read:
"'Occupation' being legally an original means of peaceably
acquiring sovereignty over territory otherwise than by
cession or succession, it was a cardinal condition of a
valid 'occupation' that the territory should be terra
nullius - a territory belonging to no-one - at the time of
the act alleged to constitute the 'occupation' (cf. Legal
Status of Eastern Greenland, P.C.I.J., Series A/B, No.53,
pp 44 f. and 63 f.). In the view of the Court, therefore,
a determination that Western Sahara was a 'terra nullius'
at the time of colonization by Spain would be possible only
if it were established that at that time the territory
belonged to no-one in the sense that it was then open to
acquisition through the legal process of 'occupation'.
80. Whatever differences of opinion there may have been
among jurists, the State practice of the relevant period
indicates that territories inhabited by tribes or peoples
having a social and political organization were not
regarded as terrae nullius. It shows that in the case of
such territories the acquisition of sovereignty was not
generally considered as effected unilaterally through
'occupation' of terra nullius by original title but through
agreements concluded with local rulers. On occasion, it
is true, the word 'occupation' was used in a non-technical
sense denoting simply acquisition of sovereignty; but that
did not signify that the acquisition of sovereignty through
such agreements with authorities of the country was
regarded as an 'occupation' of a "terra nullius" in the
proper sense of these terms. On the contrary, such
agreements with local rulers, whether or not considered as
an actual 'cession' of the territory, were regarded as
derivative roots of title, and not original titles obtained
by occupation of terrae nullius."
Judge Ammoun, Vice-President of the Court, delivered a separate opinion in
which he commended as penetrating the views expressed on
behalf of the
Republic of Zaire which he restated as follows (63) ibid., at pp 85-86:
" Mr. Bayona-Ba-Meya, goes on to dismiss the materialistic
concept of terra nullius, which led to this dismemberment
of Africa following the Berlin Conference of 1885.
Mr. Bayona-Ba-Meya substitutes for this a spiritual notion:
the ancestral tie between the land, or 'mother nature', and
the man who was born therefrom, remains attached thereto,
and must one day return thither to be united with his
ancestors. This link is the basis of the ownership of the
soil, or better, of sovereignty. This amounts to a denial
of the very concept of terra nullius in the sense of a land
which is capable of being appropriated by someone who is
not born therefrom. It is a condemnation of the modern
concept, as defined by Pasquale Fiore, which regards as
terrae nullius territories inhabited by populations whose
civilization, in the sense of the public law of Europe, is
backward, and whose political organization is not conceived
according to Western norms.
One might go still further in analysing the statement
of the representative of Zaire so as to say that he would
exclude from the concept of terra nullius any inhabited
territory. His view thus agrees with that of Vattel, who
defined terra nullius as a land empty of inhabitants."
He concluded (64) ibid., at p 86 that "the concept of terra nullius, employed
at all periods, to the brink of the twentieth century,
to justify conquest and
colonization, stands condemned." The court was unanimously of the opinion
that Western Sahara at the time
of colonization by Spain in 1884 was not a
territory belonging to no-one (terra nullius).
41. If the international law notion that inhabited land may be classified as
terra nullius no longer commands general support, the
doctrines of the common
law which depend on the notion that native peoples may be "so low in the scale
of social organization" that
it is "idle to impute to such people some shadow
of the rights known to our law" (65) In re Southern Rhodesia (1919) AC, at pp
can hardly be retained. If it were permissible in past centuries to
keep the common law in step with international law, it is imperative
today's world that the common law should neither be nor be seen to be frozen
in an age of racial discrimination.
42. The fiction by which the rights and interests of indigenous inhabitants
in land were treated as non-existent was justified by
a policy which has no
place in the contemporary law of this country. The policy appears explicitly
in the judgment of the Privy Council
in In re Southern Rhodesia in rejecting
an argument (66) ibid., at p 232 that the native people "were the owners of
the unalienated
lands long before either the Company or the Crown became
concerned with them and from time immemorial ... and that the unalienated
lands belonged to them still". Their Lordships replied (67) ibid., at p 234-
"the maintenance of their rights was fatally inconsistent
with white settlement of the country, and yet white
settlement was the object of the whole forward movement,
pioneered by the Company and controlled by the Crown, and
that object was successfully accomplished, with the result
that the aboriginal system gave place to another prescribed
by the Order in Council".
Whatever the justification advanced in earlier days for refusing to recognize
the rights and interests in land of the indigenous inhabitants
colonies, an unjust and discriminatory doctrine of that kind can no longer be
accepted. The expectations of the international
community accord in this
respect with the contemporary values of the Australian people. The opening up
of international remedies
to individuals pursuant to Australia's accession to
the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
(68) See Communication 78/1980 in Selected Decisions of the Human
Rights Committee under the Optional Protocol, vol.2, p 23 brings
the common law the powerful influence of the Covenant and the international
standards it imports. The common law does
not necessarily conform with
international law, but international law is a legitimate and important
influence on the development
of the common law, especially when international
law declares the existence of universal human rights. A common law doctrine
on unjust discrimination in the enjoyment of civil and political
rights demands reconsideration. It is contrary both to international
standards and to the fundamental values of our common law to entrench a
discriminatory rule which, because of the supposed position
on the scale of
social organization of the indigenous inhabitants of a settled colony, denies
them a right to occupy their traditional
lands. It was such a rule which
evoked from Deane J. (69) Gerhardy v. Brown
[1985] HCA 11
; (1985) 159 CLR 70, at p 149 the
"the common law of this land has still not reached the stage
of retreat from injustice which the law of Illinois and
Virginia had reached in 1823 when Marshall C.J., in Johnson
v. McIntosh (70) (1823) 8 wheat, at p 574 (21 US , at
p 253), accepted that, subject to the assertion
of ultimate dominion (including the power to convey title
by grant) by the State, the 'original inhabitants' should
be recognized as having 'a legal as well as just claim' to
retain the occupancy of their traditional lands".
43. However, recognition by our common law of the rights and interests in
land of the indigenous inhabitants of a settled colony
would be precluded if
the recognition were to fracture a skeletal principle of our legal system.
The proposition that the Crown became
the beneficial owner of all colonial
land on first settlement has been supported by more than a disregard of
indigenous rights and
interests. It is necessary to consider these other
reasons for past disregard of indigenous rights and interests and then to
to a consideration of the question whether and in what way our
contemporary common law recognizes such rights and interests in land.
Crown title to colonies and Crown ownership of colonial land distinguished
44. In the trilogy of cases cited earlier in this judgment (71) Supra, pp
12-15: Attorney-General v. Brown; Randwick Corporation
v. Rutledge; the Seas
and Submerged Lands Case, it was said that colonial land became a royal
demesne - that is, that the Crown became
the absolute beneficial owner in
possession of all colonial land - on first settlement, the event which
conferred sovereignty on
the Imperial Crown. Curiously, in Williams v.
Attorney-General for New South Wales (72)
[1913] HCA 33
; (1913) 16 CLR 404, at p
439, Isaacs
it was unquestionable that -
"when Governor Phillip received his first Commission from
King George III. on 12th October 1786, the whole of the
lands of Australia were already in law the property of the
King of England".
With respect to Isaacs J., that proposition is wholly unsupported.
Roberts-Wray comments (73) Commonwealth and Colonial Law op cit,
the proposition is "startling and, indeed, incredible". We need not be
concerned with the date on which sovereignty over
the Australian colonies was
acquired by the Crown but we are concerned with the proposition that on, and
by reason of, the acquisition
of sovereignty, the Crown acquired all colonial
land as a royal demesne.
45. There is a distinction between the Crown's title to a colony and the
Crown's ownership of land in the colony, as Roberts-Wray
points out (74)
ibid., p 625:
"If a country is part of Her Majesty's dominions, the
sovereignty vested in her is of two kinds. The first
is the power of government. The second is title to the
country ...
This ownership of the country is radically different
from ownership of the land: the former can belong only to
a sovereign, the latter to anyone. Title to land is not,
per se, relevant to the constitutional status of a country;
land may have become vested in the Queen, equally in
a Protectorate or in a Colony, by conveyance or under
statute ...
The distinction between these two conceptions has,
however, become blurred by the doctrine that the
acquisition of sovereignty over a Colony, whether by
settlement, cession or conquest, or even of jurisdiction
in territory which remains outside the British dominions,
imports Crown rights in, or in relation to, the land
Similarly, Sir John Salmond distinguished the acquisition of territory from
the Crown's acquisition of property (75) Jurisprudence,
7th ed. (1924),
appendix "The Territory of the State", p 554:
"The first conception pertains to the domain of public law,
the second to that of private law. Territory is the
subject-matter of the right of sovereignty or imperium
while property is the subject-matter of the right of
ownership or dominium. These two rights may or may not
co-exist in the Crown in respect of the same area. Land
may be held by the Crown as territory but not as property,
or as property but not as territory, or in both rights at
the same time. As property, though not as territory, land
may be held by one state within the dominions of another."
Professor O'Connell in his work International Law (76) 2nd ed. (1970), at p
378, cited by Hall J. in Calder v. Attorney-General of
British Columbia (1973)
SCR.313, at pp 404-405; (1973) 34 DLR (3d) 145, at p 210 points to the
distinction between acquisition of
territory by act of State and the abolition
of acquired rights:
"This doctrine (of act of State), which was affirmed in
several cases arising out of the acquisition of territory
in Africa and India, has been misinterpreted to the effect
that the substantive rights themselves have not survived
the change."
The acquisition of territory is chiefly the province of international law; the
acquisition of property is chiefly the province of
the common law. The
distinction between the Crown's title to territory and the Crown's ownership
of land within a territory is made
as well by the common law as by
international law. A.W.B. Simpson (77) A History of the Land Law, 2nd ed.
(1986) distinguishes the
land law rule in England that all land is held of the
Crown from the notion that all land is owned by the Crown. Speaking of the
mediaeval conception of materialism, he comments (78) ibid., p 47:
"This attitude of mind also encouraged the rejection of any
theory which would say that the lord 'owned' the land, and
that the rights of tenants in the land were iura in re
aliena. Such a theory would have led inevitably to saying
that the King, who was ultimately lord of all land, was the
'owner' of all land.
The lawyers never adopted the premise that the King
owned all the land; such a dogma is of very modern
appearance. It was sufficient for them to note that the
King was lord, ultimately, of all the tenants in the realm,
and that as lord he had many rights common to other lords
(e.g. rights to escheats) and some peculiar to his position
as supreme lord (e.g. rights to forfeitures)."
The general rule of the common law was that ownership could not be acquired by
occupying land that was already occupied by another.
As Blackstone pointed
out (79) Commentaries, Bk.II, ch.1, p 8:
"Occupancy is the thing by which the title was in fact
originally gained; every man seizing such spots of ground
as he found most agreeable to his own convenience, provided
he found them unoccupied by any one else." (Emphasis
46. It was only by fastening on the notion that a settled colony was terra
nullius that it was possible to predicate of the Crown
the acquisition of
ownership of land in a colony already occupied by indigenous inhabitants. It
was only on the hypothesis that
there was nobody in occupation that it could
be said that the Crown was the owner because there was no other. If that
be rejected, the notion that sovereignty carried ownership in its
wake must be rejected too. Though the rejection of the notion
nullius clears away the fictional impediment to the recognition of indigenous
rights and interests in colonial land, it
would be impossible for the common
law to recognize such rights and interests if the basic doctrines of the
common law are inconsistent
with their recognition.
47. A basic doctrine of the land law is the doctrine of tenure, to which
Stephen C.J. referred in Attorney-General v. Brown, and
it is a doctrine which
could not be overturned without fracturing the skeleton which gives our land
law its shape and consistency.
It is derived from feudal origins.
The feudal basis of the proposition of absolute Crown ownership
48. The land law of England is based on the doctrine of tenure. In English
legal theory, every parcel of land in England is held
either mediately or
immediately of the King who is the Lord Paramount; the term "tenure" is used
to signify the relationship between
tenant and lord (80) Attorney-General of
Ontario v. Mercer (1883) LR 8 App Cas 767, at pp 771-772, not the relationship
between tenant
and land. The characteristic of feudalism "is not tenere
terram, but tenere terram de X" (81) Pollock and Maitland, The History
English Law, 2nd ed. (1898, reprinted 1952), vol.1, p 234n. It is implicit in
the relationship of tenure that both lord and tenant
have an interest in the
land: "The King had 'dominium directum', the subject 'dominium utile'" (82)
ibid., p 773; Co Litt 16. Absent
a "dominium directum" in the Crown, there
would be no foundation for a tenure arising on the making of a grant of land.
Crown acquired territory outside England which was to be subject to
the common law, there was a natural assumption that the doctrine
should be the basis of the land law. Perhaps the assumption did not have to
be made. After all, as Holdsworth observed
(83) op cit, vol.ii, p 199, the
universal application of the doctrine of tenure is a purely English
phenomenon. And Pollock and Maitland
may be correct in saying (84) op cit,
vol.2, p 236; accord: Holdsworth, op cit, vol.ii, (1923), p 75 fn.8 that the
notion of universal
tenure "perhaps was possible only in a conquered country".
In Scotland, the King was not Paramount Lord of all land: some allodial
remained in the Orkney and Shetland Islands, though most land that had been
held allodially became subject to feudal tenure
(85) Bell, Lectures on
Conveyancing, (Edinburgh, 1867), vol.1, ch I, pp 531-532; Stair, The
Institutions of the Law of Scotland,
4th ed. (1826), pp 219, 222; Craigie,
Scottish Law of Conveyancing, (Edinburgh, 1899), pp 27-28; Lord Advocate v.
Balfour (1907)
SC 1360, at p 1368-1369. However, the English view favoured a
universal application of the doctrine of tenure (86) Pollock and Maitland,
cit, pp 232-233:
" Every acre of English soil and every proprietary right
therein have been brought within the compass of a single
formula, which may be expressed thus: - Z tenet terram
illam de ... domino Rege. The king himself holds land which
is in every sense his own; no one else has any proprietary
right in it; but if we leave out of account this royal
demesne, then every acre of land is 'held of' the king. The
person whom we may call its owner, the person who has the
right to use and abuse the land, to cultivate it or leave
it uncultivated, to keep all others off it, holds the land
of the king either immediately or mediately."
49. It is arguable that universality of tenure is a rule depending on English
history and that the rule is not reasonably applicable
to the Australian
colonies. The origin of the rule is to be found in a traditional belief that,
at some time after the Norman Conquest,
the King either owned beneficially and
granted, or otherwise became the Paramount Lord of, all land in the Kingdom
(87) Bacon's Abridgement,
6th ed. (1807), vol.V, "Prerogative", B,1.
According to Digby's History of the Law of Real Property (88) (1897), p 34
William I succeeded
to all rights over land held by the Anglo-Saxon kings; he
acquired by operation of law the land of those who had resisted his conquest
and a vast quantity of land was deemed to have been forfeited or surrendered
to William and regranted by him. He may have become
the proprietor of all
land in England so that no allodial land remained. Or it may be, as
Blackstone asserts, that in England, as
in France, the allodial estates were
surrendered into the king's hands and were granted back as feuds, the only
difference being
that in France the change "was effected gradually, by the
consent of private persons; (the change) was done at once, all over England,
by the common consent of the nation" (89) Commentaries, Bk II, ch.4, pp 50-51.
But, whatever the fact, it is the fiction of royal
grants that underlies the
English rule. Blackstone says (90) ibid that -
"it became a fundamental maxim, and necessary principle
(though in reality a mere fiction) of our English tenures,
'that the king is the universal lord and original
proprietor of all the lands in his kingdom; and that no man
doth or can possess any part of it, but what has, mediately
or immediately, been derived 'as a gift from him, to be
held upon feodal services.' For this being the real case
in pure, original, proper feuds, other nations who adopted
this system were obliged to act upon the same supposition,
as a substruction and foundation of their new polity,
though the fact was indeed far otherwise".
It is not surprising that the fiction that land granted by the Crown had been
beneficially owned by the Crown was translated to the
colonies and that Crown
grants should be seen as the foundation of the doctrine of tenure which is an
essential principle of our
land law. It is far too late in the day to
contemplate an allodial or other system of land ownership. Land in Australia
been granted by the Crown is held on a tenure of some kind and the
titles acquired under the accepted land law cannot be disturbed.
50. Accepting the doctrine of tenure, it was an essential postulate that the
Crown have such a title to land as would invest the
Sovereign with the
character of Paramount Lord in respect of a tenure created by grant and would
attract the incidents appropriate
to the tenure, especially the Crown's right
to escheat (91) Wright, Introduction to the Law of Tenures, 4th ed. (1792), p
Crown was invested with the character of Paramount Lord in the
colonies by attributing to the Crown a title, adapted from feudal
theory, that
was called a radical, ultimate or final title: see, for example, Amodu Tijani
v. Secretary, Southern Nigeria (92) (1921)
2 AC 399, at pp 403, 404, 407;
Nireaha Tamaki v. Baker (93) (1901) AC 561, at p 580; cf. Administration of
Papua and New Guinea v.
Daera Guba (94) (1973) 130 CLR 353, at pp 396-397.
The Crown was treated as having the radical title to all the land
over which the Crown acquired sovereignty. The radical title is a
postulate of the doctrine of tenure and a concomitant
of sovereignty.
sovereign enjoys supreme legal authority in and over a territory, the
sovereign has power to prescribe what
parcels of land
and what interests in
those parcels should be enjoyed by others and what parcels of land should be
kept as the sovereign's
51. By attributing to the Crown a radical title to all land within a
territory over which the Crown has assumed sovereignty, the
common law enabled
the Crown, in exercise of its sovereign power, to grant an interest in land to
be held of the Crown or to acquire
land for the Crown's demesne. The notion
of radical title enabled the Crown to become Paramount Lord of all who hold a
tenure granted
by the Crown and to become absolute beneficial owner of
unalienated land required for the Crown's purposes. But it is not a corollary
of the Crown's acquisition of a radical title to land in an occupied territory
that the Crown acquired absolute beneficial ownership
of that land to the
exclusion of the indigenous inhabitants. If the land were desert and
uninhabited, truly a terra nullius, the
Crown would take an absolute
beneficial title (an allodial title) to the land for the reason given by
Stephen C.J. in Attorney-General
v. Brown (95) See pp 13-14 above; (1847) 1
Legge, at pp 317-318: there would be no other proprietor. But if the land
were occupied
by the indigenous inhabitants and their rights and interests in
the land are recognized by the common law, the radical title which
is acquired
with the acquisition of sovereignty cannot itself be taken to confer an
absolute beneficial title to the occupied land.
Nor is it necessary to the
structure of our legal system to refuse recognition to the rights and
interests in land of the indigenous
inhabitants. The doctrine of tenure
applies to every Crown grant of an interest in land, but not to rights and
interests which do
not owe their existence to a Crown grant. The English
legal system accommodated the recognition of rights and interests derived
occupation of land in a territory over which sovereignty was acquired by
conquest without the necessity of a Crown grant.
52. After the conquest of Ireland, it was held in The Case of Tanistry (96)
(1608) Davis 28 (80 ER 516); 4th ed. Dublin (1762) English
translation 78, at
pp 110-111 that the Crown was not in actual possession of the land by virtue
of the conquest and that -
"a royal monarch (who) hath made a new conquest of a realm,
although in fact he hath the lordship paramount of all the
lands within such realm, so that these are all held of him,
mediate vel immediate, and he hath also the possession of
all the lands which he willeth actually to seise and retain
in his own hands for his profit or pleasure, and may also
by his grants distribute such portions as he pleaseth ...
yet ... if such conqueror receiveth any of the natives or
antient inhabitants into his protection and avoweth them
for his subjects, and permitteth them to continue their
possessions and to remain in his peace and allegiance,
their heirs shall be adjudged in by good title without
grant or confirmation of the conqueror, and shall enjoy
their lands according to the rules of the law which the
conqueror hath allowed or established, if they will submit
themselves to it, and hold their lands according to the
rules of it, and not otherwise."
Similarly, after the conquest of Wales, in Witrong and Blany (97) (1674) 3
Keb.401, at p 402
[1685] EngR 4051
; (84 ER 789, at p 789) and see McNeil,
op cit, p 174 it was
held that the inhabitants who had been left in possession of land needed
new grant to support their possession
under the common law and they held their
interests of the King without a new conveyance.
In these cases, the courts
were speaking
of converting the surviving interests into an estate of a kind
familiar to the common law,
but there is no reason why the common
not recognize novel interests in land which, not depending on Crown grant, are
from common law tenures. In
Amodu Tijani (98) (1921) 2 AC, at p 403
Viscount Haldane, speaking for the Privy Council, referred to
the variable
nature of native
title to land capable of recognition by the common law:
"There is a tendency, operating at times unconsciously, to
render (native) title conceptually in terms which are
appropriate only to systems which have grown up under
English law. But this tendency has to be held in check
closely. As a rule, in the various systems of native
jurisprudence throughout the Empire, there is no such full
division between property and possession as English lawyers
are familiar with. A very usual form of native title is
that of a usufructuary right, which is a mere qualification
of or burden on the radical or final title of the Sovereign
where that exists. In such cases the title of the
Sovereign is a pure legal estate, to which beneficial
rights may or may not be attached. But this estate is
qualified by a right of beneficial user which may not
assume definite forms analogous to estates, or may, where
it has assumed these, have derived them from the intrusion
of the mere analogy of English jurisprudence."
And, in Administration of Papua and New Guinea v. Daera Guba (99) (1973) 130
CLR, at p 397; but note comment by McNeil, op cit, p
297, fn.237. Cf. the
Indian title in Ontario under the Proclamation of 1763: St. Catherine's
Milling and Lumber Company v. The
Queen (1888) 14 App Cas 46 Barwick C.J. was
able to say that the indigenous people of Papua New Guinea -
"were secure in their usufructuary title to land, (but)
the land came from the inception of the colony into the
dominion of Her Majesty. That is to say, the ultimate
title subject to the usufructuary title was vested in the
Crown. Alienation of that usufructuary title to the Crown
completed the absolute fee simple in the Crown".
In Amodu Tijani, the Privy Council admitted the possibility of recognition not
only of usufructuary rights but also of interests in
land vested not in an
individual or a number of identified individuals but in a community. Viscount
Haldane observed(100) (1921)
2 AC, at pp 403-404:
"The title, such as it is, may not be that of the
individual, as in this country it nearly always is in some
form, but may be that of a community. Such a community
may have the possessory title to the common enjoyment
of a usufruct, with customs under which its individual
members are admitted to enjoyment, and even to a right
of transmitting the individual enjoyment as members by
assignment inter vivos or by succession. To ascertain
how far this latter development of right has progressed
involves the study of the history of the particular
community and its usages in each case. Abstract principles
fashioned a priori are of but little assistance, and are as
often as not misleading."
Recognition of the radical title of the Crown is quite consistent with
recognition of native title to land, for the radical title,
without more, is
merely a logical postulate required to support the doctrine of tenure (when
the Crown has exercised its sovereign
power to grant an interest in land) and
to support the plenary title of the Crown (when the Crown has exercised its
sovereign power
to appropriate to itself ownership of parcels of land within
the Crown's territory). Unless the sovereign power is exercised in one
other of those ways, there is no reason why land within the Crown's territory
should not continue to be subject to native title.
It is only the fallacy of
equating sovereignty and beneficial ownership of land that gives rise to the
notion that native title
is extinguished by the acquisition of sovereignty.
53. If it be necessary to categorize an interest in land as proprietary in
order that it survive a change in sovereignty, the interest
possessed by a
community that is in exclusive possession of land falls into that category.
Whether or not land is owned by individual
members of a community, a community
which asserts and asserts effectively that none but its members has any right
to occupy or use
the land has an interest in the land that must be proprietary
in nature: there is no other proprietor. It would be wrong, in my
to point to the inalienability of land by that community and, by importing
definitions of "property" which require alienability
under the municipal laws
of our society(101) See, for example, National Provincial Bank Ltd. v.
[1965] UKHL 1
AC 1175, at pp 1247-1248,
to deny that the indigenous people
owned their land. The ownership of land within a territory
in the exclusive
occupation of a people
must be vested in that people: land is susceptible of
ownership, and there are no other
owners. True it
is that land in exclusive
possession of an indigenous people is not, in any private law sense, alienable
for the laws and
customs of an indigenous
people do not generally
contemplate the alienation of the people's traditional land. But
has asserted that, if the
Crown should acquire sovereignty over that land,
the new sovereign may extinguish the indigenous
interest in the land
create proprietary rights in its place and it would be curious if, in
place of interests that were
as non-proprietary,
proprietary rights
could be created. Where a proprietary title capable of recognition by the
law is found
to have been possessed
by a community in occupation of a
territory, there is no reason why that title should not be
recognized as
burden on the Crown's
radical title when the Crown acquires sovereignty over
that territory. The fact that individual
the community, like the
individual plaintiff Aborigines in Milirrpum(102) (1971) 17 FLR, at p 272,
enjoy only usufructuary
that are not proprietary
in nature is no
impediment to the recognition of a proprietary community title. Indeed, it is
to admit traditional usufructuary
rights without admitting a
traditional proprietary community title. There may be difficulties
boundaries or of membership
of the community or of representatives of the
community which was in exclusive possession,
those difficulties afford no
for denying the existence of a proprietary community title capable of
recognition by the
law. That being so, there is no
impediment to the
recognition of individual non-proprietary rights that are derived from
community's
laws and customs and are
dependent on the community title. A
fortiori, there can be no impediment to the recognition
of individual
proprietary rights.
54. Once it is accepted that indigenous inhabitants in occupation of a
territory when sovereignty is acquired by the Crown are capable
of enjoying -
whether in community, as a group or as individuals - proprietary interests in
land, the rights and interests in the
land which they had theretofore enjoyed
under the customs of their community are seen to be a burden on the radical
title which the
Crown acquires. The notion that feudal principle dictates
that the land in a settled colony be taken to be a royal demesne upon
Crown's acquisition of sovereignty is mistaken. However, that was not the
only basis advanced to establish the proposition of
absolute Crown ownership
and the alternative bases must next be considered.
The "patrimony of the nation" basis of the proposition of absolute Crown
55. In Williams v. Attorney-General for New South Wales(103) (1913) 16 CLR,
at pp 449-450 and in The Commonwealth v. Tasmania. The
Tasmanian Dam Case(104)
[1983] HCA 21
; (1983) 158 CLR 1, at pp 208-212, there are references to the importance of the
revenue derived
from exercise
of the power of sale
of colonial land. The
funds derived from sales of colonial land were applied to defray the cost
on colonial government
and to subsidize emigration to the Australian
Colonies. Further, the power to reserve and dedicate
public purposes
was important
to the government and development of the Colonies as it remains
important to the government
and development
of the Commonwealth and
and Territories. Therefore it is right to describe the powers which the Crown
- at first the
Imperial Crown and later
the Crown in right of the respective
Colonies - exercised with respect to colonial lands
as powers conferred
the benefit of the
nation as a whole(105) Reg. v. Symonds (1847) NZPCC 387, at
p 395, but it does not follow
that those were
proprietary as distinct
political powers. Nor does it follow that a combination of radical title to
a power of sale
or dedication of that land
was not a valuable asset
of the Colonies. It can be acknowledged that the nation obtained
by sales and dedications
of land which dispossessed its indigenous
citizens and that, to the extent that the patrimony
has been realized,
rights and interests
of the indigenous citizens in land have been
extinguished. But that is not to say that
the patrimony was
realized by sales
and dedications
of land owned absolutely by the Crown. What the Crown
acquired was a radical
title to land and
a sovereign political power over
land, the sum of which is not tantamount to absolute ownership of land. Until
recent times, the
political power to dispose of land
in disregard of native
title was exercised so as to expand the radical title
of the Crown to absolute
ownership but, where that has
not occurred, there is no reason to deny the
law's protection to the descendants
of indigenous citizens
who can establish
their entitlement
to rights and interests which survived the Crown's
acquisition of sovereignty.
Those are rights
and interests which may now
the protection of
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
which "clothes the holders of traditional native title who are of the native
ethnic group with the same immunity from legislative
interference with their
enjoyment of their human right to own and inherit property as it clothes other
persons in the community":
Mabo v. Queensland(106) (1988) 166 CLR, at p 219.
The Royal Prerogative basis of the proposition of absolute Crown ownership
56. Mr Justice Evatt described ownership of vacant lands in a new colony as
one of the proprietary prerogatives(107) See The Attorney-General
South Wales v. Butterworth and Co. (Australia) Ltd. (1938) 38 SR (NSW) 195, at
pp 246-247 . But, as that author's lately
published work on The Royal
Prerogative shows(108) (1987), at pp 102-103, there was no judicial consensus
as to whether title to
ownership of the vacant lands in the Australian
Colonies was vested in the King as representing the supreme executive power of
British Empire or in the Crown in right of the respective Colonies. The
management and control of the waste lands of the Crown were
passed by Imperial
legislation to the respective Colonial Governments as a transfer of political
power or governmental function not
as a matter of title(109) Williams v.
Attorney-General for New South Wales (1913) 16 CLR, at pp 453, 456. The
suggestion that, after
the passing of these powers to colonial governments the
Crown commenced to hold Crown lands "in right of the colony"(110) Per Stephen
J. in the Seas and Submerged Lands Case (1975) 135 CLR, at p 439; and note per
O'Connor J. in The State of South Australia v. The
State of Victoria
[1911] HCA 17
; (1911) 12
CLR 667, at pp 710-711 and held those lands in absolute ownership, involves
that ownership
resided in the Executive
Government whose
legislature was vested with power to enact laws governing the management
colonial waste lands. But
the Imperial Parliament retained the
sovereign - that is, the ultimate - legislative power
over colonial
at least until
the adoption of the Statute of Westminster(111) Madzimbamuto v.
Lardner-Burke
[1968] UKPC 2
(1969) 1 AC 645, at p 722 and
it is hardly to be supposed that
absolute ownership of colonial land was vested in colonial governments
the ultimate legislative
power over that land was retained by the Imperial
Parliament. However, if the Crown's title is merely
a radical title - no more
than a postulate to support the exercise of sovereign power within the
familiar feudal framework of the
common law - the problem
of the vesting of
the absolute beneficial ownership of colonial land does not arise: absolute
and beneficial
Crown ownership can
be acquired, if at all, by an exercise of
the appropriate sovereign power.
57. As none of the grounds advanced for attributing to the Crown an universal
and absolute ownership of colonial land is acceptable,
we must now turn to
consider a further obstacle advanced against the survival of the rights and
interests of indigenous inhabitants
on the Crown's acquisition of
sovereignty.
The need for recognition by the Crown of native title
58. The defendant contests the view that the common law recognizes the
possession of rights and interests in land by indigenous
inhabitants of
British colonies and submits that, by the common law governing colonization,
pre-existing customary rights and interests
in land are abolished upon
colonization of inhabited territory, unless expressly recognized by the new
sovereign. There is a formidable
body of authority, mostly cases relating to
Indian colonies created by cession, to support this submission(112) Secretary
for India v. Bai Rajbai (1915) LR 42 Ind App 229, at pp 237, 238-239;
Vajesingji Joravarsingji v. Secretary of State for India (1924)
LR 51 Ind App
357, at pp 360, 361; Secretary of State for India v. Sardar Rustam Khan (1941)
AC 356, at pp 370-372. Thus Lord Dunedin's
judgment in Vajesingji
Joravarsingji v. Secretary of State for India contains the following oft-cited
passage(113) (1924) LR 51 Ind
App, at p 360:
"But a summary of the matter is this: when a territory is
acquired by a sovereign state for the first time that is an
act of state. It matters not how the acquisition has been
brought about. It may be by conquest, it may be by cession
following on treaty, it may be by occupation of territory
hitherto unoccupied by a recognized ruler. In all cases
the result is the same. Any inhabitant of the territory
can make good in the municipal Courts established by the
new sovereign only such rights as that sovereign has,
through his officers, recognized. Such rights as he had
under the rule of predecessors avail him nothing. Nay
more, even if in a treaty of cession it is stipulated that
certain inhabitants should enjoy certain rights, that does
not give a title to those inhabitants to enforce these
stipulations in the municipal Courts."
59. The proposition that pre-existing rights and interests in land must be
established, if at all, under the new legal system introduced
acquisition of sovereignty is axiomatic, and the proposition that treaties do
not create rights enforceable in municipal courts
is well established(114)
Cook v. Sprigg (1899) AC 572, at pp 578-579; Winfat Ltd. v. Attorney-General
(1985) AC 733, at p 746. However,
the relevant question is whether the rights
and interests in land derived from the old regime survive the acquisition of
sovereignty
or do they achieve recognition only upon an express act of
recognition by the new sovereign? Lord Dunedin's view in Vajesingji
Joravarsingji(115)
(1924) LR 51 Ind App, at p 361 was that recognition by the
sovereign of rights and interests possessed under the old regime was a
condition of their recognition by the common law:
"The moment that cession is admitted the appellants
necessarily become petitioners and have the onus cast on
them of showing the acts of acknowledgment, which give them
the right they wish to be declared."
Presumably, until the relevant "acts of acknowledgment" occur, the Crown would
be the absolute owner of private property but, when
those acts occur, the
rights and interests acknowledged would revest in their erstwhile possessor.
One might think that the consequence
of such a rule would be to create or
compound chaos. Of course, if the Crown were to confiscate private property as
an act of State(116)
As in Secretary of State in Council of India v. Kamachee
Boye Sahaba
[1859] EngR 837
; (1859) 7 Moo Ind App 476 (19 ER 388); but cf. Attorney-General
[1969] UKHL 3
; (1970) AC 179, at p 227, and Burmah Oil Co. Ltd. v. Lord Advocate
[1964] UKHL 6
; (1965) AC 75 in acquiring sovereignty
of a territory
or if the Crown were to
extinguish private property pursuant to a law having
effect in the
territory(117) As in Winfat
Ltd. v. Attorney-General
(1985) AC 733, thereafter
no recognition of the rights and interests
which had existed under the old
would be possible. In
either of those events, however, the loss of the
rights or interests
possessed under the old regime is attributable
of the Crown, not to an absence of an act of recognition of those
or interests. Those cases apart, Lord Dunedin's
and interests in land possessed by the inhabitants of a territory
Crown acquires sovereignty are lost
the Crown acts to acknowledge those
rights is not in accord with the weight of
authority. For example, Lord
Sumner in In
re Southern
Rhodesia(118) (1919) AC, at p 233 understood the true
rule as to the survival
of private proprietary rights on conquest
"it is to be presumed, in the absence of express
confiscation or of subsequent exproprietary legislation,
that the conqueror has respected them and forborne to
diminish or modify them".
This view accords with the old authorities of The Case of Tanistry and Witrong
and Blany(119) Supra, pp 37-38, earlier mentioned.
Again, Lord Dunedin's view
does not accord with the rule stated by Viscount Haldane in Amodu Tijani(120)
(1921) 2 AC, at p 407:
"A mere change in sovereignty is not to be presumed as meant
to disturb rights of private owners; and the general terms
of a cession are prima facie to be construed accordingly."
His Lordship does not limit the generality of the first sentence to
acquisitions by cession; rather, he appears to be construing the
cession in the light of the general principle by which private proprietary
rights survive a change in sovereignty by whatever
means. Despite his judgment
in Vajesingji Joravarsingji, Viscount Dunedin subsequently accepted(121) In
Sakariyawo Oshodi v. Moriamo
Dakolo (1930) AC 667, at p 668 that the decision
in Amodu Tijani laid down that the cession of Lagos in 1861 "did not affect
character of the private native rights". As Viscount Haldane's statement
of the rule was limited neither to the construction of
a treaty of cession nor
to the cession of Lagos, must it not be taken as the general rule of the
common law? Again Lord Denning,
speaking for the Privy Council in Adeyinka
Oyekan v. Musendiku Adele(122) (1957) 1 WLR 876, at p 880; (1957) 2 All ER
785, at p 788,
"In inquiring ... what rights are recognized, there is one
guiding principle. It is this: The courts will assume
that the British Crown intends that the rights of property
of the inhabitants are to be fully respected. Whilst,
therefore, the British Crown, as Sovereign, can make
laws enabling it compulsorily to acquire land for public
purposes, it will see that proper compensation is awarded
to every one of the inhabitants who has by native law
an interest in it: and the courts will declare the
inhabitants entitled to compensation according to their
interests, even though those interests are of a kind
unknown to English law".
We are not concerned here with compensation for expropriation but we are
concerned with the survival of private rights and interests
in land and their
liability to be extinguished by action of the Crown. The rule in Amodu Tijani
was followed by the Privy Council
in Sobhuza II. v. Miller(123) (1926) AC, at
p 525 where the title of an indigenous community, which their Lordships
thought to be
generally usufructuary in character, was held to survive as "a
mere qualification of a burden on the radical or final title of whoever
sovereign", capable of being extinguished "by the action of a paramount power
which assumes possession or the entire control of
60. In Calder v. Attorney-General of British Columbia(124) (1973) SCR, at p
416; contra per Judson J. at pp 328-330; (1973) 34 DLR
(3d), at p 218; contra
per Judson J. at pp 156, 157 Hall J. rejected as "wholly wrong" "the
proposition that after conquest or discovery
the native peoples have no rights
at all except those subsequently granted or recognized by the conqueror or
discoverer".
61. The preferable rule, supported by the authorities cited, is that a mere
change in sovereignty does not extinguish native title
to land. (The term
"native title" conveniently describes the interests and rights of indigenous
inhabitants in land, whether communal,
group or individual, possessed under
the traditional laws acknowledged by and the traditional customs observed by
the indigenous
inhabitants.) The preferable rule equates the indigenous
inhabitants of a settled colony with the inhabitants of a conquered colony
respect of their rights and interests in land and recognizes in the indigenous
inhabitants of a settled colony the rights and
interests recognized by the
Privy Council in In re Southern Rhodesia as surviving to the benefit of the
residents of a conquered
62. If native title survives the Crown's acquisition of sovereignty as, in my
view, it does, it is unnecessary to examine the alternative
arguments advanced
to support the rights and interests of the Meriam people to their traditional
land. One argument raised the presumption
of a Crown grant arising from the
Meriam people's possession of the Murray Islands from a time before
annexation; another was the
existence of a title arising after annexation in
accordance with a supposed local legal custom under the common law whereby the
people were said to be entitled to possess the Murray Islands. There
are substantial difficulties in the way of accepting either
arguments, but it is unnecessary to pursue them. It is sufficient to state
that, in my opinion, the common law of Australia
rejects the notion that, when
the Crown acquired sovereignty over territory which is now part of Australia
it thereby acquired the
absolute beneficial ownership of the land therein, and
accepts that the antecedent rights and interests in land possessed by the
indigenous inhabitants of the territory survived the change in sovereignty.
Those antecedent rights and interests thus constitute
a burden on the radical
title of the Crown.
63. It must be acknowledged that, to state the common law in this way
involves the overruling of cases which have held the contrary.
To maintain
the authority of those cases would destroy the equality of all Australian
citizens before the law. The common law of
this country would perpetuate
injustice if it were to continue to embrace the enlarged notion of terra
nullius and to persist in
characterizing the indigenous inhabitants of the
Australian colonies as people too low in the scale of social organization to
acknowledged as possessing rights and interests in land. Moreover, to
reject the theory that the Crown acquired absolute beneficial
ownership of
land is to bring the law into conformity with Australian history. The
dispossession of the indigenous inhabitants of
Australia was not worked by a
transfer of beneficial ownership when sovereignty was acquired by the Crown,
but by the recurrent exercise
of a paramount power to exclude the indigenous
inhabitants from their traditional lands as colonial settlement expanded and
was granted to the colonists. Dispossession is attributable not to a
failure of native title to survive the acquisition of sovereignty,
subsequent extinction by a paramount power. Before examining the power to
extinguish native title, it is necessary to
say something about the nature and
incidents of the native title which, surviving the Crown's acquisition of
sovereignty, burdens
the Crown's radical title.
The nature and incidents of native title
64. Native title has its origin in and is given its content by the
traditional laws acknowledged by and the traditional customs
observed by the
indigenous inhabitants of a territory. The nature and incidents of native
title must be ascertained as a matter
of fact by reference to those laws and
customs. The ascertainment may present a problem of considerable difficulty,
as Moynihan
J. perceived in the present case. It is a problem that did not
arise in the case of a settled colony so long as the fictions were
that customary rights could not be reconciled "with the institutions or the
legal ideas of civilized society"(125) In
re Southern Rhodesia (1919) AC, at p
233, that there was no law before the arrival of the British colonists in a
settled colony and
that there was no sovereign law-maker in the territory of a
settled colony before sovereignty was acquired by the Crown. These fictions
denied the possibility of a native title recognized by our laws. But once it
is acknowledged that an inhabited territory which became
a settled colony was
no more a legal desert than it was "desert uninhabited" in fact, it is
necessary to ascertain by evidence the
nature and incidents of native title.
Though these are matters of fact, some general propositions about native title
can be stated
without reference to evidence.
65. First, unless there are pre-existing laws of a territory over which the
Crown acquires sovereignty which provide for the alienation
of interests in
land to strangers, the rights and interests which constitute a native title
can be possessed only by the indigenous
inhabitants and their descendants.
Native title, though recognized by the common law, is not an institution of
the common law and
is not alienable by the common law. Its alienability is
dependent on the laws from which it is derived. If alienation of a right
interest in land is a mere matter of the custom observed by the indigenous
inhabitants, not provided for by law enforced by a
sovereign power, there is
no machinery which can enforce the rights of the alienee. The common law
cannot enforce as a proprietary
interest the rights of a putative alienee
whose title is not created either under a law which was enforceable against
the putative
alienor at the time of the alienation and thereafter until the
change of sovereignty or under the common law. And, subject to an
qualification, the only title dependent on custom which the common law will
recognize is one which is consistent with the
common law. Thus, in The Case
of Tanistry, the Irish custom of tanistry was held to be void because it was
founded in violence and
because the vesting of title under the custom was
uncertain(126) (1608) Davis (80 ER ); 4th ed. Dublin (1762) English
translation,
at pp 94-99. The inconsistency that the court perceived between
the custom of tanistry known to the Brehon law of Ireland and the
precluded the recognition of the custom by the common law. At that stage in
its development, the common law was too rigid
to admit recognition of a native
title based on other laws or customs, but that rigidity has been relaxed, at
least since the decision
of the Privy Council in Amodu Tijani. The general
principle that the common law will recognize a customary title only if it be
with the common law is subject to an exception in favour of
traditional native title.
66. Of course, since European settlement of Australia, many clans or groups
of indigenous people have been physically separated
from their traditional
land and have lost their connexion with it. But that is not the universal
position. It is clearly not the
position of the Meriam people. Where a clan
or group has continued to acknowledge the laws and (so far as practicable) to
the customs based on the traditions of that clan or group, whereby
their traditional connexion with the land has been substantially
maintained,
the traditional community title of that clan or group can be said to remain in
existence. The common law can, by reference
to the traditional laws and
customs of an indigenous people, identify and protect the native rights and
interests to which they give
rise. However, when the tide of history has
washed away any real acknowledgment of traditional law and any real observance
of traditional
customs, the foundation of native title has disappeared. A
native title which has ceased with the abandoning of laws and customs
tradition cannot be revived for contemporary recognition. Australian law can
protect the interests of members of an indigenous
clan or group, whether
communally or individually, only in conformity with the traditional laws and
customs of the people to whom
the clan or group belongs and only where members
of the clan or group acknowledge those laws and observe those customs (so far
it is practicable to do so). Once traditional native title expires, the
Crown's radical title expands to a full beneficial title,
for then there is no
other proprietor than the Crown.
67. It follows that a right or interest possessed as a native title cannot be
acquired from an indigenous people by one who, not
being a member of the
indigenous people, does not acknowledge their laws and observe their customs;
nor can such a right or interest
be acquired by a clan, group or member of the
indigenous people unless the acquisition is consistent with the laws and
that people. Such a right or interest can be acquired outside those
laws and customs only by the Crown(127) This result has been
reached in other
, at p 390; Johnson v. McIntosh (1823)
8 wheat, at p 586 (21 US , at p 259);
St. Catherine's Milling and Lumber Co. v. The Queen (1887) 13 SCR 577, at p
599. Once the Crown
acquires sovereignty and the common law becomes the law of
the territory, the Crown's sovereignty over all land in the territory
the capacity to accept a surrender of native title. The native title may be
surrendered on purchase or surrendered voluntarily,
whereupon the Crown's
radical title is expanded to absolute ownership, a plenum dominium, for there
is then no other owner(128) St.
Catherine's Milling and Lumber Co. v. The
Queen (1888) 14 App Cas, at p 55. If native title were surrendered to the
Crown in expectation
of a grant of a tenure to the indigenous title holders,
there may be a fiduciary duty on the Crown to exercise its discretionary
to grant a tenure in land so as to satisfy the expectation(129) See Guerin v.
(1984) 13 DLR (4th) 321
, at pp 334,
339, 342-343, 356-357, 360-361,
but it is unnecessary to consider the existence or extent of such a fiduciary
Here, the fact is that strangers were not allowed to
settle on the Murray Islands and, even after annexation in 1879,
were living on the Islands were deported. The Meriam people asserted an
exclusive right to occupy the Murray Islands
a community, held a
proprietary interest in the Islands. They have maintained their identity as a
people and they observe
which are traditionally based. There was a
possible alienation of some kind of interest in 2 acres to the London
prior to annexation but it is unnecessary to consider
whether that land was alienated by Meriam law or whether the alienation
sanctioned by custom alone. As we shall see, native title to that land was
lost to the Meriam people in any event on the grant
a lease by the Crown in
1882 or by its subsequent renewal.
68. Secondly, native title, being recognized by the common law (though not as
a common law tenure), may be protected by such legal
or equitable remedies as
are appropriate to the particular rights and interests established by the
evidence, whether proprietary
or personal and usufructuary in nature and
whether possessed by a community, a group or an individual. The incidents of
a particular
native title relating to inheritance, the transmission or
acquisition of rights and interests on death or marriage, the transfer
rights and interests in land and the grouping of persons to possess rights and
interests in land are matters to be determined
by the laws and customs of the
indigenous inhabitants, provided those laws and customs are not so repugnant
to natural justice, equity
and good conscience that judicial sanctions under
the new regime must be withheld: Idewu Inasa v. Oshodi(130) (1934) AC 99, at
105. Of course in time the laws and customs of any people will change and
the rights and interests of the members of the people among
themselves will
change too. But so long as the people remain as an identifiable community,
the members of whom are identified by
one another as members of that community
living under its laws and customs, the communal native title survives to be
enjoyed by the
members according to the rights and interests to which they are
respectively entitled under the traditionally based laws and customs,
currently acknowledged and observed. Here, the Meriam people have maintained
their own identity and their own customs. The Murray
Islands clearly remain
their home country. Their land disputes have been dealt with over the years by
the Island Court in accordance
with the customs of the Meriam people.
69. Thirdly, where an indigenous people (including a clan or group), as a
community, are in possession or are entitled to possession
of land under a
proprietary native title, their possession may be protected or their
entitlement to possession may be enforced by
a representative action brought
on behalf of the people or by a sub-group or individual who sues to protect or
enforce rights or
interests which are dependent on the communal native title.
Those rights and interests are, so to speak, carved out of the communal
title. A sub-group or individual asserting a native title dependent on a
communal native title has a sufficient interest
to sue to enforce or protect
the communal title(131) Australian Conservation Foundation v. The Commonwealth
146 CLR 493,
pp 530-531, 537-539, 547-548; Onus v. Alcoa of
Australia Ltd.
[1981] HCA 50
; (1981) 149 CLR 27, at pp 35-36, 41-42,
46, 51, 62, 74-75. A
native title enures for the benefit of the community as a
for the sub-groups and individuals
within it who have particular
interests in the community's lands.
70. The recognition of the rights and interests of a sub-group or individual
dependent on a communal native title is not precluded
by an absence of a
communal law to determine a point in contest between rival claimants. By
custom, such a point may have to be
settled by community consensus or in some
other manner prescribed by custom. A court may have to act on evidence which
lacks specificity
in determining a question of that kind. That is statutorily
recognized in the case of the Murray Islands. The jurisdiction conferred
the Island Court by s.41(2)(b) of the Community Services (Torres Strait) Act
1984-1990 (Q.) includes a jurisdiction which must
be exercised in accordance
with the customs of the Meriam people. The Act provides -
"An Island Court has jurisdiction to hear and
determine -
(b) disputes concerning any matter that -
(i) is a matter accepted by the community resident in
its area as a matter rightly governed by the usages
and customs of that community;
(ii) is not a breach of the by-laws applicable within
its area or of a law of the Commonwealth or the
State or a matter arising under a law of the
Commonwealth or the State;
and shall exercise ... that jurisdiction referred to in
provision (b) in accordance with the usages and customs of
the community within its area."
71. Whatever be the precision of Meriam laws and customs with respect to
land, there is abundant evidence that land was traditionally
occupied by
individuals or family groups and that contemporary rights and interests are
capable of being established with sufficient
precision to attract declaratory
or other relief. Although the findings made by Moynihan J. do not permit a
confident conclusion
that, in 1879, there were parcels of land in the Murray
Islands owned allodially by individuals or groups, the absence of such a
finding is not critical to the final resolution of this case. If the doctrine
of Attorney-General v. Brown were applied to the Murray
Islands, allodial
ownership would have been no bar to the Crown's acquisition of universal and
absolute ownership of the land and
the extinguishing of all native titles.
But, by applying the rule that the communal proprietary interests of the
indigenous inhabitants
survive the Crown's acquisition of sovereignty, it is
possible to determine, according to the laws and customs of the Meriam people,
contests among members of the Meriam people relating to rights and interests
in particular parcels of land.
72. The native titles claimed by the Meriam people - communally, by group or
individually - avoid the Scylla of the 1879 annexation
of the Murray Islands
to Queensland, but we must now consider whether they avoid the Charybdis of
subsequent extinction.
The extinguishing of native title
73. Sovereignty carries the power to create and to extinguish private rights
and interests in land within the Sovereign's territory(132)
Joint Tribal
Council of the Passamaquoddy Tribe v. Morton (1975) 528 Fed 2d 370, at p 376
n.6. It follows that, on a change of sovereignty,
rights and interests in land
that may have been indefeasible under the old regime become liable to
extinction by exercise of the
new sovereign power. The sovereign power may or
may not be exercised with solicitude for the welfare of indigenous inhabitants
in the case of common law countries, the courts cannot review the merits,
as distinct from the legality, of the exercise of sovereign
power(133) United
States v. Santa Fe Pacific Railroad Company
[1942] USSC 12
; (1941) 314 US 339, at p 347;
Tee-Hit-Ton Indians v. United States (1954)
348 US 272, at pp 281-285.
However, under the constitutional
law of this country, the legality (and hence
the validity) of an exercise
of a sovereign power depends on the authority
the organ of government purporting to exercise it: municipal
constitutional
law determines the scope of authority to exercise a sovereign
power over matters governed by municipal law, including rights and
74. In Queensland, the Crown's power to grant an interest in land is, by
Constitution
Act of 1867 (Q.), an exclusively
statutory power and the validity of a particular grant depends upon conformity
with the relevant
statute(134) Cudgen Rutile (No.2) Ltd. v. Chalk (1975) AC
520, at pp 533-534. When validly made, a grant of an interest in land
the Crown and the Sovereign's successors(135) Halsbury, op cit, 4th ed.,
vol.8, par.1047. The courts cannot refuse to give
effect to a Crown grant
"except perhaps in a proceeding by scire facias or otherwise, on the
prosecution of the Crown itself"(136)
Wi Parata v. Bishop of Wellington (1877)
3 NZ(Jur) NS 72, at p 77. Therefore an interest validly granted by the Crown,
or interest dependent on an interest validly granted by the Crown
cannot be extinguished by the Crown without statutory authority.
As the Crown
is not competent to derogate from a grant once made(137), a statute which
confers a power on the Crown will be presumed
(so far as consistent with the
purpose for which the power is conferred) to stop short of authorizing any
impairment of an interest
in land granted by the Crown or dependent on a Crown
grant. But, as native title is not granted by the Crown, there is no
presumption affecting the conferring of any executive power on the
Crown the exercise of which is apt to extinguish native title.
75. However, the exercise of a power to extinguish native title must reveal a
clear and plain intention to do so, whether the action
be taken by the
Legislature or by the Executive. This requirement, which flows from the
seriousness of the consequences to indigenous
inhabitants of extinguishing
their traditional rights and interests in land, has been repeatedly emphasized
by courts dealing with
the extinguishing of the native title of Indian bands
in North America. It is unnecessary for our purposes to consider the several
juristic foundations - proclamation, policy, treaty or occupation - on which
native title has been rested in Canada and the United
States but reference to
the leading cases in each jurisdiction reveals that, whatever the juristic
foundation assigned by those courts
might be, native title is not extinguished
unless there be a clear and plain intention to do so(138) Calder v.
Attorney-General of
British Columbia (1973) SCR, at p 404; (1973) 34 DLR (3d),
at p 210; Hamlet of Baker Lake v. Minister of Indian Affairs (1979) 107
(3d) 513, at p 552; Reg. v. Sparrow (1990) 1 SCR.1075, at p 1094; (1990) 70
DLR (4th) 385, at p 401; United States v. Santa Fe
Pacific Railroad Co. (1941)
314 US , at pp 353, 354; Lipan Apache Tribe v. United States (1967) 180 Ct Cl
487, at p 492. That approach
has been followed in New Zealand(139) Te Weehi v.
Regional Fisheries Officer (1986) 1 NZLR 680, at pp 691-692. It is patently
right rule.
76. A clear and plain intention to extinguish native title is not revealed by
a law which merely regulates the enjoyment of native
title(140) Reg. v.
Sparrow (1990) 1 SCR, at p 1097; (1990) 70 DLR (4th), at p 400 or which
creates a regime of control that is consistent
with the continued enjoyment of
native title(141) United States v. Santa Fe Pacific Railroad Co. (1941) 314 US
, at pp 353-354 .
A fortiori, a law which reserves or authorizes the
reservation of land from sale for the purpose of permitting indigenous
inhabitants
and their descendants to enjoy their native title works no
extinguishment.
77. The Crown did not purport to extinguish native title to the Murray
Islands when they were annexed in 1879. In 1882, in purported
exercise of
powers conferred by the Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876 (Q.), the Murray
Islands were reserved from sale. The 1882
instrument of reservation has not
been traced, and it is arguable that the 1876 Act did not apply to land in the
Murray Islands for
the Murray Islands were not part of Queensland when that
Act was passed. That Act was repealed by the Crown Lands Act 1884 (Q.),
took its place. In 1912, a proclamation was made pursuant to s.180 of the
Land Act 1910 which "permanently reserved and set
apart" the Murray Islands
"for use of the Aboriginal Inhabitants of the State". Section 180(1) of the
Land Act 1910 empowered the
Governor in Council to reserve any Crown land from
sale or lease "which, in the opinion of the Governor in Council, is or may be
required for public purposes". "Public purposes" included "Aboriginal
reserves"(142) s.4. "Crown land" was defined by s.4 of the
Land Act 1910 as
"All land in Queensland, except land which is, for the time
(a) Lawfully granted or contracted to be granted in
fee-simple by the Crown; or
(b) Reserved for or dedicated to public purposes; or
(c) Subject to any lease or license lawfully granted by the
Crown: Provided that land held under an occupation
license shall be deemed to be Crown land".
If the Murray Islands had been effectively "reserved for public purposes" by
the 1882 reservation, they would not have been "Crown
land" by reason of
par.(b) of the definition but, in that event, they would have fallen within
s.180(3) which provided:
" All land heretofore reserved or set apart for any public
purpose, and the fee-simple whereof has not been granted by
the Crown, shall hereafter be deemed to be a reserve for
public purposes under this Act, and deemed to have been so
reserved under this section."
Section 181 of the Land Act 1910 empowered the Governor in Council "without
issuing any deed of grant, (to) place any land reserved,
either temporarily or
permanently, for any public purpose under the control of trustees; and may
declare the style or title of such
trustees and the trusts of the land." In
1939, the Governor in Council placed the Murray Islands reserve under the
control of trustees
but did not declare "the trusts of the land". By s.4(15)
of The Land Act of 1962 (Q.) the reservation of the Murray Islands and
appointment of trustees of the reserve continue in force notwithstanding the
repeal of the Land Act 1910 and are deemed to have
been made under the
analogous provisions of the Land Act 1962. Sections 334(1) and (3) and 335 are
provisions analogous respectively
to ss.180(1) and (3) and 181 of the Land Act
1910. The definition of "Crown land" in s.5 of the Land Act 1962 corresponds
definition in the Land Act 1910.
78. No doubt the term "Crown land" was defined in these Acts in the belief,
which has been current since Attorney-General v. Brown,
that the absolute
ownership of all land in Queensland is vested in the Crown until it is
alienated by Crown grant. Nevertheless,
the denotation of the term "Crown
land" in the Land Act 1910 and the Land Act 1962 is the same whether the
common law attributes
to the Crown the radical title or absolute ownership. A
difficulty of construction arises, however, in connection with the provisions
relating to the removal of intruders from Crown land or land reserved for
public purposes. Section 91 of the Crown Lands Alienation
Act, for example,
makes it an offence for a person to be found in occupation of any such land
"unless lawfully claiming under a subsisting
lease or licence". If this
provision were construed as having denied to the Meriam people any right to
remain in occupation of their
land, there would have been an indication that
their native title was extinguished. The Solicitor-General for Queensland
that, if s.91 applied - and he did not contend that it did - the
Meriam people could lawfully have been driven into the sea at any
annexation and that they have been illegally allowed to remain on the Murray
Islands ever since. Such a conclusion would
make nonsense of the law. As Hall
J. said of a similar proposition in Calder v. Attorney-General of British
Columbia(143) (1973)
SCR, at p 414; (1973) 34 DLR (3d), at p 217: "The idea
is self-destructive". To construe s.91 or similar provisions as applying
the Meriam people in occupation of the Murray Islands would be truly
barbarian. Such provisions should be construed as being
directed to those who
were or are in occupation under colour of a Crown grant or without any colour
of right; they are not directed
to indigenous inhabitants who were or are in
occupation of land by right of their unextinguished native title.
79. Native title was not extinguished by the creation of reserves nor by the
mere appointment of "trustees" to control a reserve
where no grant of title
was made. To reserve land from sale is to protect native title from being
extinguished by alienation under
a power of sale. To appoint trustees to
control a reserve does not confer on the trustees a power to interfere with
the rights and
interests in land possessed by indigenous inhabitants under a
native title. Nor is native title impaired by a declaration that land
reserved not merely for use by the indigenous inhabitants of the land but "for
use of Aboriginal Inhabitants of the State" generally(144)
Assuming that that
term relates to all indigenous inhabitants of the State whether having any
connection with the particular reserve
or not: see Corporation of the
Director of Aboriginal and Islanders Advancement v. Peinkinna (1978) 52 ALJR
286. If the creation
of a reserve of land for Aboriginal Inhabitants of the
State who have no other rights or interest in that land confers a right to
that land, the right of user is necessarily subordinate to the right of user
consisting in legal rights and interests conferred
by native title. Of
course, a native title which confers a mere usufruct may leave room for other
persons to use the land either
contemporaneously or from time to time.
80. In this case, the Solicitor-General did not contend that if, contrary to
his submissions, native title became, after annexation
and without an act of
recognition by the Crown, a legally recognized interest in the Murray Islands,
the Crown had extinguished that
title. He drew attention to the fact that the
Meriam people had been left in peaceful occupation of the Murray Islands. For
part, counsel for the plaintiffs submitted that the State of Queensland
had no power to extinguish native title. That argument proceeded
footing that sovereignty is an attribute possessed only by an internationally
recognized sovereign and that the Commonwealth
answers that description but
the States of the Commonwealth do not(145) Seas and Submerged Lands Case
(1975) 135 CLR, at p 373.
Although that proposition is significant in
determining title to the territorial sea, seabed and airspace and continental
and incline, it has no relevance to the power to extinguish native title
to land which is not a matter of international concern(146)
ibid., at pp 373,
467. The sovereign powers which might be exercised over the waste lands of
the Crown within Queensland were vested
in the Colony of Queensland subject to
the ultimate legislative power of the Imperial Parliament so long as that
Parliament retained
that power and, after Federation, subject to the
Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Australia. The power to reserve and
dedicate land to a public purpose and the power to grant interests in
conferred by statute on the Governor in Council of Queensland and an exercise
of these powers is, subject to the
Discrimination Act
extinguish native title. The Queensland Parliament retains, subject to the
Constitution
and to restrictions imposed by valid laws of the
Commonwealth(147) Mabo v. Queensland (1988) 166 CLR 186, a legislative
extinguish native title. This being so, it is necessary to consider the
effect which the granting of leases over parts
Islands has had
on native title before the
Racial Discrimination Act
came into force.
81. A Crown grant which vests in the grantee an interest in land which is
inconsistent with the continued right to enjoy a native
title in respect of
the same land necessarily extinguishes the native title. The extinguishing of
native title does not depend on
the actual intention of the Governor in
Council (who may not have adverted to the rights and interests of the
indigenous inhabitants
or their descendants), but on the effect which the
grant has on the right to enjoy the native title. If a lease be granted, the
lessee acquires possession and the Crown acquires the reversion expectant on
the expiry of the term. The Crown's title is thus expanded
from the mere
radical title and, on the expiry of the term, becomes a plenum dominium.
Where the Crown grants land in trust or reserves
and dedicates land for a
public purpose, the question whether the Crown has revealed a clear and plain
intention to extinguish native
title will sometimes be a question of fact,
sometimes a question of law and sometimes a mixed question of fact and law.
a reservation is made for a public purpose other than for the benefit
of the indigenous inhabitants, a right to continued enjoyment
of native title
may be consistent with the specified purpose - at least for a time - and
native title will not be extinguished.
But if the land is used and occupied
for the public purpose and the manner of occupation is inconsistent with the
continued enjoyment
of native title, native title will be extinguished. A
reservation of land for future use as a school, a courthouse or a public
will not by itself extinguish native title: construction of the
building, however, would be inconsistent with the continued enjoyment
native title which would thereby be extinguished. But where the Crown has not
granted interests in land or reserved and dedicated
land inconsistently with
the right to continued enjoyment of native title by the indigenous
inhabitants, native title survives and
is legally enforceable.
82. As the Governments of the Australian Colonies and, latterly, the
Governments of the Commonwealth, States and Territories have
alienated or
appropriated to their own purposes most of the land in this country during the
last 200 years, the Australian Aboriginal
peoples have been substantially
dispossessed of their traditional lands. They were dispossessed by the
Crown's exercise of its sovereign
powers to grant land to whom it chose and to
appropriate to itself the beneficial ownership of parcels of land for the
Crown's purposes.
Aboriginal rights and interests were not stripped away by
operation of the common law on first settlement by British colonists,
the exercise of a sovereign authority over land exercised recurrently by
Governments. To treat the dispossession of the Australian
Aborigines as the
working out of the Crown's acquisition of ownership of all land on first
settlement is contrary to history. Aborigines
were dispossessed of their land
parcel by parcel, to make way for expanding colonial settlement. Their
dispossession underwrote
the development of the nation. But, if this be the
consequence in law of colonial settlement, is there any occasion now to
the cases which held the Crown to have become the absolute beneficial
owner of land when British colonists first settled here? Does
it make any
difference whether native title failed to survive British colonization or was
subsequently extinguished by government
action? In this case, the difference
is critical: except for certain transactions next to be mentioned, nothing has
been done to
extinguish native title in the Murray Islands. There, the Crown
has alienated only part of the land and has not acquired for itself
beneficial ownership of any substantial area. And there may be other areas of
Australia where native title has not been extinguished
and where an Aboriginal
people, maintaining their identity and their customs, are entitled to enjoy
their native title. Even if there
be no such areas, it is appropriate to
identify the events which resulted in the dispossession of the indigenous
inhabitants of Australia,
in order to dispel the misconception that it is the
common law rather than the action of governments which made many of the
people of this country trespassers on their own land.
83. After this lengthy examination of the problem, it is desirable to state
in summary form what I hold to be the common law of
Australia with reference
to land titles:
1. The Crown's acquisition of sovereignty over the several parts of Australia
cannot be challenged in an Australian municipal court.
2. On acquisition of sovereignty over a particular part of Australia, the
Crown acquired a radical title to the land in that part.
3. Native title to land survived the Crown's acquisition of sovereignty and
radical title. The rights and privileges conferred by
native title were
unaffected by the Crown's acquisition of radical title but the acquisition of
sovereignty exposed native title
to extinguishment by a valid exercise of
sovereign power inconsistent with the continued right to enjoy native title.
4. Where the Crown has validly alienated land by granting an interest that is
wholly or partially inconsistent with a continuing
right to enjoy native
title, native title is extinguished to the extent of the inconsistency. Thus
native title has been extinguished
by grants of estates of freehold or of
leases but not necessarily by the grant of lesser interests (e.g., authorities
to prospect
for minerals).
5. Where the Crown has validly and effectively appropriated land to itself and
the appropriation is wholly or partially inconsistent
with a continuing right
to enjoy native title, native title is extinguished to the extent of the
inconsistency. Thus native title
has been extinguished to parcels of the waste
lands of the Crown that have been validly appropriated for use (whether by
dedication,
setting aside, reservation or other valid means) and used for
roads, railways, post offices and other permanent public works which
the continuing concurrent enjoyment of native title. Native title continues
where the waste lands of the Crown have not
been so appropriated or used or
where the appropriation and use is consistent with the continuing concurrent
enjoyment of native
title over the land (e.g., land set aside as a national
6. Native title to particular land (whether classified by the common law as
proprietary, usufructuary or otherwise), its incidents
and the persons
entitled thereto are ascertained according to the laws and customs of the
indigenous people who, by those laws and
customs, have a connection with the
land. It is immaterial that the laws and customs have undergone some change
since the Crown
acquired sovereignty provided the general nature of the
connection between the indigenous people and the land remains. Membership
the indigenous people depends on biological descent from the indigenous people
and on mutual recognition of a particular person's
membership by that person
and by the elders or other persons enjoying traditional authority among those
7. Native title to an area of land which a clan or group is entitled to enjoy
under the laws and customs of an indigenous people
is extinguished if the clan
or group, by ceasing to acknowledge those laws, and (so far as practicable)
observe those customs, loses
its connection with the land or on the death of
the last of the members of the group or clan.
8. Native title over any parcel of land can be surrendered to the Crown
voluntarily by all those clans or groups who, by the traditional
customs of the indigenous people, have a relevant connection with the land but
the rights and privileges conferred by native
title are otherwise inalienable
to persons who are not members of the indigenous people to whom alienation is
permitted by the traditional
laws and customs.
9. If native title to any parcel of the waste lands of the Crown is
extinguished, the Crown becomes the absolute beneficial owner.
84. These propositions leave for resolution by the general law the question
of the validity of any purported exercise by the Crown
of the power to
alienate or to appropriate to itself waste lands of the Crown. In Queensland,
these powers are and at all material
times have been exercisable by the
Executive Government subject, in the case of the power of alienation, to the
statutes of the State
in force from time to time. The power of alienation and
the power of appropriation vested in the Crown in right of a State are also
subject to the valid laws of the Commonwealth, including the
Discrimination Act
. Where a power has purportedly been exercised
prerogative power, the validity of the exercise depends on the scope of the
prerogative
and the authority of the purported repository
in the particular
85. It remains to apply these principles to the Murray Islands and the Meriam
The effect of post-acquisition transactions
86. In February 1882, the Murray Islands were reserved from sale by the
Governor in Council acting under the Crown Lands Alienation
Act of 1876 (Q.).
Section 6 of that Act authorized the proclamation of reserves "for the use or
benefit of the aboriginal inhabitants
of the colony". Far from extinguishing
the native title of the Meriam people, the reservation of the Murray Islands
from sale left
them in undisturbed enjoyment of their land(148) Randwick
Corporation v. Rutledge (1959) 102 CLR, at pp 71-73; cf. United States
Sante Fe Pacific Railroad Co. (1941) 314 US , at p 353. Nor was their native
title affected when, in 1912, acting under the Land
Act 1910 the Governor in
Council ordered that the Murray Islands (with the exception of an area leased
to the London Missionary Society)
be permanently reserved and set apart for
the use of the Aboriginal Inhabitants of the State; nor in 1939 when trustees
of the reserve
were appointed. There was no disposition of the reserve lands
which was inconsistent with the continued right of the Meriam people
their native title.
87. However, leases were granted by the Crown over certain parcels of land in
the Murray Islands. In 1882, a special lease of 2
acres on Mer was granted to
the London Missionary Society and in later years further leases of the same
land were granted to the
London Missionary Society. The London Missionary
Society lease was subsequently transferred to the Australian Board of Missions
thence to trustees of the Board. Whatever native title had been enjoyed in
this parcel of land, that title was extinguished by the
granting or renewal of
88. Another lease was purportedly granted on 6 May 1931 to two lessees (not
being members of the Meriam people) under either s.171(1)
or s.179(1) of the
Land Act 1910-1930 (Q.) over the whole of the islands of Dauar and Waier for a
period of 20 years for the purpose
of establishing a sardine factory. The
special conditions contained in the lease included the following:
"The Lessees shall not in any way obstruct or interfere with
the use by the Murray Island natives of their tribunal (semble tribal)
gardens and plantation of the leased land.
The Lessees shall not in any way obstruct or interfere with
the operations of the Murray Island natives who fish around
the reefs adjacent to the leased land for Beche-de-mer,
Trochus etc."
Factory buildings and houses were erected there. Although the term of the
lease was extended and a new lease was issued containing
the same conditions,
the sardine factory was closed and, on 15 June 1938, the Chief Protector of
Aboriginals sought forfeiture of
the lease and revealed that:
"The Murray Island natives are asking for unrestricted entry
to these islands, although under the terms of the lease
they can proceed there for gardening purposes".
Ultimately, the lease was forfeited, the Chief Protector paid for the
improvements and Dauar and Waier again became part of the reserve.
89. The plaintiffs submit that the Crown had no power under the Land Acts to
grant a lease of these Islands for the purpose of establishing
and carrying on
a sardine factory. If that submission be right, the lease was wholly
ineffective, for a purported lease granted
without statutory authority is
ineffective to dispose of any interest in land(149) Cudgen Rutile (No.2) Ltd.
v. Chalk (1975) AC,
at pp 533-534. The submission is founded on a reading down
of s.179(1) of the Land Act 1910-1930 (which contains a general power
a lease for business purposes) so that it conforms to the power conferred by
s.179(2) to grant a lease of country land which
has been reserved for a public
purpose when the land is infested with noxious weeds. In my opinion the
powers conferred by sub-ss.(1)
and (2) of s.179 are cumulative and the power
conferred by sub-s.(1) should not be read down in the manner suggested.
Section 179
does not deny the validity of the lease. Whether land reserved
for a public purpose under s.180 could be leased by anybody but trustees
the reserve under s.185(2) is perhaps an open question, but it was not raised
in argument. It should not now be finally determined.
The question can be
left for determination, if need be, in proceedings in which the Crown's power
to grant the lease of Dauar and
Waier on 6 May 1931 is canvassed and in which
all interested parties can be joined. If the lease of Dauar and Waier were
granted, the limited reservations in the special conditions are not
sufficient to avoid the consequence that the traditional rights
and interests
of the Meriam people were extinguished. By granting the lease, the Crown
purported to confer possessory rights on
the lessee and to acquire for itself
the reversion expectant on the termination of the lease. The sum of those
rights would have
left no room for the continued existence of rights and
interests derived from Meriam laws and customs.
90. Moynihan J's findings mention the use of other land on Mer for
administrative purposes, namely, for the construction of a Court
hospital, a store, a school, a teacher's residence, a Jail House, a new
"native constable's residence with lock-up" and
a village square. His Honour
mentions a Murray Island Court Record relating to an area which "was resumed
by the Protector of Aboriginals
and set aside for a new village". Whether
these activities were authorized by law and whether, if so, they were
inconsistent with
continued enjoyment of the native title to the land affected
by these activities are questions which were not discussed in submissions
before this Court. It is not possible now finally to determine whether the
affected parcels of land are the subject of native title.
Deed of Grant in Trust
91. The Court was informed that deeds of grant in trust pursuant to the Land
Act 1962-1988 have been granted in respect of all islands
in the Torres Strait
other than the Murray Islands pursuant to the Land Act 1962-1988 and that the
plaintiffs are concerned that
similar action may be taken in respect of the
Murray Islands. A deed of grant in trust can be granted in respect of any
which, in the opinion of the Governor in Council, is or may be
required for any public purpose: s.334(1). To bring a reserve within
definition of "Crown land", the Order in Council creating the reserve must be
rescinded: ss.5 and 334(4). Although the Governor
in Council is empowered
generally to declare that land granted in trust for a public purpose shall
"revert to the Crown" (s.353)
an Act of Parliament is needed to authorize the
Governor in Council to declare that land granted in trust for the benefit of
or Islander inhabitants should revert to the Crown: s.353A. As no
deed of grant in trust has issued in respect of the Murray Islands,
does not appear to have any present application to those Islands. The
plaintiffs contend that the
Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders (Land
Holding) Act 1985
(Q.) is an Act of Parliament satisfying s.353A but, in the
absence of a deed of grant in trust, there is no need to consider that
contention. It appears that the plaintiffs see some advantage in preventing
the granting of a deed of grant in trust and they seek,
inter alia, a
declaration that the granting of a deed of grant in trust "would be unlawful
by reason of the provisions of
Racial Discrimination
(Commonwealth)."
92. This declaration is founded on the decision in Mabo v. Queensland(150)
(1988) 166 CLR 186 in which it was held
that the Queensland
Coast Islands
Declaratory Act 1985 (Q.) which purported to extinguish the plaintiffs' native
title, was nullified
by operation of
Racial Discrimination Act
The plaintiffs now seek to deny the power of the Governor in Council to grant
a deed of grant
in trust because, if effective, the
alienation of the Murray
Islands to a trustee - albeit the trustee would be the
Island Council
constituted under the Community Services
(Torres Strait) Act - would
extinguish native title including the native
title claimed by
the individual
plaintiffs. Under the relevant
provisions of the Land Act, the Island Council
as trustee would have
power to lease
land inconsistently with native title.
93. There are two reasons why the declaration sought by the plaintiffs should
be refused. First, there is no evidence that the
Governor in Council intends
to grant a deed of grant in trust in respect of land in the Murray Islands and
the Solicitor-General
denied that there were "the slightest indications" that
the Governor in Council would do so. Secondly,
Discrimination
may not have an effect on the granting of a deed of grant
in trust similar to the effect which
had upon the Queensland Coast
Islands Declaratory Act 1985. It will not have a nullifying effect if the
action taken under the relevant
State laws constitutes
a special measure
falling within
Racial Discrimination Act
and thereby escapes the
operation of
[1985] HCA 11
; (1985) 159 CLR 70. Whether the
granting of a deed of grant in trust would constitute a special measure
question which
be answered without an examination of all the relevant
circumstances; it involves findings of fact. In
the absence of findings
determine whether a deed of grant in trust would constitute a special measure,
no declaration that
the granting of such a deed
be "unlawful" can be
made. There is no need to determine whether
Racial Discrimination
is inconsistent with
the relevant provisions of the Land Act 1962, for
there is nothing to show that those provisions will be
which the plaintiffs seek to protect.
Answers to Questions
94. This matter came before the Full Court pursuant to an order made by the
Chief Justice under
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) reserving questions
relating to the rights and interests claimed by two of the plaintiffs, David
Passi and James Rice in specified
blocks of land on the islands of Mer, Dauar
and Waier. No such claim was made before this Court by the plaintiff Eddie
Mabo. In the
course of the hearing before this Court, it emerged that it was
not practicable to answer those questions by acting upon findings
Moynihan J. The plaintiffs' statement of claim was then amended to seek
declarations relating to the title of the Meriam
people. The plaintiffs Passi
and Rice claim rights and interests dependent on the native title of the
Meriam people, not as interests
dependent upon Crown grants. In the absence
of any party seeking to challenge their respective claims under the laws and
of the Meriam people, the action is not constituted in a way that
permits the granting of declaratory relief with respect to claims
those laws and customs - even had the findings of fact been sufficient to
satisfy the Court of the plaintiffs' respective
interests. Declaratory relief
must therefore be restricted to the native communal title of the Meriam
people. The plaintiffs have
the necessary interest to support an action for
declarations relating to that title.
95. The plaintiffs seek declarations that the Meriam people are entitled to
the Murray Islands -
"(a) as owners
(b) as possessors
(c) as occupiers, or
(d) as persons entitled to use and enjoy the said islands";
"the Murray Islands are not and never have been 'Crown Lands'
within the meaning of the Lands Act 1962 (Qld) (as amended) and
prior Crown lands legislation"
and that the State of Queensland is not entitled to extinguish the title of
the Meriam people.
96. As the Crown holds the radical title to the Murray Islands and as native
title is not a title created by grant nor is it a common
law tenure, it may be
confusing to describe the title of the Meriam people as conferring
"ownership", a term which connotes an estate
in fee simple or at least an
estate of freehold. Nevertheless, it is right to say that their native title
is effective as against
the State of Queensland and as against the whole world
unless the State, in valid exercise of its legislative or executive power,
extinguishes the title. It is also right to say that the Murray Islands are
not Crown land because the land has been either "reserved
for or dedicated to
public purposes" or is "subject to ... lease". However, that does not deny
that the Governor in Council may,
by appropriate exercise of his statutory
powers, extinguish native title. The native title has already been
extinguished over land
which has been leased pursuant to powers conferred by
the Land Act in force at the time of the granting or renewal of the lease.
Accordingly, title to the land leased to the Trustees of the Australian Board
of Missions has been extinguished and title to Dauar
and Waier may have been
extinguished. It may be that areas on Mer have been validly appropriated for
use for administrative purposes
the use of which is inconsistent with the
continued enjoyment of the rights and interests of Meriam people in those
areas pursuant
to Meriam law or custom and, in that event, native title has
been extinguished over those areas. None of these areas can be included
declaration.
97. I would therefore make a declaration in the following terms:
(1) that the land in the Murray Islands is not Crown land within
the meaning of that term in s.5 of the Land Act 1962-1988
(2) that the Meriam people are entitled as against the whole world
to possession, occupation, use and enjoyment of the island of
Mer except for that parcel of land leased to the Trustees of
the Australian Board of Missions and those parcels of land
(if any) which have been validly appropriated for use for
administrative purposes the use of which is inconsistent with
the continued enjoyment of the rights and privileges of Meriam
people under native title;
(3) that the title of the Meriam people is subject to the power
of the Parliament of Queensland and the power of the Governor
in Council of Queensland to extinguish that title by valid
exercise of their respective powers, provided any exercise
of those powers is not inconsistent with the laws of the
Commonwealth.
DEANE AND GAUDRON JJ. The issues raised by this case directly concern the
entitlement, under the law of Queensland, of the Meriam
people to their
the wider context of the common law
of Australia. Their resolution requires a
consideration of some fundamental questions relating to the rights, past and
of Australian Aborigines in relation to lands on which they
traditionally lived or live. The starting point lies in the second half
the eighteenth century with the establishment of the Colony of New South
(i) The establishment of New South Wales
2. The international law of the eighteenth century consisted essentially of
the rules governing the relations and dealings among
the nations of Europe.
Under it, the three main theoretical methods by which a State could extend its
sovereignty to new territory
were cession, conquest and settlement.
Settlement was initially seen as applicable only to unoccupied territory. The
of territory by "settlement" came, however, to be recognized as
applying to newly "discovered" territory which was inhabited by native
who were not subject to the jurisdiction of another European State. The
"discovery" of such territory was accepted as entitling
a State to establish
sovereignty over it by "settlement", notwithstanding that the territory was
not unoccupied and that the process
of "settlement" involved negotiations with
and/or hostilities against the native inhabitants.
3. The consistent references to "our territory called New South Wales" in the
two Commissions(152) 12 October 1786 and 2 April 1787:
see Historical Records
of Australia (hereafter "HRA"), (1914) Series 1, vol.1, pp 1, 2 and in the
Instructions(153) 25 April 1787:
ibid., p 9 from George III to Captain Arthur
Phillip indicate a view that at least part(154) i.e. the coastline and
adjacent islands
between latitudes 10 37' and 38 south (see Captain Cook's
Journal (ed. Wharton), (1893), p 312), perhaps "backed by an unexplored
interior": see In re Southern Rhodesia (1919) AC 211, at pp 215-216 of the
new Colony had automatically become British territory
in 1770 by virtue of
Cook's "discovery" and various pronouncements of taking "possession ... in the
Name of His Majesty"(155) See,
e.g., Captain Cook's Journal, op cit, p 312
and, generally, Scott, "Taking Possession of Australia - The Doctrine of
'Terra Nullius'",
(1940) 26 Royal Australian Historical Society Journal and
Proceedings, 1, at pp 8-9. In the context of the contemporary international
law, however, the preferable view is that it was the intention of the Crown
that the establishment of sovereignty would be by "settlement"
in the extended
sense explained above and would be effected when, after the arrival of the
First Fleet, Phillip complied with his
Instructions and caused his second
Commission as Governor to be read and published "with all due solemnity"(156)
HRA, (1914), Series
1, vol.1, p 9. The Commission was so read and published
on 7 February, 1788: HRA, (1922), Series 4, p xiv. Even on that approach,
there are problems about the establishment of the Colony in so far as the
international law of the time is concerned. In particular,
contemporary
international law would seem to have required a degree of actual occupation of
a "discovered" territory over which sovereignty
was claimed by settlement and
it is scarcely arguable that the establishment by Phillip in 1788 of the penal
camp at Sydney Cove
constituted occupation of the vast areas of the hinterland
of eastern Australia designated by his Commissions(157) i.e. "all the
inland (from the eastern coastline) westward as far as" longitude 135 east:
HRA, (1914), Series 1, vol.1, p 2. However,
in so far as the establishment of
British sovereignty is concerned, those problems do not exist for the purposes
of our domestic
4. Under British law in 1788, it lay within the prerogative power of the
Crown to extend its sovereignty and jurisdiction to territory
over which it
had not previously claimed or exercised sovereignty or jurisdiction(158) See
Post Office v. Estuary Radio Ltd. (1968)
2 QB 740, at p 753; New South Wales
v. The Commonwealth ("the Seas and Submerged Lands Case")
[1975] HCA 58
; (1975) 135 CLR 337,
at p 388; Wacando
v. The Commonwealth
[1981] HCA 60
; (1981) 148 CLR 1, at p 11. The
assertion by the Crown of an exercise of that
prerogative to establish a new
Colony by "settlement"
was an act of State whose primary operation lay not in
the municipal arena
but in international politics or
law. The validity of
such an act of State (including any expropriation of property or
extinguishment
of rights which it effected)
could not be challenged
courts(159) See, e.g., Salaman v. Secretary of State for India (1906)
613, at pp 625-627,
635, 639-640; Sobhuza II.
v. Miller (1926) AC 518, at pp
528-529; Secretary of State for India v. Sardar
Rustam Khan (1941) AC 356,
pp 369-370. Nor could
any promise or undertaking which it embodied be directly
enforced against the
Crown in those courts(160)
See, e.g., Cook v. Sprigg
(1899) AC 572; Secretary of State for India v. Sardar Rustam Khan (1941) AC,
at p 371; J.H. Rayner Ltd.
v. Dept. of Trade (1990)
2 AC 418. The result is
that, in a case such as the present where no question
of constitutional power
involved, it must be accepted
in this Court(161) See, e.g., Seas and
Submerged Lands Case (1975) 135 CLR,
at p 388 that the whole
of the territory
designated in
Phillip's Commissions was, by 7 February 1788, validly
established as a "settled"
British Colony.
(ii) The introduction of the common law
5. The common law of this country had it origins in, and initially owed its
authority to, the common law of England(162) Confirmed
by 9 GEO IV c.83 (The
Australian Courts Act 1828 (Imp)), s.24. Under the common law of England, a
distinction has traditionally been
drawn, for the purposes of identifying the
law of a new British Colony, between colonies where British sovereignty was
established
by cession or conquest and colonies where such sovereignty was
established by settlement or "occupancy"(163) See Blackstone, Commentaries,
17th ed. (1830) (hereafter "Blackstone"), vol.1, par.107. In cases of cession
and conquest, the pre-existing laws of the relevant
territory were presumed to
be preserved by the act of State constituting the Colony but the Crown, as new
Sovereign, could subsequently
legislate by proclamation pending local
representative government. The position was quite different in the case of a
settled Colony.
Where persons acting under the authority of the Crown
established a new British Colony by settlement, they brought the common law
with them. The common law so introduced was adjusted in accordance with the
principle that, in settled colonies, only so much of
it was introduced as was
"reasonably applicable to the circumstances of the Colony"(164) Cooper v.
Stuart (1889) 14 App Cas 286,
at p 291; see, also, State Government Insurance
Commission v. Trigwell
[1979] HCA 40
; (1979) 142 CLR 617, esp. at p 634; Blackstone,
This left room for the continued operation of some local laws or
customs among the native people and even the incorporation
laws and customs as part of the common law. The adjusted
common law was
binding as the domestic law of the new
Colony and,
except to the extent
authorized by statute, was not susceptible
of being overridden or negatived by
the Crown by the
subsequent exercise
of prerogative powers. Putting to one
side the Crown's
prerogative to establish courts and representative local
government, the
overall position was succinctly explained by the Privy Council
in Sammut v. Strickland(165) (1938) AC 678, at p 701:
the "English
necessarily applied in so far as such laws were applicable
to the conditions
of the new Colony. The Crown
clearly had
no prerogative right to legislate in
such a case." A fortiori, the Crown
had no prerogative right to override the
law by executive
act without legislative basis.
6. It follows that, once the establishment of the Colony was complete on 7
February 1788, the English common law, adapted to meet
the circumstances of
the new Colony, automatically applied throughout the whole of the Colony as
the domestic law except to the extent
(if at all) that the act of State
establishing the Colony overrode it. Thereafter, within the Colony, both the
Crown and its subjects,
old and new, were bound by that common law.
(iii) The English law of real property
7. The English common law principles relating to real property developed as
the product of concepts shaped by the feudal system
of medieval times. The
basic tenet was that, consequent upon the Norman Conquest, the Crown was the
owner of all land in the kingdom.
A subject could hold land only as a tenant,
directly or indirectly, of the Crown. By 1788, the combined effect of the
Statute Quia
Emptores 1290 and the Tenures Abolition Act 1660 had been largely
to abolish the "pyramid of free tenants"(166) Gray, Elements of
(1987), p 57 which had emerged under the feudal system of tenure and to
confine the practical significance of the basic
tenet that all land was owned
by the Crown to matters such as escheat and foreshore rights. The "estate"
which a subject held in
land as tenant was itself property which was the
subject of "ownership" both in law and in equity. The primary estate of a
the estate in fee simple, became, for almost all practical purposes,
equivalent to full ownership of the land itself. Nonetheless,
the underlying
thesis of the English law of real property remained that the radical title to
(or ultimate ownership of) all land
was in the Crown and that the maximum
interest which a subject could have in the land was ownership not of the land
itself but of
an estate in fee in it. The legal ownership of an estate in
land was in the person or persons in whom the legal title to it was
Under the rules of equity, that legal estate could be held upon trust for some
other person or persons or for some purpose.
8. If the slate were clean, there would be something to be said for the view
that the English system of land law was not, in 1788,
appropriate for
application to the circumstances of a British penal colony(167) See, e.g.,
Roberts-Wray, Commonwealth and Colonial
Law, (1966), p 626. It has, however,
long been accepted as incontrovertible that the provisions of the common law
which became applicable
upon the establishment by settlement of the Colony of
New South Wales included that general system of land law(168) See, e.g.,
v. Permanent Trustee Co. of N.S.W.
[1904] HCA 10
; (1904) 1 CLR 283, at pp 299-300;
Williams v. Attorney-General for New South Wales
[1913] HCA 33
; (1913) 16 CLR
follows that, upon the establishment of the Colony, the radical title to all
land vested
in the Crown.
Subject to some
minor and presently irrelevant
matters, the practical effect of the vesting of radical title in the
to enable the
English system of private ownership of estates held of
the Crown to be observed in the Colony. In
particular, the
mere fact that
radical title to all the lands of the Colony was vested in the British Crown
did not preclude
the preservation
and protection,
by the domestic law of the
new Colony, of any traditional native interests in land which had existed
under native
law or custom at
the time the Colony was established. Whether,
and to what extent, such pre-existing native claims to
land survived
annexation and
were translated into or recognized as estates, rights or other
interests must be determined by reference
to that domestic
(iv) Traditional claims to land under the law of a "settled" Colony
9. There are some statements in the authorities which support a general
proposition to the effect that interests in property which
existed under the
previous law or custom of a new British Colony availed "nothing" unless
recognized by the Crown(169) See, e.g.,
Vajesingji Joravarsingji v. Secretary
of State for India (1924) LR 51 Ind Ap 357, at p 360; Secretary of State for
India v. Sardar
Rustam Khan (1941) AC, at p 371. Those statements are correct
to the extent that they recognize that the act of State establishing
is itself outside the domestic law of the Colony and beyond the reach of the
domestic courts. As has been seen, however,
once a Colony was established by
"settlement", the Crown was bound by the common law which, subject to
appropriate adjustment, automatically
became the domestic law of the Colony.
After the establishment of the Colony, the act of State doctrine does not
preclude proceedings
in the courts in which, rather than seeking to enforce or
challenge the act of State establishing the Colony, it is sought to vindicate
domestic rights arising under the common law consequent upon that act of
10. The strong assumption of the common law was that interests in property
which existed under native law or customs were not obliterated
by the act of
State establishing a new British Colony but were preserved and protected by
the domestic law of the Colony after its
establishment. Thus, in In re
Southern Rhodesia(170) (1919) AC, at p 233, the Privy Council expressly
affirmed that there are "rights
of private property", such as a proprietary
interest in land, of a category "such that upon a conquest it is to be
presumed, in the
absence of express confiscation or of subsequent
expropriatory legislation, that the conqueror has respected them and forborne
diminish or modify them". Similarly, in Amodu Tijani v. Secretary, Southern
Nigeria ("Amodu Tijani")(171) (1921) 2 AC 399, at p 407,
the Privy Council
affirmed and applied the "usual" principle "under British ... law" that when
territory is occupied by cession,
"the rights of property of the inhabitants
(are) to be fully respected".
11. In Adeyinka Oyekan v. Musendiku Adele(172) (1957) 1 WLR 876, at p 880;
(1957) 2 All ER 785, at p 788, the Privy Council expressly
held that the
assumption that pre-existing rights are recognized and protected under the law
of a British Colony is a "guiding principle".
In a judgment read by Lord
Denning, their Lordships said:
"In inquiring ... what rights are recognized, there is one
guiding principle. It is this: The courts will assume that
the British Crown intends that the rights of property of the
inhabitants are to be fully respected. Whilst, therefore,
the British Crown, as Sovereign, can make laws enabling it
compulsorily to acquire land for public purposes, it will
see that proper compensation is awarded to every one of the
inhabitants who has by native law an interest in it: and
the courts will declare the inhabitants entitled to
compensation according to their interests ... "
That case was concerned with the position in a Colony established by cession
and the above passage needs to be modified to take account
of the fact that,
as has been seen, the Crown had no prerogative right to legislate by
subsequent proclamation in the case of a Colony
established by settlement.
Otherwise, the "guiding principle" which their Lordships propounded is clearly
capable of general application
to British Colonies in which indigenous
inhabitants had rights in relation to land under the pre-existing native law
It should be accepted as a correct general statement of the common
law. For one thing, such a guiding principle accords with fundamental
of justice. Indeed, the recognition of the interests in land of native
inhabitants was seen by early publicists as a dictate
of natural law(173) See,
e.g., Wolff, Jus Gentium Methodo Scientifica Pertractatum (trans. Drake),
(1934), vol.II, pp 155-160, ss308-ss313;
Vattel, The Law of Nations or
Principles of the Law of Nature, London, (1797), pp 167-171; F. de Victoria,
De Indis et de Jure Belli
Relectiones, (ed. Nys, trans. Bate), (1917), pp 128,
138-139; Grotius, Of the Rights of War and Peace, (1715), vol.2, Ch.22, pars
9, 10. For another, it is supported by other convincing authority(174) See,
generally, the cases referred to by Professor McNeil
in his landmark work,
Common Law Aboriginal Title, (1989), pp 173-174, 183-184 and 186-188 applying
to a wide spectrum of British
Colonies, including a long-standing New
Zealand(175) See Reg. v. Symonds (1847) NZPCC 387, at pp 391-392 case and
recent Canadian
cases(176) See Calder v. Attorney-General of British Columbia
(1973) 34 DLR (3d) 145, at pp 152, 156, 193-202; Guerin v. The Queen
DLR (4th) 321
, at pp 335-336. In this Court, the assumption that traditional
native interests were preserved and protected
under the law of a settled
territory was accepted by Barwick C.J. (in a judgment in which McTiernan and
Menzies JJ. concurred) in
Administration of Papua and
New Guinea v. Daera
[1973] HCA 59
; (1973) 130 CLR 353, at p 397; see, also, Geita Sebea v.
[1941] HCA 37
; (1941) 67 CLR 544, at p 557 as applicable to the settled territory
of British Papua.
(v) What kinds of pre-existing native interests were respected and protected
by the common law?
12. The judgments in past cases contain a wide variety of views about the
kinds of pre-existing native interests in land which are
assumed to have been
fully respected under the common law applicable to a new British Colony. In
some cases, a narrow and somewhat
rigid approach was taken. Thus, in In re
Southern Rhodesia(178) (1919) AC, at p 233, it was said by the Privy Council
that pre-existing
interests in relation to land are presumed to be protected
and preserved under the law of a newly annexed British territory only
"belonged to the category of rights of private property" and were the product
of a "social organization" whose "usages and
conceptions of rights and duties"
were able "to be reconciled with the institutions or the legal ideas of
civilized society". It
is true that their Lordships went on to make
clear(179) ibid., at p 234 that those requirements could be satisfied in the
rights claimed by "indigenous peoples whose legal conceptions" were
differently developed from those recognized by the common law.
Nonetheless,
the requirement that the pre-existing rights be of the category of "rights of
private property" invited a formulation
in terms of common law "proprietary
rights" and the requirement that local "usages and conceptions of rights and
duties" be reconcilable
with the "institutions or the legal ideas of civilized
society" involved a degree of conformity with the social and legal mores of
England or Europe.
13. In contrast, one finds clear support in other judgments, including later
judgments of the Privy Council, for a less demanding
and more flexible
approach. In Amodu Tijani(180) (1921) 2 AC, at p 403, their Lordships
disparagingly referred to "a tendency, operating
at times unconsciously, to
render (native title to land) conceptually in terms which are appropriate only
to systems which have grown
up under English law". That tendency must, they
said(181) ibid, be "held in check closely" since "(a)s a rule, in the various
of native jurisprudence throughout the Empire, there is no such full
division between property and possession as English lawyers
are familiar
with." Subsequently, having referred to a number of different types of "native
title" to land, their Lordships said(182)
ibid., at pp 403-404:
"The title, such as it is, may not be that of the
individual, as in this country it nearly always is in some
form, but may be that of a community. Such a community
may have the possessory title to the common enjoyment of
a usufruct, with customs under which its individual
members are admitted to enjoyment, and even to a right
of transmitting the individual enjoyment as members by
assignment inter vivos or by succession. To ascertain how
far this latter development of right has progressed involves
the study of the history of the particular community and its
usages in each case. Abstract principles fashioned a priori
are of but little assistance, and are as often as not
misleading."
14. It is important to note that the judgment in Amodu Tijani makes quite
clear(183) ibid., at p 403 that their Lordships saw the
Indian claims to
traditional homelands in Canada as providing the obvious example of the kind
of traditional native title which was
assumed to be recognized and protected
under the law of a British Colony. They referred to the judgments in St.
Catherine's Milling
and Lumber Company v. The Queen(184) (1888) 14 App Cas 46
(hereafter "St. Catherine's Milling Case") and Attorney-General for Quebec
Attorney-General for Canada(185) (1921) 1 AC 401, two cases dealing with the
Indian claims, as explaining the relevant principles.
The traditional native
title involved in the St. Catherine's Milling Case was that of the Salteaux
tribe of Ojibbeway Indians.
The land, which was in the Province of Ontario,
consisted of "a tract of country upwards of 50,000 square miles in
extent"(186) St.
Catherine's Milling Case (1888) 14 App Cas, at p 51. It was
largely uncultivated and the Indians' claim to it was as lands upon
pursued "their avocations of hunting and fishing"(187) ibid. The claim was
that of the whole tribe and was clearly seen
by their Lordships as of a nature
which did not conform to English notions of property. It provided an
"illustration of the necessity
for getting rid of the assumption that the
ownership of land naturally breaks itself up into estates, conceived as
creatures of inherent
legal principle"(188) Amodu Tijani (1921) 2 AC, at p
403. Under the law of the Province, it was to be recognized and protected as
right of occupation or user of the relevant land which "qualified" the
"radical or final title" of the Sovereign(189) ibid.
15. In Adeyinka Oyekan v. Musendiku Adele(190) (1957) 1 WLR, at p 880; (1957)
2 All ER, at p 788, the Privy Council, while using
the phrase "rights of
property", clearly endorsed the more lenient approach adopted in Amodu Tijani
to the kind of pre-existing native
"rights" which are to be assumed to be
fully respected under the law of a new British territory. The courts will,
their Lordships
said(191) ibid, assume that the traditional interests of the
native inhabitants are to be so respected "even though those interests
a kind unknown to English law". That approach is supported by other
authority(192) See, e.g., Sunmonu v. Disu Raphael (1927)
AC 881, at pp
883-884; Sakariyawo Oshodi v. Moriamo Dakolo (1930) AC 667, at pp 668-669 and
by compelling considerations of justice.
It should be accepted as correct.
16. On that approach, the pre-existing native interests with respect to land
which were assumed by the common law to be recognized
and fully respected
under the law of a newly annexed British territory were not confined to
interests which were analogous to common
law concepts of estates in land or
proprietary rights. Nor were they confined by reference to a requirement that
the existing local
social organization conform, in its usages and its
conceptions of rights and duties, to English or European modes or legal
To the contrary, the assumed recognition and protection extended to
the kinds of traditional enjoyment or use of land which were
referred to by
the Privy Council in Amodu Tijani. As their Lordships made plain in that(193)
(1921) 2 AC, at pp 403-404 and subsequent(194)
See, e.g., Sobhuza II. v.
Miller (1926) AC, at p 525; Sunmonu v. Disu Raphael (1927) AC, at pp 883-884
cases, such a traditional
interest would ordinarily be that of a community or
group. It could, however, be that of an individual. It could relate to lands
which were under actual cultivation or to lands which, like much of the lands
involved in the Canadian cases to which their Lordships
referred, were left
uncultivated but which, under the law or custom observed in the territory,
constituted traditional homelands
or hunting grounds. What the common law
required was that the interest under the local law or custom involve an
established entitlement
of an identified community, group or (rarely)
individual to the occupation or use of particular land and that that
entitlement to
occupation or use be of sufficient significance to establish a
locally recognized special relationship between the particular community,
group or individual and that land. In the context of the Privy Council's
insistence(195) Amodu Tijani (1921) 2 AC, at pp 403-404
that English concepts
of property might be quite inappropriate and that all that was involved might
be the possession of the common
enjoyment of a usufruct(196) ibid., at p 402,
it is clear that such a traditional interest could result from the established
recognized occupation and use by a tribe or clan of particular land for
purposes such as the obtaining of food(197) ibid., at pp
409-410: "prima
facie based ... on a communal usufructuary occupation".
(vi) Common law native title
17. As has been seen, it must be accepted as settled law that the provisions
of the common law which became applicable upon the
establishment by settlement
of the Colony of New South Wales included the system of land law which existed
in England and that the
consequence of that was that the radical title to all
land in the new Colony vested in the Crown. If there were lands within the
Colony in relation to which no pre-existing native interest existed, the
radical title of the Crown carried with it a full and unfettered
proprietary
estate. Put differently, the radical title and the legal and beneficial
estate were undivided and vested in the Crown.
Thereafter, any claim by the
Aboriginal inhabitants to such lands by reason of possession or occupation
after the establishment
of the Colony must be justified by ordinary common law
principles or presumptions which apply and (at least theoretically) applied
indifferently to both native inhabitants and Europeans (e.g. possessory title
based on a presumed lost grant).
18. On the other hand, if there were lands within a settled Colony in
relation to which there was some pre-existing native interest,
the effect of
an applicable assumption that that interest was respected and protected under
the domestic law of the Colony would
not be to preclude the vesting of radical
title in the Crown. It would be to reduce(198) ibid., at p 410, qualify(199)
pp 403, 404 or burden(200) Attorney-General for Quebec v.
Attorney-General for Canada (1921) 1 AC, at pp 409-410 the proprietary
in land which would otherwise have vested in the Crown, to the extent which
was necessary to recognize and protect the pre-existing
native interest.
Obviously, where the pre-existing native interest was "of a kind unknown to
English law", its recognition and protection
under the law of a newly settled
British Colony would require an adjustment either of the interest itself or of
the common law: either
a transformation of the interest into a kind known to
the common law or a modification of the common law to accommodate the new kind
of interest.
19. In Amodu Tijani, the Privy Council gave careful consideration to the
manner in which traditional native claims may be recognized
and protected
under the law of a British Colony. The claim which their Lordships recognized
as established in that case was that
of a native community based on communal
occupation. Their Lordships recognized that the interests underlying such a
claim could
theoretically be respected and protected under the law of a Colony
by transforming them into some "definite forms analogous to estates
derived ... from the intrusion of the mere analogy of English
jurisprudence"(201) (1921) 2 AC 399, at p 403. They concluded,
however, that
the appropriate course was to recognize a "full native title of usufruct"(202)
ibid., at p 403 which qualified and
reduced the proprietary estate of the
Crown as radical owner. In rejecting the conclusion reached by the Supreme
Court of Nigeria
to the effect that native "title" under the earlier law or
custom had been extinguished upon the establishment of the Colony by cession,
they said(203) ibid., at pp 409-410:
"That title ... is prima facie based, not on such individual
ownership as English law has made familiar, but on a
communal usufructuary occupation ... In (our) opinion there
is no evidence that this kind of usufructuary title of the
community was disturbed in law".
As their Lordships also indicated, a similar approach had been adopted by the
Privy Council with respect to the claims of Canadian
Indians to their
traditional homelands or hunting grounds(204) See ibid., at p 403, fn.1 and,
generally, St. Catherine's Milling
Case (1888) 14 App Cas, at pp 54-55;
Attorney-General for Quebec v. Attorney-General for Canada (1921) 1 AC, at pp
408-410. The content
of the traditional native title recognized by the common
law must, in the event of dispute between those entitled to it, be determined
by reference to the pre-existing native law or custom(205) See Adeyinka Oyekan
v. Musendiku Adele (1957) 1 WLR, at pp 880-881; (1957)
2 All ER, at p 788. We
shall, hereafter, use the phrase "common law native title" to refer generally
to that special kind of title.
20. The content of such a common law native title will, of course, vary
according to the extent of the pre-existing interest of
the relevant
individual, group or community. It may be an entitlement of an individual,
through his or her family, band or tribe,
to a limited special use of land in
a context where notions of property in land and distinctions between
ownership, possession and
use are all but unknown(206) See, e.g., Amodu Tijani
(1921) 2 AC, at pp 404-405. In contrast, it may be a community title which is
practically "equivalent to full ownership"(207) Geita Sebea v. Territory of
Papua (1941) 67 CLR, at p 557 and see Amodu Tijani (1921)
2 AC, at pp 409-410.
Even where (from the practical point of view) common law native title
approaches "full ownership", however,
it is subject to three important
limitations.
21. The first limitation relates to alienation. It is commonly expressed as
a right of pre-emption in the Sovereign, sometimes
said to flow from
"discovery" (i.e. in the European sense of "discovery" by a European
State)(208) See, e.g., Johnson v. McIntosh
[1823] USSC 22
; (1823) 8 Wheat 543, at p 592 (21 US
240, at p 261); Reg. v. Symonds (1847) NZPCC, at pp 389-391. The effect of
such a right of
pre-emption in the Crown is not to preclude changes to
entitlement and enjoyment within the local native system. It is to preclude
alienation outside that native system otherwise than by surrender to the
Crown. The existence of any rule restricting alienation
outside the native
system has been subjected to some scholarly questioning and criticism(209)
See, e.g., McNeil, op cit, pp 221ff.
In our view, however, the rule must be
accepted as firmly established(210) See, e.g., Nireaha Tamaki v. Baker (1901)
AC, at p 579;
Attorney-General for Quebec v. Attorney-General for Canada
(1921) 1 AC, at pp 408, 411; Administration of Papua and New Guinea v.
Guba (1973) 130 CLR, at p 397.
22. The second limitation has sometimes been seen as flowing from the
first(211) See Attorney-General for Quebec v. Attorney-General
(1921) 1 AC, at p 408. Arguably, it would be more accurate to say that the
first flows from it. It is that the title,
whether of individual, family,
band or community, is "only a personal ... right"(212) See, ibid., at p 406;
and see St. Catherine's
Milling Case (1888) 14 App Cas, at p 54 and, that
being so(213) Reg. v. Toohey; Ex parte Meneling Station Pty. Ltd.
[1982] HCA 69
; (1982) 158
327, at p 342, it does not constitute a legal or beneficial estate or
interest in the actual land. Thus, it was
held by the Privy
Attorney-General for Quebec v. Attorney-General for Canada(214) (1921) 1 AC,
at pp 408, 411 that even
a specific provision
in an 1850 Canadian statute(215)
13 and 14 Vict c 42, s.1 that lands set aside under the statute for a
band were to be
"vested in trust for" that band did not, in a
context where the traditional Indian title was merely "a personal and
usufructuary
right", suffice to create an equitable estate in the lands set
aside under the statute. The inalienability outside
the native system
common law native title except by surrender to the Crown, the personal nature
of the rights under it and the
absence of any legal
or equitable estate or
interest in the land itself invite analogy with the kind of entitlement to use
the land of another
which confers no estate or interest in the land
and constitutes a "mere equity"(216) See, e.g., National Provincial
[1965] UKHL 1
; (1965) AC 1175, at pp 1238-1239, 1247-1248; Reg. v. Toohey; Ex
parte Meneling Station Pty.
Ltd. (1982) 158 CLR, at p 342.
other hand,
the rights under common law native title can, as the Privy Council has pointed
out(217) Amodu Tijani (1921) 2
pp 409-410, approach the rights flowing
from full ownership at common law. The preferable
approach is that adopted in
Tijani(218)
ibid., at p 403 and by Dickson J. in the Supreme Court of
Canada in Guerin v. The Queen(219)
(1984) 13 DLR (4th), at
p 339, namely,
recognize the inappropriateness of forcing the native title to conform to
traditional common
law concepts and to
accept it as
sui generis or unique.
23. The third limitation is related to both the first and the second. It is
that common law native title, being merely a personal
right unsupported by any
prior actual or presumed Crown grant of any estate or interest in the land,
was susceptible of being extinguished
by an unqualified grant by the Crown of
an estate in fee or of some lesser estate which was inconsistent with the
rights under the
common law native title. In such a case, prior occupation or
use under the common law native title is explained by the common law's
recognition of prior entitlement under the earlier indigenous law or custom
and is predicated upon the absence of any intervening
grant from the Crown.
Accordingly, it does not found an assumption of a prior lost grant and would
be unavailing against those claiming
under the inconsistent grant which would
otherwise be beyond challenge except on the ground of invalidity on its
face(220) See, e.g.,
Nireaha Tamaki v. Baker (1901) AC, at p 579. Common law
native title could also be effectively extinguished by an inconsistent dealing
by the Crown with the land, such as a reservation or dedication for an
inconsistent use or purpose, in circumstances where third
party rights
intervened or where the actual occupation or use of the native title-holders
was terminated. In the latter case, an
ultimate lack of effective challenge
would found either an assumption of acquiescence in the extinguishment of the
title or a defence
based on laches or some statute of limitations.
24. Implicit in what has been written above is the rejection of any
proposition to the effect that the common law native title recognized
law of a British Colony was no more than a permissive occupancy which the
Crown was lawfully entitled to revoke or terminate
at any time regardless of
the wishes of those living on the land or using it for their traditional
purposes. Acceptance of that,
or any similar, proposition would deprive the
traditional inhabitants of any real security since they would be liable to be
dispossessed
at the whim of the Executive, however unjust. There is some
support in the decided cases for such a proposition. In particular,
supported by some cases in the United States(221) See, in particular,
Tee-Hit-Ton Indians v. United States
[1955] USSC 24
; (1954) 348 US 272,
at p 279; but cf.,
per Marshall C.J., Johnson v. McIntosh (1823) 8 wheat, at p 587; (21 US, at p
259) and Cherokee
Nation v. Georgia
[1831] USSC 6
; (1831) 5 Pet 1, at p 17; (30 US 1, at p
12), where special constitutional and historical considerations arguably
apply(222) See,
e.g., Priestley, "Communal Native Title and the Common Law",
(1974) 6 Fed LR 150 and Hookey, "Chief Justice Marshall and the English
A Comment", (1974) 6 Fed LR 174, and, superficially, by the ambiguous
reference to "dependent upon the goodwill of the Sovereign"
in the Privy
Council's judgments in the St. Catherine's Milling Case(223) (1888) 14 App
Cas, at p 54 and Attorney-General for Quebec
v. Attorney-General for
Canada(224) (1921) 1 AC, at p 406. However, the weight of authority (see
below) and considerations of justice
seem to us to combine to compel its
25. The substance of the judgment of the Privy Council in Attorney-General
for Quebec v. Attorney-General for Canada is, upon analysis,
inconsistent with
the notion that the common law native title was no more than a shadowy
entitlement to occupy or use the relevant
land until the Crown saw fit to
terminate it. Their Lordships recognized that the Indian usufructuary title
was "a right" which,
while being "personal ... in the sense that it is in its
nature inalienable except by surrender to the Crown" (emphasis added), was
"burden" on the Crown's proprietary estate in the land(225) ibid., at pp 408,
411. They also acknowledged(226) ibid., at p 411
that the Crown's
"substantial and paramount estate, underlying the Indian title"(227)) ibid.,
at p 410, quoting from the St. Catherine's
Milling Case did not become "a
plenum dominium" "except after a surrender of (the Indian title) ... to the
Crown"(228) ibid., at
p 411. If common law native title conferred no more than
entitlement to occupy or use until the Crown or those acting locally on
behalf told the native title-holders to cease their occupation or use, the
term "title" would be misleading, the "rights" under
it would be essentially
illusory since they could be lawfully terminated at the whim of the Executive,
the reference to inalienability
"except by surrender" would be inappropriate,
and the statements that the title was a "burden" on the Crown's proprietary
and that the title precluded the Crown from possessing "a plenum
dominium" would be simply wrong. It is true that, at one point
judgment, their Lordships, quoting from the Privy Council judgment in the St.
Catherine's Milling Case, referred(229) ibid.,
at p 406 to the Indian title as
a personal right "dependent upon the goodwill of the Sovereign". That phrase
may be explicable as
a reference to past procedural difficulties in enforcing
non-contractual rights against the Crown. Be that as it may, the context
the case makes it highly probable that the phrase was used to distinguish
Indian title from an estate in land, and it cannot properly
be understood as
intended to convey the view that the Indian title was merely a kind of
permissive occupancy terminable at will.
In that regard, it is relevant to
note that what was said in both the majority and minority judgments in the
Supreme Court of Canada
in the St. Catherine's Milling Case(230) (1887) 13 SCR
577 was plainly inconsistent with the suggestion that the Indian occupancy
under the native title was merely such a permissive occupancy. Ritchie C.J.
(for the majority) stated(231) ibid., at pp 599-600
(emphasis added) that the
Indians possessed the "right of occupancy" and that the Crown's legal title
was "subject to that occupancy,
with the absolute exclusive right to
extinguish the Indian title either by conquest or by purchase". Strong J. (in
the minority)
disregarded the possibility of "conquest" and expressed the
view(232) ibid., at p 612 (emphasis added). See, also, per Gwynne J.
that the lands occupied by the Indians under native title "are, until
surrendered, treated as their rightful though inalienable
property, so far as
the enjoyment and possession are concerned", adding(233) ibid., at p 613 that
"these territorial rights of the
Indians were strictly legal rights".
26. The judgments in subsequent Privy Council cases make plain their
Lordships' view that the Crown was not, as between the native
inhabitants and
itself, lawfully entitled to effect a unilateral extinguishment of common law
native title against the wishes of
the native occupants. Thus, in Nireaha
Tamaki v. Baker(234) (1901) AC, at p 579, their Lordships quoted with approval
the following
comment of Chapman J. in Reg. v. Symonds(235) (1847) NZPCC , at
p 390 which they described as being "very pertinent" to the case
before them:
"Whatever may be the opinion of jurists as to the strength
or weakness of the Native title ... it cannot be too
solemnly asserted that it is entitled to be respected, that
it cannot be extinguished (at least in times of peace)
otherwise than by the free consent of the Native occupiers."
That statement was made by Chapman J. in the course of demonstrating that "in
solemnly guaranteeing the Native title, and in securing
what is called the
Queen's pre-emptive right, the Treaty of Waitangi, confirmed by the Charter of
the Colony, does not assert either
in doctrine or in practice any thing new
and unsettled"(236) ibid. Their Lordships' endorsement of it was as a
statement of the
effect of the common law.
27. The Privy Council judgment in Amodu Tijani is also inconsistent with the
notion that the common law native title was merely
a permissive occupancy
which the Crown could terminate at any time without any breach of its legal
obligations to the traditional
occupants. Their Lordships consistently
referred to the native title as "a right" or "rights". They described the
legal title of
the Crown as being qualified(237) (1921) 2 AC, at p 403 and
reduced(238) ibid., at p 410 by the common law native title. They rejected
views expressed by the Chief Justice of Nigeria to the effect that the merely
"seigneurial" rights of control possessed by the natives
were extinguished
upon cession, on the ground that those views "virtually exclude ... the legal
reality of the community usufruct"
by failing to "recognize the real character
of the title to land occupied by a native community"(239) ibid., at p 409
(emphasis added).
That title was, their Lordships said(240) ibid., at pp
"prima facie based, not on such individual ownership as
English law has made familiar, but on a communal
usufructuary occupation, which may be so complete as to
reduce any radical right in the Sovereign to one which only
extends to comparatively limited rights of administrative
interference" (emphasis added).
The judgment in Amodu Tijani was subsequently described by the Privy
Council(241) Sunmonu v. Disu Raphael (1927) AC, at p 883 as one
in which "the
title to native lands is explained" and in which "various misconceptions ...
were finally laid to rest".
28. In Administration of Papua and New Guinea v. Daera Guba(242) (1973) 130
CLR, at p 397 (emphasis added), Barwick C.J. identified
the "traditional
result" of the establishment of British sovereignty by "occupation or
settlement" as being that "the indigenous
people were secure in their
usufructuary title to land" and that "the ultimate title subject to the
usufructuary title was vested
in the Crown. Alienation of that usufructuary
title to the Crown completed the absolute fee simple in the Crown." In a
where the primary issue in the case was whether a claim by traditional
inhabitants against the Crown was defeated by reason of an
earlier "purchase"
by the Crown, it is most unlikely that Barwick C.J., who spoke for the
majority of the Court on that issue, would
so describe the common law native
title if he had considered that the Crown could extinguish it by unilateral
act at any time without
breach of its legal obligations to the traditional
owners. Similarly, it is most unlikely that Williams J., whose judgment was
of the majority in Geita Sebea v. Territory of Papua, would have
held(243) (1941) 67 CLR, at p 557 that, for the purposes of assessing
compensation, the communal usufructuary title was "equivalent to full
ownership" and that no deduction should be made by reason of
restrictions upon
alienability, if his Honour had considered that the title was extinguishable
at the will of the Crown without infringement
of the rights of the native
title-holders.
29. Notwithstanding that the rights of use or occupancy under a common law
native title recognized by the law of a settled British
Colony were binding
upon the Crown, the native inhabitants of such a Colony in the eighteenth
century were in an essentially helpless
position if their title was wrongfully
denied or extinguished or their possession was wrongfully terminated by the
Crown or those
acting on its behalf. In theory, the native inhabitants were
entitled to invoke the protection of the common law in a local court
established) or, in some circumstances, in the courts at Westminster. In
practice, there is an element of the absurd about
the suggestion that it would
have even occurred to the native inhabitants of a new British Colony that they
should bring proceedings
in a British court against the British Crown to
vindicate their rights under a common law of which they would be likely to
know nothing.
There were, however, a few occasions on which, even in those
times, proceedings were brought in British courts to vindicate the
the weak against the actions of the powerful. The case of James Sommersett
(the "Negro Case")(244) (1772) 20 Howells'
State Trials 2 provides an example.
Even if the native inhabitants of an eighteenth century Colony did somehow
institute proceedings
against the Crown or its agents in the British courts,
however, they would have failed. As has been said, if the Crown had already
made an unqualified grant of an inconsistent estate in the relevant land, the
common law native title of the inhabitants would have
been extinguished. The
same position would apply if the Crown had reserved or dedicated the land for
some inconsistent public purpose
or use in circumstances giving rise to third
party rights or assumed acquiescence. True it is that, subject to the effect
acquiescence, the Crown would have infringed the legal rights of the
traditional inhabitants and would have acted wrongfully. The
extent of Crown
immunity from curial proceedings was, however, such that, no breach of
contract being involved, no action would have
lain against the Crown to
prevent the wrongful act being done or against the Crown or its agents for
compensatory damages after it
was done(245) See, e.g., Clode, The Law and
Practice of Petition of Right, (1887), pp 53-54; Tobin v. The Queen
[1864] EngR 21
; (1864) 16
310, at pp 353-356
[1864] EngR 21
; (143 ER 1148, at p 1165); Windsor and Annapolis
Railway Co. v. The Queen and the Western Counties Railway Co.
(1886) 11 App
607, at p 614; and see also, as to New South Wales, Farnell v. Bowman
(1887) 12 App Cas 643, at p 649 and note
that it may be theoretically
arguable that a claim could have been framed as a real action: see,
generally, Holdsworth, A History
of English Law, 3rd ed. (1944),
vol.9, p 19.
Indeed, until a general remedy was granted by statute against the Crown, the
Sovereign's
courts would not even entertain
the suggestion that the Sovereign
would do or had done wrong(246) See, e.g., Werrin v. The Commonwealth
[1938] HCA 3
59 CLR 150, at pp 167-168; Williams v. Downs (1970) 72 SR (NSW) 622, at pp
30. The practical inability of the native inhabitants of a British Colony to
vindicate any common law title by legal action in the
event of threatened or
actual wrongful conduct on the part of the Crown or its agents did not,
however, mean that the common law's
recognition of that title was unimportant
from the practical point of view. The personal rights under the title were
not illusory:
they could, for example, be asserted by way of defence in both
criminal and civil proceedings (e.g. alleged larceny of produce or
after a purported termination of the title by the Crown by mere notice as
distinct from inconsistent grant or other dealing).
More important, if the
domestic law of a British Colony recognized and protected the legitimate
claims of the native inhabitants
to their traditional lands, that fact itself
imposed some restraint upon the actions of the Crown and its agents even if
inhabitants were essentially helpless if their title was wrongfully
extinguished or their possession or use was forcibly terminated.
(vii) The act of State establishing New South Wales
31. It has been seen that the validity of the act of State establishing a new
Colony cannot be challenged in the domestic courts.
Nor can the domestic
courts invalidate an expropriation of property or extinguishment of rights
effected in the course of that act
of State, or enforce a promise or
undertaking made or given as part of it. On the other hand, when the subject
seeks to assert a
right alleged to arise under the domestic law and a question
arises whether the act of State establishing a Colony excluded what
otherwise be a rule of the common law or precluded or extinguished rights
which would otherwise exist under the domestic law,
it is incumbent upon the
domestic courts in the discharge of their jurisdiction to determine whether,
as a matter of domestic law,
the act of State did have that extended
operation. Were the law otherwise, the subject would have no rights against
the Executive
in any case where the Executive simply asserted that property or
rights to which the subject was presumptively entitled under the
had been expropriated, precluded or extinguished by the act of State
establishing a Colony. Accordingly, it is open to
the domestic courts to
consider the question whether the act of State establishing a particular
Colony, or other act or declaration
performed or made as part of that act of
State, or some other expropriation of property had the effect of negativing
the strong assumption
of the common law that pre-existing native interests in
lands in the Colony were respected and protected(247) See, e.g., In re
Rhodesia (1919) AC, at p 233; Amodu Tijani (1921) 2 AC, at p 407;
Adeyinka Oyekan v. Musendiku Adele (1957) 1 WLR, at p 880; (1957)
2 All ER, at
p 788; Administration of Papua and New Guinea v. Daera Guba (1973) 130 CLR, at
p 397. Both legal principle relating
to the deprivation of property or
rights and considerations of justice require that any such act or declaration
be clear and unambiguous(248)
See, e.g., In re Southern Rhodesia (1919) AC, at
p 233; Adeyinka Oyekan v. Musendiku Adele (1957) 1 WLR, at p 880; (1957) 2 All
at p 788; Calder v. Attorney-General of British Columbia (1973) 34 DLR
(3d), at p 210; Hamlet of Baker Lake v. Minister of Indian
Affairs (1979) 107
DLR (3d) 513, at p 552.
32. As has been said, the establishment of the Colony of New South Wales by
settlement was complete, at the latest, when Captain
Phillip caused his second
Commission to be read and published in the territory of the Colony. It is
debatable whether the act of
State constituting the Colony consisted solely of
the reading and publishing of the second Commission or should be extended to
the other documents which were read and published(249) the Statute 27
GEO III c.2 (authorizing the establishment of a Criminal Court
of Record) and
the Letters Patent of 2 April and 5 May 1787 (establishing courts) and/or the
earlier activities of Captain Cook and
the members of his expedition on the
eastern coastline. Even if the act of State establishing the Colony be so
extended to include
all the documents read and all those activities, there is
nothing which could properly be seen as effecting a general confiscation
extinguishment of any native interests which may have existed in the Colony
under native law or custom or as negating or reversing
the strong assumption
of the common law that any such pre-existing native interests were respected
and protected under the law of
the Colony once established.
33. Cook's activities of discovery and pronouncements of taking possession
were in no way directed to depriving the native inhabitants
of the ownership
of any land in which they had an interest under their law or custom. They
were concerned with the assertion of
British sovereignty. Examination of the
documents which might arguably be involved in the act of State establishing
the Colony discloses
little that is relevant to the question of its intended
effect upon any existing native interests in the lands of the new Colony.
first Commission was a formal document which, for present purposes, did no
more than appoint Phillip as the Governor of the
designated territory. The
second Commission conferred upon Phillip "full power and authority to agree
for such lands tenements and
hereditaments as shall be in our power to dispose
of and them to grant to any person or persons"(250) HRA, (1914) Series 1,
p 7 (emphasis added). The Instructions recorded(251) ibid., p 12 the
Royal intent that, after arrival in the territory of the new
Colony, supplies
of livestock be acquired by the use of "a quantity of arms and other articles
of merchandize" for the purposes of
"barter with the natives either on the
territory of New South Wales or the islands adjacent". They also recorded(252)
ibid., pp 14-15
the Royal wish that land be granted and provisions be supplied
to emancipated convicts. In order to enable encouragement to be given
prospective new settlers, Phillip was instructed(253) ibid., p 15 that he
should, "with all convenient speed, transmit a report
of the actual state and
quality of the soil at and near the said intended settlement". As regards the
Aboriginal inhabitants, the
Instructions contained what was to become a
familiar clause. It read(254) ibid., pp 13-14:
"You are to endeavour by every possible means to open
an intercourse with the natives, and to conciliate their
affections, enjoining all our subjects to live in amity
and kindness with them. And if any of our subjects shall
wantonly destroy them, or give them any unnecessary
interruption in the exercise of their several occupations,
it is our will and pleasure that you do cause such offenders
to be brought to punishment according to the degree of
the offence. You will endeavour to procure an account
of the numbers inhabiting the neighbourhood of the
intended settlement, and report your opinion to one of our
Secretaries of State in what manner our intercourse with
these people may be turned to the advantage of this colony."
There is nothing in the Statute 27 GEO III c.2 or any of the other documents
associated with the actual establishment of the Colony
which takes the matter
any further.
34. It follows that, for present purposes, the most that can be said about
the act of State establishing the Colony is that it envisaged
(i) that some
lands within the Colony would become Crown lands and be available both for the
establishment of the penal settlement
and for future grants of Crown land to
emancipated convicts and new settlers, and (ii) that the native inhabitants
of the Colony
would be protected and not subjected to "any unnecessary
interruption in the exercise of their several occupations". The expectation
that some colonial lands would become Crown lands and be available both for
the use of the Crown and for future grant to others was
one that would have
probably existed in respect of all of the British Colonies established in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
It may be arguable, though we think
unpersuasively, that the Instructions unambiguously authorized the unilateral
extinguishment
by the Crown of any existing native interests in the land
required for the actual establishment of the convict settlement ("at and
the said intended settlement"(255) ibid., p 15). Otherwise, it seems to us to
be simply not arguable that there was anything
in the act of State
establishing the Colony which constituted either an expropriation or
extinguishment of any existing native interests
in the vast areas of land in
the new Colony or a negation or reversal of the strong assumption of the
common law that such native
interests were respected and protected under the
law of the Colony after its establishment.
35. Any explanation of the absence, in the documents encompassed by the act
of State, of any specific reference to existing native
interests in the lands
of the Colony necessarily involves a degree of speculation. In the context of
British experience in North
America (including the 1763 Imperial
Proclamation(256) the "Indian Bill of Rights", which had "force ... analogous
to the status
of Magna Carta" and which "has always been considered to be the
law throughout the Empire", following "the flag" to "newly discovered
acquired lands or territories": see Calder v. Attorney-General of British
Columbia (1973) 34 DLR (3d), at p 203; Reg. v. Foreign
Secretary; ex parte
Indian Association of Alberta (1982) QB 892, at p 912 which recognized Indian
rights of occupation of their
traditional homelands) and of the specific
instructions to Phillip protecting the Aboriginal inhabitants of Australia
from "any unnecessary
interruption in the exercise of their several
occupations", it is unlikely that there was any actual but unexpressed intent
part of the Crown that the act of State establishing the Colony of New
South Wales should reverse the assumption of the common law
or extinguish
existing native interests in land throughout the more than 1.4 million square
miles of the Colony. The information
provided by Cook and those who sailed
with him had been misleading about the numbers of native inhabitants. Banks
thought that there
were "very few inhabitants" on either the eastern coast in
general or around Botany Bay(257) See the extract from Banks' evidence
the House of Commons Committee on Transportation quoted by R.J. King in "Terra
Australis: Terra Nullius aut Terra Aboriginum?",
(1986) 72 Journal of the
Royal Australian Historical Society, 75, at p 77 and, while admitting that
what the inland might produce
was "totaly unknown", commented that "we may
have liberty to conjecture however that (it is) totaly uninhabited"(258) J.
'Endeavour' Journal of Joseph Banks, 1768-1771, (ed. Beaglehole),
(1962), vol.2, p 122. In fact, it is now clear that parts of the
were, for an unindustralized and uncultivated territory, quite heavily
populated. If one must speculate, the most likely
explanation of the absence
of specific reference to native interests in land is that it was simply
assumed either that the land needs
of the penal establishment could be
satisfied without impairing any existing interests (if there were any) of the
Aboriginal inhabitants
in specific land or that any difficulties which did
arise could be resolved on the spot with the assent or acquiescence of the
Aboriginals:
e.g., by "purchase" (on behalf of the Crown) "of a part of the
country from the native inhabitants for articles more agreable and
them"(259) "An Anonymous Proposal for the Settlement of New South Wales",
(1783-86), Historical Records of New South Wales,
vol.2, p 364 (semble,
written by Sir John Call).
36. There can be cases in which events after an act of State can remove
uncertainty or ambiguity about what was involved in the
act of State itself.
What was done after the establishment of the Colony of New South Wales does
not, however, affect the nature
and content of the act of State which
established it. The reason why that is so is that there is no relevant
ambiguity about the
act of State establishing the Colony. We know what was
done and it is plain that what was done neither constituted a specific
expropriation
of pre-existing native interests in the lands of the Colony nor
sufficed to negate the strong assumption of the common law that any
pre-existing native interests were respected and protected under the law of
the Colony after its establishment. In any event,
while those subsequent acts
were increasingly inconsistent with the existence of any valid Aboriginal
claims to land within the Colony,
they cannot properly be seen as evincing an
intention to extinguish any Aboriginal interests of a kind presumptively
recognized by
the common law. When they were purportedly rationalized and
justified, it was on the basis of a denial that there were pre-existing
Aboriginal interests of the relevant kind for the law to respect and protect.
All the lands of the Colony had been, so it was asserted,
unoccupied for
practical purposes. As such, they were all unoccupied and unclaimed waste
lands of which the Crown had become the
complete and unqualified legal and
beneficial owner.
(viii) The Aborigines and the land in 1788
37. The numbers of the Aboriginal inhabitants of the Australian continent in
1788, the relationship between them and the lands on
which they lived, and the
content of the traditional laws and customs which governed them are still but
incompletely known or imperfectly
comprehended. The following broad
generalizations must, however, now be accepted as beyond real doubt or
intelligent dispute at
least as regards significant areas of the territory
which became New South Wales. As has been said, it is clear that the numbers
of Aboriginal inhabitants far exceeded the expectations of the settlers. The
range of current estimates for the whole continent
is between three hundred
thousand and a million or even more. Under the laws or customs of the
relevant locality, particular tribes
or clans were, either on their own or
with others, custodians of the areas of land from which they derived their
sustenance and from
which they often took their tribal names. Their laws or
customs were elaborate and obligatory. The boundaries of their traditional
lands were likely to be long-standing and defined. The special relationship
between a particular tribe or clan and its land was
recognized by other tribes
or groups within the relevant local native system and was reflected in
differences in dialect over relatively
short distances. In different ways and
to varying degrees of intensity, they used their homelands for all the
purposes of their
lives: social, ritual, economic. They identified with them
in a way which transcended common law notions of property or possession.
was the case in other British Colonies(260) See, e.g., Amodu Tijani (1921) 2
AC, at p 404; Sobhuza II. v. Miller (1926) AC, at
p 525, the claim to the land
was ordinarily that of the tribe or other group, not that of an individual in
his or her own right.
38. In the context of the above generalizations, the conclusion is inevitable
that, at the time of the establishment of the Colony
of New South Wales in
1788, there existed, under the traditional laws or customs of the Aboriginal
peoples in the kaleidoscope of
relevant local areas, widespread special
entitlements to the use and occupation of defined lands of a kind which
founded a presumptive
common law native title under the law of a settled
Colony after its establishment. Indeed, as a generalization, it is true to
that, where they existed, those established entitlements of the Australian
Aboriginal tribes or clans in relation to traditional
lands were no less
clear, substantial and strong than were the interests of the Indian tribes and
bands of North America, at least
in relation to those parts of their
traditional hunting grounds which remained uncultivated.
39. It follows from what has been said in earlier parts of this judgment that
the application of settled principle to well-known
facts leads to the
conclusion that the common law applicable to the Colony in 1788, and
thereafter until altered by valid legislation,
preserved and protected the
pre-existing claims of Aboriginal tribes or communities to particular areas of
land with which they were
specially identified, either solely or with others,
by occupation or use for economic, social or ritual purposes. Under the law
of the Colony, they were entitled to continue in the occupation or use of
those lands as the holders of a common law native title
which was a burden
upon and reduced the title of the Crown. The Crown and those acting on behalf
of the Crown were bound by that
native title notwithstanding that the Crown's
immunity from action and the fiction that the King could do no wrong precluded
proceedings
against the Crown to prevent, or to recover compensation for, its
wrongful infringement or extinguishment. In accordance with the
principles of English constitutional law applicable to a settled Colony, the
sovereignty of the British Crown did not, after
the act of State establishing
the Colony was complete, include a prerogative right to extinguish by
legislation or to disregard by
executive act the traditional Aboriginal rights
in relation to the land which were recognized and protected by the common law
true legal rights. The combined effect of (i) the personal nature of those
rights, (ii) the absence of any presumption of a prior
grant to the
Aboriginal title-holders, and (iii) the applicable principles of English land
law was that native title would be extinguished
by a subsequent inconsistent
grant of the relevant land by the Crown which was not invalid on its face.
That extinguishment would,
however, involve a wrongful infringement by the
Crown of the rights of the Aboriginal title-holders.
40. It is unnecessary for the purposes of this judgment, and probably now
impracticable, to seek to ascertain what proportion of
the lands of the
continent were affected by such common law native titles. Obviously, the
proportion was a significant one. Conceivably,
it was the whole.
(ix) The Australian cases
41. The only reported decision of an Australian court directly dealing with
the merits of an Aboriginal claim to particular traditional
tribal or communal
lands is Milirrpum v. Nabalco Pty. Ltd.(261) (1970) 17 FLR 141. There, a
group of Aborigines representing native
tribes sued a mining company and the
Commonwealth in the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory claiming relief in
relation to the
possession and enjoyment of areas of land which had initially
been part of the Colony of New South Wales. The learned trial judge
(Blackburn J.) rejected the plaintiffs' claim of common law communal native
title. The primary reason for that rejection was that
his Honour found that
the plaintiffs had not established, on the balance of probabilities, that
their predecessors had had the same
links as themselves to the relevant areas
of land at the time of the establishment of New South Wales. It is not
necessary, for
present purposes, to examine the correctness or the relevance
of that particular finding in the context of the evidence in Milirrpum.
importance of the case for present purposes lies in Blackburn J.'s conclusion
that, quite apart from that finding, there were
general reasons of principle
which precluded the plaintiffs' success. One was that a doctrine of common law
native title had no place
in a settled Colony except under express statutory
provisions. Another was that, under any such doctrine, the narrow and
rigid approach referred to in In re Southern Rhodesia would be
appropriate and that the plaintiffs had failed to establish any pre-existing
interest in relation to the land which satisfied the requirement that it be of
the category of "rights of property".
42. It should be apparent from what has been written above that we disagree
with each of the above conclusions of general principle
reached by Blackburn
J. in Milirrpum. As has been seen, the doctrine of presumptive common law
native title, which has long been
recognized by the common law, is applicable
to a settled British Colony. As has also been seen, the view expressed in In
re Southern
Rhodesia, to the effect that pre-existing native interests are not
assumed to be recognized by the law of a British Colony unless
within the category of "rights of private property", has not prevailed in
subsequent cases and should be rejected. Nonetheless,
it must be acknowledged
that Blackburn J.'s ultimate conclusion that the doctrine of common law native
title had never formed part
of the law of any part of Australia derives
support from some general statements of great authority in earlier Australian
We turn to consider the four most important of those cases. They are:
Attorney-General v. Brown(262) (1847) 1 Legge 312, Cooper
v. Stuart(263)
(1889) 14 App Cas 286, Williams v. Attorney-General for New South Wales(264)
[1913] HCA 33
; (1913) 16 CLR 404 and
Randwick Corporation
v. Rutledge(265)
[1959] HCA 63
; (1959) 102 CLR
43. In Attorney-General v. Brown, Williams v. Attorney-General for New South
Wales and Randwick Corporation v. Rutledge, one finds
strong support for the
broad proposition that, upon the settlement of New South Wales, the
unqualified legal and beneficial ownership
of all land in the Colony vested in
the Crown. Arguably, the judgment of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
(Stephens C.J., Dickinson
and Therry JJ.) in Attorney-General v. Brown is
ambiguous in that their Honours confined the proposition(266) See (1847) 1
at p 318 to "waste lands" which they defined(267) ibid., at p 319 as
meaning "all the waste and unoccupied lands of the colony" (emphasis
Careful reading of the judgment seems to us, however, to make plain that
implicit in it is the assumption that all the lands
of the Colony were
relevantly unoccupied at the time of its establishment.
44. In Williams v. Attorney-General for New South Wales, Isaacs J., in the
course of a judgment dealing with the ownership of the
land of State
Government House in Sydney, identified as his starting point "the
unquestionable position that, when Governor Phillip
received his first
commission from King George III on 12 October 1786, the whole of the lands of
Australia were already in law the
property of the King of England"(268) (1913)
16 CLR, at p 439. It has been pointed out that that proposition is far from
"unquestionable"
in so far as its identification of the time of establishment
of the Colony is concerned(269) See Roberts-Wray, op cit, p 631: "startling
and, indeed, incredible". Be that as it may, it is clear that Isaacs J.
regarded the proposition that, on the establishment of New
South Wales, the
unqualified legal and beneficial property in all the lands of the Colony
vested in the Crown as being clear beyond
argument. His Honour's judgment
also made plain his view that the Aboriginal inhabitants had no claims which
qualified or affected
the absolute ownership of the Crown(270) See the
reference to Batman's Treaty: (1913) 16 CLR, at p 439.
45. The question in Randwick Corporation v. Rutledge was whether the lands
used for Randwick Racecourse in Sydney fell within an
exemption from rating
under the Local Government Act 1919 (N.S.W.). Windeyer J., in the course of a
judgment with which Dixon C.J.
and Kitto J. (and perhaps Fullagar J.(271) See
(1959) 102 CLR, at p 61) agreed, stated(272) ibid., at p 71 that from the
first settlement
of New South Wales all lands of the territory lay in the
grant of the Crown and, until grant, formed "a royal demesne". His Honour
added(273) ibid that, "when in 1847 a bold argument ... challenged the right
of the Crown ... to dispose of land in the colony, it
was as a legal
proposition firmly and finally disposed of by Sir Alfred Stephen C.J.: The
Attorney-General v. Brown".
46. The other case, Cooper v. Stuart, was a decision of the Privy Council on
appeal from the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
In the course of
considering whether the rule against perpetuities had been applicable to a
reservation in an 1823 Crown grant of
land in the Colony, their Lordships
asserted(274) (1889) 14 App Cas, at p 291 that, at the time of the
establishment of the Colony,
it "consisted of a tract of territory practically
unoccupied, without settled inhabitants or settled law". Their statement to
effect was thereafter seen as authoritatively establishing that the
territory of New South Wales had, in 1788, been terra nullius
not in the sense
of unclaimed by any other European power, but in the sense of unoccupied or
uninhabited for the purposes of the
47. It is important to note that, in each of those four cases, the reasoning
supporting one or both of the broad propositions that
New South Wales had been
unoccupied for practical purposes and that the unqualified legal and
beneficial ownership of all land in
the Colony had vested in the Crown,
consists of little more than bare assertion. The question of Aboriginal
entitlement was not directly
involved in any of them and it would seem that no
argument in support of Aboriginal entitlement was advanced on behalf of any
In three(275) Attorney-General v. Brown; Williams v. Attorney-General
for New South Wales; Randwick Corporation v. Rutledge, and
arguably all, of
them the relevant comments were obiter dicta. Nonetheless, the authority
which the four cases lend to the two propositions
is formidable. Indeed, the
paucity of the reasoning tends to emphasize the fact that the propositions
were regarded as either obvious
or well-settled. Certainly, they accorded
with the general approach and practice of the representatives of the Crown in
after its establishment.
(x) The "dispossession of the original Inhabitants"
48. The first days of the Colony were peaceful in so far as the Aboriginal
inhabitants were concerned. They received numerous gifts
from the new
arrivals(276) See, e.g., Phillip's despatch of May 15, 1788, Historical
Records of New South Wales, vol.1, Pt 2, pp
128-129, 131. They gave up,
without dispute, the lands initially occupied by, and in connection with, the
penal camp.
49. As time passed, the connection between different tribes or groups and
particular areas of land began to emerge. The Europeans
took possession of
more and more of the lands in the areas nearest to Sydney Cove. Inevitably,
the Aborigines resented being dispossessed.
Increasingly there was violence as
they sought to retain, or continue to use, their traditional lands.
50. An early flash point with one clan of Aborigines illustrates the first
stages of the conflagration of oppression and conflict
which was, over the
following century, to spread across the continent to dispossess, degrade and
devastate the Aboriginal peoples
and leave a national legacy of unutterable
shame. It came in 1804 in the fertile areas surrounding the lower reaches of
the Hawkesbury
River. The Aborigines were said to have threatened to set fire
to the settlers' wheat crops when they ripened. Governor King summoned
representatives of the Aborigines for questioning. They "readily came"(277)
ibid., vol.5, p 513. In his despatch of 20 December
1804 to Lord Hobart, King
reported(278) ibid that "they very ingenuously answered that they did not like
to be driven from the few
places that were left on the banks of the river,
where alone they could procure food; that they had gone down the river as the
men took possession of the banks; if they went across white men's ground
the settlers fired upon them and were angry; that if they
could retain some
places on the lower part of the river they should be satisfied and would not
trouble the white men. The observation
and request appear to be so just and so
equitable that I assured them no more settlements should be made lower down
the river." In
an earlier despatch to King, Hobart had expressly
acknowledged(279) ibid., vol.4, p 684 the extent to which the practice in the
had departed from "the wise and humane instructions" of his
"predecessors" and that the Aborigines had been "too often" subjected
"unjustifiable injuries". In due course, King's assurance that no more
settlements should be made lower down the river was dishonoured.
wrongs involved in the dispossession of the Aborigines were acknowledged, the
underlying problems were left unaddressed.
51. Throughout the rest of the century, the white expropriation of land
continued, spreading not only throughout the fertile regions
of the continent
but to parts of the desert interior. There were some reserves established for
Aborigines and some reservations,
increasingly ignored, in pastoral leases
protecting Aboriginal usufructuary access. On the broad front, however, land
was granted
by the Crown or dedicated or reserved for inconsistent public
purposes without regard to Aboriginal claims. As political power in
to domestic matters was transferred from the Imperial Government in England to
the European Colonists on the other side
of the world, the Aborigines were
increasingly treated as trespassers to be driven, by force if necessary, from
their traditional
of the first one hundred and five years of European settlement is provided
the contrast between what Cook wrote in the Endeavour's Log Book in August
1770 and what Captain Wharton F.R.S. wrote as editor
of a transcription of the
Log Book in 1893. Cook had written of the Aborigines(280) See Captain Cook's
Journal, op cit, p 323:
"They live in a Tranquility which is not disturbed by the
Inequality of Condition. The earth and Sea of their own
accord furnishes them with all things necessary for Life
... they live in a Warm and fine Climate, and enjoy every
wholesome Air, so that they have very little need of
Cloathing; ... in short, they seem'd to set no Value upon
anything we gave them; nor would they ever part with
anything of their own ... This, in my opinion Argues that
they think themselves provided with all the necessarys of
In his notes to that passage, Wharton was roundly condemnatory of the "native
Australians" and their habits. For present purposes,
however, the
significance of his comments lies in his portrayal of the state of affairs, as
regards the Aborigines and the land,
which had developed by 1893(281) ibid.,
pp 323-324:
"Their treachery, which is unsurpassed, is simply an outcome
of their savage ideas, and in their eyes is a form of
independence which resents any intrusion on their land,
their wild animals, and their rights generally. In their
untutored state they therefore consider that any method
of getting rid of the invader is proper. ... although
treated by the coarser order of colonists as wild beasts
to be extirpated, those who have studied them have formed
favourable opinions of their intelligence. The more savage
side of their disposition being, however, so very apparent,
it is not astonishing that, brought into contact with white
settlers, who equally consider that they have a right to
settle, the aborigines are rapidly disappearing."
It should be stressed that the statement that "the coarser order of colonists"
treated the Aborigines "as wild beasts to be extirpated"
was written in 1893
and was obviously a reference to free settlers not to transported
convicts(282) Transportation of convicts to
the Australian Colonies ended in
1868. What the extract makes plain is that the oppression and, in some areas
of the continent,
the obliteration or near obliteration of the Aborigines were
the inevitable consequences of their being dispossessed of their traditional
52. Only seven years later, the Australian Aborigines were, at least as a
matter of legal theory, included among the people who,
"relying on the
blessing of Almighty God", agreed to unite in an indissoluble Commonwealth of
Australia(283) See the preamble to
the Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
Act (63 and 64 Vict c 12). The
Constitution
contained but two references to
them. Both were dismissive and have now been removed. The first(284)
excluded them from the reach of the power of the Commonwealth
Parliament to make laws with respect to the people of any race. In
where the courts had affirmed the proposition that the territory of New South
Wales had been "practically unoccupied" in
1788 and that the lands of the
Colony were unaffected by any pre-existing traditional claims, the second(285)
s.127 was not all that
surprising. It had been adopted by the framers of the
Constitution
without any dissent or, for that matter, any real discussion. It
provided that, "in reckoning the numbers of the people of the Commonwealth,
of a State or other part of the Commonwealth, aboriginal natives shall not be
53. In the very early days, the explanation of the disregard of Aboriginal
claims and the resulting dispossession and conflict may
have been that the new
arrivals were ignorant of the fact that, under pre-existing local law or
custom, particular tribes or clans
had established entitlements to the
occupation and use of particular areas of land. That explanation is not,
however, a plausible
one in respect of later events. Increasingly, the fact
that particular tribes or clans enjoyed traditional entitlements to the
and use of particular lands for ritual, economic and social
purposes was understood. Increasingly, that fact was even acknowledged
government authorities and in formal despatches(286) See, e.g., the examples
given by Reynolds, The Law of the Land, (1987), Chs.III
and V. Thus, on 14
March 1841, James Stephen, probably the most knowledgeable of all the
nineteenth century permanent heads of the
Imperial Colonial Office, noted on a
despatch received from South Australia(287) Colonial Office Records,
Australian Joint Copying
Project, File No.13/16, Folio 57:
"It is an important and unexpected fact that these Tribes
had proprietary rights in the Soil - that is, in particular
sections of it which were clearly defined or well understood
before the occupation of their country".
Two years later, Stephen wrote(288) ibid., File No. 18/34, Folio 106 (9 June
1843) of the "dispossession of the original Inhabitants".
54. Nor can it be said that it did not occur to the Imperial and local
authorities that the dispossession of the Aboriginal inhabitants
might involve
the infringement of rights recognized by the common law. The story of the
development of South Australia, including
the ineffective reservation in the
Letters Patent of 1836(289) Appendix to Reprints of the Public General Acts of
South Australia
1837-1936, vol.8, pp 830-831 protecting "the rights of any
Aboriginal Natives (of South Australia) to the actual occupation or enjoyment
in their own persons or in the persons of their descendants of any land
therein now actually occupied or enjoyed by such Natives",
demonstrates that
the contrary was the case(290) See, e.g., the sources referred to in Reynolds,
op cit, pp 103-120. Another example
is apposite. In Williams v.
Attorney-General for New South Wales(291) (1913) 16 CLR, at p 439, Isaacs J.
referred to Governor Bourke's
Proclamation approved by the Colonial Office,
refusing to recognize Batman's 1835 Treaty with the local Aboriginal elders
purchase of a large tract of land on the shores of Port Phillip, as a
"very practical application" of the doctrine that the Crown
had acquired full
legal and beneficial ownership of all the lands of Australia. Examination of
the contemporary documents discloses
that the purchasers obtained advice from
no less an authority than Dr. Stephen Lushington(292) Then a leader of the
English Bar and
judge of the London consistory court and subsequently the
eminent English Admiralty Judge and a member of the Judicial Committee
Privy Council. In an Opinion dated 18 January 1836(293) See HRA, (1923),
Series 1, vol.18, p 389 (emphasis added), Dr. Lushington
advised that the
purported grants of land by the Aborigines were "not valid without the consent
of the Crown". He added(294) ibid
that he did not think "that the right to
this Territory is at present vested in the Crown" but that it was "competent
to the Crown
to prevent such settlements being made by British Subjects, if it
should think fit". Presumably, Dr. Lushington was recognizing the
title and associated right of pre-emption of the Crown but acknowledging the
rights in relation to the territory of the Aboriginal
occupants. When a copy
of Dr. Lushington's Opinion was forwarded to the then Secretary of State for
the Colonies, Lord Glenelg,
he conceded(295) ibid., p 390 "the great weight
which is due to the deliberate judgment of Dr. Lushington on a question of
this nature"
but dismissed Dr. Lushington's advice on the specious ground that
he must have been "under a misapprehension of some of the most
material parts
of the case". It is perhaps relevant to mention that, in an earlier despatch
to Bourke, Glenelg had written that,
although many circumstances had
contributed to render him anxious that the "Rights" of the Aborigines "should
be studiously defended",
to concede to them "any right to alienate to private
adventurers ... would subvert the foundation on which all Proprietary rights
in New South Wales at present rest"(296) ibid., p 379.
55. Inevitably, one is compelled to acknowledge the role played, in the
dispossession and oppression of the Aborigines, by the two
propositions that
the territory of New South Wales was, in 1788, terra nullius in the sense of
unoccupied or uninhabited for legal
purposes and that full legal and
beneficial ownership of all the lands of the Colony vested in the Crown,
unaffected by any claims
of the Aboriginal inhabitants. Those propositions
provided a legal basis for and justification of the dispossession. They
constituted
the legal context of the acts done to enforce it and, while
accepted, rendered unlawful acts done by the Aboriginal inhabitants to
traditional occupation or use. The official endorsement, by administrative
practice and in judgments of the courts, of those
two propositions provided
the environment in which the Aboriginal people of the continent came to be
treated as a different and lower
form of life whose very existence could be
ignored for the purpose of determining the legal right to occupy and use their
traditional
(xi) Should the propositions supported by the Australian cases and past
practice be accepted?
56. If this were any ordinary case, the Court would not be justified in
reopening the validity of fundamental propositions which
have been endorsed by
long-established authority and which have been accepted as a basis of the real
property law of the country
for more than one hundred and fifty years. And
that would be so notwithstanding that the combined effect of Crown grants, of
acquiescence in reservations and dedications and of statutes of
limitations would be that, as a practical matter, the consequences
re-examination and rejection of the two propositions would be largely, and
probably completely, confined to lands which remain
under Aboriginal
occupation or use. Far from being ordinary, however, the circumstances of the
present case make it unique. As has
been seen, the two propositions in
question provided the legal basis for the dispossession of the Aboriginal
peoples of most of their
traditional lands. The acts and events by which that
dispossession in legal theory was carried into practical effect constitute the
darkest aspect of the history of this nation. The nation as a whole must
remain diminished unless and until there is an acknowledgment
of, and retreat
from, those past injustices. In these circumstances, the Court is under a
clear duty to re-examine the two propositions.
For the reasons which we have
explained, that re-examination compels their rejection. The lands of this
continent were not terra
nullius or "practically unoccupied" in 1788. The
Crown's property in the lands of the Colony of New South Wales was, under the
law which became applicable upon the establishment of the Colony in
1788, reduced or qualified by the burden of the common law native
title of the
Aboriginal tribes and clans to the particular areas of land on which they
lived or which they used for traditional purposes.
(xii) The nature, incidents and limitations of the common law native title of
Australian Aborigines
57. To a large extent, the nature, incidents and limitations of the rights
involved in the common law native title of Australian
Aborigines appear from
what has been written above. It would, however, seem desirable to identify
them in summary form at this stage
of this judgment.
58. Ordinarily, common law native title is a communal native title and the
rights under it are communal rights enjoyed by a tribe
or other group. It is
so with Aboriginal title in the Australian States and internal Territories.
Since the title preserves entitlement
to use or enjoyment under the
traditional law or custom of the relevant territory or locality, the contents
of the rights and the
identity of those entitled to enjoy them must be
ascertained by reference to that traditional law or custom. The traditional
or custom is not, however, frozen as at the moment of establishment of a
Colony. Provided any changes do not diminish or extinguish
the relationship
between a particular tribe or other group and particular land, subsequent
developments or variations do not extinguish
the title in relation to that
59. The rights of an Aboriginal tribe or clan entitled to the benefit of a
common law native title are personal only. The enjoyment
of the rights can be
varied and dealt with under the traditional law or custom. The rights are
not, however, assignable outside
the overall native system. They can be
voluntarily extinguished by surrender to the Crown. They can also be lost by
the abandonment
of the connection with the land or by the extinction of the
relevant tribe or group. It is unnecessary, for the purposes of this
consider the question whether they will be lost by the abandonment of
traditional customs and ways. Our present view is
that, at least where the
relevant tribe or group continues to occupy or use the land, they will not.
60. The personal rights conferred by common law native title do not
constitute an estate or interest in the land itself. They are
extinguished by
an unqualified grant of an inconsistent estate in the land by the Crown, such
as a grant in fee or a lease conferring
the right to exclusive possession.
They can also be terminated by other inconsistent dealings with the land by
the Crown, such as
appropriation, dedication or reservation for an
inconsistent public purpose or use, in circumstances giving rise to third
party rights
or assumed acquiescence. The personal rights of use and
occupation conferred by common law native title are not, however, illusory.
They are legal rights which are infringed if they are extinguished, against
the wishes of the native title-holders, by inconsistent
grant, dedication or
reservation and which, subject only to their susceptibility to being
wrongfully so extinguished, are binding
on the Crown and a burden on its
(xiii) Legislative powers with respect to common law native title.
61. Like other legal rights, including rights of property, the rights
conferred by common law native title and the title itself
can be dealt with,
expropriated or extinguished by valid Commonwealth, State or Territorial
legislation operating within the State
or Territory in which the land in
question is situated. To put the matter differently, the rights are not
entrenched in the sense
that they are, by reason of their nature, beyond the
reach of legislative power. The ordinary rules of statutory interpretation
require, however, that clear and unambiguous words be used before there will
be imputed to the legislature an intent to expropriate
or extinguish valuable
rights relating to property without fair compensation(297) See, e.g., The
Commonwealth v. Hazeldell Ltd.
[1918] HCA 75
25 CLR 552, at p 563; Central Control
Board (Liquor Traffic) v. Cannon Brewery Company Ltd. (1919) AC 744, at p
[1904] HCA 12
; (1904) 1 CLR 363, at pp 373-374 (affirmed (1907) AC 73): a
case dealing with possessory
title. Thus, general waste lands
legislation is not to be construed, in the absence of clear and unambiguous
as intended to apply in a way
extinguish or diminish rights
under common law native title. If lands in relation to which
such title exists
are clearly
within the ambit of such legislation, the legislative
provisions conferring executive powers
will, in the absence of clear
unambiguous
words, be construed so as not to increase the capacity of the
Crown to extinguish or
diminish the native title.
That is to say,
of the Crown wrongfully to extinguish the native title by inconsistent grant
will remain but any liability
of the Crown
to pay compensatory damages for
such wrongful extinguishment will be unaffected. The executive
acts of the
Crown under
Crown or waste
lands legislation will likewise be presumed not to
have been intended to derogate from the
native title. Thus, when
Crown lands
or waste lands are transferred to trustees to be held upon trust for
Aboriginal interests,
it will be presumed, in the
unambiguous words, that the lands were intended to be held by the trustees for
holders of the common law
native title
to the extent necessary to enable
enjoyment of their rights of occupation and use.
62. There are, however, some important constraints on the legislative power
of Commonwealth, State or Territory Parliaments to extinguish
or diminish the
common law native titles which survive in this country. In so far as the
Commonwealth is concerned, there is the
requirement of
Constitution
that a law with respect to the acquisition of property provide
"just terms". Our conclusion that rights under common law native
true legal rights which are recognized and protected by the law would, we
think, have the consequence that any legislative
extinguishment of those
rights would constitute an expropriation of property, to the benefit of the
underlying estate, for the purposes
s.51(xxxi).
An even more important
restriction upon legislative powers to extinguish or diminish common law
native title flows from the paramountcy
of valid legislation of the
Commonwealth Parliament over what would otherwise be valid State or Territory
legislation. In particular,
as Mabo v. Queensland(298) (1988) 166 CLR 186
has demonstrated, the provisions of the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
represent an important restraint upon State or Territory legislative power to
extinguish or diminish common law native title.
63. It is unnecessary and would be impracticable to seek to identify the
extent to which particular legislative provisions have
clearly and
unambiguously extinguished or adversely affected common law native title in
different areas of this country. That being
so, the general comments about
enforcement and protection in the next section of this judgment must
necessarily be read as subject
to the provisions of any valid applicable
legislation.
(xiv) The enforcement and protection of common law native title
64. As has been seen, common law native title-holders in an eighteenth
century British Colony were in an essentially helpless position
rights under their native title were disregarded or wrongly extinguished by
the Crown. Quite apart from the inherent unlikelihood
of such title-holders
being in a position to institute proceedings against the British Crown in a
British court, the vulnerability
of the rights under native title resulted in
part from the fact that they were personal rights susceptible to
extinguishment by inconsistent
grant by the Crown and in part from the
immunity of the Crown from court proceedings. The vulnerability persists to
the extent that
it flows from the nature of the rights as personal. On the
other hand, as legislative reforms increasingly subjected the Crown or
nominal defendant on its behalf to the jurisdiction of the courts and to
liability for compensatory damages for a wrong done to
a subject, the ability
of native title-holders to protect and vindicate the personal rights under
common law native title significantly
increased. If common law native title
is wrongfully extinguished by the Crown, the effect of those legislative
reforms is that compensatory
damages can be recovered provided the proceedings
for recovery are instituted within the period allowed by applicable
limitations
provisions. If the common law native title has not been
extinguished, the fact that the rights under it are true legal rights means
that they can be vindicated, protected and enforced by proceedings in the
ordinary courts.
65. In a case where the Crown or a trustee appointed by the Crown wrongly
denies the existence or the extent of an existing common
law native title or
threatens to infringe the rights thereunder (e.g. by an inconsistent grant),
the appropriate relief in proceedings
brought by (or by a representative party
or parties on behalf of) the native title-holders will ordinarily be
declaratory only since
it will be apparent that the Crown or the trustee,
being bound by any declaration, will faithfully observe its terms. Further
is, however, available where it is necessary to protect the rights of
the title-holders. One example of such further relief is relief
injunction(299) See, e.g., Nireaha Tamaki v. Baker (1901) AC, at p 578.
Notwithstanding their personal nature and their
special vulnerability to
wrongful extinguishment by the Crown, the rights of occupation or use under
common law native title can
themselves constitute valuable property. Actual
or threatened interference with their enjoyment can, in appropriate
circumstances,
attract the protection of equitable remedies. Indeed, the
circumstances of a case may be such that, in a modern context, the appropriate
form of relief is the imposition of a remedial constructive trust framed to
reflect the incidents and limitations of the rights under
the common law
native title. The principle of the common law that pre-existing native rights
are respected and protected will, in
a case where the imposition of such a
constructive trust is warranted, prevail over other equitable principles or
rules to the extent
that they would preclude the appropriate protection of the
native title in the same way as that principle prevailed over legal rules
which would otherwise have prevented the preservation of the title under the
common law. In particular, rules relating to requirements
of certainty and
present entitlement or precluding remoteness of vesting may need to be adapted
or excluded to the extent necessary
to enable the protection of the rights
under the native title.
(xv) The annexation of the Murray Islands
66. It must now be accepted as settled(300) See Wacando v. The Commonwealth
[1981] HCA 60
; (1981) 148 CLR 1 that the Murray Islands
are deemed to have
become, part of the Colony of Queensland on 1 August 1879
pursuant to the
combined effect of the Imperial
Patent of 10 October 1878, the
Queensland Coast Islands Act 1879
(Q.) and the Proclamation of 18 July
1879(301) See Supplement to the Queensland Government Gazette, vol.25, No.10,
21 July, 1879:
the Proclamation was made on 18 July, gazetted on 21 July and
expressed to take effect from 1 August of the Queensland Governor
in Council.
If, as is arguable, the Imperial Letters Patent did not validly authorize the
local Act and Proclamation of 1879, any
defect was retrospectively cured by
the Colonial Boundaries Act 1895 (Imp)(302) See Wacando v. The Commonwealth
(l981) 148 CLR at
pp 16-18, 24-27, 28, 30; and note that the possible
relevance of the Pacific Islanders Protection Acts 1872-1875 (Imp) appears not
to have been adverted to in Wacando. See, generally, Lumb, "The Torres Strait
Islands: Some Questions Relating to their Annexation
and Status", (1990) 19
67. Upon the annexation of the Murray Islands to Queensland, the law of
Queensland became applicable to them. For its part, the
law of Queensland
traced back to the law of New South Wales, from whose territory Queensland had
been carved by the Imperial Letters
Patent and Order in Council of 6 June
1859(303) Pursuant to 18 and 19 Vict c 54 (Imp) (the New South Wales
Constitution
Act 1855). The power to separate the northern portion of New
South Wales was first inserted in the
Australian Constitutions Act
, and continued in the Australian Constitutions Act 1850 (Imp), s.34 and
the New South Wales
Constitution
Act 1855 (Imp) respectively. Since the
establishment of New South Wales in 1788, there had been no legislation
enacted which expressly
altered the Colony's domestic law in relation to the
preservation and protection of pre-existing native entitlements to the
and use of land. Nor had there been any such legislation enacted
in Queensland after its establishment as a Colony. There had been
general statutes - Imperial and Colonial - dealing with waste lands and their
disposition. In a context where, as has been
seen, the rights of occupation
and use under common law native title can be "so complete as to reduce any
radical right in the Sovereign
to one which only extends to comparatively
limited rights of administrative interference"(304) Amodu Tijani (1921) 2 AC,
the settled rules of statutory construction required that the
general words of those provisions be construed as not intended to extinguish
those rights(305) See, e.g., the cases referred to in fn.297 (above).
Accordingly, where lands in respect of which common law native
title existed
were included in the "waste lands" affected by such legislation, the
legislation neither obliterated nor reduced the
personal rights of the native
title-holders. To the extent that general provisions in such legislation
would otherwise have the
effect of making the native title-holders trespassers
on the relevant land, those provisions must be read as inapplicable to those
native title-holders. In particular, the provisions of the Crown Lands
Alienation Act 1876 (Q.) did not, of themselves, either extinguish
common law native title in relation to the lands to which it applied or make
them trespassers upon those lands. On the
other hand, such legislation did
not enhance the nature of common law native title by diminishing or abolishing
the capacity of the
Crown wrongfully to extinguish it by an inconsistent grant
which was not invalid on its face. After Federation, the power of the
deal with land in Queensland and to extinguish native title by inconsistent
grant remained in the Crown in right of the
68. It follows that, at the time the Murray Islands were annexed to the
Colony, it was a doctrine of the domestic law of Queensland,
as it was of the
domestic law of New South Wales and the common law of England, that
pre-existing native interests in relation to
land were preserved and
protected. There was nothing at all in the Proclamation of the Governor
annexing the Islands, or in the
associated Letters Patent and legislation,
which could even arguably be suggested as evincing an intention to negative
that strong
assumption of the common law. To the contrary, the unavoidable
inference is that it was the intention of the Crown that the existing
entitlements of the native inhabitants to the occupation and use of their
traditional homelands would be preserved and protected.
The question
therefore arises whether those existing entitlements were of a nature such as
to found a common law native title.
(xvi) Traditional claims to land in the Murray Islands
69. The detailed findings of Moynihan J. of the Supreme Court of Queensland
in relation to the issues of fact remitted to that court
unavoidably contain
areas of uncertainty and elements of speculation. Nonetheless, they provide,
for present purposes, a sound basis
for some generalizations in relation to
native entitlements to the occupation and use of land within the Murray
Islands under local
law or custom at the time of their annexation to
Queensland. It suffices, for the purposes of this judgment, to say that the
people lived in an organized community which recognized individual and
family rights of possession, occupation and exploitation of
identified areas
of land. The entitlement to occupation and use of land differed from what has
come to be recognized as the ordinary
position in settled British Colonies in
that, under the traditional law or custom of the Murray Islanders, there was a
focus upon the entitlement of the individual or family as distinct
from the community as a whole or some larger section of it. It
that, with the exception of the area used by the London Missionary Society,
those individual or familial entitlements
under traditional law or custom
extended to all the land of the Islands. It is true, as the learned
Solicitor-General for Queensland
submitted, that it is impossible to identify
any precise system of title, any precise rules of inheritance or any precise
of alienation. Nonetheless, there was undoubtedly a local native
system under which the established familial or individual rights
of occupation
and use were of a kind which far exceed the minimum requirements necessary to
found a presumptive common law native
title. In circumstances where the strong
assumption of the common law was unaffected by the act of State annexing the
Islands, the
effect of the annexation was that the traditional entitlements of
the Meriam people were preserved. The radical title to all the
lands of the
Islands vested in the Crown. The Crown's proprietary estate in the land was,
however, reduced, qualified or burdened
by the common law native title of the
Islanders which was thereafter recognized and protected by the law of
Queensland. It is unnecessary
to determine whether the lands of the Islands
became, upon annexation, Crown lands for the purposes of the Crown Lands
Act. If they did, the common law native title of the Islanders was
not extinguished but remained a burden on the underlying title
of the Crown,
and any provisions of that Act which would have the effect of modifying the
common law native title or restricting
the rights of use and occupation of the
Islanders were, to that extent, inapplicable.
(xvii) Post-annexation legislation and executive acts
70. In 1985, the Queensland Parliament enacted the Queensland Coast Islands
Declaratory Act. In Mabo v. Queensland(306) [1988]
HCA 69; (1988)
166 CLR 186, this Court
held that the effect of that Act, if it had been wholly valid, would have been
retrospectively
to extinguish,
from the time of annexation in 1879, any
rights, interests and claims which any of the Meriam people might have had
relation to
land in the Islands. The Act was, however, held by the Court to
be invalid, by reason of inconsistency with
Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth), to the extent that it purportedly extinguished
any traditional native title of the Murray Islanders. In the present case,
the defendant State of Queensland has conceded that any native title to the
occupation and use of lands in the Murray Islands which
survived annexation
has not been extinguished by subsequent legislation. That concession was
rightly made since, putting to one
side the purported extinguishment by the
Queensland Coast Islands Declaratory Act, there is no provision of any other
relevant statute
which could properly be construed as evidencing a legislative
intent to extinguish the rights of the Murray Islanders under the common
native title which preserved traditional entitlements.
71. After 1879, there were some dealings with two particular areas of Murray
Islands land which set them apart from the other lands
of the Islands. One of
those areas was the subject of a series of leases by the Crown to the London
Missionary Society. The current
"lessees" of that area are the trustees of
the Australian Board of Missions. The parties interested in it are not before
and the general comments made hereunder in relation to land in the
Murray Islands should not be understood as applicable to that
area of land.
The second area, consisting of the whole of the Islands of Dauer and Waier,
was the subject of a purported twenty-year
Crown lease to two non-Islanders
for the purpose of establishing a sardine factory. This lease recognized and
protected usufructuary
rights of the Murray Islanders and was subsequently
forfeited. It would seem likely that, if it was valid, it neither
extinguished
nor had any continuing adverse effect upon any rights of Murray
Islanders under common law native title. It is, however, appropriate
the question of the validity and possible effect of that lease until another
72. In 1882, a "reservation from sale" of the lands of the Murray Islands was
purportedly made pursuant to the provisions of the
Crown Lands Alienation Act
1876 (Q.). The instrument of reservation has not been located. Its validity
is open to doubt since it
is arguable that the Crown Lands Alienation Act was
inapplicable to lands within a territory which was not annexed to Queensland
until after its enactment. Be that as it may, there is nothing to suggest
that the instrument of reservation contained anything
which would have the
effect of extinguishing the common law native title of Murray Islanders to
lands within the Islands.
73. It is unnecessary to trace in detail the history of subsequent Crown
lands legislation in Queensland. It was argued on behalf
of the plaintiffs
that the lands of the Murray Islands had remained right outside the provisions
of the Land Act 1910 (Q.). The preferable
view is, however, that, by one
course or another, the Murray Islands were initially within the definition of
"Crown Lands" for the
purposes of that Act(307) See the definition of "Crown
land" in s.4 and the provisions of s.180(3). Section 180(1) of the Land Act
1910 authorized the Governor in Council to reserve any Crown land required for
"public purposes", which by definition included "Aboriginal
reserves"(308)
s.4, from sale or lease. In 1912, the Governor in Council permanently
reserved and set apart the Murray Islands "for
use of the Aboriginal
inhabitants of the State". Section 181 of the Land Act authorized the
Governor in Council, without issuing
any deed of grant, to place any land
reserved for any public purpose under the control of trustees. In 1939, the
Governor in Council
placed the Murray Islands reserve under the control of
trustees without specifically declaring any particular trust upon which it
held. The effect of subsequent legislative provisions is that the reservation
of the Murray Islands and the appointment of trustees
continue in force as if
made under the presently operative provisions of the Land Act 1962 (Q.).
However, by reason of that reservation,
the lands included in the Murray
Islands reserve are not "Crown lands" for the purposes of the Land Act 1962
since s.5 of that Act
excludes, from its definition of "Crown land", any land
"which is, for the time being ... reserved for ... public purposes" and the
definition of "public purposes" includes "Aboriginal reserves"(309) s.5.
74. None of the above-mentioned executive acts had the effect of
extinguishing the existing rights of Murray Islanders under common
title. The reservation from sale or lease "for use of the Aboriginal
inhabitants of the State" should clearly be construed
as intended to protect,
rather than extinguish, any existing native rights of occupation and use. The
placing of the lands of the
Murray Islands under the control of trustees must
likewise be construed as intended to safeguard rather than extinguish those
rights. It follows that the common law native title of Murray
Islanders in relation to land in the Murray Islands survives. In the
what has been said previously in this judgment, the identity of familial or
individual title-holders and the content of
the rights possessed in relation
to particular land fall to be determined by reference to local law or custom.
(xviii) Relief
75. Subsequent to the completion of the argument, the firstnamed plaintiff,
Mr. Eddie Mabo, died. The secondnamed and thirdnamed
plaintiffs, Mr. David
Passi and Mr. James Rice, remain as competent plaintiffs. Each of them claims
to be a native title-holder
in relation to land on Mer Island and to have an
interest in that land.
76. It would be inappropriate for this Court to seek to define the rights of
any plaintiffs in the absence of other persons who
may have competing claims
to the relevant areas of land. Each of Mr. Passi and Mr. Rice has, however,
standing to seek and obtain
more general declaratory relief against the
defendant State of Queensland in relation to the question whether all existing
entitlements
to land within the Murray Islands were, as the defendant State
claims, extinguished upon annexation of the Islands to Queensland.
circumstances, the answers to the questions reserved for the Full Court and
any declaratory relief should be confined to
declarations:
1. That, upon the annexation of the Murray Islands to
Queensland, the radical title to all the lands in the
Murray Islands vested in the Crown in right of the State
of Queensland;
2. That, putting to one side the London Missionary Society
land and subject to the effect of the grant of the forfeited
Crown lease of the islands of Dauer and Waier, the Crown's
ownership of lands in the Murray Islands after their
annexation to Queensland was qualified and reduced by a
communal native title of the Murray Islanders to the land of
the Islands which was preserved and protected by the common
3. That the entitlement of particular Island families or
individuals with respect to particular land under that common
law communal title falls to be determined by reference to
traditional law or custom;
4. That, apart from the effect of the leases of the London
Missionary Society land and of the forfeited Crown lease of
the islands of Dauer and Waier, the common law native title
of Murray Islanders in respect of land in the Islands has not
been extinguished by subsequent legislation or executive act;
5. That the lands of the Murray Islands are not "Crown lands"
for the purposes of the Land Act 1962 (Q.); and
6. That the rights under that common law native title are true
legal rights which may be enforced and protected by legal
action and which, if wrongfully extinguished (e.g., by
inconsistent grant) without clear and unambiguous statutory
authorization, found proceedings for compensatory damages.
We would reserve liberty to apply to the plaintiffs for further relief
including, if the circumstances justified it, injunctive relief
declarations of a remedial constructive trust.
77. It should be mentioned that the plaintiffs also sought a declaration that
any future grant by the Governor in Council of lands
on Murray Island in
purported pursuance of the Land Act 1962 would be unlawful by reason of the
provisions of
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth). In our
view, it has not been shown that such a declaration is warranted. For one
thing, the material before the Court does
not establish that there exists any
intention to make such a grant. For another, the effect of this judgment is
that any such deed
of grant would, if it had the effect of extinguishing the
rights of the Murray Islanders under common law native title, be wrongful
unless it was clearly and unambiguously authorized by a valid enactment of the
Queensland Parliament. There is no basis upon which
the Court could properly
conclude that the Queensland Government is likely, in the absence of such
clear and unambiguous legislative
authorization, to infringe the rights of
Murray Islanders by such an inconsistent deed of grant. If such clear and
unambiguous legislation
was purportedly enacted, it would be necessary to
examine its operation to determine whether it was invalid by reason of
inconsistency
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
78. There are two further matters which should be mentioned. The first is
that we are conscious of the fact that, in those parts
of this judgment which
deal with the dispossession of Australian Aborigines, we have used language
and expressed conclusions which
some may think to be unusually emotive for a
judgment in this Court. We have not done that in order to trespass into the
assessment or attribution of moral guilt. As we have endeavoured to
make clear, the reason which has led us to describe, and express
conclusions
that the full facts of that dispossession
are of critical importance to the
assessment of the legitimacy of the propositions that the continent was
unoccupied for legal purposes
and that the unqualified legal and beneficial
ownership of all the lands of the continent vested in the Crown. Long
acceptance of
legal propositions, particularly legal propositions relating to
real property, can of itself impart legitimacy and preclude challenge.
their association with the dispossession that, in our view, precludes those
two propositions from acquiring the legitimacy
which their acceptance as a
basis of the real property law of this country for more than a hundred and
fifty years would otherwise
impart. The second further matter is that, in the
writing of this judgment, we have been assisted not only by the material
before us by the parties but by the researches of the many scholars who
have written in the areas into which this judgment has necessarily
We acknowledge our indebtedness to their writings and the fact that our own
research has been largely directed to sources
which they had already
identified.
DAWSON J. In 1879 the Murray Islands (comprising Mer, Dauer and Waier), which
lie between Australia and New Guinea in Torres Strait,
were annexed by the
Colony of Queensland(310) See U.K. Letters Patent dated 10 October 1878;
Proclamation of 18 July 1879; Queensland
Government Gazette, 21 July 1879; and
Queensland Coast Islands Act 1879
(Q.). The Colonial Boundaries Act 1895
(Imp) (58 and 59 Vict c 34) removed any doubts about the effectiveness of
these measures
by authorizing the incorporation of the Murray Islands into
Queensland retrospectively. See also Wacando v. The Commonwealth
CLR 1 and Mabo v. Queensland (1988) 166 CLR 186, at pp 235-236. Those
islands thereupon became
part of the colony
proclaimed to be subject
to the laws in force in Queensland. Although the letters patent which
the Governor
of Queensland
to proclaim the annexation provided that
the application of Queensland laws to the islands might be modified,
no modification
and upon annexation the laws in force in Queensland were
applied in their entirety.
2. The annexation of the Murray Islands is not now questioned. It was an act
of state by which the Crown in right of the Colony
of Queensland exerted
sovereignty over the islands. Whatever the justification for the acquisition
of territory by this means (and
the sentiments of the nineteenth century by no
means coincide with current thought), there can be no doubt that it was, and
legally effective.
3. The plaintiffs are Murray Islanders and members of the Meriam people.
Each of them claims rights in specified parcels of land
on the Murray Islands.
The basis of their claims is, alternatively:
(a) their holding the land under traditional native title;
(b) their possessing usufructuary rights over the land; or
(c) their owning the land by way of customary title.
The plaintiffs contend that their rights are of a kind that have been enjoyed
by the Meriam people since time immemorial. They say
that these rights were
not extinguished upon the assumption of sovereignty by the Crown over the
Murray Islands at the time of annexation.
And, while the plaintiffs
acknowledge that the traditional land rights for which they contend are of a
kind which may be extinguished
at any time by the Crown, they say that they
can only be extinguished by clear and unequivocal action so that, in effect,
legislation is required. Thus the plaintiffs deny that the rights
which they claim can be extinguished by manifest policy on the
part of the
Crown. In particular, the plaintiffs deny that the Queensland Crown lands
legislation, which is of a kind found in all
States of Australia, is
sufficient to extinguish traditional land rights. The plaintiffs say that the
Crown has taken no steps, other
than by the Queensland Coast Islands
Declaratory Act 1985 (Q.), to extinguish their traditional land rights. That
Act, which amongst
other things declared that upon annexation the Murray
Islands were vested in the Crown in right of Queensland freed from all other
rights, was held by a majority in Mabo v. Queensland(311) (1988) 166 CLR 186
upon certain assumptions to be invalid,
in the sense
of inoperative, under
Constitution
by reason of its inconsistency with the
Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth). It is implicit in the plaintiffs' case that,
because any further legislation to extinguish their rights in the land would
be inconsistent with the
Racial Discrimination Act
, they are, while that Act
is in force, secure in their enjoyment of those rights.
4. The plaintiffs also claim that the Crown, far from extinguishing their
rights, has recognized them. In this respect the plaintiffs
point to the
reservation of the Murray Islands by the Crown for the use or benefit of the
aboriginal inhabitants of the State. They
say that the reservation of these
islands shows that they were not intended to be opened up for settlement or to
be the subject of
Crown grants which, they freely concede, would extinguish
any traditional land rights.
5. The defendant argues that if the traditional land rights claimed by the
plaintiffs ever existed, they were extinguished from
the moment of annexation.
It contends that those rights could not have survived the assertion of
sovereignty by the Crown unless
they were recognized in some way. The
defendant argues that not only were any traditional land rights over the
Murray Islands not
recognized, but they were extinguished by the exercise of a
clear governmental policy which existed at the time of annexation and
continued since then. The defendant does not contend that, if there are
traditional land rights that survived the assumption
of sovereignty, they have
been subsequently extinguished.
6. One thing is clear - I do not understand it to have been contested by the
plaintiffs - and that is that, upon annexation, the
ultimate title to the
lands comprising the Murray Islands vested in the Crown. This was a necessary
consequence of the exertion of
sovereignty by the Crown for, under the system
of law which the Crown brought with it, the ultimate title to land - sometimes
the absolute or radical title - resides in the Crown. The law that the
Crown brought with it was the common law and, at common law,
land is not the
subject of absolute ownership other than by the Crown(312) See Williams, "The
Fundamental Principles of the Present
Law of Ownership of Land", (1931) 75 The
Solicitors' Journal 843, at p 844; rather, it is the subject of tenure. That
for most purposes be of historical rather than practical interest,
for the fee simple which may be acquired under the Crown carries
with it all
the advantages of absolute ownership. But it is fundamental in any
consideration of the acquisition of territory such
as is required by this
case. Thus it was that upon annexation of the Murray Islands the Crown became
the absolute owner of the land
and such rights as others might have in it must
be derived from the Crown and amount to something less than absolute
ownership. The
notion that only the Crown has the radical title stems from the
feudal system of land tenure but, as Stephen J. pointed out in New
South Wales
v. The Commonwealth(313)
[1975] HCA 58
; (1975) 135 CLR 337, at pp 438-439, it does not much
matter whether it now be
regarded in that
way or whether it be regarded as a
prerogative right accompanying the exertion of sovereignty. The result is the
same: upon annexation
the lands annexed became the
property of the Crown and
any rights in the land that the plaintiffs have must
be held under the Crown.
7. The main thrust of the plaintiffs' case is, however, that following the
annexation of the Murray Islands no formal grant of an
interest in land to the
Meriam people was necessary for their existing interests in the land to
continue, notwithstanding that from
the time of annexation they held their
interests under the Crown. Further, the plaintiffs deny that the continuation
of their rights
was dependent upon any positive act of recognition by the
Crown, although they contend that, in any event, there have been acts of
recognition by the Crown and, later, the Queensland legislature. Indeed, the
plaintiffs argue that their rights are presumed to continue
even in the
absence of some positive act of recognition. In other words, the plaintiffs
argue that if the continuation of the rights
of the Meriam people existing in
the land prior to annexation requires some form of recognition, that
recognition need not be express
but may be established by acquiescence.
8. There is ample authority for the proposition that the annexation of land
does not bring to an end those rights which the Crown
chooses, in the exercise
of its sovereignty, to recognize. This is so whether the assumption of
sovereignty is by way of conquest,
cession or annexation, or by the occupation
of territory that is not at the time held under another sovereign. The law
was summarized
by the Privy Council in Vajesingji Joravarsingji v. Secretary
of State for India(314) (1924) LR 51 Ind App 357, at p 360:
"(W)hen a territory is acquired by a sovereign state for the
first time that is an act of state. It matters not how the
acquisition has been brought about. It may be by conquest,
it may be by cession following on treaty, it may be by
occupation of territory hitherto unoccupied by a recognized
ruler. In all cases the result is the same. Any inhabitant
of the territory can make good in the municipal Courts
established by the new sovereign only such rights as that
sovereign has, through his officers, recognized. Such
rights as he had under the rule of predecessors avail him
Their Lordships went on to point out that in that case, which was a case of
the acquisition of territory by cession(315) ibid., at
"The moment that cession is admitted the appellants
necessarily become petitioners and have the onus cast on
them of showing the acts of acknowledgment, which give them
the right they wish to be declared. ...
The whole object accordingly of inquiry is to see
whether, after cession, the British Government has conferred
or acknowledged as existing the proprietary right which the
appellants claim."
9. In Secretary of State for India v. Bai Rajbai the Privy Council was
concerned with the cession of territory previously under
native rule and said
of the members of the class of persons (the kasbatis) one of whom was the
respondent's ancestor(316) (1915)
LR 42 Ind App 229, at p 237:
"The relation in which they stood to their native sovereigns
before this cession, and the legal rights they enjoyed under
them, are, save in one respect, entirely irrelevant matters.
They could not carry in under the new regime the legal
rights, if any, which they might have enjoyed under the
old. The only legal enforceable rights they could have
as against their new sovereign were those, and only those,
which that new sovereign, by agreement expressed or implied,
or by legislation, chose to confer upon them. Of course
this implied agreement might be proved by circumstantial
evidence, such as the mode of dealing with them which the
new sovereign adopted, his recognition of their old rights,
and express or implied election to respect them and be bound
by them, and it is only for the purpose of determining
whether and to what extent the new sovereign has recognized
these ante-cession rights of the kasbatis, and has elected
or agreed to be bound by them, that the consideration of
the existence, nature, or extent of these rights becomes a
relevant subject for inquiry in this case."
10. And in Secretary of State for India v. Sardar Rustam Khan the Privy
Council again dealt with what was in effect a cession of
territory by the
passing over of sovereignty to the Government of India. Lord Atkin,
delivering the judgment of their Lordships,
observed(317) (1941) AC 356, at p
"It follows, therefore, that in this case the Government
of India had the right to recognize or not recognize the
existing titles to land. In the case of the lands in suit
they decided not to recognize them, and it follows that the
plaintiffs have no recourse against the Government in the
municipal courts."
In making this observation, his Lordship declined, in accordance with the
authorities, to embark upon any consideration of whether
the decision was just
or unjust, politic or impolitic(318) ibid., at p 372; see also Cook v. Sprigg
(1899) AC 572, at p 579.
11. Amodu Tijani v. Secretary, Southern Nigeria(319) (1921) 2 AC 399 is a
case in which the Crown did accord recognition to rights
existing prior to the
assumption of sovereignty by the Crown. In that case certain territory,
comprising the colony of Lagos, was
ceded by the Eleko (effectively the King
of Lagos) to the British Crown and the issue to be determined was the basis
for the calculation
of compensation for land which was taken for public
purposes under the Public Lands Ordinance 1903 of the colony. The cession
was made on the footing that the rights of property of the inhabitants
were to be fully respected, although there was no doubt that
the radical title
to the land vested in the British Crown at the time of cession(320) ibid., at
p 407. These rights included the
seigneurial rights of the "white cap chiefs"
to receive rent or tribute from the occupiers of land allotted to them by the
the rights of the white cap chiefs to family lands held individually
by them and the communal usufructuary right of the members of
community to communal lands(321) ibid., at pp 410-411; in the Divisional and
Full Courts below the white cap chiefs were
held not to have absolute
ownership of the communal lands but only to have a form of seigneurial right
in relation to them (Amodu
Tijani v. Secretary, Southern Provinces (1914-1922)
III Nig LR 24). This arrangement of itself would have conferred no rights
those inhabitants because the municipal courts cannot enforce obligations
under a treaty against the sovereign, but it did afford
some evidence of the
recognition of those rights by the new sovereign. There was, however, other
evidence of recognition of those
rights. For example, the native inhabitants
were assured that it was the settled intention of the British Government to
secure them
in the possession of all their rights and privileges existing at
the time of the cession(322) ibid., at pp 406-407; see also Amodu
Secretary, Southern Provinces (1914-1922) III Nig LR, at p 29 (Divisional
Court). Moreover, in so far as the white cap
chiefs' seigneurial rights were
concerned, the lower courts noted that the British Government was apparently
aware of their continued
exercise after cession and did not prevent this,
although it sometimes disregarded these rights by, for example, granting the
away to others(323) Amodu Tijani v. Secretary, Southern Provinces
(1914-1922) III Nig LR, at pp 29-30 (Divisional Court) and at p
Court). Finally, the Privy Council considered that the system of Crown grants
applying in the colony was not introduced
with a view to altering substantive
titles already existing but to define properly these substantive titles and to
facilitate a system
of conveyancing(324) Amodu Tijani v. Secretary, Southern
Nigeria (1921) 2 AC, at pp 404, 407-408. In the course of its judgment
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council noted that the precise incidents and
nature of the rights held by the native inhabitants
of the land (whether
individually or communally) depended on the particular circumstances and that
"(a)bstract principles fashioned
a priori are of but little assistance, and
are as often as not misleading"(325) ibid., at p 404. The Privy Council went
on to conclude
that the radical title to the land, which was then in the Crown
as a result of the cession, was "throughout qualified by the usufructuary
rights of communities, rights which, as the outcome of deliberate policy, have
been respected and recognized"(326) ibid. In reaching
this conclusion, the
Privy Council noted that "(a) mere change in sovereignty is not to be presumed
as meant to disturb rights of
private owners"(327) ibid., at p 407.
12. The Privy Council was again concerned with the cession of land to the
British Crown in the former colony of Lagos in Adeyinka
Oyekan v. Musendiku
Adele(328) (1957) 1 WLR 876. Lord Denning, delivering the judgment of the
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council,
recognized(329) ibid., at p 880 that
the treaty of cession was an act of state by which the British Crown acquired
full rights of
sovereignty over Lagos. He continued:
"The effect of the Act of State is to give to the British
Crown sovereign power to make laws and to enforce them,
and therefore the power to recognize existing rights
or extinguish them or to create new ones. In order to
ascertain what rights pass to the Crown or are retained by
the inhabitants, the courts of law look, not to the treaty,
but to the conduct of the British Crown."
His Lordship went on to say that in inquiring what rights are recognized there
is one guiding principle, namely:
"The courts will assume that the British Crown intends that
the rights of property of the inhabitants are to be fully
respected".
His Lordship then expounded a second proposition:
"Whilst, therefore, the British Crown, as Sovereign, can
make laws enabling it compulsorily to acquire land for
public purposes, it will see that proper compensation is
awarded to every one of the inhabitants who has by native
law an interest in it: and the courts will declare the
inhabitants entitled to compensation according to their
interests, even though those interests are of a kind unknown
to English law".
For the latter of these two propositions, Lord Denning cited as authority
Amodu Tijani v. Secretary, Southern Nigeria. Of course
in Lagos there was
legislative provision for the payment of compensation for the compulsory
acquisition of such land. There is, however,
no general proposition to be
found, either in law or in history, that the Crown is legally bound to pay
compensation for the compulsory
acquisition of land or any interests in it by
the exercise of sovereign rights. The first proposition - the guiding
principle - may
express sentiments which had emerged by the mid-nineteenth
century, but whether, in any particular case, a change of sovereignty
accompanied by a recognition or acceptance by the new sovereign of
pre-existing rights is a matter of fact. There is no basis
for a general
presumption either for or against recognition or acceptance by the new
sovereign of pre-existing rights, although a
presumption in favour of their
recognition may be raised in the interpretation of a treaty of cession(330)
Amodu Tijani v. Secretary,
Southern Nigeria (1921) 2 AC, at p 407.
13. In any event, whether or not there is any presumptive recognition of
native interests in land upon a change in sovereignty may
be little more than
a matter of emphasis upon which there is some variance in the cases. Once it
is accepted, as I think it must
be, that recognition of these interests by the
Crown may be a matter of inference from all the facts, including mere
acquiescence,
it is obvious that if, following a change in sovereignty, the
new sovereign allows native occupation and use of the land to continue
undisturbed, that may afford some foundation for the conclusion that such
native interests (if any) in the land as may have existed
prior to the
assumption of sovereignty are recognized by the Crown. Of course, these
interests need not correspond with title to
land as known to the sovereign
under its own law(331) ibid., at pp 402-404 - for example, the interests by
virtue of which land was
occupied by the natives of Lagos was held to be
communal(332) ibid., at pp 409-410 and this is not a form of title to land
known to the British Crown under English law. On the other hand, if
native interests in land are not recognized at all by the new
sovereign, they
will be extinguished at the time sovereignty is assumed. But, in the end, the
question whether any native interests
in the land have been extinguished by an
assumption of sovereignty is a question of fact which can only be determined
by reference
to the surrounding circumstances.
14. There may be circumstances which render it impossible to draw any
inference of recognition of native interests in land even
where there is no
interference with the continued native occupation of land following a change
in sovereignty. For example, in In
re Southern Rhodesia(333) (1919) AC 211 the
Privy Council considered lands in Southern Rhodesia over which the sovereign
at one time a chief known as Lobengula. A charter had been issued
which incorporated the British South Africa Company for commercial
and gave it wide administrative powers. After hostilities Lobengula fled and
his rule came to an end, and thus the company,
in 1894, became the effective
ruler by conquest on behalf of the Crown. Amongst the powers exercised by the
company was the power
to grant title to land in the name of the Crown. Upon
the question of the recognition of native title, Lord Sumner, delivering the
judgment of the Board, said(334) ibid., at pp 234-235:
"According to the argument the natives before 1893 were
owners of the whole of these vast regions in such a sense
that, without their permission or that of their King and
trustee, no traveller, still less a settler, could so
much as enter without committing a trespass. If so, the
maintenance of their rights was fatally inconsistent with
white settlement of the country, and yet white settlement
was the object of the whole forward movement, pioneered by
the Company and controlled by the Crown, and that object
was successfully accomplished, with the result that the
aboriginal system gave place to another prescribed by the
Order in Council.
This fact makes further inquiry into the nature of the
native rights unnecessary. If they were not in the nature
of private rights, they were at the disposal of the Crown
when Lobengula fled and his dominions were conquered; if
they were, any actual disposition of them by the Crown upon
a conquest, whether immediately in 1894 or four years later,
would suffice to extinguish them as manifesting an intention
expressly to exercise the right to do so. The Matabeleland
Order in Council of 1894 and the Southern Rhodesia Order in
Council of 1898 provided for native reserves, within which
the tribal life of the natives might be continued under
protection and control, and to the rest of the country the
Company's officers and white men were admitted independently
of any consent of the natives. The Company's alienations
by grant are unquestionably valid, yet the natives have no
share in them. The ownership of the reserves was, at least
administratively, vested in the Company under the Southern
Rhodesian Native Regulations promulgated by the High
Commissioner in 1898, and with the consent of the Crown
other dispositions of those reserves can be made by the
Company from time to time. By the will of the Crown and
in exercise of its rights the old state of things, whatever
its exact nature, as it was before 1893, has passed away
and another and, as their Lordships do not doubt, a better
has been established in lieu of it. Whoever now owns the
unalienated lands, the natives do not."
These unalienated lands consisted partly of native reserves, partly of land in
the company's own occupation and partly of country
altogether waste and
unsettled(335) ibid., at p 213. Thus the circumstances surrounding or
following the assumption of sovereignty
(in that case, by conquest) indicated
that even though the occupation of the natives had not necessarily been
physically disturbed,
their pre-existing rights (if any) had nevertheless not
been accepted by the Crown and so had not been recognized by it.
15. The recognition of native interests in land following the exercise of
sovereignty by the Crown is sometimes described as the
recognition of the
continued existence of those interests. The vesting of the radical title in
the Crown upon the assumption of sovereign
authority is, however, incompatible
with the continued existence in precisely the same form of any pre-existing
rights. Necessarily
the pre-existing rights were held of a former sovereign or
in the absence of any sovereign at all. After the Crown has assumed
sovereignty
and acquired the radical title to the land, any pre-existing
"title" must be held, if it is held at all, under the Crown. This new
is therefore not merely the continuation of a title previously held,
notwithstanding that it may be identifiable by reference
to the previous
title. If the new title is to be held under the Crown, the Crown must
obviously accept it. Such acceptance may
be by way of acquiescence in the
continued occupancy of land by the aboriginal inhabitants and, if the native
interests are accepted
in this manner by the Crown, the nature of those
interests can then only be determined by reference to the nature of the former
by the aboriginal inhabitants. The appearance (although not the
fact as a matter of law) is, then, that these native interests continue
undisturbed. In this sense it may be true to say that positive recognition of
native interests by the Crown is unnecessary for their
continued existence and
that what appear to be different views upon the subject are, on analysis,
fundamentally the same.
16. In my view this explains the conclusion of Hall J. (Spence and Laskin JJ.
agreeing) in Calder v. Attorney-General of British
Columbia that traditional
native title is not dependent upon a grant to or recognition of rights in the
native inhabitants(336) (1973)
34 DLR (3d) 145, at p 218 because such title is
not dependent upon a treaty, statute or other formal government action(337)
at p 200; see also United States v. Santa Fe Pacific Railroad Co.
[1942] USSC 12
; (1941) 314 US 339, at p 347; Narragansett Tribe v. Southern Rhode
Island Land
Development Corp (1976) 418 F Supp 798, at p 807;
Hamlet of Baker Lake v.
Minister of Indian Affairs (1979) 107 DLR (3d)
513, at p 541; Delgamuukw v.
British Columbia (1991) 79 DLR
(4th) 185, at p 286; Guerin v. The Queen
13 DLR (4th) 321
p 336. But if what Hall J. meant was that traditional
native title somehow survived the exertion of sovereignty by the Crown
independently
of any recognition of it by the Crown (accepting that mere
acquiescence might, depending upon the circumstances, provide
the necessary
recognition), I am unable to agree.
17. What I have said is not inconsistent with the well-established principle
that the municipal courts have no jurisdiction to entertain
a challenge to an
act of state and, in particular, that obligations assumed by one sovereign to
another, as in a treaty, cannot be
enforced by municipal courts(338) See
Secretary of State for India v. Kamachee Boye Sahaba (1859) 13 Moo 22, at pp
75, 86 (15 ER
9, at pp 28-29, 32-33); Doss v. Secretary of State for India in
Council (1875) LR 19 Eq. 509, at pp 534, 535; Cook v. Sprigg (1899)
578-579; Vajesingji Joravarsingji v. Secretary of State for India (1924) LR 51
Ind.App, at p 360; Hoani Te Heuheu Tukino
v. Aotea District Maori Land Board
(1941) AC 308, at pp 324-325; Secretary of State for India v. Sadar Rustam
Khan (1941) AC, at
pp 369-372. Recent authority for this proposition is to be
found in Winfat Enterprise (HK) Co. Ltd. v. Attorney-General of Hong
(1985) AC 733. In that case, the Privy Council was concerned with the cession
of the New Territories in Hong Kong to the
British Crown. The Peking
Convention, by which the cession was made, expressed an understanding that
there would be no expropriation
or expulsion of the inhabitants of the New
Territories but that if land were required for public purposes a fair price
would be paid.
18. Lord Diplock delivered the judgment of the Judicial Committee of the
Privy Council and, if I may say so with respect, accurately
reflected the
authorities when he observed of a claim by the appellant land developers to a
title which survived the cession(340)
ibid., at p 746:
"The elementary fallacy of British constitutional law
which vitiates the land developers' claim is the contention
that this vaguely expressed understanding, stated in the
Peking Convention, that there shall not be expropriation or
expulsion, is capable of giving rise to rights enforceable
in the municipal courts of Hong Kong or by this Board acting
in its judicial capacity. Although there are certain obiter
dicta to be found in cases which suggest the propriety of
the British Government giving effect as an act of state to
promises of continued recognition of existing private titles
of inhabitants of territory obtained by cession, there is
clear long-standing authority by decision of this Board
that no municipal court has authority to enforce such an
obligation."
19. As I have said, the plaintiffs base their claim upon traditional native
title, usufructuary rights and customary ownership.
It would seem that they
seek to draw a distinction between all three and, in particular, between
traditional native, or aboriginal,
title and usufructuary rights. Since the
main thrust of the plaintiffs' case was directed towards establishing the
existence of
traditional native title, it is that aspect of the case to which
I turn first.
20. Although the earliest cases upon this subject were decided in the United
States, it is convenient to deal initially with the
Canadian authorities.
This is because the historical context in which the United States cases arose
and the policy which they reflect
do not find any real counterpart elsewhere.
That policy involved dealing with a largely hostile native population in the
European settlement and concluding various treaties with the natives
that afforded them a particular status which, to a large extent,
basis of the law laid down in the cases. On the other hand, in Canada, whilst
there are unique features, the Privy Council
was the final court of appeal and
there is thus a common origin for the law upon the subject of aboriginal title
(or Indian title
as it is often called) in both Canada and Australia.
21. St. Catherine's Milling and Lumber Company v. The Queen(341) (1888) 14
App Cas 46 was a case which concerned, amongst other
things, the nature of the
tenure of the aboriginal inhabitants - the Indians - of land in Ontario. Lord
Watson, who gave judgment
for the Privy Council, decided the case upon the
basis that Indian title stemmed from a royal proclamation of 1763 that
to the land in question. That proclamation recited that it was just
and reasonable that the several nations and tribes of Indians
who lived under
British protection should not be molested or disturbed in the "possession of
such parts of Our dominions and territories
as, not having been ceded to or
purchased by us, are reserved to them or any of them as their hunting grounds"
and declared that
no warrants of survey should be granted or patents be passed
for lands beyond the bounds of the respective governments of the colonies
established under the proclamation or "until Our further pleasure be known",
such lands, not having been ceded or purchased as aforesaid,
being reserved to
the Indians. It was further declared that, subject to an exception in favour
of the Hudson's Bay Company, land
outside the bounds of such governments was
reserved "under Our sovereignty, protection, and dominion, for the use of the
said Indians".
Finally, the proclamation enacted that no private person should
make any purchase from the Indians of lands reserved to them within
colonies where settlement was permitted, and that all purchases had to be on
behalf of the Crown, in a public assembly of the
Indians, by the governor or
commander-in-chief of the colony in which the lands lay.
22. Lord Watson said(342) ibid., at pp 54-55:
"It was suggested in the course of the argument for the
Dominion, that inasmuch as the proclamation recites that the
territories thereby reserved for Indians had never 'been
ceded to or purchased by' the Crown, the entire property of
the land remained with them. That inference is, however, at
variance with the terms of the instrument, which shew that
the tenure of the Indians was a personal and usufructuary
right, dependent upon the good will of the Sovereign. The
lands reserved are expressly stated to be 'parts of Our
dominions and territories;' and it is declared to be the
will and pleasure of the sovereign that, 'for the present,'
they shall be reserved for the use of the Indians, as their
hunting grounds, under his protection and dominion. There
was a great deal of learned discussion at the Bar with
respect to the precise quality of the Indian right, but
their Lordships do not consider it necessary to express any
opinion upon the point. It appears to them to be sufficient
for the purposes of this case that there has been all
along vested in the Crown a substantial and paramount
estate, underlying the Indian title, which became a plenum
dominium whenever that title was surrendered or otherwise
extinguished."
23. Although Lord Watson chose to base the interest of the Indians in the
land entirely upon the proclamation, that was not the
only source of their
title or, at all events, it has not subsequently been treated as being so.
Instead, a title of the same kind
has been held to arise independently of the
proclamation so that both Indians who are not covered by the proclamation and
are covered have been held to have the same kind of title over
land(343) See Calder v. Attorney-General of British Columbia (1973)
(3d), at pp 156, 200; Hamlet of Baker Lake v. Minister of Indian Affairs
(1979) 107 DLR (3d), at p 541; Delgamuukw v. British
Columbia (1991) 79 DLR
(4th), at p 286.
24. The question upon which the Privy Council refrained from expressing an
opinion - the nature of Indian title - has never been
given a precise answer.
Lord Watson did, however, suggest that Indian title was a kind of "personal
and usufructuary right". A personal
and usufructuary right is a right
temporarily to possess, use or enjoy the advantages of land belonging to
another so far as may
be had without causing damage or prejudice to it. In
Delgamuukw v. British Columbia(344) (1991) 79 DLR (4th) 185, at p 458; see
also Attorney-General for Ontario v. Bear Island Foundation (1984) 15 DLR
(4th) 321, at p 360, for example, McEachern C.J. described
Indian title for
the purposes of that case as including "all those sustenance practices and the
gathering of all those products of
the land and waters ... which (the Indians)
practised and used before exposure to European civilization (or sovereignty)
for subsistence
or survival".
25. Whilst attempts have subsequently been made to classify the rights
arising from Indian title as proprietary rights(345) See
Guerin v. The Queen
(1982) 143 DLR (3d) 416, at p 462 (Federal Court of Appeal); but cf. Calder v.
Attorney-General of British Columbia
(1973) 34 DLR (3d), at p 167; Hamlet of
Baker Lake v. Minister of Indian Affairs (1979) 107 DLR (3d), at p 558;
Delgamuukw v. British
Columbia (1991) 79 DLR (4th), at pp 415-416 which held
to the contrary, such a notion is contrary to the observation of Lord Watson
that the tenure of the Indians was "dependent upon the good will of the
Sovereign" or his later observation(346) (1888) 14 App Cas.,
at p 58 that the
character of the interest of the Indian inhabitants in the land was less than
that of owners in fee simple and was
a "mere burden" upon the Crown's present
proprietary estate. However, it may be that in truth aboriginal title is
neither a personal
nor a proprietary right but is sui generis. This was the
view of Dickson J. (with whom Beetz, Chouinard and Lamer JJ. concurred)
Guerin v. The Queen where he said(347)
(1984) 13 DLR (4th) 321
, at p 339:
"It appears to me that there is no real conflict between
the cases which characterize Indian title as a beneficial
interest of some sort, and those which characterize it a
personal, usufructuary right. Any apparent inconsistency
derives from the fact that in describing what constitutes
a unique interest in land the courts have almost inevitably
found themselves applying a somewhat inappropriate
terminology drawn from general property law. There is a
core of truth in the way that each of the two lines of
authority has described native title, but an appearance of
conflict has none the less arisen because in neither case is
the categorization quite accurate.
Indians have a legal right to occupy and possess certain
lands, the ultimate title to which is in the Crown. While
their interest does not, strictly speaking, amount to
beneficial ownership, neither is its nature completely
exhausted by the concept of a personal right. It is true
that the sui generis interest which the Indians have in the
land is personal in the sense that it cannot be transferred
to a grantee, but it is also true, as will presently appear,
that the interest gives rise upon surrender to a distinctive
fiduciary obligation on the part of the Crown to deal with
the land for the benefit of the surrendering Indians."
I will deal later with the fiduciary obligation referred to by Dickson J.
26. However, it is the question not of whether, but of how, Indian title can
be extinguished that has given rise to greater dispute.
In Calder v.
Attorney-General of British Columbia an action was brought on behalf of the
Nishga Indian tribe seeking a declaration
that their Indian title to certain
lands in British Columbia had never been lawfully extinguished. Apart from
Pigeon J., who held
that the Court had no jurisdiction without the fiat of the
Lieutenant-Governor of the Province, the remaining members of the court
equally divided: Judson, Martland and Ritchie JJ. held that whatever rights
the aboriginal inhabitants had had in the land,
they were extinguished by the
exercise of sovereign powers, whereas Hall, Spence and Laskin JJ. held to the
contrary. Judson, Martland
and Ritchie JJ. also agreed with Pigeon J., so
that the plaintiff's appeal was dismissed. Judson J. (with whom Martland and
JJ. concurred) held that "the sovereign authority elected to exercise
complete dominion over the lands in question, adverse to any
occupancy which the Nishga Tribe might have had, when, by legislation, it
opened up such lands for settlement, subject to
the reserves of land set aside
for Indian occupation"(348) (1973) 34 DLR (3d), at p 167. This legislation,
which consisted of a series
of proclamations, ordinances and statutes,
comprehensively regulated the method of alienation and possession of the
relevant lands.
27. Conversely, Hall J. (with whom Spence and Laskin JJ. concurred) held that
the Indian title of the Nishga tribe, being a legal
right, could not be
extinguished "except by surrender to the Crown or by competent legislative
authority, and then only by specific
legislation"(349) ibid., at p 208. He
further held that once Indian title is established it is presumed to continue
until the contrary
is proved(350) ibid. The consequence was, in his view,
that as there was no specific legislation and no surrender, the title of
Nishga tribe had not been extinguished.
28. However, in Reg. v. Sparrow(351) (1990) 70 DLR (4th) 385, a case which
dealt with the issue of whether an aboriginal right to
fish for food had been
extinguished, the Supreme Court of Canada failed to endorse the requirement,
suggested by Hall J. in Calder,
that specific legislation was necessary to
extinguish Indian title. In a judgment delivered by Dickson C.J.C. and La
Forest J. it
merely said(352) ibid., at p 401:
"The test of extinguishment to be adopted, in our opinion,
is that the Sovereign's intention must be clear and plain if
it is to extinguish an aboriginal right."
This test was accepted in two single judge decisions after Calder - that of
Mahoney J. of the Federal Court of Canada in Hamlet of
Baker Lake v. Minister
of Indian Affairs(353) (1979) 107 DLR (3d) 513 and that of McEachern C.J. of
the Supreme Court of British
Columbia in Delgamuukw v. British Columbia -
which clearly contemplated that specific legislation was not essential to
Indian title. In particular, in the latter case McEachern C.J.
held that a series of ordinances (which made provision for, among
things, pre-emption of land, leases, actions for ejectment, Crown reserves and
surveys, water privileges and mining licences)
established such a thorough and
comprehensive land system in British Columbia based on the appropriation of
all lands in that colony
to the Crown that, together with a policy of throwing
open the colony for settlement, was entirely inconsistent with the continued
existence of any system of aboriginal interests in land, and so had the effect
of extinguishing Indian title(354) (1991) 79 DLR (4th),
at pp 465, 474.
29. It is now possible to turn briefly to several United States authorities.
As I have explained, the course of history in that
country finds no real
parallel elsewhere and the law in its detailed application is of limited
assistance in a case such as the present
one. That is because the Indian
tribes were regarded as "domestic dependent nations" who retained a certain
degree of sovereignty
and thus had a very special relationship with the United
States government(355) See, for example, Cherokee Nation v. Georgia
[1831] USSC 6
US 1, at p 12; Worcester v. Georgia (1832) 31 US 350, at p 376; United States
[1886] USSC 194
; (1886) 118 US 375, at pp 383-384; Seminole
Nation v. United States
[1942] USSC 105
; (1942) 316 US 286, at pp 296-297; United States v. Mitchell
[1983] USSC 154
; (1983) 463 US 206,
30. Nevertheless, the notion of native or Indian title owes much to the
celebrated judgment of Marshall C.J. in the case of Johnson
v. McIntosh(356)
(1823) 21 US 240. It is unnecessary to refer to the detailed facts of the
case. As Marshall C.J. pointed out(357)
ibid., at p 253, the inquiry was in
great measure "confined to the power of Indians to give, and of private
individuals to receive,
a title, which can be sustained in the courts of this
country". He then described the discovery of the American continent and the
relations which were to exist between the discoverers and the natives. On
this aspect, Marshall C.J. said(358) ibid., at pp 253-254:
"In the establishment of these relations, the rights of
the original inhabitants were, in no instance, entirely
disregarded; but were, necessarily, to a considerable
extent, impaired. They were admitted to be the rightful
occupants of the soil, with a legal as well as just claim
to retain possession of it, and to use it according to their
own discretion; but their rights to complete sovereignty,
as independent nations, were necessarily diminished, and
their power to dispose of the soil, at their own will,
to whomsoever they pleased, was denied by the original
fundamental principle, that discovery gave exclusive title
to those who made it. While the different nations of Europe
respected the right of the natives, as occupants, they
asserted the ultimate dominion to be in themselves; and
claimed and exercised, as a consequence of this ultimate
dominion, a power to grant the soil, while yet in possession
of the natives. These grants have been understood by
all, to convey a title to the grantees, subject only to the
Indian right of occupancy."
31. The nature and extent of Indian title in the United States is amply
described in Tee-Hit-Ton Indians v. United States(359)
[1955] USSC 24
348 US 272. In
that case a claim was made under the Fifth Amendment of the United States
Constitution
for compensation for the taking of timber by the United States
from lands in Alaska over which the Tee-Hit-Ton Indians claimed Indian
The Supreme Court held that the claimants' Indian title amounted to a
permissive occupancy which could be extinguished by
the government without
compensation. Reed J., delivering the judgment of the Court, said(360) ibid.,
"It is well settled that in all the States of the Union the
tribes who inhabited the lands of the States held claim to
such lands after the coming of the white man, under what
is sometimes termed original Indian title or permission
from the whites to occupy. That description means mere
possession not specifically recognized as ownership by
Congress. After conquest they were permitted to occupy
portions of territory over which they had previously
exercised 'sovereignty,' as we use that term. This is not
a property right but amounts to a right of occupancy which
the sovereign grants and protects against intrusion by third
parties but which right of occupancy may be terminated
and such lands fully disposed of by the sovereign itself
without any legally enforceable obligation to compensate the
32. So, not unlike the position in Canada, Indian title in the United States
(in the absence of recognition by Congress through
treaty or legislation so
that it becomes property within the meaning of the Fifth Amendment) is a right
of occupancy which can be
terminated by Congress at will(361) See Oneida
Indian Nation v. County of Oneida
[1974] USSC 15
; (1974) 414 US 661, at p 667; Lipan Apache
v. United States (1967) 180 Ct Cl 487, at p 492; United States v. Santa
Railroad Co. (1941) 314 US, at p 347; Johnson
v. McIntosh (1823) 21
US, at pp 258, 259; United States v. Tillamooks
[1946] USSC 126
; (1946) 329 US 40, at p 46;
United States v. Atlantic Richfield
Co. (1977) 435 F Supp 1009, at p 1031;
Narragansett Tribe v. Southern
Rhode Island Land Development Corp (1976) 418 F
807; Gila River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community v. United States
494 F 2d 1386, at p 1389 The actual title to the land lies
United States(362) Johnson v. McIntosh (1823) 21 US, at p 253;
Oneida Indian
Nation v. County of Oneida (1974) 414 US, at
p 667; United States v.
Tillamooks (1946) 329 US, at p 46. However, Indian
title will only be
extinguished where Congress' intention
to effect such extinguishment is "clear
and plain"(363) Lipan Apache Tribe
v. United States (1967) 180 Ct Cl, at p
33. In New Zealand the course of the law has been affected by the statutory
implementation of the Treaty of Waitangi. This treaty
guaranteed to the
native inhabitants of New Zealand "the full, exclusive, and undisturbed
possession of their Lands and Estates,
Forests, Fisheries, and other
properties which they may collectively or individually possess, so long as it
is their wish and desire
to retain the same in their possession"(364) Art.2 as
quoted in Nireaha Tamaki v. Baker (1901) AC 561, at pp 566-567. The sole and
absolute right of pre-emption from the aboriginal inhabitants was vested in
the Crown: Land Claims Ordinance 1841 (N.Z.). For that
reason New Zealand
authority is, for the most part, not directly relevant, but the basic
principle that, upon the assumption of sovereignty,
the radical title to lands
in New Zealand vested in the Crown giving it the right - apart from the treaty
- to extinguish native
title, has not been doubted(365) See Reg. v. Symonds
(1847) NZPCC 387, at pp 388-389 and 393-394. The position was summarized by
North J. in In re the Ninety-Mile Beach(366) (1963) NZLR 461, at p 468:
"There is no doubt that it is a fundamental maxim of
our laws that the Queen was the original proprietor of all
lands in the Kingdom and consequently the only legal source
of private title, and that this principle has been imported
with the mass of the common law into New Zealand; that it
'pervades and animates the whole of our jurisdiction in
respect to the tenure of land.' ... (I)n my opinion it
necessarily follows that on the assumption of British
sovereignty - apart from the Treaty of Waitangi - the rights
of the Maoris to their tribal lands depended wholly on the
grace and favour of Her Majesty Queen Victoria, who had
an absolute right to disregard the Native title to any
lands in New Zealand, whether above high-water mark or below
high-water mark. But as we all know, the Crown did not
act in a harsh way and from earliest times was careful to
ensure the protection of Native interests and to fulfil the
promises contained in the Treaty of Waitangi."
34. I have been able to deal with the authorities, other than the Australian
authorities, in a somewhat selective way. A full and
scholarly examination is
to be found in the judgment of Blackburn J. in Milirrpum v. Nabalco Pty.
Ltd.(367) (1971) 17 FLR 141.
But I have been able to do so because, at least
so far as the plaintiffs' claim to traditional native title is concerned, this
turns upon the application of accepted principles rather than upon the
ascertainment of the principles themselves. It is obviously
a convenient
course, which has been adopted in other cases, to assume that traditional
native title or aboriginal title existed in
the Murray Islands prior to
annexation and to see whether it has been extinguished. That is essentially a
question of historical
fact to which I shall now turn. The plaintiffs, against
the weight of overseas authority to which I have referred, maintain that
aboriginal title may be extinguished only by express legislation. However,
this is to confuse the prerogative of the Crown with
the power of the
legislature. No doubt aboriginal title - or any other title for that matter -
may be extinguished by legislation,
but that is because of the power of the
legislature, not because of the nature of the title of the Crown. Aboriginal
it is in this context that the word "title" is misleading) is an
occupancy which the Crown, as absolute owner, permits to continue.
permission may be withdrawn. The extinction of aboriginal title does not,
therefore, require specific legislation. No doubt
the intention of the Crown
must be plain, but there is no reason in principle or logic why it should not
be inferred from the course
taken by the Crown in the exercise of its powers,
whether in administering statute law or otherwise.
35. The genesis of the law which applies in the Murray Islands is to be found
in the Colony of New South Wales, of which Queensland
originally formed a
part. The law of New South Wales included the common law. If there ever had
been any doubt about that, it was
settled by s.24 of the Australian Courts Act
1828 (Imp) (9 GEO IV c.83) which provided that all the laws and statutes in
force within
the realm of England at the time of the passing of that Act
should be applied in the Colony of New South Wales so far as they could
applied. The Colony of Queensland inherited the laws of the Colony of New
South Wales upon its separation from New South Wales
in 1859. To use the words
of the Letters Patent of 6 June 1859 that erected Queensland into a separate
colony, the Governor of the
new colony was commanded to govern "according to
such laws and ordinances as are now in force in our said colony of New South
and its dependencies and as shall hereafter be in force in our said
Colony of Queensland". It was the law of Queensland which was
introduced upon
the annexation of the Murray Islands. It was introduced expressly and the
power of the new sovereign, the Crown in
right of the Colony of Queensland, to
introduce that law cannot be questioned. There is no need to classify the
Murray Islands as
conquered, ceded or settled territory. Those
classifications have been used to determine the question of what law, if any,
is introduced
to acquired territory, but they are irrelevant where the law
which is introduced is expressly declared by the new sovereign(368)
v. Stuart (1889) 14 App Cas 286, at p 291. There is thus no need to resort to
notions of terra nullius in relation to
the Murray Islands. The law which
applied upon annexation was the law of Queensland and, as I understand the
plaintiffs' submissions,
there is no issue about that in this case.
36. Upon any account, the policy which was implemented and the laws which
were passed in New South Wales make it plain that, from
the inception of the
colony, the Crown treated all land in the colony as unoccupied and afforded no
recognition to any form of native
interest in the land. It simply treated the
land as its own to dispose of without regard to such interests as the natives
have had prior to the assumption of sovereignty. What was done was quite
inconsistent with any recognition, by acquiescence or otherwise,
title. Indeed, it is apparent that those in authority at the time did not
consider that any recognizable form of native
title existed.
37. Thus it was that successive Governors of the Colony of New South Wales
were given power to grant land without reference to any
claim or consent by
the aboriginal inhabitants. The power of the earlier Governors (from Governor
Phillip to Governor Brisbane)
to grant land extended to the whole of the
colony which at that time (so far as the mainland was concerned) extended from
in the north, in the latitude of 10 degrees 37' south, to South Cape
in the south, in the latitude of 43 degrees 49' south, and to
all country
inland to the west as far as the 135th degree of east longitude.
38. The instructions to these earlier Governors, which accompanied their
Commissions, merely required the Governors to extend their
intercourse with
the natives, to conciliate their affections, and to enjoin the Sovereign's
subjects to live in kindness and amity
with them(369) Governor Hunter's
Instructions dated 23 June 1794 (Historical Records of Australia ("HRA"),
(1914), Series I, vol.1,
p 520, at p 522); see also Governor Phillip's
Instructions dated 25 April 1787 (HRA, (1914), i.1.9, at pp 13-14); Governor
Instructions dated 23 February 1802 (HRA, (1915), i.3.391, at p 393);
Governor Bligh's Instructions dated 25 May 1805 (HRA, (1916),
i.6.8, at p 10);
Governor Macquarie's Instructions dated 9 May 1809 (HRA, (1916), i.7.190, at p
192); Governor Brisbane's Instructions
dated 5 February 1821 (HRA, (1917),
i.10.596, at p 598). The generality of these instructions, which made no
reference at all to
any interest of the aboriginal inhabitants in the land,
may be contrasted with the considerable and minute detail in the instructions
as to the way in which the Governors' power to grant land was to be
exercised(370) See, for example, Governor Phillip's Instructions
April 1787 (HRA, (1914), i.1.9, at pp 14-15); Governor Phillip's Instructions
re Land Grants enclosed in Despatch No.3 Grenville
to Phillip dated 22 August
1789 (H.R.A, (1914), i.1.124-128); Governor Hunter's Instructions dated 23
June 1794 (HRA, (1914), i.1.520,
at pp 523-526); Governor King's Instructions
dated 23 February 1802 (HRA, (1915), i.3.391, at pp 394-396); Governor Bligh's
Instructions
dated 25 May 1805 (HRA, (1916), i.6.8, at pp 11-14); Governor
Macquarie's Instructions dated 9 May 1809 (HRA, (1916), i.7.190, at
193-196); Governor Brisbane's Instructions dated 5 February 1821 (HRA, (1917),
i.10.596, at pp 598-601).
39. Some efforts were, however, made for the welfare of the aboriginal
inhabitants by setting aside land for their use and benefit.
For example,
Governor Macquarie assigned 10,000 acres of land for the "permanent Benefit"
of certain natives for the purposes of
establishing a reserve on which those
natives could be educated and "civilized", and encouraged to cultivate the
land(371) Despatch
No.10 Macquarie to Earl Bathurst dated 24 February 1820
(HRA, (1917), i.10.262). Governor Macquarie also indicated and
demonstrated
his willingness to grant small areas of land to individual
aboriginal inhabitants(372) See Despatch No.15 Macquarie to Earl Bathurst
dated 8 October 1814 (HRA, (1916), i.8.367, at p 369); Despatch No.4 Macquarie
to Earl Bathurst dated 24 March 1815 (HRA, (1916),
i.8.461, at p 467);
Despatch from Macquarie to Earl Bathurst dated 27 July 1822 (HRA, (1917),
i.10.671, at pp 677-678); HRA, (1916),
i.8. note 86; HRA, (1917), i.10 note
64; Proclamation dated 4 May 1816 enclosed in Despatch No.10 Macquarie to Earl
Bathurst dated
8 June 1816 (HRA, (1917), i.9.141). Likewise, Governor Brisbane
reserved 10,000 acres of land "for the use of the Aborigines" and
certain officers as trustees of the land upon which the London Missionary
Society was to establish a mission. The trustees
were empowered to remove
intruders or trespassers and "to convey, for terms of years, or in tail, or in
fee simple" an amount not
exceeding 30 acres to any Aborigine on condition
that the land not be sold, let or given to any white person(373) Despatch
Brisbane to Earl Bathurst dated 8 February 1825 (HRA, (1917), i.11.512,
at pp 512-513). The land was to revert to the Crown if
the project
failed(374) Despatch No.1 Earl Bathurst to Darling dated 10 January 1827 (HRA,
(1920), i.13.14, at p 15). Examples
might be multiplied but it is
sufficient to observe that none of the measures taken for the welfare of the
aboriginal inhabitants
involved the acceptance of any native rights over the
land. On the contrary, in so far as the measures involved the provision of
land, they were undertaken in the exercise of the relevant Governor's
discretion under the power conferred upon him by his Commission
and the land
so provided was not necessarily that which the aboriginal inhabitants settled
on it had traditionally occupied.
40. As settlement expanded under successive Governors of New South Wales,
conflict between the colonists and the aboriginal inhabitants
intensified.
There was correspondingly more pressure to attend to the welfare of the
aboriginal inhabitants(375) See, e.g. the report
of a Select Committee of the
House of Commons on Aborigines 1836 (538), vol.VII, p 1. Most of the measures
that were taken did not,
however, relate to land. For instance, instructions
were issued by Lord Glenelg for the appointment of Protectors of Aborigines
who were, amongst other things, to watch over the rights and interests of the
natives within their jurisdiction, to represent their
wants, wishes or
grievances to the colonial government and to attempt to settle them down and
to educate and "civilize" them(376)
Despatch No.72 Lord Glenelg to Gipps dated
31 January 1838 (HRA, (1923), i.19.252). However, outrages committed on
inhabitants did not cease and were the subject of concern. When
Lord Russell succeeded Lord Glenelg in the colonial office, he reiterated
solicitude of the Imperial government for the Aborigines, saying that "it is
impossible that the Government should forget that
the original aggression was
our own, and that we have never yet performed the sacred duty of making any
systematic or considerable
attempt to impart to the former occupiers of New
South Wales the blessings of Christianity, or the knowledge of the Arts and
of civilised life"(377) Despatch No.62 Lord Russell to Gipps dated
21 December 1839 (HRA, (1924), i.20.439, at p 440). But still
nothing was
said which could be construed in any way as a recognition or acceptance by the
Crown of any native rights in the land.
41. Alternatively, to the extent that measures were taken which related to
land, they were too late to produce any fundamental change
in the character of
the occupation of the land following the assumption of sovereignty. For
example, in 1848 Earl Grey stated in
a despatch to Governor Fitz Roy(378)
Despatch No.24 Earl Grey to Fitz Roy dated 11 February 1848 (HRA, (1925),
i.26.223, at p 225):
"I think it essential that it should be generally understood
that leases granted for (the purpose of pastoral occupation)
give the grantees only an exclusive right of pasturage for
their cattle, and of cultivating such Land as they may
require within the large limits thus assigned to them; but
that these Leases are not intended to deprive the natives
of their former right to hunt over these Districts, or to
wander over them in search of subsistence, in the manner
to which they have been heretofore accustomed, from the
spontaneous produce of the soil, except over land actually
cultivated or fenced in for that purpose."
On advice that a condition to this effect could not validly be inserted in
Crown leases by the local Government, Fitz Roy requested
an Order in Council
giving the necessary authority(379) Despatch No.221 Fitz Roy to Earl Grey
dated 11 October 1848 (HRA, (1925),
i.26.632). As a result, an Order in
Council dated 18 July 1849 was made enabling the Governor to insert in
pastoral leases "such
conditions, clauses of forfeiture, exceptions, and
reservations, as may be necessary for securing the peaceful and effectual
of the land comprised in such leases, and for preventing abuses and
inconveniences incident thereto". Earl Grey considered that
this Order in
Council would enable the Governor "to prevent the injury to the public which
would result from the absolute exclusion
of natives or other persons
travelling or searching for minerals and so forth"(380) Quoted in Rusden,
History of Australia, (1883),
vol.II, p 513. The somewhat imprecise wording
of this Order in Council is self-evident and it was thus a safe prediction
the Earl refused to declare that the native rights deserved respect,
they would not be respected"(381) ibid. Thus, although a clause
reserving to
the Aborigines "free access to the said parcel of land" or to any portion of
it including the trees and water which
would "enable them to procure the
animals, birds, fish and other foods of which they subsist" was apparently
inserted in Queensland
leases(382) Reynolds, The Law of the Land, (1987), p
144, the squatters ignored this provision and, by and large, they continued
drive the aboriginal inhabitants from their runs.
42. Therefore, the policy of the Imperial Government during this period is
clear: whilst the aboriginal inhabitants were not to
be ill-treated,
settlement was not to be impeded by any claim which those inhabitants might
seek to exert over the land. Settlement
expanded rapidly and the selection and
occupation of the land by the settlers were regulated by the Governors in a
way that was intended
to be comprehensive and complete and was simply
inconsistent with the existence of any native interests in the land.
43. Initially settlers were permitted to occupy land only where that land had
been granted or leased to them by, or on the authority
of, the Governor and so
the earlier Governors were able to control the settlement of the colony. As I
have said, such settlement
was regulated in considerable detail by the
instructions given to these earlier Governors. However, as settlement
expanded, the
quantity of land surveyed was insufficient to meet the demand,
and so settlers were permitted by Governors Macquarie and Brisbane
land without a grant or lease, such occupation being terminable at the will of
the Crown(383) Perry, Australia's First
Frontier, (1963), pp 33-34, 44. The
Governors after Governor Brisbane were empowered by their Commissions, with
the advice and consent
of the Executive Council, to divide the whole of the
colony "into Districts, Counties, Hundreds, Towns, Townships and
Parishes"(384)
See, for example, Governor Darling's Commission dated 16 July
1825 (HRA, (1919), i.12.99, at p 103); Governor Bourke's Commission
June 1831 (HRA, (1923), i.16.837, at p 841) and Governor Gipps' Commission
dated 5 October 1837 (HRA, (1923), i.19.295,
at p 299). The disposal (by
sale or grant without purchase) of the waste lands within these divisions, the
terms and mode of
such disposal, the purchase price (in the case of sale) and
the quit rent (in the case of grant without purchase) were exhaustively
comprehensively specified in the instructions issued to the Governors from
time to time(385) See, for example, Governor Darling's
Instructions dated 17
July 1825 (HRA, (1919), i.12.107, at pp 113-124) and "the Ripon Regulations"
(see Roberts, History of Australian
Land Settlement: (1788-1920), (1924), p
44. Under Governor Darling the settlers were only permitted to select land
within certain prescribed limits(386) First specified
by Government Order
dated 5 September 1826 and then expanded by Government Order dated 14 October
1829, which came to be known as
the "Limits of Location" and, as of 14 October
1829, consisted of nineteen counties which essentially comprised the area that
today known as the State of New South Wales. Land outside these limits
(such as that comprising today's States of Victoria and Queensland)
considered and treated by the Crown as waste lands just as was unalienated
land within these limits. When it became clear that
the government could not
prevent squatters from grazing their stock outside the Limits of Location, the
government acted to regulate
their occupation and to assert the rights of the
Crown over that land. The government treated these squatters as unauthorized
of unalienated Crown land and permitted the land to be occupied only
under a licence. For the purposes of regulating the use and
occupation of
land beyond the Limits of Location, the government divided this land into
districts, each of which had a Commissioner
and a Border Police Force(387) See
4 Wm IV No.10 (amended by 5 Wm IV No.12); 7 Wm IV No.4; 2 Vict No.19; 2 Vict
No.27; 5 Vict No.1.
45. Subsequently the Sale of Waste Land Act 1842 (Imp) (5 and 6 Vict c.36)
was passed. This Act made comprehensive provision for
the terms on which the
Governor was to exercise his power to alienate the waste lands of the Crown
and it was followed by the Sale
of Waste Land Act 1846 (Imp) (9 and 10 Vict
c.104), which was to similar effect. Both of these Acts were clearly based on
the premise
that the waste lands were owned by the Crown. Squatting was
further regulated by an Order in Council dated 9 March 1847 which divided
land in the Colony of New South Wales into three classes (settled land,
intermediate land and unsettled land) and specified the
terms on which
pastoral leases in those classes would be granted by the Crown. The class
designated "unsettled land" comprised land
which was unsuitable for farming
purposes but might be the subject of squatting. Most of the land in what was
to become Queensland
was unsettled land.
46. The fact that the Crown regarded unalienated waste land as entirely its
own to deal with as it pleased is further exemplified
by its refusal to
recognize a "treaty" whereby John Batman purported to acquire 500,000 acres
known as "Dutigalla" and 100,000 acres
known as "Geelong" from certain
natives. Given the policy of the Crown which I have described, the refusal
emphasized that the Crown
considered itself to be the owner of the land,
unencumbered by any form of native title.
47. It is unnecessary to trace in detail the history of land settlement in
Queensland. It is sufficient to say that squatters had
reached the fringe of
what is now Queensland in 1836 and expanded throughout Queensland by the early
1860s(388) See generally Roberts,
op cit, pp 53-58, 155-165, 202; Roberts, The
Squatting Age in Australia: 1835-1847, (1935), pp 169-177, 208-214. The
conflict between the settlers and the aboriginal inhabitants which
was manifest in early New South Wales was repeated. But again
no basis was
afforded for saying that native rights in the land were recognized or
accepted. There is nothing to indicate that any
change occurred in the way in
which the Crown dealt with the land. That is to say, land was dealt with upon
the basis that, where
not retained or reserved for public purposes, it was
available for settlement without regard to any claim on the part of the
inhabitants. Certainly the comprehensive system of land regulation
that was adopted by the Colony of Queensland(389) See, for example,
of Crown Lands Act 1860 (Q.), Unoccupied Crown Lands Occupation Act 1860 (Q.),
Tenders for Crown Lands Act 1860 (Q.),
Occupied Crown Lands Leasing Act 1860
(Q.), Unoccupied Crown Lands Act 1860 (Q.), Pastoral Leases Act 1863 (Q.),
Crown Lands Alienation
Act 1868 (Q.), the Homestead Acts, Crown Lands Act 1884
(Q.), Land Act 1910 (Q.) made no mention of native rights. Indeed, so far
the native inhabitants were concerned, the first Governor of the Colony of
Queensland, Sir George Bowen, was merely required to
"promote religion and
education among the native inhabitants", "to protect them in their persons and
in the free enjoyment of their
possessions", "by all lawful means (to) prevent
and restrain all violence and injustice which may in any manner be practised
or attempted
against them" and to take such measures as appeared to him
necessary "for their conversion to the Christian Faith and for their
advancement
in civilization"(390) Governor Bowen's Instructions dated 6 June
48. There may not be a great deal to be proud of in this history of events.
But a dispassionate appraisal of what occurred is essential
determination of the legal consequences, notwithstanding the degree of
condemnation which is nowadays apt to accompany any
account(391) See, e.g.
Wacando v. The Commonwealth (1981) 148 CLR, per Murphy J. at pp 27-28. The
policy which lay behind the legal
regime was determined politically and,
however insensitive the politics may now seem to have been, a change in view
does not of itself
mean a change in the law. It requires the implementation of
a new policy to do that and that is a matter for government rather than
courts. In the meantime it would be wrong to attempt to revise history or to
fail to recognize its legal impact, however unpalatable
it may now seem. To do
so would be to impugn the foundations of the very legal system under which
this case must be decided.
49. Having dealt with the history I now turn specifically to the Crown lands
legislation which, in my view, makes it abundantly
clear that the Crown
assumed ownership of the waste lands, unencumbered by any native interests.
The early legislation is recounted
by Windeyer J. in Randwick Corporation v.
Rutledge(392)
[1959] HCA 63
; (1959) 102 CLR 54, at p 71 et seq.; see also Mabo v. Queensland
CLR, at pp 236-240 in a judgment with which Dixon C.J.
and Kitto J.
agreed. Upon settlement, all the land in the Colony
of New South
Wales, which
then comprised the whole of eastern Australia,
became in law vested in the
Crown. The early Governors
had express powers
under their Commissions to make
grants of land, referred
to in the preamble to 6 Wm.IV No.16 (1836) as
"to grant and dispose
of the waste lands". The term "waste lands"
from legislative definition, understood long before
colonization of New
South Wales in 1788 to designate colonial lands not
appropriated
under any title from the Crown(393) Williams
v. Attorney-General
for New South Wales
[1913] HCA 33
; (1913) 16 CLR 404, per Isaacs J. at p 440; see also per
Barton ACJ. at p
428. Initially, ultimate control over
the disposal of
lands was retained by the Imperial Crown. The revenue from this source
used to fund the administration
of, and emigration
to, the colony. So it was
that while The
Australian Constitutions Act 1842
(Imp) (5 and 6 Vict c.76)
the Governor of New South Wales to make laws for the peace, welfare
and good government of New
South Wales with the advice and consent
legislative council, this power was made subject to the proviso that "no such
... interfere in any manner with the
sale or other appropriation of
the lands belonging to the Crown within (New South Wales) or
with the revenue
thence arising"(394)
50. As I have said, the sale of the waste lands of the Crown came to be
regulated by the Sale of Waste Land Act 1842. "Waste Lands
of the Crown" was
defined to mean "any Lands situate (in New South Wales), and which now are or
shall hereafter be vested in Her
Majesty, Her Heirs and Successors, and which
have not been already granted or lawfully contracted to be granted to any
Persons in Fee Simple, or for an Estate of Freehold, or for a Term
of Years, and which have not been dedicated and set apart for
some public
Use"(395) s.23. Under this Act the Queen and her authorized agents were
expressly empowered to except from sale and either
reserve to Her Majesty, Her
Heirs and Successors, or dispose of in such other manner as for the public
interest may seem best, "such
Lands as may be required ... for the Use or
Benefit of the aboriginal Inhabitants of the Country"(396) s.3. A later Act,
of Waste Land Act 1846, empowered the Queen to demise, or to grant a
licence to occupy, waste lands of the Crown for a term not exceeding
years(397) s.1 and provision was made in that Act for the prosecution of
persons in occupation of waste lands without such
a demise or licence(398)
s.4. The definition of "Waste Lands of the Crown" in the 1846 Act was similar
to that contained in the
1842 Act, except that it expressly included waste
lands "whether within or without the Limits allotted to Settlers for
Location"(399)
51. In 1855 responsible government was attained in New South Wales. The steps
preceding it - direct Crown rule, followed by a limited
legislature in 1823
and further advances towards representative institutions in 1828 and 1842(400)
New South Wales Act 1823 (Imp)
(4 GEO IV. c.96); Australian Courts Act 1828
(Imp) (9 GEO IV c.83); The
Australian Constitutions Act 1842
(Imp) (5 and 6
- were all accompanied by a refusal by the Imperial government to
relinquish control of the disposal of
waste lands, notwithstanding
that before
1850 the Imperial government ceased to contribute to the expenses of the
colonial government.
However, by 1855 "(t)he
insistence of the public for
complete powers, added to the revolutionary change on the subject of
emigration,
which took place on
the discovery of gold, led to the final
concession"(401) Williams v. Attorney-General for New South Wales (1913)
CLR, per Isaacs
J. at p 449. The New South Wales
Constitution
Act 1855 (Imp)
(18 and 19 Vict c.54) provided that as from its date of proclamation "the
entire management and control of the waste
lands belonging to the Crown in
(New South Wales) and also the appropriation of the gross proceeds of the sale
of any such lands
and of all other proceeds and revenues of the same from
whatever source arising within the said colony including all royalties mines
and minerals shall be vested in the legislature of the said colony"(402) s.2.
Accordingly, the Sale of Waste Land Acts 1842 and 1846
were repealed by The
Australian Waste Lands Act 1855
(Imp) (18 and 19 Vict c.56)(403) s 1. However,
past appropriations of the proceeds
of the sale or disposal of the waste lands
the Crown made under the repealed Acts were deemed not to be invalid(404)
regulations respecting the disposal of the waste lands of the
Crown made under the repealed Acts were to remain in force
in New South
until otherwise provided by the legislature of New South Wales(405)
New South Wales
Constitution
Act also contained a proviso that preserved
contracts, promises or engagements made with respect to land under the
previous legislation(406)
s.2; see also The
Australian Waste Lands Act
directed my attention to this proviso in Mabo v. Queensland(407) (1988) 166
CLR, at pp 237-240 and need not repeat what I said
52. In 1847 in The Attorney-General v. Brown(408) (1847) 1 Legge (N.S.W.) 312
the suggestion was made that the Crown had neither
the property in the waste
lands of the Colony of New South Wales nor possession of them. Stephen C.J.,
delivering a judgment, which
was the judgment of the Court, gave the firm
answer(409) ibid., at p 316:
"We are of the opinion, then, that the waste lands of this
Colony are, and ever have been, from the time of its first
settlement in 1788, in the Crown; that they are, and ever
have been, from that date (in point of legal intendment),
without office found, in the Sovereign's possession; and
that, as his or her property, they have been and may now be
effectually granted to subjects of the Crown."
53. The separation of the Colony of Queensland from the Colony of New South
Wales was effected by Letters Patent dated 6 June 1859.
At the same time an
Order in Council was made providing for the government of the new colony.
Clause 5 of the Letters Patent gave
power to the Governor of the Colony of
Queensland, with the advice of the Executive Council, to grant any "waste or
unsettled" lands
vested in the Crown within the Colony of Queensland subject
to any laws in force in that colony regulating the sale or disposal of
lands. Clause 17 of the Order in Council provided that, subject to The New
South Wales
Constitution
Act and The
Australian Waste Lands Act
legislature of the Colony of Queensland was to have power to make laws for
the sale, letting, disposal and occupation
of the waste lands of
the Crown within the colony.
54. In 1867 the Queensland legislature passed a consolidating Act, the
Constitution
Act 1867 (Q.), which incorporated Queensland constitutional
legislation passed between 1860 and 1867. Section 30 of that Act provides
that, subject to the provisions of The New South Wales
Constitution
Australian Waste Lands Act
"which concern the maintenance of existing
contracts", the legislature of the colony has
power to make laws for
regulating the sale,
letting, disposal and occupation of the waste lands of
the Crown within the colony.
Section 40 provides that the entire management
and control of waste lands belonging to the Crown in the colony shall be
its legislature subject to a proviso which is
similar to that
contained in s.2 of The New South Wales
Constitution
Act. Section 40 also
provides that the appropriation of the gross proceeds of the sales of such
lands and of all other proceeds
and revenues shall be vested in the
legislature.
Sections 30
Constitution
Act are the source of
legislative power in Queensland to deal with waste lands. They are authorized
by cl.17 of the Order in Council
of 1859 which is in turn authorized by s.7 of
The New South Wales
Constitution
Act. Upon the annexation of the Murray
Islands in 1879 the powers referred to in ss.30 and 40 extended to those
islands as part of
Queensland. The Queensland legislature thereupon had power
to deal with the waste lands of the Murray Islands, and that power was
limited by the proviso to s.40, the proviso having no application in the
circumstances, as I explained in Mabo v. Queensland(410)
(1988) 166 CLR, at p
55. There followed a series of Acts passed by the Queensland parliament
dealing with the alienation of Crown lands. The term "Crown
lands" was used
as an alternative to the term "waste lands" and is variously defined in the
legislation. For example, in the Crown
Lands Alienation Act 1868 (Q.), s.2,
it is defined in part as:
"All lands vested in Her Majesty which have not been
dedicated to any public purpose or which have not been
granted or lawfully contracted to be granted to any person
in fee simple".
In the Crown Lands Alienation Act 1876 (Q.), s.1, it is defined in part as:
"All lands vested in Her Majesty which are not dedicated
to any public purpose and which are not for the time being
subject to any deed of grant lease contract promise or
engagement made by or on behalf of Her Majesty"(411) See
also Crown Lands Act 1884 (Q.), s.4 and Land Act 1897 (Q.), s.4.
And, in the Land Act 1910 (Q.), s.4, it is defined as it is in the current
legislation, the Land Act 1962 (Q.) (s.5), namely, as:
"All land in Queensland, except land which is, for the time
(a) Lawfully granted or contracted to be granted in
fee-simple by the Crown; or
(b) Reserved for or dedicated to public purposes; or
(c) Subject to any lease or license lawfully granted
by the Crown: Provided that land held under an
occupation license shall be deemed to be Crown
56. Generally speaking these Acts empowered the Governor in Council to grant
in fee simple or to demise for a term of years or to
otherwise deal with Crown
lands in Queensland. They also empowered the Governor in Council to reserve
Crown lands for public purposes,
including for the use or benefit of the
aboriginal inhabitants or for aboriginal reserves, and to place such land
under the control
of trustees; alternatively the Governor in Council was
empowered to grant Crown lands in trust for such public purposes(412) See
Crown Lands Alienation Act 1868, s.18; Crown Lands Alienation Act 1876, ss.6,
7; Crown Lands Act 1884, ss.95, 96; Land Act 1897,
ss.190, 191; Land Act 1910,
ss.4, 180, 181; and see now Land Act 1962, ss.5, 334, 335.
57. The observation of Blackburn J. in Milirrpum(413) (1971) 17 FLR, at pp
254-255 (although it was made in relation to the entire
history of land policy
and legislation in New South Wales, South Australia and the Northern
Territory) is apposite:
"The first event in that history, for the purposes of this
case, was the inclusion in Governor Phillip's second
commission of the words 'full power and authority to agree
for such lands tenements and hereditaments as shall be in
our power to dispose of and them to grant to any person or
persons ...'. (Since then there has been) a long succession
of legislative and executive acts designed to facilitate
the settlement and development of the country, not expressly
by white men, but without regard for any communal native
His Honour regarded it as significant, as indeed I do, that there was a
consciousness that the occupation of the land by white men
was a deprivation
of the Aborigines, but that nevertheless no attempt was made to solve this
problem by way of the creation or application
of law relating to title to land
which the Aborigines could invoke(414) ibid., at pp 256-259.
58. The very concept of waste lands is an indication that the Crown
proceeded, and was required to proceed, in disregard of any
notion of native
title and this is emphasized by the power to reserve from the sale of waste
lands land required for the use or benefit
of the aboriginal inhabitants.
This was the case both on the mainland and in the Murray Islands, where the
Crown lands legislation
applied by virtue of the instruments effecting the
annexation.
59. It was pursuant to Crown lands legislation that reserves in Queensland
were created. For instance, on 30 June 1871 an aboriginal
reserve at Mackay
was gazetted and, following recommendations by a Commission of Inquiry (set up
in 1873) and growing interstate
and international concern about the treatment
of Aborigines in Queensland, further reserves at Durundur, Bribie Island, Cape
Hillsborough,
Townsville, Bowen and Cardwell were gazetted in 1877. However,
partly due to the opposition of certain settlers and partly due to
financial support from the government, most of these reserves were cancelled
in 1878 (the reserve at Mackay was cancelled
in 1880 and that at Durundur in
1885). Subsequently, in the late 1880s and early 1890s, further reserves were
established to be run
by church organizations with little financial support
from the government.
60. Following recommendations made to the Queensland government in 1896 the
Aboriginals Protection and Restriction of the Sale of
Opium Act 1897 (Q.) was
passed. It was pursuant to this Act that the natives were placed on
government controlled reserves and were
entirely isolated from contact with
other races. The first of these reserves was set up in 1897 at Bogimbah Creek
on Fraser Island
and was initiated by the removal of about 50 natives from the
Maryborough district. This was the beginning of a large-scale program
removals (authorized under s.9 of the Act) to reserves at places such as
Yarrabah, Durundur, Barambah, Taroom, Hull River, Woorabinda
and Palm Island.
By the end of the 1930s, reserves had also been gazetted in the north at
Edward River, Lockhart River and Doomadgee.
Concurrently, "country reserves"
(often on the outskirts of rural towns) were set up to provide a source of
aboriginal labour for
pastoral areas (e.g. outside Herberton and
Georgetown)(415) See generally Foxcroft, Australian Native Policy, (1941), pp
Anderson, "Queensland" in Peterson (ed.), Aboriginal Land Rights: A
Handbook, (1981), pp 54-64; Singe, The Torres Strait: People
and History,
(1979), pp 214-215.
61. Thus, whilst land was reserved in Queensland for Aborigines, those placed
on the reserves did not necessarily have any traditional
association with the
land. Moreover, the land remained land owned by the Crown, the reserves could
be revoked or altered by the
Crown and the location and size of the reserves
was largely dictated by the suitability of the land for settlement by the
white population.
62. It appears that by a proclamation issued in 1882 the Murray Islands were
reserved for native use. The proclamation would seem
to have been issued
pursuant to the powers conferred on the Governor in Council by s.6 of the
Crown Lands Alienation Act 1876. In
the same year a special lease (Special
Lease 164) of two acres on Mer was granted by the Crown to the London
Missionary Society for
fourteen years. That lease appears to have been
subsequently renewed and was later transferred to the General Secretary,
Board of Missions, then to the Trustees of the Australian Board of
Missions and finally to the Corporation of the Synod of the Diocese
Carpentaria.
63. By an Order in Council dated 14 November 1912, the Governor in Council
ordered that "the Murray Islands (Mer, Daua, Waua) containing
an area of about
1200 acres (exclusive of Special Lease 1677)" were to be "permanently reserved
and set apart for use of the Aboriginal
Inhabitants of the State (of
Queensland)". Presumably Special Lease 1677 relates to the land previously the
subject of Special Lease
164. The reservation was made pursuant to the powers
conferred upon the Governor in Council by s.180 of the Land Act 1910.
64. By an Order in Council dated 9 September 1939 the reserve comprising the
Murray Islands was placed under the control of trustees
pursuant to s.181(1)
of the Land Act 1910. This section provided that the Governor in Council
might, by Order in Council and without
issuing any deed of grant, place any
land reserved for any public purpose under the control of trustees and might
declare the style
or title of such trustees and the trusts of the land.
65. Aboriginal reserves, whether created under the Crown Lands Alienation Act
1876 or the Land Act 1910, were, as I have said, initially
regulated by the
Aboriginals Protection and Restriction of the Sale of Opium Act 1897. For the
purposes of that Act, an "aboriginal"
included an aboriginal inhabitant of
Queensland(416) s.4(a). The Governor in Council was empowered to appoint a
Protector of Aboriginals
in respect of proclaimed districts in Queensland and
a superintendent for each reserve in each district(417) ss.5, 6, 7. The Act
provided in a detailed way for the welfare of "aboriginals" by the imposition
of controls upon them and upon others in relation to
66. This Act was repealed by the Aboriginals Preservation and Protection Act
1939 (Q.)(418) s.3 but the Murray Islands reserve was
continued, and
regulated, as a reserve under the Torres Strait Islanders Act 1939 (Q.)(419)
s.1(4)(a). Certain sections of the Aboriginals
Preservation and Protection
Act, which was to be read and construed with the Torres Strait Islanders
Act(420) Torres Strait Islanders
Act 1939, s.21, also applied to the Murray
Islands reserve. The former Act continued the office of Chief Protector of
Aboriginals,
albeit in the guise of the Director of Native Affairs(421)
s.6(1), and the latter Act provided that a designated Protector of Aboriginals
was to be the Protector of Islanders for the purposes of that Act(422) s.4(2).
The Torres Strait Islanders Act also made detailed
provision for the
regulation of the affairs of the aboriginal inhabitants, including the
protection and management of their property(423)
See the Aboriginals
Preservation and Protection Act, s.16 read in conjunction with the Torres
Strait Islanders Act, s.21. Further,
it established a council to govern each
island reserve in Torres Strait which was to be elected from among the native
inhabitants
of the relevant reserve(424) s.11. Each council was to exercise
"the functions of local government of the reserve" and was charged
good rule and government of the reserve in accordance with island customs and
practices"(425) s.18(1). For these purposes
the council was empowered to make
by-laws, including by-laws in relation to the "subdivision of land and use and
occupation of land,
buildings and use and occupation of buildings, ...
boundaries and fences"(426) s.18(1), (3). However, the by-laws were to be of
no force or effect until approved by the Director(427) s.18(8). This Act also
provided for an island court for each reserve consisting
of members of the
council(428) s.20(1), which was to adjudicate on all offences committed by
islanders on the reserve against the
by-laws of the reserve(429) s.20(2).
Provision was made for appeal from a decision of the island court to the
Protector of Islanders(430)
s.20(11). The Governor in Council was given
extensive power to make regulations for, among other things, the welfare,
control and
supervision of islanders and the jurisdiction and procedure of
island courts(431) s.6.
67. The Aboriginals Preservation and Protection Act and the Torres Strait
Islanders Act were repealed by the Aborigines' and Torres
Strait Islanders'
Affairs Act 1965 (Q.)(432) s.4(1). The Murray Islands reserve was, however,
continued as a reserve under that
Act(433) s.4(2)(a)(ii) and (v). This Act
created the position of Director of Aboriginal and Island Affairs (which was
occupied by
the former Director of Native Affairs)(434) s.10(1), (2). This
position was later incorporated(435) s.10A inserted by the Aborigines'
Torres Strait Islanders' Affairs Act Amendment Act 1967 (Q.), s.3. In the
case of the Murray Islands the Director was also appointed
trustee of the
reserve(436) Queensland Government Gazette, 29 November 1969, p 1297. The
office of protector was abolished, but
the previous superintendents of
reserves became managers of the communities which resided on those
reserves(437) s.4(2)(b)(i), (ii).
Under the Act a district officer in the
district in which a reserve was situated was given the power to manage and
deal with the
property of any islander residing on the reserve where the
officer was satisfied that this was in the best interests of the islander
his dependent family members(438) ss.27, 28, although the district officer
could be required to cease doing so on the order of
a stipendiary
magistrate(439) s.29. The island councils were continued(440) s.45(1)(b) with
similar functions and powers although
in addition they were empowered to levy
a rate and to impose fees, charges, fares, rents and dues in respect of any
property, service,
matter or thing for the purpose of enabling them to
exercise and perform their functions(441) s.47. The island courts were also
continued(442) s.52(1), but an appeal lay in the first instance to a group
representative appointed under the Act(443) s.51 and then
to the district
officer(444) s.52(2). The Governor in Council was also given extensive power
to make regulations for, among other
things, the administration of reserves
and the employment, welfare and control of islanders residing on the
reserves(445) s.60.
Pursuant to this power The Aborigines' and Torres Strait
Islanders' Regulations 1966 were promulgated. They dealt with, among other
things, the administration of reserves, entry on to reserves and the
68. The Act succeeding the Aborigines' and Torres Strait Islanders' Affairs
Act, the Torres Strait Islanders Act 1971 (Q.), may
be dealt with shortly.
This Act continued the Murray Islands as a reserve(446) s.4(1). It also
continued The Corporation of the
Director of Aboriginal and Island
Affairs(447) s.5 (its name was subsequently changed to The Corporation of the
Director of Aboriginal
and Islanders Advancement(448) Aborigines Act and Other
Acts Amendment Act 1975 (Q.), s.4) and the island councils(449) s.4(3) (these
were subsequently incorporated(450) s.35A inserted by the Aborigines and
Islanders Acts Amendment Act 1979 (Q), s.21) with much the
same powers as they
had under the previous Act. The island courts were continued as well(451)
s.42(1), but an appeal now lay in
the first instance to the group
representative, then to the Island Advisory Council appointed under the
Act(452) s.49 and then to
a stipendiary magistrate(453) s.43(1). A
significant change, however, was that under the Act a district officer could
only assume
the management of an islander's property when requested to do so
by the islander(454) s.61(1) and, subsequently, an islander was
terminate such management as of right(455) Aborigines Act and Torres Strait
Islanders Act Amendment Act 1974 (Q.), s.6.
Again, the Governor in Council
was given extensive power to make regulations for the welfare of islanders and
for the administration
of the reserves on which they resided(456) s.78. The
Torres Strait Islanders Regulations 1972 were made under this Act; these
regulations
related to, among other things, the administration and control of
reserves, the proceedings of island councils and the powers, jurisdiction
proceedings of island courts.
69. This Act was repealed by the
Community Services (Torres Strait) Act 1984
Under that Act the Murray Islands are continued as a trust
area(458) s.5(1). "Trust area" was at that time defined as "land granted
trust by the Governor in Council for the benefit of Islander inhabitants or
reserved and set apart by the Governor in Council
for the benefit of Islanders
under the provisions of law relating to Crown lands"(459) s.6(1); this
definition has since been amended
by the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Land (Consequential Amendments) Act 1991 (Q.), s.22(2). The island councils
are continued(460)
s.593) and, as under the repealed Act, are
incorporated(461) s.15(1) and made "capable in law of suing and being sued, of
holding (absolutely or subject to trusts), letting, leasing,
hiring, disposing of and otherwise dealing with property real and
personal"(462)
s.15(3). The previous powers of island councils are also
extended to include the powers of a "Local Authority" in certain
circumstances(463)
s.23(3)(d). Although a council's by-laws have no force or
effect until approved by the Governor in Council, there is no longer any
in another body to suspend a by-law. Provision is also made for island courts
but these are now generally to be constituted
by two justices of the peace who
are islanders resident in the relevant trust area(464) s.40(2)(a). The
court extends, among other things, to disputes
concerning any matter that "is a matter accepted by the community resident in
relevant trust area) as a matter rightly governed by the usages and
customs of that community"(465) s.41(2)(b)(i). The decision of
an island court
upon such a matter is final and conclusive(466) s.41(3). Finally, the Governor
in Council is given extensive power
to make regulations for, among other
things, the administration and supervision of island councils, the
of island courts, the self-management and good
government of islanders, the skills development, training and employment of
and the financial well-being of islanders(467) s.81.
70. As can be seen from the preceding summary none of these Acts that
regulated or now regulate reserves (such as the Murray Islands
adverts to any native interests in the reserved land and, significantly, the
power of an island council under these Acts
does not extend to dealing with
titles to land.
71. So far as the Murray Islands are concerned, the creation of a reserve of
practically all of the land on the Murray Islands for
the benefit of
aboriginal inhabitants so soon after annexation is, in the light of the policy
adopted by Queensland towards land
and the aboriginal inhabitants on the
mainland, a clear indication that the Crown was proceeding upon a basis other
than that of
preserving any native rights in respect of the land. The creation
of a reserve is not necessarily inconsistent with the continued
existence of
native title(468) See United States v. Santa Fe Pacific Railroad Co. (1941)
314 US, at p 353; Gila River Pima-Maricopa
Indian Community v. United States
(1974) 494 F 2d, at pp 1389-1392. However, it is to be noted that in these
cases the issue was
whether the creation of the reserve extinguished Indian
title outside the reserve, rather than whether the creation of the reserve
extinguished any pre-existing Indian title over the reserved land, but where
the circumstances which accompany a reservation of land
clearly indicate the
Crown's exercise of rights of absolute ownership such that there is no room
for the continued existence of native
title, then the reservation will clearly
be inconsistent with the recognition of that title. The reservation of the
Murray Islands
and the regulation of the affairs of the aboriginal inhabitants
was part of a legislative and administrative scheme extending to
the whole of
the colony and it is clear that elsewhere the creation of aboriginal reserves
was unrelated to the preservation of native
title. The reservation was in no
way a recognition of any traditional land rights. The policy behind the
creation of reserves on
the mainland was accurately described by Blackburn J.
in Milirrpum(469) (1971) 17 FLR, at p 255:
"The creation of aboriginal reserves - a policy which goes
back at least to the time of Governor Macquarie - implies
the negation of communal native title, for they are set up
at the will of the Government and in such places as the
Government chooses. There is never the slightest suggestion
that their boundaries are negotiated between parties by way
of the adjustment of rights."
72. Just as those concerned with the administration of the Murray Islands
assumed full power to regulate the affairs of the occupants
of the Murray
Islands reservation, the Crown (and its agents) assumed full power to deal
with the land as it saw fit. Indeed, the
creation of reserves out of Crown
land was itself the exercise by the Crown of its rights of absolute ownership
over the land. In
these circumstances the fact that almost the whole of the
Murray Islands was reserved carries with it no particular significance.
the contrary, there is a certain unreality in any separate examination of the
reservation of the Murray Islands in order to discern
an intention not to
disturb native title. The lands comprising the islands were quite plainly
thought to be Crown lands and to be
in no different category to Crown lands
elsewhere in the colony. There was never in Queensland, as there was not in
New South Wales,
any policy which could be said to embrace the concept of
native title. The opposite was the case and it is in that context that
creation of reserves for the benefit of aboriginal inhabitants must be seen.
73. The findings of fact made by Moynihan J. upon the remitter of this matter
to the Supreme Court of Queensland are consistent
with the conclusions which I
have arrived at from a consideration of the legislation passed and executive
action taken, namely that
as from annexation traditional native title in the
land was not recognized by the Crown (or, what amounts to the same thing, was
extinguished by the Crown). In particular, Moynihan J. found that there was
no concept of public or general community ownership
of land before the arrival
of Europeans but that all land was considered to be in the possession of a
particular individual or family
group. Whatever the true character of
traditional native title, it seems that it can only be claimed by or on behalf
of native inhabitants and that it does not support the claim of an
individual to a particular parcel of land. Of course this of
itself does not
deny the possibility that the Crown has recognized or granted to the native
inhabitants of the Murray Islands after
annexation something more than
traditional native title, and more akin to private ownership of the land. But
Moynihan J. was able
to go only so far as to find that, prior to European
the propriety of respecting and not trespassing on "someone else's place or
locality"; his Honour found this attitude to be "ingrained
in the culture of
the people ... rather than objectively laid down and enforced by some distinct
agency - rather like our (or more
likely another age's) concept of good
manners for example than the traffic regulations enforced by the police
force". This respect
for another's "place or locality" was not due to any
spiritual or religious relationship with the land or necessarily to any
value of the land as such; instead, it was at least partly due to
"the need to control access in the terms of distribution or sharing
sustaining or socially advantageous resources in a potentially volatile social
environment". In other words, controlled access
to land on the basis of
social groupings was necessary for social harmony. In addition Moynihan J.
found that the disposition of
and dealings in village land and garden land at
this time essentially depended on whatever basis was acceptable to those
affected and, to the extent to which a wider community might be
affected, whatever basis was acceptable to that community. Moynihan
concluded that, prior to the arrival of Europeans:
"The ultimate determining factor in terms of the control and
disposition of land was simply what was acceptable in terms
of social harmony and the capacity of an individual to
impose his (it seems almost (always) to have been a him)
will on the community."
74. Moynihan J. thus appears to have formed the view that it would be no more
than speculation to conclude that there was any particular
system controlling
the use of land on the Murray Islands before European contact.
75. European contact brought with it certain changes. In particular a system
of chieftainship was introduced with the appointment
of the "mamoose" (or
chief) at the instigation of the European authorities and this was followed by
the establishment of the island
council, the island court and the island
policemen. These were all introduced agencies that, in the words of Moynihan
J., bore "little
or no relationship to anything previously in place in the
society or reflected by the culture". Other changes included the introduction
of school for the children, the introduction of Christianity, the migration of
a number of islanders to the mainland and a change
in the economy from one
based on subsistence gardening supplemented by fishing to one based on cash
from employment. To some extent
the manner of dealing with land was also
affected - for example, it appears that since European contact the practice of
loaning garden land to other Murray Islanders has become a
relatively common and accepted transaction. In particular though, after
European contact, the London Missionary Society, the schoolmaster and finally
the island court assumed the function of resolving
disputes concerning
residential (or village) land and gardening land. Previously, there was
nothing resembling these institutions
or performing their functions. Of the
court Moynihan J. said:
"I am inclined to think that the operation of the Court
reflected as much as anything the imperative of achieving
social harmony by seeking to reconcile conflicting parties
or having them accept a decision perhaps in terms of
accepted expectation."
And, a little later, he concluded that:
"The view I take on the whole of the evidence is that
the role of the Court was to maintain social harmony by
accommodating peoples' wishes as far as possible and doing
what seemed to be right in the circumstances."
In other words, it appears that the court proceeded upon an ad hoc basis
rather than upon the basis of protecting such rights (if
any) as may have
existed before the annexation of the Murray Islands. Whilst the court did seek
to achieve a consistent application
of certain basic principles, this was
because of the intrinsic value of consistency and predictability rather than
an attempt to
apply any traditional or customary law. Thus the institutions
introduced by the Europeans (in particular, the island court) do not
evidence of the recognition of any rights in land enjoyed by the native
inhabitants before annexation.
76. On 6 May 1931 a lease (Special Lease 6619) was granted to two persons
(not being aboriginal inhabitants) over the whole of the
islands of Dauer and
Waier for a period of twenty years for the purpose of establishing a sardine
factory. A new lease (Special Lease
6856) was later granted in the same year
on the same terms except that it provided for an extension of the lease for
thirty years
upon the giving of six months' notice. This lease was then
transferred to Murray Island Fisheries Limited on 10 June 1932. The
was, however, forfeited in 1938 for failure to pay the rent due and the
improvements made on the leased land were purchased
by the Lands Department on
behalf of the Chief Protector of Aboriginals.
77. The granting of the lease of land to the London Missionary Society
referred to earlier and of the lease for the purposes of
a sardine factory are
inconsistent with the preservation of native title, although in the latter
case the lease was subject to conditions
that the lessees would not in any way
obstruct or interfere with the use of the Murray Island natives of "their
tribal gardens and
plantations" on the demised land and would not in any way
obstruct or interfere with the operations of the Murray Island natives
fished around the reefs adjacent to the demised land. The construction of
public buildings and the carrying out of public works
on the islands is also
inconsistent with the preservation of native title.
78. The court records do show that in September 1913 the government purchased
three portions of land for a gaol house, a court house
and a recreation
reserve respectively for a total sum of 6.0.0 pounds. Further, it appears
that during the 1960s the Department
of Native Affairs paid $50 for a site for
a kindergarten "in recognition of any claim he (the recipient) had to the use
of the land".
And, in 1973 the area of land used by the kindergarten was
increased and another person was paid $75 by the Department of Aboriginal
Islander Affairs for the loss of use of the land. Each of these transactions
was variously referred to as a "sale", a "disposal",
an "acquisition" or a
"purchase". The court records also show that in 1928 land on Mer "was resumed
by the Protector of Aboriginals
and set aside for a new village. The land was
then cleared and subdivided into 23 lots and balloted for".
However, it was only upon some occasions when Murray
Islanders were deprived of the use of their land that they were compensated.
For example, in 1978 land was used for the construction
of an air-strip on Mer
without any question of compensation being raised. In any event, such payments
as were made were (despite
some of the terminology used) for the loss of use
of the land rather than for the acquisition of any rights in the land, the
being made in some instances after the intervention of the island
council. In my view there was no legal obligation to give such
compensation
and the giving of it is explicable on the grounds that it was desirable to
avoid ill-feeling and possibly to compensate
the occupier for any improvements
(such as gardens or dwellings) that may have been made by him. It is true
that on occasions land
on the Murray Islands has been referred to as being
"owned" by or "belonging to" the native inhabitants and that in one instance
land was said to have been "resumed". However, in the circumstances, this
again only reflects an imprecision in the language used
rather than the true
legal position. It is equally true that on occasions "trespassers" were
removed from the Murray Islands, but
this is explicable not on the basis that
they were trespassers on land owned by the native inhabitants but that they
were trespassers
on land owned by the Crown, notwithstanding that they may
have been removed to protect the native inhabitants.
79. In my view, the conclusion is inevitable that, assuming the native
inhabitants of the Murray Islands to have held some sort
of rights in the land
immediately before the annexation of those islands, the Crown in right of the
Colony of Queensland, on their
annexation, exerted to the full its rights in
the land inconsistently with and to the exclusion of any native or aboriginal
It did so under the law which it brought with it. It did so from the
start by acting upon the assumption (which was also the assumption
behind the relevant legislation) that there was no such thing as native title
and that the Crown was exclusively entitled to
all lands which had not been
alienated by it: lands which were designated as Crown lands. In making
provision for the reservation
of land for public purposes, in particular the
welfare of the aboriginal population, the relevant legislation and the action
pursuant to it disclose no intention to preserve native rights in the
land: they were simply thought not to exist. The reservation
of land for the
use of the aboriginal population was in the exercise of a benevolent
by the Crown in accordance
with a legislative scheme which was inconsistent with the exertion of native
rights, communal or otherwise,
in the land. If any ambiguity arose from the
fact that practically the whole of the Murray Islands were reserved and the
the aboriginal inhabitants were allowed to continue in occupation of
the land more or less as they had been in the past (or at all
events since
European contact), that ambiguity is resolved when it is recognized that the
scheme under which the islands were reserved
extended to the whole of the
colony and was elsewhere plainly incompatible with the preservation of any
native title and consistent
only with the assertion by the Crown of full and
complete dominion over land. Indeed, the creation of aboriginal reserves was
the purpose of actually retaining the land within the control of the Crown
or its agencies in order that it might be administered
for the benefit of the
aboriginal population of the colony. Further, aboriginal reserves were not
created in a manner which coincided
with the aboriginal inhabitants'
occupation of the land. On the contrary, aboriginal reserves were created
without any regard to
aboriginal title.
80. My conclusion that the plaintiffs have no aboriginal title to the land
necessarily carries with it the further conclusion that
the plaintiffs'
separate claim to usufructuary rights over the land cannot succeed. Imprecise
as the authorities are concerning
the nature of aboriginal title, it would
appear upon any view to embrace usufructuary rights. The separate claims made
by the plaintiffs
to aboriginal title and usufructuary rights would appear to
be based upon the notion that aboriginal title is proprietary by nature,
whereas usufructuary rights are, by definition, not proprietary in nature. The
weight of authority rather suggests that aboriginal
title is of its nature
also non-proprietary and carries with it little if anything more than
usufructuary rights. But it is unnecessary
to pursue the matter because it is
not, and cannot be, questioned that aboriginal title may be extinguished and
it follows that any
usufructuary rights amounting to something less than
aboriginal title may also be extinguished. The exertion by the Crown of its
rights over the Murray Islands, as evidenced by, among other things, the
creation of a reserve, to the exclusion of any native rights
in that land,
carries with it the result that any usufructuary rights in the land stemming
from occupancy before annexation, have
been extinguished.
81. Similarly, in the light of what I have already said, the plaintiffs'
claims to ownership by custom of the lands comprising the
Murray Islands
cannot be sustained. The short answer is that, upon the facts found by
Moynihan J., which I have set out previously,
the plaintiffs failed to
establish any custom by which they could be said to have inherited rights over
the land which they claim.
A system, such as that which apparently existed
prior to annexation, whereby the control and disposition of land depended on
was acceptable in terms of social harmony and on the capacity of the
individual to impose his will on the community, does not seem
to me to amount
to any sort of custom, whether or not characterized as a system of laws,
regarding the control and disposition of
land. But, more fundamentally,
customary rights which are not recognized by a new sovereign who acquires the
radical title to the
land are extinguished upon the assumption of sovereignty,
no less than rights which might be characterized as aboriginal title.
doubt, as in my view is the case with aboriginal title, recognition may take
the form of acquiescence, at least where the customary
reasonable(470) Halsbury's Laws of England (4th ed.), vol.12, pars 406,
409-414; New Windsor Corporation v. Mellor (1975)
Ch 380, at p 386; Lockwood
v. Wood (1844) 6 QB 50, at p 64
[1844] EngR 452
; (115 ER 19, at p 24); Mercer v. Denne (1904) 2
Ch 534, at pp 551-552;
Tyson v. Smith (1838) 9 Ad. and E 406, at p 421 (112 ER
at p 1271) and not repugnant to the common law(471) The Case of Tanistry
(1608) Davis 28, at p 40 (80 ER 516, at p 527); 4th ed.
Dublin (1762) p 78, at
p 109 (English translation). But the history, both
legislative and executive,
to which I have made reference,
affords no basis for any claim that the Crown
in right of the Colony or
State of Queensland recognized the existence of any
rights of ownership on the part of the aboriginal inhabitants of the
Murray Islands.
82. As I have said, under both the
Community Services (Torres Strait) Act
its predecessor, an island council is required to
govern the reserve "in
accordance with the customs and practices" of the islanders.
Indeed, the 1980
by-laws expressly require the
transmission of land on the holder's death or
permanent departure to be "in accordance
with native custom" (by-law no.35)
and provide
that, if a deceased islander does not make a will, the deceased
islander's land and
property is to be distributed by the island court
native custom" (by-law no.38). Also, in some cases, the jurisdiction of the
island court is required to be exercised having
regard to or in accordance
with "the usages and customs of the community"(472) See,
for example,
Community Services (Torres Strait)
, (b). The plaintiffs
contend that these provisions confer "statutory rights" on the Meriam people.
However, these
provisions cannot
preserve that which has been found not to
exist by Moynihan J. and they do not constitute a recognition of customary
rights which,
at least so far as land is concerned, are inconsistent with
Queensland laws introduced upon annexation.
83. The plaintiffs placed reliance upon The Case of Tanistry(473) (1608)
Davis 28 (80 ER 516); 4th ed. Dublin (1762) p 78 (English
translation). That
was a case in which it was sought to establish the continuation in Ireland of
the custom of tanistry (a tenure
involving a mode of descent through the male
line) despite the introduction of the common law of England. It was held in
that the custom did not survive because it was unreasonable and
repugnant to the common law(474) ibid., at pp 33-35, 40 (pp 521-523,
ER); pp 92-95, 109 of English translation. In addition, the court affirmed
the basic principle which I have stated before(475)
ibid., at pp 40-41 (p 528
of ER); pp 111-112 of English translation:
"queen Elizabeth shall not be said to be in actual
possession of this land, by virtue of the first conquest, if
it doth not appear by some record that the first conqueror
had seised this land at the time of the conquest, and
appropriated it particularly to himself as parcel of his
proper demesne.
For the kings of England have always claimed and had
within their dominions, a royal monarchy and not a despotick
monarchy or tyranny ... And therefore when such a royal
monarch, who will govern his subjects by a just and positive
law, hath made a new conquest of a realm, although in fact
he hath the lordship paramount of all the lands within
such realm, so that these are all held of him, mediate vel
immediate, and he hath also the possession of all the lands
which he willeth actually to seise and retain in his own
hands for his profit or pleasure, and may also by his grants
distribute such portions as he pleaseth to his servants and
warriors, or to such colonies as he will plant immediately
upon the conquest ... yet Sir James Ley chief-justice said,
that if such conqueror receiveth any of the natives or
antient inhabitants into his protection and avoweth them
for his subjects, and permitteth them to continue their
possessions and to remain in his peace and allegiance, their
heirs shall be adjudged in by good title without grant or
confirmation of the conqueror, and shall enjoy their lands
according to the rules of the law which the conqueror hath
allowed or established, if they will submit themselves to
it, and hold their lands according to the rules of it, and
not otherwise."
In other words, on conquest the Crown took the paramount title to (though not
actual possession of) all the lands in the conquered
realm so that all the
lands were held of the Crown. If the Crown permitted the conquered people to
remain in possession of the land
then they obtained good title to it (under
the laws designated by the conqueror) without grant or confirmation of the
Case of Tanistry therefore does not assist the plaintiffs in their
claim to ownership by custom. Even if they were able to establish
necessary custom, it did not survive the annexation of the Murray Islands by
the Crown in right of the Colony of Queensland because,
unlike the situation
in The Case of Tanistry, the Crown did not permit the inhabitants of the
Murray Islands to remain in possession
of the land in accordance with its
laws, including any custom recognized under Queensland law. Instead their
continued occupation
was at the pleasure of the Crown.
84. Alternatively, the plaintiffs argue that, whether or not they are able to
establish that they have traditional land rights,
they nevertheless have a
title based on possession. This argument is heavily based on a theory
advanced by Professor McNeil in his
book Common Law Aboriginal Title, (1989).
The starting point is that the plaintiffs' predecessors in title have been in
of the land since beyond living memory. Upon annexation, the common
law was introduced into the Murray Islands as part of the law
of Queensland.
Under the common law, occupation is prima facie proof of possession and
possession carries with it a possessory title,
which is good as against those
who cannot show a better title in themselves. Indeed, mere possession of land
is prima facie evidence
of a seisin in fee. Thus, say the plaintiffs, since
they were allowed to remain in possession of their lands and since no one can
assert a better title against them, they must be taken to hold their land by
way of an estate in fee simple.
85. But, of course, any presumption that the plaintiffs have an estate in fee
simple is rebuttable(476) See Wheeler v. Baldwin
52 CLR 609, at p 632
and any possessory title would not withstand the assertion by the Crown of its
radical title.
upon the assumption of sovereignty by the
Crown, the plaintiffs or their predecessors could only retain such interests
chose to recognize by one means or another and, as I have
endeavoured to explain, the Crown upon annexation asserted
land to the exclusion of any rights of ownership on the part of the plaintiffs
or their predecessors.
86. The plaintiffs put yet another argument. They submit that if they fail
to establish title to the lands which they claim on
the Murray Islands,
nevertheless the Crown, whether as a trustee or not, owes them a fiduciary
duty to deal with those lands in such
a manner as to have regard to their
traditional rights in them. They argue that this duty arises from the
unilateral assumption
of control by the Crown over the native inhabitants on
annexation, the policy of protection of the native inhabitants adopted by
Crown and the creation of a reserve (later put under the control of trustees)
for the use and benefit of the native inhabitants.
The plaintiffs say that
this duty imposes an obligation on the defendant, among other things, to
preserve or have regard to the
traditional land rights of the plaintiffs, to
exercise any discretionary powers conferred by statute or otherwise in a
manner which
preserves or has regard to these rights, and to pay proper
compensation for any extinguishment or impairment of these rights. I
some difficulty with this submission because, assuming that the plaintiffs had
traditional rights in those lands, I have reached
the conclusion that those
rights have been extinguished. It is in the end for that reason that I have
also concluded that there
is no fiduciary duty imposed upon the Crown such as
is advanced by the plaintiffs, but it is necessary for me to elaborate my
for reaching that conclusion.
87. In the United States it has been held that a fiduciary relationship
exists between the United States government and the various
Indian tribes.
Its foundation is said to lie in the judgments of Marshall C.J. in Cherokee
Nation v. Georgia(477)
[1831] USSC 6
; (1831) 30 US 1
and in Worcester v. Georgia(478) (1832)
31 US 350. This relationship seems to derive from the fact that the Indian
tribes, as "domestic
dependent nations", rather than as individuals abandoning
their national character and submitting as subjects
to the laws of another,
have sought and received the protection of a more powerful government, namely,
that of the United States.
Accordingly there has
arisen between the Indian
tribes and the United States government a relationship which has been
as resembling that between
a ward and his guardian(479) Cherokee
Nation v. Georgia (1831) 30 US, at p 12 and Worcester v. Georgia
(1832) 31 US,
at p 376; see
also United States v. Kagama (1886) 118 US, at pp 383-384. This
relationship has also been described
as "a general trust relationship
the United States and the Indian people"(480) United States v. Mitchell (1983)
p 225, and the United States government,
in dealing with the
Indians, and in particular in carrying out its treaty obligations towards
them, is under "a humane and self imposed
policy" whereby "it has charged
itself with moral obligations of the highest responsibility
and trust"(481)
Seminole Nation v. United
States (1942) 316 US, at pp 296-297. The precise
origins of this United States "federal
trust responsibility", as it is
called, as well as its content, are somewhat obscure. Marshall C.J.
spoke in broad moral
terms, but the theoretical basis has been
explained(482) See Note, "Rethinking the Trust Doctrine in Federal Indian Law"
(1984) 98 Harvard Law Review 422. It is
clear, however, that the doctrine is
dependent upon a history of protection of the Indian
tribes, as separate
domestic dependent
nations with their own limited form of sovereignty and
territorial and governmental integrity,
the protection being undertaken by
United States government either pursuant to legislation or otherwise. The
doctrine also assumes
some form of title in the Indian
tribes to the land,
either by way of aboriginal title ("unrecognized Indian title") or under
("recognized Indian title").
88. In Canada the notion of a fiduciary duty with respect to aboriginal lands
was taken up in Guerin v. The Queen(483)
DLR (4th) 321.
In that case
part of an Indian reserve set apart for the use of the Musqueam band was
surrendered to the Crown by
the band "in trust
to lease the same to such
person or persons, and upon such terms as the Government of Canada may deem
most conducive
to our Welfare
and that of our people". The Crown accepted the
surrender and entered into a lease upon terms substantially less
advantageous
those which had been discussed with the band. No copy of the lease was
made available to the band until a considerable
it had been entered
into. Under the Indian Act, RSC 1952, c.149, it was provided that reserves
were to be held by the
the use of the respective Indian bands for
which they were set apart: s.18(1). It was also provided that generally lands
in a reserve
were not to be sold, alienated, leased or otherwise disposed of
until they had been surrendered to the Crown by the
band for whose
benefit in common the reserve was set apart: s.37. The purpose of this
latter stipulation was to interpose
the Crown between
the bands and the
prospective purchasers or lessees of their land so as to prevent the bands
from being exploited(484)
89. Dickson J. (with whom Beetz, Chouinard and Lamer JJ. agreed) found that
the Crown was under a fiduciary duty towards the Indians
with respect to the
surrendered land which, whilst not a trust, made the Crown liable in the same
way and to the same extent as if
a trust were in effect. The finding of
Dickson J. that a fiduciary duty existed was dependent upon the existence of
Indian title
and the statutory provisions prohibiting the disposal of reserve
land except through surrender to the Crown. He said(485) ibid.,
"In my view, the nature of Indian title and the
framework of the statutory scheme established for disposing
of Indian land places upon the Crown an equitable
obligation, enforceable by the courts, to deal with the land
for the benefit of the Indians. ...
The fiduciary relationship between the Crown and the
Indians has its roots in the concept of aboriginal, native
or Indian title. The fact that Indian bands have a certain
interest in lands does not, however, in itself give rise to
a fiduciary relationship between the Indians and the Crown
The conclusion that the Crown is a fiduciary depends upon
the further proposition that the Indian interest in the land
is inalienable except upon surrender to the Crown."
90. Wilson J. (with whom Ritchie and McIntyre JJ. agreed) held that, while
the Crown did not hold reserve land under s.18 of the
Indian Act in trust for
the bands because the bands' interests were limited by the nature of Indian
title, it did hold the lands
subject to a fiduciary obligation to protect and
preserve the bands' interests from invasion or destruction. Thus the Crown
not utilize reserve land for purposes incompatible with the bands'
Indian title unless the relevant band agreed(486) ibid., at p
357. Wilson J.
further held that this fiduciary duty, which was founded upon aboriginal
title, "crystallized upon the surrender
into an express trust of specific land
for a specific purpose"(487) ibid., at p 361.
91. The existence of some sort of fiduciary or trust obligation upon the
Crown in dealing with surrendered reserve land which is
identified in Guerin
is similar to a manifestation of the fiduciary relationship said to generally
exist between the Indian tribes
and the United States government. That is
that land in the United States, whether held under unrecognized or recognized
Indian title,
cannot be disposed of without the consent of Congress; in other
words, analogously to the position of the Crown in Canada, the United
government has assumed a responsibility to protect the Indian tribes in their
land transactions(488) See, for example, Catawba
Indian Tribe of South
Carolina v. State of South Carolina
[1983] USCA4 1475
; (1983) 718 F 2d 1291, at pp 1298-1299;
Joint Tribal Council of Passamaquoddy
Tribe v. Morton (1975)
[1975] USCA1 273
; 528 F 2d 370, at
p 379; Narragansett Tribe v. Southern Rhode Island Land Development Corp
(1976) 418 F Supp,
at p 803; United States
v. Oneida Nation of New York (1973)
477 F 2d 939, at p 942; Fort Sill Apache Tribe of State of Oklahoma v.
States (1973) 477
F 2d 1360, at p 1366.
92. However, it has been suggested that in Canada, as in the United States,
the Crown in fact has a broader responsibility to act
in a fiduciary capacity
with respect to its aboriginal peoples. That responsibility is said to arise
out of the Crown's historic
powers over, and assumption of responsibility for,
those aboriginal peoples and out of the recognition and affirmation of
aboriginal rights contained in s.35(1) of the Canadian
Constitution(489) Reg. v. Sparrow (1990) 70 DLR (4th), at p 408 but cf.
v. British Columbia (1991) 79 DLR (4th), at p 482.
93. But once it is accepted, as I think it must be, that aboriginal title did
not survive the annexation of the Murray Islands,
then there is no room for
the application of any fiduciary or trust obligation of the kind referred to
in Guerin or of a broader
nature. In either case the obligation is dependent
upon the existence of some sort of aboriginal interest existing in or over the
land. Yet, as I have said, upon annexation the lands comprising the Murray
Islands became Crown lands and the Crown asserted the
right to deal with those
lands unimpeded by any recognition of, or acquiescence in, native title.
94. As I have already stated, in 1939 a trust (at least in name) of the lands
comprising the Murray Islands was created pursuant
to s.181(1) of the Land Act
1910. The present trustee would appear to be a corporation sole, The
Corporation of the Director of
Aboriginal and Islanders Advancement. But the
terms of the trust, which are now to be gleaned from the Land Act 1962, are
inconsistent
with the preservation of any form of native title and may in this
respect be contrasted with the provisions of the Indian Act. The
created without any deed of grant from the Crown to the trustees and appears
to be limited to the imposition of an obligation
to control the use of the
land without any title being vested in the trustees. It is, therefore, more
akin to an administrative arrangement
than a conventional trust. Whether or
not a trust of this kind creates any enforceable rights in equity against the
Crown or those
appointed as "trustees" by the Crown is a question which may on
some other occasion require to be answered(490) cf. Williams v.
Attorney-General
[1913] HCA 33
; (1913) 16 CLR 404; see also Tito v. Waddell (No.2)
(1977) Ch 106, at pp 211, 216, 223, 228-229, 234, 235-236;
of State for India (1882) 7 App Cas 619, per Lord Selborne L.C. at
pp 625-626, Lord O'Hagan at p 630, and Lord
at pp 631-632;
Investments v. Department of Environment
[1977] UKHL 2
; (1978) AC 359, per Lord Diplock at p
Lord Simon of Glaisdale
at p 397; Aboriginal Development Commission v.
Treka Aboriginal
Arts and Crafts Ltd. (1984) 3 NSWLR 502,
at p 517; Guerin v.
Queen (1982) 143 DLR (3d), at pp 468-470, but I am prepared to assume
the purposes of argument that some
form of trust has been
created giving rise
to enforceable obligations on the part of the Crown.
As I have said, it is
the Land Act
1962 which defines the
nature of the trust and it seems to me
that the relevant provisions of
that Act assert the control of the
the exclusion
of any native interests in the land.
95. Under the Land Act 1962, the trustees may take action for the removal of
trespassers, for the protection of the land or for
injury to or misuse of the
land(491) s.338(1). They may also, with the approval of the Governor in
Council, make by-laws for, among
other things, protecting the land from
trespass, injury or misuse and regulating the use and enjoyment of the land
and imposing reasonable
fees and charges therefor(492) s.339. The trustees
are also prohibited from permitting any person to occupy the reserved land for
any purpose that is contrary to or inconsistent with the purposes for which
the land was reserved(493) s.350(1)(a). Further, the
trustees may lease the
whole or any part of the land, but only with the prior approval of the
relevant Minister(494) s.343(1). In
this respect it is relevant to note that
the Governor in Council may, on the recommendation of the Minister, approve
the leasing
of the land for a purpose other than the purpose for which the
land was reserved(495) s.343A(1) and that, while any rents are generally
applied solely for the purposes of the trust, the Minister does have the power
to apply them for some other purpose(496) s.346.
Moreover, the trustees do
not have power to sell or transfer the land(497) s.342(1). Finally, the
Governor in Council, by Order
in Council, is empowered to rescind in whole or
in part or amend, alter, vary or otherwise modify any Order in Council
and setting apart any Crown land for any public purpose(498)
s.334(4). If the Order in Council reserving the land for a public purpose
rescinded by the Governor in Council, the Minister may order the trust to be
wound up and any surplus moneys are to be remitted
to the Minister to be
disposed of as the Minister may direct(499) s.354(1).
96. These provisions define the parameters of the trust and they do so
without any reference to any interest in the land on the
part of the
inhabitants of the reserve. It is clear that, in establishing a reserve, the
Crown is not creating an interest in the
land in anyone else which can form
the subject of a fiduciary or trust obligation owed by the Crown to that other
person or persons.
It is merely setting aside Crown land for a particular
purpose. The Crown retains absolute control over the disposition of that
and the legislation does not prevent, but expressly enables, the Crown to
revoke the reserve, whereupon it once again becomes
Crown land within the
meaning of s.5 of the Land Act 1962 and so is available for disposal by the
Crown as absolute owner just as
it was before it was reserved. In dealing with
reserved land in this way there is no legislative requirement imposed on the
to consider the interests of the inhabitants of the reserve at all.
97. Moreover, it does not appear that the reserve comprising the Murray
Islands or the trust created with respect to those lands
was for the benefit
of the inhabitants of the Murray Islands to the exclusion of the other
aboriginal inhabitants of the State of
Queensland. It has not proved possible
to locate the actual terms of the proclamation issued in 1882 but the Order in
Council dated
14 November 1912, which reserved the Murray Islands, did so for
the use of "the Aboriginal Inhabitants of the State". Moreover,
the Order in
Council dated 9 September 1939, which placed the reserve under the control of
trustees, did so by reference to the reserve
in those terms, that is to say,
it referred to the reserve as being a reserve for the use of "the Aboriginal
Inhabitants of the State".
In The Corporation of the Director of Aboriginal
and Islanders Advancement v. Peinkinna(500) (1978) 52 ALJR 286, the Privy
considered the nature of a reserve "for the Benefit of the Aboriginal
Inhabitants of the State, Aurukun" which was placed under the
control of the
Director of Native Affairs as trustee. The Privy Council was prepared to
assume, without deciding, that a public
charitable trust arose by reason of
the Land Act 1962 and the Orders in Council made under it reserving that land
and placing it
under the control of a trustee. However, their Lordships
concluded that such a trust would be a trust for the benefit of the aboriginal
inhabitants of the State as a class and not a trust for the benefit of the
aboriginal inhabitants upon the reserve at Aurukun. That
indistinguishable in all relevant respects from the present one and it may be
observed that a trust to control land for the
use of the aboriginal
inhabitants of the State generally does not suggest a trust intended to
protect such communal or individual
interests in the land as may have been
previously possessed by the inhabitants of the Murray Islands.
98. There is no doubt that the initial annexation of the Murray Islands was
motivated in part by a desire on the part of the Crown
in right of the Colony
of Queensland to protect the native inhabitants of the islands. Further, it
is clear that the policy adopted
by the Queensland legislature towards the
native inhabitants of the Murray Islands and of Queensland in general was one
of protection
of their welfare and, to a certain extent, preservation of their
traditional way of life(501) See, for example, Pearl-Shell and Beche-de-Mer
Fishery Act 1881 (Q.); Liquor Act 1912 (Q.), s.71(2); Native Animals
Protection Act 1906 (Q.), s.9(c); Fauna Conservation Act 1952
(Q.), s.78;
Fisheries Act 1957 (Q.), s.3; Fisheries Act 1976 (Q.), s.5(d);
Torres Strait
Fisheries Act 1984
(Q.). But the measures taken in furtherance of this policy
in no way relate to native interests in land and cannot be used to found
fiduciary duty upon the Crown to deal with land in a particular way.
99. In the absence of any native title and in the light of the detailed
legislative provisions which govern the relationship of
the Crown with the
aboriginal inhabitants of the State upon the basis that there is no native
title or (if there is a difference)
traditional rights in the land, there is,
in my view, no foundation for the imposition of a fiduciary duty upon the
Crown to deal
with the lands comprising the Murray Islands in a manner
involving the recognition of any of the rights which the plaintiffs claim.
course, it was not suggested, nor could it be, that the Queensland legislature
which, subject to any paramount Commonwealth legislation,
has plenary power to
deal with those lands, is under any fiduciary duty in the exercise of that
100. The plaintiffs also pursued an argument based on the
Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth). As I have said, under s.334(4) of the Land Act
1962 the Governor in Council may rescind an Order in Council reserving and
setting apart any Crown land for any public purpose. The Murray Islands are
deemed to have been so reserved and set apart under such
an Order in Council:
s.334(3). Under s.334(1) the Governor in Council may grant in trust any Crown
land which, in the opinion of
the Governor in Council, is or may be required
for any public purpose. "Public purpose" includes the benefit of aboriginal
and islander
inhabitants or any objects or purposes connected therewith or
incidental thereto: s.5. The plaintiffs contend that by virtue of
provisions the Governor in Council may rescind the Order in Council reserving
the Murray Islands for the use of the aboriginal
inhabitants of the State and
grant the land in trust for the benefit of the aboriginal and islander
inhabitants of the Murray Islands.
The grant, they say, may be to the Murray
Island Council, which is a body corporate capable of holding land (absolutely
to trusts) under
Community Services (Torres Strait)
. To do that, the plaintiffs argue, would be unlawful under
Racial Discrimination Act
Section 9(1)
"It is unlawful for a person to do any act involving a
distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on
race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin which
has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the
recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing,
of any human right or fundamental freedom in the political,
economic, social, cultural or any other field of public
The human right or fundamental freedom which the plaintiffs allege would be
nullified or impaired is, apparently, that identified
in Mabo v. Queensland,
namely, the right to own and inherit property (including the right to be
immune from arbitrary deprivation
of property).
101. The consequences of a grant in trust of the Murray Islands to the Island
Council under the Land Act 1962 would include: giving
to the Governor in
Council an authority to exclude certain lands and improvements to the land
from the grant(502) ss.334C, 334F and
to make certain reservations from the
grant(503) ss.334D; an inability on the part of the trustee to lease any part
of the land except
with the prior approval of the relevant Minister and then
only on certain conditions including that the term of the lease is not
exceed seventy-five years(504) ss.343,344; a prohibition upon a lessee from
transferring or mortgaging the lease or sub-letting
without the prior approval
of the Minister(505) s.347; and giving a power to the Minister to cancel a
lease for breach of its terms
by the lessee or where "it is desirable in the
public interests so to do" without any right to compensation(506) s.348.
the Governor in Council may, by Order in Council, declare that land
granted in trust for the benefit of aboriginal or islander inhabitants
revert to the Crown, but only if he is authorized to do so by an Act that
specifically relates to that land; in such a case,
the land reverts to the
Crown freed and discharged from the trusts and all encumbrances, estates or
interests whatsoever and may
be dealt with by the Crown as if it had never
been granted(507) s.353A(1); see also s.352A which relates to the resumption
granted in trust for the benefit of aboriginal or islander inhabitants
where that land is approved by an Act for resumption as land
surplus to the
requirements of the trust.
102. At the time when argument was heard, a further Act, the
Aborigines and
Torres Strait Islanders (Land Holding) Act 1985
(Q.), permitted land vested in
an island council as trustee to be divested and thereupon to become Crown land
under the Land Act
1962(508) s.10. This divestiture of land from an island
council was to take place when a "qualified" islander (defined in s.4(1))
applied to the council for a lease (of a kind described in s.9 of that Act) of
part of the land and that application was approved
by the council. The
Governor in Council was thereupon authorized to grant the lease pursuant to
the Land Act 1962(509) s.9(2).
The restrictions imposed by the Land Act 1962
on the transfer and mortgaging of leases and on sub-letting were equally
to leases granted under this Act(510) s.18. The Act further
stipulated the method by which the annual rent payable under such leases
to be determined(511) s.16, the rent being payable to the relevant island
council(512) s.17(1) to be used by that council for
the purposes of the local
government of the trust area under its control or otherwise for the benefit of
that trust area(513) s.17(2).
Finally the Act stipulated the grounds on which
these leases became liable to forfeiture(514) ss.21-24, in which event the
to revert to and vest in the relevant council(515) s.27. The system
of granting leases under this Act has, however, been terminated
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Land (Consequential Amendments) Act 1991
(Q.), s.13(516) Section 13 inserted s.33A into
the Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islanders (Land Holding) Act, an Act which came into operation after
hearing argument in this case.
103. It is unnecessary to refer in any more detail to the consequences which
may follow upon a grant in trust of the land comprising
the Murray Islands,
for the discrimination which the plaintiffs allege under
Discrimination Act
is the nullification
or impairment of the traditional land
rights which they claim in the land. The view which I have expressed
any rights in
the land held by the aboriginal inhabitants were extinguished
upon annexation and it follows that the relevant
legislation cannot
regarded as authorizing the nullification or impairment of the enjoyment or
exercise of those rights. On the
contrary, on the
view that I have taken, the
legislation authorizes the conferring of rights of a kind which the plaintiffs
do not have.
104. In dealing with this aspect of the plaintiffs' argument as I have, I
have been able to avoid the problem adverted to in Mabo
v. Queensland by
Brennan, Toohey and Gaudron JJ.(517) (1988) 166 CLR, at p 216 that:
Racial Discrimination Act
) proscribes
the doing of an act of the character therein mentioned.
It does not prohibit the enactment of a law creating,
extinguishing or otherwise affecting legal rights in or
over land: Gerhardy v. Brown(518)
[1985] HCA 11
; (1985) 159 CLR 70,
at pp 81, 120-121. It is arguable that
the operation of a law which brings into existence or
extinguishes rights in or over land is not affected by
merely because a consequence of the change in rights is that
one person is free to do an act which would otherwise be
unlawful or another person is no longer able to resist an
act being done. It is not necessary to decide that question
That question remains.
105. The plaintiffs also place reliance upon
Discrimination Act
. That sub-section provides:
"If, by reason of, or of a provision of, a law of the
Commonwealth or of a State or Territory, persons of a
particular race, colour or national or ethnic origin do not
enjoy a right that is enjoyed by persons of another race,
colour or national or ethnic origin, or enjoy a right to a
more limited extent than persons of another race, colour or
national or ethnic origin, then, notwithstanding anything
in that law, persons of the first-mentioned race, colour or
national or ethnic origin shall, by force of this section,
enjoy that right to the same extent as persons of that other
race, colour or national or ethnic origin."
But, of course, in the absence of the traditional land rights which they
claim, the plaintiffs enjoy the same rights under the Crown
lands legislation
as any other inhabitant of Queensland and any special rights which they enjoy
under the legislation dealing with
the Murray Islands are by way of addition
to, and not in limitation of, those rights which are enjoyed generally.
106. As I have said, for the purpose of reaching their conclusion in Mabo v.
Queensland the majority assumed the existence of traditional
land rights over
the Murray Islands and it was upon this basis that they determined that the
Queensland Coast Islands Declaratory
Act 1985 (Q.) was inconsistent with the
Racial Discrimination Act
. The minority considered it inappropriate to allow
to the defendant's defence upon the assumption of facts yet to be
proved by the plaintiff. In the event, I have concluded that those
not been proved with the result that, in my view, there
was no inconsistency
between the Queensland Coast Islands Declaratory
Act (which, in any event, has
since been repealed by the
Torres Strait Islander Land Act 1991
Racial Discrimination Act
. Nor is there any inconsistency between the
latter Act and the provisions of the
Land Act 1962
which enable a grant in
be made of the lands comprising the Murray Islands.
107. As I have said, since the Court heard this case, a further Act, the
Torres Strait Islander Land Act 1991
has come into operation.
Under this Act
land may be granted in fee simple to trustees to be held for the benefit of
islanders, their
ancestors and descendants.
The trustees are empowered to deal
with that land in a number of ways and, in particular, to grant a lease
licence over the whole
or part of that land to an islander who has a
particular connection with that land under island custom.
Provision is also
land to be claimed by an islander or group of islanders on the
grounds, among other things, of customary
affiliation or historical
association, in which case, if the claim is established, and the Minister
agrees, the land may be granted
in fee simple to trustees
to hold for the
benefit of the successful claimants.
108. Finally, the plaintiffs contend that the land comprising the Murray
Islands was not Crown land within the meaning of the Crown
Lands Alienation
Act 1876 (if the reserve was established in 1882) or within the meaning of the
Land Act 1910 (if the reserve was
established in 1912). According to the
plaintiffs, waste land or Crown land must mean land which is genuinely vacant
and unoccupied
so that the Crown can take a full possessory title over it
based on occupation which does not displace any other occupation. They
that if land occupied by indigenous peoples, such as the Murray Islands, were
to be treated as waste land or Crown land it would
result in those indigenous
peoples becoming trespassers upon annexation. This argument is unsustainable.
As I have already stated,
waste land designates land that has not been
alienated by the Crown. This is made clear by the definition of "Crown lands"
Land Act 1910 (s.4). While "Crown lands" are defined in the Crown
Lands Alienation Act 1876 (s.1) as lands "vested in Her Majesty"
this does not
mean vested in actual possession, as a matter of fact, but vested in legal
possession. Of course the Crown does not
physically possess waste lands but,
as a matter of law, it is considered to possess them so that, for example, it
can bring an action
for trespass. Land inhabited by an indigenous people
whose rights are not recognized by the Crown are therefore waste lands or
lands within the meaning of the Crown lands legislation. But the native
inhabitants do not become trespassers if, as is the case
with the Murray
Islands, those native inhabitants occupy the land with the permission of the
Crown. The plaintiffs also contend
that, even if the Murray Islands are Crown
land and so capable of being dealt with as such by the Crown, the Crown in
right of the
State of Queensland had, and still has, no power to deal with
land on the Murray Islands (e.g. under the deed of grant in trust legislation)
because there was no Imperial grant of power to deal with these lands, as
opposed to lands on the mainland. The short answer to
this contention is that
it was the Crown in right of the Colony of Queensland which annexed the Murray
Islands to Queensland under
the authority of Imperial letters patent, later
confirmed by Imperial legislation. The Crown in right of Queensland had power
deal with waste lands in that colony and upon annexation the Murray Islands
fell within the ambit of that power.
109. This matter comes before the Court in the form of questions reserved for
its consideration pursuant to
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth). The first
two of those questions relate to the particular interest of the plaintiffs
Passi and Rice in individual parcels
of land. The claim of the plaintiff Mabo
is no longer pursued. Towards the conclusion of argument, the attention of
the plaintiffs'
counsel was directed to the difficulty of answering the first
two questions asked having regard to the findings made by Moynihan
may not support the claims made by individuals or families to specific parcels
110. It was suggested that there may nevertheless be room for argument that
the plaintiffs exercised traditional rights in the land
as members of a
relevant group. Accordingly, the plaintiffs reformulated the declarations
which they sought in the action and it
seems appropriate to express my
ultimate conclusions with respect to the reformulated declarations, rather
than attempt to answer
the questions referred. For my
would refuse
each of the declarations sought. However, the first and second of those
declarations incorporate a claim, in the alternative,
that the Meriam people
are, and have been since 1879, entitled as against the whole world to occupy,
use and enjoy the Murray Islands.
Of course, the plaintiffs and their
predecessors have, since annexation, been permitted to occupy, use and enjoy
lands which comprise
some part of the Murray Islands, but they have been
permitted to do so, not in recognition of any traditional land rights, but as
occupants of a reserve created by the Crown pursuant to legislation. It is
because I conceive the first and second declarations
sought, in the form which
I have described, to be based upon the continued existence of traditional land
rights in one form or another
that I am of the view that they ought to be
refused. As I have said, any traditional land rights which the plaintiffs may
were extinguished upon the assumption of sovereignty by the Crown
over the Murray Islands and any fiduciary or trust obligation that
otherwise have existed in relation to such rights is precluded by the terms of
the relevant legislation. Accordingly, if traditional
land rights (or at least
rights akin to them) are to be afforded to the inhabitants of the Murray
Islands, the responsibility, both
legal and moral, lies with the legislature
and not with the courts.
Introduction TOOHEY J. The plaintiffs seek declarations as to their
entitlement and that of the Meriam people as a whole to three
Torres Strait
islands - Mer (known also as Murray Island), Dauer (also spelt Dauar and
Dawar) and Waier - and as to the powers and
obligations of the defendant, the
State of Queensland, with respect to those islands and the rights of the
Meriam people who live
there. The three islands are collectively known as the
Murray Islands; I shall refer to them in this judgment simply as "the
Islands"(519)
For general background, see Hocking, Torres Strait Islanders and
Australian Law, (1987), International Academy of Comparative Law,
Congress, Session A.1: "The Aborigine in Comparative Law".
The plaintiffs' claim
2. Central to the case is the plaintiffs' claim that they or the Meriam
people are, and have been since prior to annexation by the
British Crown,
entitled to the Islands: (a) as owners (b) as possessors (c) as occupiers or
(d) as persons entitled to use and enjoy
the Islands. The declarations now
sought give primacy to the rights of the Meriam people rather than to those of
the individual
plaintiffs. Indeed, at the end of the hearing the plaintiff Mr
Mabo, who has since died, no longer asserted any claim on his own
3. The plaintiffs put their claim on three bases. First, that the interests
their predecessors enjoyed in the Islands prior to
annexation survived
acquisition by the British Crown and became a dimension of the common law
("traditional title", sometimes referred
to as "native title"). Second, that
those predecessors acquired a possessory title as a consequence of the
operation of the common
law in the new colony ("common law aboriginal title").
The precise way in which this argument was put will need attention later in
the judgment. Third, that they could establish, as of today, local legal
customary rights(520) An argument not reliant on the effect
of annexation.
They said that legal customs exercised by the Meriam people today, though
different from common law, should prevail
so long as certain conditions are
met. The customs must be certain; they must have been exercised since "time
immemorial" without
interruption; they must be reasonable and not oppressive
at the time of their inception; they must be observed as of right and not
pursuant to any licence or permission granted by another; and they must not be
inconsistent with any statute law(521)Hanasiki v.
O.J. Symes (Unreported, High
Court of the Solomon Islands, 17 August 1951); Bastard v. Smith (1837) 2 M and
[1837] EngR 942
; (174 ER 238);
Pain v. Patrick (1690) 3 Mod. 289 (87 ER 191);
Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th ed., vol.12, par.406.
4. This third basis of claim raises difficult questions with respect to the
interruption of these rights since such a "title" rests,
not on factual
occupation or possession, but on the exercise of particular customs.
Difficulties also arise in so far as authority
supporting customary rights
focuses on specific customs. Entitlement is to enjoy a particular custom
rather than to continue a way
of life, or occupation, generally(522) For
example the custom of "Borough English" in which the youngest son, and not the
succeeded to the burgage tenement on the death of his father:
Blackstone, Commentaries, 17th ed. (1830), vol.II, p 83. It has become
unnecessary to pursue these questions. Given my conclusions in regard to
traditional title, I need not consider this basis of claim
further. The
judgment turns on conclusions as to traditional title though important
questions are raised by the plaintiffs' claim
to a possessory title.
5. The plaintiffs say that their traditional title is good against the whole
world and that it continues today, "subject to the
capacity of the Defendant
to extinguish the same by, or pursuant to clear and plain legislation"(523)
Plaintiffs' claim for declaratory
relief as finally formulated during the
hearing: par.1.E.. They say (and the defendant so concedes, while denying the
of any title) that power has not been exercised to extinguish that
title with respect to the Islands generally. They say further
defendant is bound as a trustee or is under a fiduciary duty to recognise and
protect the rights asserted and that the defendant
is accountable in law for a
breach of that trust or that obligation. As to their possessory title, the
plaintiffs contend that it
also is good against all the world and say that no
action has been taken by the defendant to extinguish or acquire it.
6. Finally, the plaintiffs seek a declaration that the defendant is not
empowered to make a deed of grant in trust in respect of
the Islands under the
Land Act 1962 (Q.) and that any such deed would be unlawful by reason of
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth). Alternatively, they say,
such a deed may not be granted except upon payment of proper compensation.
7. Broadly speaking, the legal issues to be decided by the Court include:
the effect of annexation, involving questions of the presumption
and the position of the Crown on annexation by settlement; the existence and
nature of aboriginal interests which may
continue after annexation or be
created by operation of the common law on settlement; the capacity of the
Crown to extinguish any
such interests; and the consequences in law of any
breach of trust or fiduciary obligation owed by the defendant to the
or to the Meriam people.
8. The two kinds of interest claimed by the plaintiffs have different sources
and different characteristics, though the two overlap
in some ways and the
same set of circumstances, it is said, may give rise to either title. The
first interest, traditional title(524)
See generally McNeil, Common Law
Aboriginal Title, (1989) (hereafter "McNeil"), Ch.6, has been the most
commonly argued in land rights
cases; its origin lies in the indigenous
society occupying territory before annexation. This title is one recognised by
law (though what is required to establish that recognition is a
matter of contention) but its specific nature and incidents correspond
those of the traditional system of law existing before acquisition of
sovereignty by the Crown. The second kind of title, common
law aboriginal
title(525) See generally McNeil, Ch.7, has no existence before annexation
since it is said to arise by reason of the
application of the common law. Not
only its existence but its nature and incidents are determined entirely by
principles of common
law. "Title" is a title based on possession and the
consequences of that status at common law. It would, if made out, amount to
fee simple.
9. It will be necessary to examine each form of title at greater length. But
it is important to appreciate that, particularly with
respect to traditional
title, the use of the term "title" is artificial and capable of misleading.
The rights claimed by the plaintiffs
on behalf of the Meriam people do not
correspond to the concept of ownership as understood by the land law of
England, developed
since feudal times, and by the later land law of Australia.
"Title" is no doubt a convenient expression and has the advantage that,
recognised by the law of Australia (or Canada, the United States or New
Zealand), it fits more comfortably into the legal system
of the colonising
power. In the case of the Meriam people (and the Aboriginal people of
Australia generally), what is involved is
"a special collective right vested
in an Aboriginal group by virtue of its long residence and communal use of
land or its resources"(526)
The Law Reform Commission, Australia, Report
No.31, The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws, (1986), par.63. Speaking
traditional or native title is communal and the rights it generates
belong to the group as a whole: Amodu Tijani v. Secretary, Southern
(1921) 2 AC 399, at pp 403-404; Calder v. Attorney-General of British Columbia
(1973) SCR 313, at p 355; (1973) 34 DLR (3d)
145, at p 175; Re Paulette and
Registrar of Titles (No.2) (1973) 42 DLR (3d) 8, at p 27 (reversed on appeal
on different grounds).
10. At the forefront of the argument is the issue whether such rights in land
as were held by indigenous groups survived annexation.
There are of course
evidentiary problems that will arise in this regard but they do not affect the
principle involved. If the matter
is seen strictly in terms of aboriginal
"title", it is perhaps not surprising that a court may reject such a claim as
rise to a title recognised by the common law. That was the
approach taken by Blackburn J. to the plaintiffs' claim in Milirrpum
Nabalco Pty. Ltd.(527) (1971) 17 FLR 141. But in truth what the courts are
asked to recognise are simply rights exercised by
indigenous peoples in regard
to land, sufficiently comprehensive and continuous so as to survive
annexation.
11. Before proceeding further, one more point should be noted. While this
case concerns the Meriam people, the legal issues fall
to be determined
according to fundamental principles of common law and colonial constitutional
law applicable throughout Australia.
The Meriam people are in culturally
significant ways different from the Aboriginal peoples of Australia, who in
turn differ from
each other. But, as will be seen, no basic distinction need
be made, for the purposes of determining what interests exist in ancestral
lands of indigenous peoples of Australia, between the Meriam people and those
who occupied and occupy the Australian mainland. The
relevant principles are
Annexation - its consequences
12. In his judgment Brennan J. has traced the steps leading up to the Letters
Patent passed by Queen Victoria on 10 October 1878
"for the rectification of
the Maritime Boundary of the Colony of Queensland, and for the annexation to
the Colony of (certain) Islands
lying in Torres Straits, and between Australia
and New Guinea". Pursuant to authority contained in the Letters Patent and
Queensland Coast Islands Act 1879
(Q.), the Governor of Queensland, on 21
July 1879, declared that the islands described in the Schedule to the
Proclamation (which
included the Islands) "shall be annexed to and become part
of the Colony of Queensland".
13. If these procedures were ineffective to incorporate the Islands into
Queensland, it must be taken that the Colonial Boundaries
Act 1895 (Imp)
authorised their incorporation retrospectively(528) Wacando v. The
Commonwealth
[1981] HCA 60
; (1981) 148 CLR 1.
14. In considering the consequences of the annexation of the Islands, the
distinction between sovereignty and title to or rights
in land is crucial.
The distinction was blurred in English law because the sovereignty of the
Crown over England derived from the
feudal notion that the King owned the land
of that country. It was ownership of the land that produced the theory of
tenures, of
obligations owed to the Crown in return for an estate in land.
The position of the Crown as the ultimate owner of land, the holder
radical title, has persisted and is not really in issue in these proceedings.
What is in issue is the consequences that flow
from that radical title.
15. The blurring of the distinction between sovereignty and title to land
should not obscure the fact that(529) McNeil, p 108:
"(t)he former is mainly a matter of jurisdiction, involving
questions of international and constitutional law,
whereas the latter is a matter of proprietary rights,
which depend for the most part on the municipal law of
property. Moreover, acquisition of one by the Crown would
not necessarily involve acquisition of the other."
16. Lord Reid, in Nissan v. Attorney-General(530)
[1969] UKHL 3
; (1970) AC 179, at pp
210-211, after referring to some nineteenth
century decisions
courts, said:
" In my view, none of these cases decides that when the
Crown annexes territory it is entitled to confiscate the
property of British subjects which is in that territory."
But what of the annexation of territory not occupied by British subjects? It
was only with the colonising of territories that were
uninhabited or treated
as such that settlement came to be recognised as an effective means of
acquiring sovereignty, additional to
conquest and cession. There is no
question of annexation of the Islands by conquest or cession so it must be
taken that they were
acquired by settlement even though, long before European
17. One thing is clear. The Islands were not terra nullius. Nevertheless,
principles applicable to the acquisition of territory
that was terra nullius
have been applied to land that was inhabited. Justification for this extension
has been sought in various
ways, including the extent to which the indigenous
people have been seen as "civilised" or to be in permanent occupation. Thus,
in Cooper v. Stuart(531) (1889) 14 App Cas 286, at p 291 Lord Watson
"There is a great difference between the case of a Colony
acquired by conquest or cession, in which there is an
established system of law, and that of a Colony which
consisted of a tract of territory practically unoccupied,
without settled inhabitants or settled law, at the time
when it was peacefully annexed to the British dominions.
The Colony of New South Wales belongs to the latter class."
18. The reference to "peacefully annexed" carries a certain irony in the
light of what we now know. But, in any event, the idea
that land is terra
nullius because it lacks "settled inhabitants" is a contentious one(532) The
application of the doctrine of terra
nullius to Australia is strongly attacked
in Reynolds, The Law of the Land, (1987), passim. In particular, the view
that a nomadic
lifestyle is inconsistent with occupation of land is at odds
with reality. It pays no regard to the reason why people move from
of land to another. Often people move, not because they lack any association
with the land over which they travel but to
follow the availability of water
and food in a harsh climate. An approach more in accord with reality may be
found in the judgment
of the International Court of Justice in Western Sahara
(Advisory Opinion). The majority concluded(533) (1975) ICJR 12, at p 39:
"In the view of the Court, therefore, a determination that
Western Sahara was a 'terra nullius' at the time of
colonization by Spain would be possible only if it were
established that at that time the territory belonged to
no-one in the sense that it was then open to acquisition
through the legal process of 'occupation'."
19. The matter was put even more strongly by Vice-President Ammoun in a
separate opinion apparently endorsing the following assessment
by one of the
parties(534) ibid., at pp 85-86:
" Mr. Bayona-Ba-Meya goes on to dismiss the materialistic
concept of terra nullius, which led to this dismemberment
of Africa following the Berlin Conference of 1885.
Mr. Bayona-Ba-Meya susbtitutes for this a spiritual notion:
the ancestral tie between the land, or 'mother nature', and
the man who was born therefrom, remains attached thereto,
and must one day return thither to be united with his
ancestors. This link is the basis of the ownership of the
soil, or better, of sovereignty. This amounts to a denial
of the very concept of terra nullius in the sense of a land
which is capable of being appropriated by someone who is
not born therefrom. It is a condemnation of the modern
concept, as defined by Pasquale Fiore, which regards as
terrae nullius territories inhabited by populations whose
civilization, in the sense of the public law of Europe, is
backward, and whose political organization is not conceived
according to Western norms.
One might go still further in analysing the statement
of the representative of Zaire so as to say that he would
exclude from the concept of terra nullius any inhabited
territory. His view thus agrees with that of Vattel, who
defined terra nullius as a land empty of inhabitants."
20. The idea that land which is in regular occupation may be terra nullius is
unacceptable, in law as well as in fact. Even the
proposition that land which
is not in regular occupation may be terra nullius is one that demands
scrutiny; there may be good reason
why occupation is irregular. Rather, in
terms of Western Sahara (Advisory Opinion), the question is whether, at the
time of colonisation,
the land belonged to no-one.
21. The operation of the notion of terra nullius only arises in the present
case because of its theoretical extension to the Islands.
But clearly it can
have no operation. The plaintiffs accept that the Islands were settled by
Britain rather than conquered or ceded.
But it does not follow that
principles of land law relevant to acquisition of vacant land are applicable.
The acquisition of sovereignty
was effected, both with respect to other
European colonisers and the indigenous inhabitants, by the acquisition by the
British Crown
of radical title. No more was required or, with respect to
occupied land, possible. Immediately on acquisition indigenous inhabitants
became British subjects whose interests were to be protected in the case of a
settled colony by the immediate operation of the common
law. The Crown did not
acquire a proprietary title to any territory except that truly uninhabited.
22. The real question is whether the rights of the Meriam people to the
Islands survived annexation. This is not answered by pointing
to dicta which
acknowledge that, on settlement, land vested in the Crown(535) See for
instance Attorney-General v. Brown (1847) 1
Legge 312, at pp 316-318; Randwick
Corporation v. Rutledge
[1959] HCA 63
; (1959) 102 CLR 54, at p 71; New South Wales v. The
Commonwealth
Seas and Submerged Lands Case")
[1975] HCA 58
; (1975) 135 CLR 337, at pp
438-439, irrespective of whether there were indigenous
inhabitants.
Traditional title
(i) Existence: Recognition
23. It follows from what has been said that traditional title is not
precluded by the argument that the Crown acquired a proprietary
interest in
all land in the colony on annexation. Previous interests in the land may be
said to survive unless it can be shown that
the effect of annexation is to
destroy them. That is, the onus rests with those claiming that traditional
title does not exist(536)
See Calder (1973) SCR, at p 375; (1973) 34 DLR(3d),
at pp 189-190.
24. In this respect the defendant argued that previously existing aboriginal
interests in ancestral lands continue after annexation
only if they are
recognised by positive executive or legislative acts. This submission is
supported by a line of authority including
Vajesingji Joravarsingji v.
Secretary of State for India(537) (1924) LR 51 Ind App 357, Secretary of State
for India v. Bai Rajbai(538)
(1915) LR 42 Ind App 229, Asrar Ahmed v. Durgah
Committee, Ajmer(539) (1947) 34 AIR(PC) 1. and Tee-Hit-Ton Indians v. United
States(540)
[1955] USSC 24
; (1955) 348 US 272.
25. In Vajesingji Joravarsingji Lord Dunedin said(541) (1924) LR 51 Ind App,
at p 360, referring to the act of state which amounts
to acquisition of
sovereignty whether by conquest, cession or settlement:
"In all cases the result is the same. Any inhabitant of the
territory can make good in the municipal Courts established
by the new sovereign only such rights as that sovereign
has, through his officers, recognized. Such rights as he
had under the rule of predecessors avail him nothing."
Blackburn J., in Milirrpum(542) (1971) 17 FLR, especially at pp 223-227,
followed this line of authority. This perhaps is not surprising,
at least in
so far as the Privy Council decisions were concerned, since they were binding
on him where applicable(543) See also Hookey,
"The Gove Land Rights Case: A
Judicial Dispensation for the Taking of Aboriginal Lands in Australia?",
[1972] FedLawRw 5
; (1972) 5 Federal Law Review
26. However, a line of authority represented by In re Southern Rhodesia(544)
(1919) AC 211, at p 233, Amodu Tijani(545) (1921) 2
AC, at pp 407, 410, Guerin
v. The Queen(546) (1984) 2 SCR 335, at pp 378-379;
(1984) 13 DLR (4th) 321
p 336, Calder and Delgamuukw
v. British Columbia(547) (1991) 79 DLR (4th) 185
is more persuasive and should be followed. This
so called doctrine of
was exemplified by Lord Sumner in the Privy Council in In re
Southern Rhodesia(548) (1919) AC, at
"(U)pon a conquest it is to be presumed, in the absence of
express confiscation or of subsequent expropriatory
legislation, that the conqueror has respected (private
property rights) and forborne to diminish or modify them".
And in Amodu Tijani(549) (1921) 2 AC, at p 407 Viscount Haldane, speaking for
the Privy Council, confirmed this presumption, without
limiting it to colonies
acquired by conquest.
27. A sovereign can, by a positive act, seize private as well as public
property in the act of acquiring sovereignty and the seizure
non-justiciable(550) Secretary of State in Council of India v. Kamachee Boye
[1859] EngR 837
; (1859) 7 Moo Ind App 476 (19 ER 388). But
seizure of private property
by the Crown in a settled colony after annexation has occurred
would amount to
an illegitimate act of
state against British subjects since in a settled
colony, where English law applies, there
is no power in the Crown to make
except pursuant to statute. Emergency powers aside, the common law
required legislative authority
for compulsory acquisition of
Furthermore, the proposition that positive acts of recognition are required
before interests
exist entails the difficult
idea that on acquisition of
sovereignty rights disappear, only to spring back to life immediately
recognition
occurs. Even more
startling is the consequence that, immediately
on annexation, all indigenous inhabitants became trespassers on
the land on
they and their ancestors had lived. That was not a consequence the
common law dictated; if it were thought to
be, this Court should
declare it to
be an unacceptable consequence, being at odds with basic values of the common
28. I conclude therefore that, subject to proof of the relevant interest,
traditional title to land is not extinguished by the act
of state amounting to
annexation but is presumed to continue unless and until lawfully terminated.
(ii) Existence: Requirements of proof
29. Given that traditional title may exist after annexation because it was
not precluded by Crown ownership of occupied lands and
because it arose
regardless of positive recognition by the Crown, what is required to prove
such a title? At the outset a distinction
should be noted between the
existence of traditional title and the nature of the title. These two
questions dictate different lines
of inquiry but they have been blurred in
some instances, leading to confusion in the proof required to establish title.
30. Relevant authority has dealt with the question of proof of the existence
of traditional title in different ways. In English
and Australian decisions
two requirements have emerged: that the interests said to constitute title be
proprietary and that they
be part of a certain kind of system of rules. Both
of these requirements are apparent in In re Southern Rhodesia. There the Privy
Council said(551).(1919) AC, at pp 233-234, in relation to the question
whether the rights of the Matabele and Mashonas (the indigenous
inhabitants of
what became Southern Rhodesia) survived annexation:
"(I)t was necessary that the argument should go to the
length of showing that the rights, whatever they exactly
were, belonged to the category of rights of private
property ...
The estimation of the rights of aboriginal tribes is
always inherently difficult. Some tribes are so low in
the scale of social organization that their usages and
conceptions of rights and duties are not to be reconciled
with the institutions or the legal ideas of civilized
society. Such a gulf cannot be bridged. It would be idle
to impute to such people some shadow of the rights known
to our law and then to transmute it into the substance of
transferable rights of property as we know them. ... On
the other hand, there are indigenous peoples whose legal
conceptions, though differently developed, are hardly less
precise than our own."
The Court concluded that "the position of the natives of Southern Rhodesia ...
approximate(s) rather to the lower than to the higher
limit"(552) ibid., at p
31. Thus traditional title was said to depend on proof of something akin to a
private proprietary right emanating from a "civilized
society". The Court did
not spell out what "institutions or ... legal ideas" were necessary to
constitute such a society but it
is clear that approximation to British
society would suffice. The passage implies the possibility of "conceptions of
duties" which, because of their nature (determined by their
source), do not amount to traditional title. There may be a system of
but not such as to attract the notion of traditional title at common law. The
distinction echoes that said to exist between
law and custom.
32. In Milirrpum Blackburn J. concluded(553) (1971) 17 FLR, at pp 244-245,
262 that no positive doctrine of "communal native title"
existed at common law
at the time of annexation. So he did not need to deal with proof of title.
But, in order to answer submissions
made to him, his Honour went on to
consider that question. Based on those submissions, he said that communal
native title involved
proof that the aboriginal interests said to comprise the
title were "capable of recognition" and that they were "proprietary"(554)
ibid., at p 198. In answering the first question, whether the interests were
capable of recognition, Blackburn J. quoted(555) ibid.,
at p 264 the passage
from In re Southern Rhodesia noted earlier in this judgment and then heeded
comments made by Viscount Haldane
for the Privy Council in Amodu Tijani(556)
(1921) 2 AC, at pp 402-403:
"(I)n interpreting the native title to (the) land ...(t)here
is a tendency, operating at times unconsciously, to render
that title conceptually in terms which are appropriate only
to systems which have grown up under English law. But this
tendency has to be held in check closely."
33. Blackburn J. then considered the distinction made by the Privy Council in
In re Southern Rhodesia, leaving open the question
whether assessment
according to such a scale may be possible, and said(557) (1971) 17 FLR, at p
"(T)he social rules and customs of the plaintiffs cannot
possibly be dismissed as lying on the other side of an
unbridgeable gulf. The evidence shows a subtle and
elaborate system highly adapted to the country in which
the people led their lives, which ... was remarkably free
from the vagaries of personal whim or influence. If ever
a system could be called 'a government of laws, and not of
men', it is that shown in the evidence before me."
34. Thus, his Honour recognised the system before him as a system of law(558)
ibid., at p 268. However, on the other requirement
of proof, that the
aboriginal interests be proprietary, the plaintiffs failed. Blackburn J. held
that the clan's relationship with
the land was not proprietary because it
failed to satisfy the essential elements of a proprietary interest under the
common law,
those elements being: the right to use or enjoy, the right to
exclude others and the right to alienate(559) ibid., at pp 272-273.
35. North American courts have taken a different approach to the question of
proof of the existence of traditional title. One of
the leading discussions
in this regard is to be found in Hamlet of Baker Lake v. Minister of Indian
Affairs and Northern Development.
There Mahoney J. concluded(560) (1979) 107
DLR (3d) 513, at p 542, after an examination of Canadian and United States
and a reference to Milirrpum:
" The elements which the plaintiffs must prove to
establish an aboriginal title cognizable at common law are:
1. That they and their ancestors were members of an
organized society.
2. That the organized society occupied the specific
territory over which they assert the aboriginal title.
3. That the occupation was to the exclusion of other
organized societies.
4. That the occupation was an established fact at the time
sovereignty was asserted by England."
36. Hamlet of Baker Lake and like authority may be analysed in the following
way. Ultimately, traditional title has a common law
existence because the
common law recognises the survival of traditional interests and operates to
protect them. Proof of existence,
therefore, is a threshold question. The
content of the interests protected is that which already exists traditionally;
the substance
of the interests is irrelevant to the threshold question.
Moreover, it would defeat the purpose of recognition and protection if
those existing rights and duties which were the same as, or which approximated
to, those under English law could comprise traditional
title; such a criterion
is irrelevant to the purpose of protection. Furthermore, the problem which
arises where, for example, the
evidence of the claimed traditional right is so
vague that there is doubt that it existed, or exists, is different. That is
an evidentiary
problem and the criterion for dealing with it is not the
claimed right's similarity to, difference from, or even incomprehensibility
at, common law. Therefore, inquiries into the nature of traditional title are
essentially irrelevant(561) See Calder (1973) SCR,
at p 372; (1973) 34 DLR
(3d), at p 187. A determination that a traditional right or duty amounts to a
proprietary interest, however
that is defined, will not reveal the existence
or non-existence of traditional title, except in so far as it indicates that
coherent rights and duties were, and are, exercised in an area of
37. The same criticism can be directed at a requirement which distinguishes
between types of society. In the end such a criterion
is concerned with the
kind of traditional right or duty, the distinguishing feature being its
source. It presupposes the possibility
that rights and duties will not
constitute a title even though they are coherent, existent and underlie a
functioning society. Therefore,
apart from a prohibition against
discriminatory treatment of some indigenous societies, an inquiry into the
kind of society from
which rights and duties emanate is irrelevant to the
existence of title, because it is inconceivable that indigenous inhabitants
occupation of land did not have a system by which land was utilised in a way
determined by that society. There must, of course,
be a society sufficiently
organised to create and sustain rights and duties, but there is no separate
requirement to prove the kind
of society, beyond proof that presence on land
was part of a functioning system. It follows from this discussion that
requirements
that aboriginal interests be proprietary or part of a certain
kind of system of rules are not relevant to proof of traditional title.
38. In general the approach taken in the North American authority is to be
preferred. So, what is required to prove title?
39. The requirements of proof of traditional title are a function of the
protection the title provides(562) Bartlett, "Aboriginal
Land Claims at Common
Law", (1983) 15 University of Western Australia Law Review 293, at p 310. It
is the fact of the presence of
indigenous inhabitants on acquired land which
precludes proprietary title in the Crown and which excites the need for
of rights. Presence would be insufficient to establish title if it
was coincidental only or truly random, having no connection with
or meaning in
relation to a society's economic, cultural or religious life. It is presence
amounting to occupancy which is the foundation
of the title and which attracts
protection, and it is that which must be proved to establish title(563) ibid.,
at pp 311, 319-320.
See now Ontario (Attorney-General) v. Bear Island
Foundation (1991) 83 DLR (4th) 381; Hamlet of Baker Lake (1979) 107 DLR (3d),
at p 542; The Queen v. Sparrow (1990) 1 SCR 1075; (1990) 70 DLR (4th) 385.
Thus traditional title is rooted in physical presence.
That the use of land
was meaningful must be proved but it is to be understood from the point of
view of the members of the society.
(iii) Occupancy of land
40. North American cases have begun to articulate factors which will indicate
this kind of presence on, or use of, land. Any such
articulation cannot be
exhaustive.
41. First, presence on land need not amount to possession at common law in
order to amount to occupancy(564) See Calder (1973) SCR,
at p 328; (1973) 34
DLR (3d), at p 156. United States and Canadian cases have required proof of
occupancy by reference to the demands
of the land and society in question "in
accordance with the way of life, habits, customs and usages of the (indigenous
people) who
are its users and occupiers"(565) Sac and Fox Tribe of Indians of
Oklahoma v. United States (1967) 383 F 2d 991, at p 998. In Hamlet
Lake the Canadian Federal Court held that the Inuit succeeded in showing that
they occupied their land. Mahoney J. said(566)
(1979) 107 DLR (3d), at pp
"The absence of political structures like tribes was an
inevitable consequence of the modus vivendi dictated by
the Inuit's physical environment. ... Furthermore,
the exigences of survival dictated the sparse, but wide
ranging, nature of their occupation.
The nature, extent or degree of the aborigines'
physical presence on the land they occupied, required by
the law as an essential element of their aboriginal title
is to be determined in each case by a subjective test.
To the extent human beings were capable of surviving on
the barren lands, the Inuit were there; to the extent the
barrens lent themselves to human occupation, the Inuit
occupied them."
42. This aspect of occupancy need not be pursued further since the economy of
the Meriam people on the Islands was, compared with
that described in Hamlet
of Baker Lake, settled and intensive. It is clear, however, that a nomadic
lifestyle is not inconsistent
with occupancy(567) This is not to say that a
nomadic lifestyle cannot amount to possession at common law: see McNeil, pp
43. Secondly, it has been said that to amount to occupancy presence on land
must have been established "long prior" to the point
of inquiry(568) Alcea
Band of Tillamooks v. United States (1945) 59 F Supp 934, at p 965; affirmed
[1946] USSC 126
; (1946) 329 US 40. That is necessarily
a relative concept. In Milirrpum
Blackburn J. was content to approach the plaintiffs' claim
as requiring proof
of occupancy from
a "time in the indefinite past". He rejected the expression
"from time immemorial", though used
in the statement of claim, as having
technical connotations that were of no relevance to the plaintiffs' case(569)
(1971) 17 FLR,
at p 152. Blackburn J. thought it
necessary that the
plaintiffs prove occupancy from the acquisition of English sovereignty, a
also taken by Mahoney J. in Hamlet
of Baker Lake(570) (1979) 107 DLR (3d), at
pp 542, 546. If occupation by an indigenous people
is an established fact at
of annexation, why should more be required? In any event, in the
present case, the defendant
did not argue that the plaintiffs failed
their presence on the Islands was too recent.
44. Thirdly, it was said in United States v. Santa Fe Pacific Railroad
[1942] USSC 12
; (1941) 314 US 339, at p 345; see also Alcea Band
of Tillamooks (1945)
59 F Supp, at p 965:
"If it were established as a fact that the land in question
were, or were included in, the ancestral home of the
Walapais in the sense that they constituted definable
territory occupied exclusively by the Walapais (as
distinguished from lands wandered over by many tribes),
then the Walapais had 'Indian title'". (emphasis added)
This principle of exclusive occupancy is justified in so far as it precludes
indiscriminate ranging over land but it is difficult
to see the basis for the
rule if it precludes title merely on the ground that more than one group
utilises land. Either each smaller
group could be said to have title,
comprising the right to shared use of land in accordance with traditional use;
or traditional
title vests in the larger "society" comprising all the rightful
occupiers. Moreover, since occupancy is a question of fact, the
"society" in
occupation need not correspond to the most significant cultural group among
the indigenous people(572) Blackburn J.
in Milirrpum (1971) 17 FLR, at p 273,
expressly left open the possibility of a larger group establishing traditional
45. It may be noted that the
Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act
(Cth) ("the
Land Rights Act
") speaks in various places of "Aboriginals
entitled by Aboriginal tradition to the use or occupation
of ... land, whether
the traditional entitlement is qualified as to place, time,
circumstance, purpose or permission"(573)
For instance,
, (1AD)(a),
(1AE)(a), (1B)(4); see also
Land Rights Act
recognises that
traditional occupation
may not be exclusive. It may be, for instance, that
one group is entitled to come on to land
for ceremonial purposes, all other
rights in the land belonging to another group(574) The reports of Aboriginal
Land Commissioners
Land Rights Act
a number of examples that
bear out this observation.
46. It is, of course, ultimately a matter of speculation how long, and in
what manner, the Meriam people lived on the Islands before
European contact.
However, it seems that the Islands were probably first inhabited by people of
Melanesian origin coming from Papua
New Guinea(575) Determination of Moynihan
J., vol.1, p 89 and that the Islanders lived by way of a subsistence economy
gardening and fishing. Cultivation was by a slash and burn
technique(576) ibid., pp 76-77. Dwellings, occupied by family groups,
built from bamboo and fenced around(577) ibid., p 96. Moynihan J. said(578)
ibid., p 91:
"The islands had been occupied by such people for some
generations."
Later his Honour said (579) ibid., p 155:
" Given considerations such as the constraints imposed
by the rugged terrain on what are, in any event, three
small islands, the pressures of population, the elaborate
and complex social organisation of the people and the
importance of gardening from the point of view of
subsistence and socially it would perhaps be surprising
if the Murray Islanders had not, during the period of their
occupation of the Islands, developed ways of controlling
access to and the use of land (in the extended sense) and
the resources it afforded. In any event it seems fairly
safe to assume they brought with them a social organisation
which they adopted (sic) to the conditions on the Islands."
And, with respect to the current Meriam society, Moynihan J. found(580) ibid.,
pp 155-156:
"Murray Islanders have a strong sense of relationship to
their Islands and the land and seas of the islands which
persists from the time prior to European contact. They
have no doubt that the Murray Islands are theirs."
47. All the factors discussed above in support of traditional title are
clearly satisfied in the present case. Indeed, the defendant
agreed that the
Meriam people were present on the Islands before and at the time of annexation
and that the Crown in right of Queensland
has not attempted since then to
dispossess them. However, the defendant argued that there was no ordered
system of land tenure before
annexation which was continued, albeit changed,
to the present time. The argument seems to have been that the system of rules
which Meriam society was based prior to European contact was too uncertain
to amount to traditional title; and that, after annexation,
disputes over land
were resolved by the Island Court which owed little to the pre-contact
48. The first aspect of the argument rests on such statements by Moynihan J.
as(581) ibid., p 172:
"The ultimate determining factor in terms of the control
and disposition of land was simply what was acceptable in
terms of social harmony and the capacity of an individual
to impose his ... will on the community."
It is true that the findings of Moynihan J. do not allow the articulation of a
precise set of rules and that they are inconclusive
as to how consistently a
principle was applied in local law, for example, with respect to inheritance
of land. But, as has been said
earlier in this judgment, the particular nature
of the rules which govern a society or which describe its members'
relationship with
land does not determine the question of traditional land
rights. Because rights and duties inter se cannot be determined precisely,
does not follow that traditional rights are not to be recognised by the common
49. The only relevance of an argument of uncertainty is if it can be said
that the rules or practices governing Meriam society were
so capricious and
their application so inconsistent as to indicate that the Meriam people's
presence on the Islands was coincidental
and random(582) There may in some
circumstances be an argument that a traditional system was so violent or
otherwise repressive of
human rights as to make adoption by the common law
impossible: see Bastard v. Smith. But that is not relevant here. On the
of Moynihan J. that is impossible to conclude.
50. An argument to the effect that, regardless of the state of things at the
time of annexation, the Meriam people now do not have
title because they no
longer exercise "traditional" rights and duties and have adopted European ways
also fails. There is no question
that indigenous society can and will change
on contact with European culture. Since annexation a school, a hospital, the
Court, the Island Council, a police force and other government agencies
have been introduced to the Islands. Christianity has had
influence; so too have changed means of communication. The economy of the
Islands is now based on cash from employment
rather than on gardening and
fishing(583) Determination of Moynihan J., vol.1, pp 158-159; vol.2, p 26.
51. But modification of traditional society in itself does not mean
traditional title no longer exists(584) See Hamlet of Baker
Lake (1979) 107
DLR (3d), especially at pp 527-529. Traditional title arises from the fact of
occupation, not the occupation of a
particular kind of society or way of life.
So long as occupation by a traditional society is established now and at the
time of annexation,
traditional rights exist. An indigenous society cannot,
as it were, surrender its rights by modifying its way of life(585) In Hamlet
of Baker Lake aboriginal title was held to exist despite the fact that the
Inuit had changed from a nomadic to a settled lifestyle:
see ibid., at pp
524-529. See also Ontario (Attorney-General) v. Bear Island Foundation; Re
Paulette and Registrar of Titles (No.2)
(1973) 42 DLR (3d) 8; Sparrow (1990)
1 SCR, at pp 1094-1099; (1990) 70 DLR (4th), at pp 397-401.
52. It follows from what has been said that the Meriam people, represented by
the plaintiffs, had traditional title to the Islands
which survived
annexation. It is necessary now to consider submissions as to the power of the
Crown to extinguish that title.
Extinguishment of traditional title
(i) The power of the Crown to extinguish traditional title
53. The plaintiffs' argument before the Court proceeded on the assumption
that the Crown had power to extinguish traditional title,
at any rate "by, or
pursuant to, clear and plain legislation"(586) The precise language employed
by counsel for the plaintiffs varied
only little during argument e.g.
"extinguishable by appropriate clear and plain legislative words"; "assuming
the legislation clearly
and plainly permitted it". Nevertheless, something
should be said about the concept of extinguishment.
54. There is precedent for the proposition that the Crown has power to
extinguish traditional title(587) Johnson v. McIntosh (1823)
21 US 240, at p
259; United States v. Santa Fe Pacific Railroad Co.; St Catherine's Milling
and Lumber Company v. The Queen (1888)
14 AC 46; Tee-Hit-Ton Indians v. United
States (1955) 348 US, at p 279; Hamlet of Baker Lake (1979) 107 DLR (3d), at p
Mabo v. Queensland (1988) 166 CLR 186, at pp 195, 201, 213-214, the
power to extinguish by legislation consisting
of "clear and
was assumed. But is such a power exercisable only with the consent of the
titleholders (that is,
akin to a right
of pre-emption),
or is it a power
exercisable unilaterally without account of the traditional titleholders'
In what way
is it different
from the power in the Crown
compulsorily to acquire any interest in land? Is it compensable? Although
most authority
assume a power in the Crown to extinguish
traditional title unilaterally, there is support for the proposition
is required.
It is true that in St Catherine's Milling the Privy
Council said(588) (1888) 14 App Cas, at pp 54, 55
that the Indians'
was "a personal and usufructuary right, dependent upon the good will of the
Sovereign" and that it existed
at the "pleasure
sovereign". In that
case however, the Indians' interest was held to arise from the Royal
Proclamation of
1763. On the other
in Worcester v. Georgia Marshall
C.J. said(589) (1832) 31 US 350, at p 370 that the Crown's title comprised
"the exclusive
of purchasing such lands as the natives were willing to
sell". And in The Queen v. Symonds Chapman J. said(590)
(1847) NZPCC
p 390; Chapman J. continued: "It follows from what has been said, that in
solemnly guaranteeing the Native
title, and in
what is called the
Queen's pre-emptive right, the Treaty of Waitangi ... does not assert either
in doctrine
or in practice
new and unsettled.":
"Whatever may be the opinion of jurists as to the strength
or weakness of the Native title ... it cannot be too
solemnly asserted that it is entitled to be respected,
that it cannot be extinguished (at least in times of
peace) otherwise than by the free consent of the Native
occupiers."
55. Furthermore, even assuming the power of extinguishment to be a power to
act unilaterally, it is not easy to discern the basis
for such a proposition.
There are suggestions in decided cases that it may be a concomitant of an
assertion of sovereignty(591) See
Johnson v. McIntosh (1823) 21 US, at p 253.
But to say that, with the acquisition of sovereignty, the Crown has the power
to extinguish
traditional title does not necessarily mean that such a power is
any different from that with respect to other interests in land.
has the power, subject to constitutional, statutory or common law
restrictions, to terminate any subject's title to property
by compulsorily
acquiring it(592) See Calder (1973) SCR, at p 353; (1973) 34 DLR (3d), at p
56. Another rationale for the special power of the Crown to extinguish
traditional title appears to be that it is part of British
colonial policy to
protect the interests of indigenous inhabitants; that the Crown's power is the
corollary of the general inalienability
of title, which itself constituted a
means of protecting aboriginal people from exploitation by settlers(593) See
The Queen v. Symonds
(1847) NZPCC , at pp 390-391; Guerin v. The Queen (1984)
2 SCR, at pp 383-384; (1984) 13 DLR (4th), at p 340, where reference is
to the Royal Proclamation of 1763, applicable to recently-acquired North
American colonies; note also the Proclamation by Governor
Bourke and comments
by Lord Glenelg following John Batman's attempted purchases of land at Port
Phillip in 1835, discussed in McNeil,
pp 224-225. That traditional title is
generally inalienable may itself be open to debate(594) Dicta referring to
inalienability
must be read in the light of ordinances and statutes precluding
alienation except by surrender to the Crown. See for instance Nireaha
v. Baker (1901) AC 561, at p 579; Attorney-General for Quebec v.
Attorney-General for Canada (1921) 1 AC 401, at pp 408, 411;
Administration of
Papua and New Guinea v. Daera Guba
[1973] HCA 59
; (1973) 130 CLR 353, at p 378. This is not
the place for an
examination of alienability
of land in indigenous societies;
no sufficient
evidence was offered to the Court in that regard. But
alienability itself is a relative
concept and there was evidence in at least
one of the claims made under the
Land Rights Act
land being "given" by the
few remaining
survivors of one group to another group: see the Report by the
Aboriginal Land Commissioner,
Alligator Rivers Stage II land claim,
pars 118, 119. But, in any event, a principle of protection is hardly a basis
a unilateral power in the Crown, exercisable
without consent. Moreover,
inalienability of the title says nothing of the Crown's
power or the nature of
the title. Rather, it
describes rights, or restrictions on rights, of
settlers or other potential purchasers(595)
See The Queen v. Symonds (1847)
, at pp 389-391; McNeil, pp 230-235.
57. Finally, some cases suggest that a power to extinguish traditional title
unilaterally is vested in the Crown as a result of
an inherent quality of the
title itself. This follows from characterisation of the title as "a personal
and usufructuary right"
as opposed to a proprietary right(596) St. Catherine's
Milling (1888) 14 App Cas, at p 54; Tee-Hit-Ton Indians v. United States
348 US, at pp 279, 281 ("right of occupancy", not compensable); Calder
(1973) SCR, at pp 352-353; (1973) 34 DLR (3d), at pp 173-174
("usufructuary
right", but right to compensation suggested), the former being inherently
weaker and more susceptible to extinguishment.
As long ago as 1921 the Privy
Council cautioned against attempting to define aboriginal rights to land by
reference to the English
law notion of estates. In Amodu Tijani, Viscount
Haldane said(597) (1921) 2 AC, at p 403:
"There is a tendency, operating at times unconsciously, to
render (native) title conceptually in terms which are
appropriate only to systems which have grown up under
English law. But this tendency has to be held in check
58. As discussed earlier, the specific nature of such a title can be
understood only by reference to the traditional system of rules.
as to whether it is "personal" or "proprietary" ultimately is fruitless and
certainly is unnecessarily complex. The
warning in Amodu Tijani has been
heeded in recent cases. For example, in Calder Judson J. said(598) (1973)
SCR, at p 328; (1973)
34 DLR (3d), at p 156. See also Dickson J. in Guerin
(1984) 2 SCR, at p 382; (1984) 13 DLR (4th), at p 339: "It appears to me
that there is no real conflict between the cases which characterize Indian
title as a beneficial interest of some sort, and those
which characterize it a
personal, usufructuary right. Any apparent inconsistency derives from the
fact that in describing what constitutes
a unique interest in land the courts
have almost inevitably found themselves applying a somewhat inappropriate
terminology drawn
from general property law.":
"(T)he fact is that when the settlers came, the Indians were
there, organized in societies and occupying the land as
their forefathers had done for centuries. This is what
Indian title means and it does not help one in the solution
of this problem to call it a 'personal or usufructuary
Therefore, a conclusion that traditional title is in its nature "personal" or
"proprietary" will not determine the power of the Crown
to extinguish the
title unilaterally.
59. As I have said, the plaintiffs did not contest the Crown's power to
extinguish traditional title by clear and plain legislation.
That concession
was properly made, subject to a consideration of the implications that arise
in the case of extinguishment without
the consent of the titleholders. Where
the legislation reveals a clear and plain intention to extinguish traditional
title, it is
effective to do so. In this regard traditional title does not
stand in a special position, although the canon of construction referred
Lord Atkinson in Central Control Board (Liquor Traffic) v. Cannon Brewery
Company Limited(599) (1919) AC 744, at p 752. See
also The Commonwealth v.
Hazeldell Ltd.
[1918] HCA 75
; (1918) 25 CLR 552, at p 563 and the decisions there referred to
is of equal
application:
"That canon is this: that an intention to take away the
property of a subject without giving to him a legal right
to compensation for the loss of it is not to be imputed
to the Legislature unless that intention is expressed in
unequivocal terms."
Application of this canon to traditional title may be found in several
Canadian and American decisions(600) For Canada, see Calder
(1973) SCR, at p
404; (1973) 34 DLR (3d), at p 210; Sparrow (1990) 1 SCR, at p 1099; (1990) 70
DLR (4th), at p 401. For the United
States, see United States v. Santa Fe
Pacific Railroad Co. (1941) 314 US, at pp 353-354; Lipan Apache Tribe v.
United States (1967)
180 Ct Cl 487, at p 492.
60. It need hardly be said that where an executive act is relied upon to
extinguish traditional title, the intention of the legislature
that executive
power should extend this far must likewise appear plainly and with clarity.
61. It follows that traditional title may not be extinguished by legislation
that does no more than provide in general terms for
the alienation of the
waste lands of the colony or Crown land. That is not to say that the
legislature must identify with specificity
particular interests to be
extinguished if the legislative intention is otherwise clear(601) Mabo v.
Queensland (1988) 166 CLR, at
pp 213-214. Even if a law deals specifically
with land the subject of traditional title, it may take the form of a
reservation
or grant to trustees for the benefit of indigenous people and so
be consistent with the continuance of title. These are all questions,
answers to which depend upon the terms of the legislation and any relevant
circumstances. Where there has been an alienation
of land by the Crown
inimical to the continuance of traditional title, any remedy against the Crown
may have been lost by the operation
of limitation statutes. And nothing in
this judgment should be taken to suggest that the titles of those to whom land
has been alienated
by the Crown may now be disturbed. Except in the context
of the lease to the London Missionary Society and the lease granted over
and Waier (to be discussed), that is not a matter the Court was asked to
(ii) Has there been any extinguishment?
62. While it is common ground that nothing has been done to extinguish the
rights of the Meriam people to the Islands generally,
there have been some
transactions which were inconsistent with the continuance of traditional title
in respect of the relevant land.
63. The London Missionary Society came to the Murray Islands in or about
1871; in 1877 it moved its local headquarters to Mer(602)
Determination of
Moynihan J., vol.1, p 99. In 1882 the Queensland Government granted the
Society a special lease of 2 acres on Mer
for a term of 14 years(603) ibid.,
vol.2, p 12. There were further leases of the land to the Society. In 1914
the Society assigned
its leasehold interest to the General Secretary of the
Australian Board of Missions. The General Secretary later assigned his
to the trustees of the Board and in 1933 the trustees assigned their
interest to the Corporation of the Synod of the Diocese of Carpentaria(604)
ibid., vol.2, p 25.
64. The plaintiffs made submissions as to the consequences of the lease to
the Society but claimed no relief in respect of what
had occurred. Whether,
in the light of the principles discussed in this judgment, the leases granted
in 1882 and subsequently were
effective to extinguish the traditional title of
the Meriam people to that land is a question we do not have to answer. It may
that, since there was a special lease of 2 acres of the Islands, the
intention of the legislature to extinguish title was expressed
in unequivocal
terms. If so, questions arise as to the consequences of that extinguishment.
But, in the absence of a claim for particular
relief in respect of the lease
and in the absence of representation on behalf of anyone laying claim to an
interest under any lease,
these questions must remain unanswered.
65. In 1931 a lease was granted over the islands of Dauer and Waier for a
term of 20 years for the purpose of establishing a sardine
factory. The lease
was granted to two persons who were not Meriam people(605) ibid., vol.2, p 47.
Special conditions attached to
the lease precluded the lessees from
interfering with "the use by the Murray Island natives of their tribal gardens
and plantations"
or with "the operations of the Murray Island natives who fish
around (the) reefs"(606) ibid., vol.2, pp 48-49. Subsequently the
Protector of Aboriginals bought the improvements made on Dauer and the two
islands became part of the reserve again(607) ibid.,
vol.2, pp 51-52.
66. Whether that lease was effective to extinguish the traditional title of
the Meriam people to Dauer and Waier, again is a question
the Court was not
asked to answer and no relief is claimed in regard to that transaction. In
those circumstances it is unnecessary
to say more about the lease.
(iii) Status of the Islands as Crown land
67. As mentioned earlier, the Islands were annexed to Queensland in 1879,
whether by proclamation or, retrospectively, by legislation.
statutes the Islands were "reserved" from sale. Brennan J. has identified the
relevant legislative history and it is
unnecessary to repeat what his Honour
has said in that regard.
68. The current legislation is the Land Act 1962 (Q.), s.5 of which defines
"Crown land" as follows:
"All land in Queensland, except land which is, for the time
(a) lawfully granted or contracted to be granted in
fee-simple by the Crown; or
(b) reserved for or dedicated to public purposes; or
(c) subject to any lease or licence lawfully granted by the
Crown: Provided that land held under an occupation
licence shall be deemed to be Crown land."
69. Section 4 of the Land Act is the repeals and savings provision. By
s.4(15)(a) all appointments of trustees of reserves and all
things lawfully
done under the repealed Acts and in force at the commencement of the 1962
statute "shall continue to be of full force
and effect" and be deemed to have
been done "under the analogous provisions of and for the purposes of this
70. In consequence, the earlier reservation of the Islands from sale
continued and the Islands are excluded from the definition
of Crown land in
the 1962 statute. In further consequence, there has been no alienation of the
Islands by the Crown and there can
be none, while the Islands are reserved for
a public purpose. Nothing in the reservation of the Islands through various
nor the appointment of trustees to control reserved land could amount
to an extinguishment of traditional title. Nor did the defendant
71. Thus, if the plaintiffs can make good their claim to traditional title to
the Islands, whether on their own behalf or on behalf
of the Meriam people,
there is nothing in the legislative history of Queensland, at least until the
Queensland Coast Islands Declaratory
Act 1985 (Q.), which is destructive of
traditional title. And, so far as the plaintiffs' title is concerned, that
Act was held to
have been nullified by
Racial Discrimination Act
(Cth)(608) Mabo v. Queensland.
(iv) Deed of grant in trust
72. As indicated at the outset of this judgment, the plaintiffs seek
declaratory relief in regard to any deed of grant in trust
in respect of the
Islands. They say that the defendant is not "empowered" to make such a grant
under the Land Act and that the making
of such a grant would be unlawful by
Racial Discrimination Act
. There is an
alternative claim, namely,
that a deed may be granted in respect of the
Islands only upon payment of "proper compensation".
73. Section 334(1) of the Land Act empowers the Governor in Council to grant
in trust, or by Order in Council to reserve and set
apart, any Crown land
which is or may be required for any public purpose. For reasons already given,
the Islands are not Crown land
and they would have to become Crown land before
s.334(1) could be brought into operation. It would be necessary therefore to
the Order in Council creating the existing reserve: s.334(4).
74. Section 353A(1) of the Land Act contains a special provision whereby, in
the case of land granted in trust for the benefit of
Aboriginal or Islander
inhabitants, the Governor in Council may, by Order in Council, declare that
the land shall revert to the Crown.
But he may do so only if authorised by an
Act of Parliament specifically relating to that land. The effect of such a
declaration
is that the land reverts to the Crown "freed and discharged from
the trusts and all encumbrances, estates or interests whatsoever
dealt with by the Crown as if it had never been granted".
75. If there were a real prospect that the Governor in Council intended to
make a deed of grant in trust in respect of the Islands,
it would be
appropriate for the Court to determine this aspect of the plaintiffs' claim to
declaratory relief. But there was no
evidence to this effect and the
Solicitor-General denied that there was any indication of the Governor's
intentions to do so. In
those circumstances no justification exists for
making a declaration in the terms sought even if the plaintiffs had otherwise
good their case for that relief.
76. That case depends upon the operation of
Discrimination Act
. But the questions raised by those sections
in the present
context are not the same questions decided in Mabo v. Queensland and
could not be answered without reference
to factual matters, a decision about
which is not before the Court. Nevertheless, the
Racial Discrimination Act
a wider significance
which is explored towards the end of this judgment.
Fiduciary duty
77. The plaintiffs seek a declaration that:
"the Defendant is under a fiduciary duty, or alternatively
bound as a trustee, to the Meriam People, including the
Plaintiffs, to recognize and protect their rights and
interests in the Murray Islands".
They argued that such a duty arises by reason of annexation, over which the
Meriam people had no choice; the relative positions of
power of the Meriam
people and the Crown in right of Queensland with respect to their interests in
the Islands; and the course of
dealings by the Crown with the Meriam people
and the Islands since annexation. However, while the plaintiffs claim the
declaration
just mentioned, the statement of claim does not seek any specific
relief for a breach of fiduciary duty.
(i) Existence of the obligation
78. The factors giving rise to a fiduciary duty are nowhere exhaustively
defined(609) Hospital Products Ltd. v. United States Surgical
Corporation
[1984] HCA 64
; (1984) 156 CLR 41, at pp 68, 96-97, 141-142; Finn, Fiduciary Obligations,
(1977), p 1. There are certain
kinds of relationships
which necessarily entail
fiduciary obligations, for example, trustee and beneficiary, company director
shareholder, principal
and agent. But a fiduciary obligation may arise in
a variety of circumstances as a result of a particular
relationship. The kinds
of relationships which can give rise to a fiduciary obligation are not
closed(610) Hospital Products Ltd.
ibid., at pp 68, 96, 102;
Tufton v. Sperni
(1952) 2 TLR 516, at p 522; English v. Dedham Vale Properties Ltd. (1978) 1
p 110; (1978) 1 All ER 382,
at p 398. In Hospital Products Ltd.
Mason J. said(611) (1984) 156 CLR, at pp 96-97:
"The critical feature of (fiduciary) relationships is that
the fiduciary undertakes or agrees to act for or on behalf
of or in the interests of another person in the exercise
of a power or discretion which will affect the interests
of that other person in a legal or practical sense. The
relationship between the parties is therefore one which
gives the fiduciary a special opportunity to exercise the
power or discretion to the detriment of that other person
who is accordingly vulnerable to abuse by the fiduciary of
his position."
79. Underlying such relationships is the scope for one party to exercise a
discretion which is capable of affecting the legal position
of the other. One
party has a special opportunity to abuse the interests of the other. The
discretion will be an incident of the
first party's office or position(612)
Weinrib, "The Fiduciary Obligation", (1975) 25 University of Toronto Law
Journal 1, at pp 4-8;
Guerin (1984) 2 SCR, at p 384; (1984) 13 DLR (4th), at
pp 340-341. The undertaking to act on behalf of, and the power detrimentally
to affect, another may arise by way of an agreement between the parties, for
example in the form of a contract, or from an outside
source, for example a
statute or a trust instrument. The powers and duties may be gratuitous and
"may be officiously assumed without
request"(613) Finn, Op Cit, p 201; Guerin
ibid., at p 384; p 341 of DLR
80. The defendant argued that there is no source for any obligation on the
Crown to act in the interests of traditional titleholders
and that, given the
power of the Crown to destroy the title, there is no basis for a fiduciary
obligation. This can be answered
in two ways. First, the argument ignores
the fact that it is, in part at least, precisely the power to affect the
interests of a
person adversely which gives rise to a duty to act in the
interests of that person(614) Hospital Products Ltd. (1984) 156 CLR, at
Weinrib, Op Cit, at pp 4-8; the very vulnerability gives rise to the need for
the application of equitable principles. The
second answer is that the
argument is not supported by the legislative and executive history of
Queensland in particular and of Australia
in general. In the present case, a
policy of "protection" by government emerges from the legislation, examples of
which are quoted
above, as well as by executive actions such as the creation
of reserves, the removal of non-Islanders from the Islands in the 1880s
the appointment of a school teacher and an "adviser" in 1892. More general
indications include the stated policy of protection
underlying the
condemnation of purported purchases of land by settlers from Aborigines as,
for example, the John Batman incident
referred to earlier. And even the
general presumption that the British Crown will respect the rights of
indigenous peoples occupying
colonised territory, as discussed above, itself
indicates that a government will take care when making decisions which are
potentially
detrimental to aboriginal rights.
81. The defendant also argued that the Crown cannot be a trustee or fiduciary
in the present circumstances because its responsibilities
towards the
Islanders with respect to the reserve are a matter of "governmental
discretion", in reliance upon the "political trust"
decisions in Kinloch v.
Secretary of State for India(615) (1882) 7 App Cas 619 and Tito v. Waddell
(No.2)(616) (1977) Ch 106, rather
than an enforceable equitable obligation. In
Kinloch Lord Selborne L.C. said(617) (1882) 7 App Cas, at pp 625-626:
"Now the words 'in trust for' are quite consistent with,
and indeed are the proper manner of expressing, every
species of trust - a trust not only as regards those
matters which are the proper subjects for an equitable
such as might take place between the Crown and public
officers discharging, under the directions of the Crown,
duties or functions belonging to the prerogative and to
the authority of the Crown. In the lower sense they are
matters within the jurisdiction of, and to be administered
by, the ordinary Courts of Equity; in the higher sense they
82. Whether the idea of a political or "higher" trust has any utility need
not be considered here because it does not, in any case,
apply in the present
circumstances. Kinloch concerned a specific grant of goods by Royal Warrant
to the Secretary of State for India
in Council "in trust" for armed forces
personnel. The interest claimed to be held in trust was created expressly by
the Crown itself.
If a traditional title exists, it arises as a matter of
common law, quite independently of any grant or other action on the part
the Crown. And if it is extinguishable, then the existence of the power is
also a matter of law, independent of legislation or
the Crown's action.
Ultimately the decisions in both Kinloch and Tito v. Waddell (No.2)(618) The
trust claimed in Tito v. Waddell
(No.2) to exist for the benefit of Banaban
landowners, with respect to a fund comprising compensation or royalties paid
lessees, was a question of construction of the Mining Ordinance 1928
of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony turned on the construction
instrument to determine whether it created an express trust. The obligation
relevant in the present case arises as a matter
of law because of the
circumstances of the relationship.
83. The defendant further relied on Williams v. Attorney-General for New
South Wales(619)
[1913] HCA 33
; (1913) 16 CLR 404. In
that case, this
Court held that use
by the Crown of land for a Governor's residence in New South Wales did
dedicate the land
for a public purpose
so as to create a trust for the benefit
of the public of New South Wales or of the United
Kingdom, comprising
right to have the
land continue to be used for that purpose. But the decision
with respect to the trust question
turned on the
impossibility of specifying
the interest in the land to which the public were entitled(620) ibid., at pp
429, 433-435,
decision also seems to have
turned, in part, on the
lack of specificity of the objects of the claimed trust - that is,
of New South Wales or of the
United Kingdom: see pp 433-435. No such
difficulty occurs here.
84. In Guerin the Supreme Court of Canada held that the Crown had a fiduciary
duty towards the Indians. Dickson J. (Beetz, Chouinard
and Lamer JJ.
concurring) said(621) (1984) 2 SCR, at p 376; (1984) 13 DLR (4th), at p 334:
" The fiduciary relationship between the Crown and the
Indians has its roots in the concept of aboriginal, native
or Indian title. The fact that Indian Bands have a certain
interest in lands does not, however, in itself give rise to
a fiduciary relationship between the Indians and the Crown.
The conclusion that the Crown is a fiduciary depends upon
the further proposition that the Indian interest in the
land is inalienable except upon surrender to the Crown."
In its terms the fiduciary obligation found by Dickson J. depended on the
statutory scheme prescribing the process by which the Indian
land could be
disposed of(622) cf. ibid., per Wilson J. at pp 348-350; pp 356-357 of DLR.
But the relevant elements of that scheme
appear to be that the Indians'
interest in land was made inalienable except by surrender to the Crown,
arguably an attribute of traditional
title independent of statute in any case.
85. Be that as it may, if the Crown in right of Queensland has the power to
alienate land the subject of the Meriam people's traditional
interests and the result of that alienation is the loss of traditional title,
and if the Meriam people's power to deal
with their title is restricted in so
far as it is inalienable, except to the Crown, then this power and
corresponding vulnerability
give rise to a fiduciary obligation on the part of
the Crown. The power to destroy or impair a people's interests in this way is
extraordinary and is sufficient to attract regulation by Equity to ensure that
the position is not abused. The fiduciary relationship
arises, therefore, out
of the power of the Crown to extinguish traditional title by alienating the
land or otherwise; it does not
depend on an exercise of that power.
86. Moreover if, contrary to the view I have expressed, the relationship
between the Crown and the Meriam people with respect to
traditional title
alone were insufficient to give rise to a fiduciary obligation, both the
course of dealings by the Queensland Government
with respect to the Islands
since annexation - for example the creation of reserves in 1882 and 1912 and
the appointment of trustees
in 1939 - and the exercise of control over or
regulation of the Islanders themselves by welfare legislation - such as The
Labourers' Protection Act of 1884 (Q.), The Torres Strait Islanders Act
of 1939 (Q.) under which an Island Court was established
and a form of "local
government" instituted, and the
Community Services (Aborigines) Act 1984
- would certainly create such an obligation.
(ii) Nature of the obligation
87. To say that, where traditional title exists, it can be dealt with and
effectively alienated or extinguished only by the Crown,
but that it can be
enjoyed only by traditional owners, may be tantamount to saying that the legal
interest in the traditional rights
is in the Crown whereas the beneficial
interest in the rights is in the indigenous owners. In that case the kind of
fiduciary obligation
imposed on the Crown is that of a constructive trustee.
In any event, the Crown's obligation as a fiduciary is in the nature of,
should be performed by reference to, that of a trustee.
88. In Guerin Dickson J. said(623) ibid., at p 376; p 334 of DLR, referring
to the Crown's duty towards the Musqueam Indians:
"This obligation does not amount to a trust in the private
law sense. It is rather a fiduciary duty. If, however,
the Crown breaches this fiduciary duty it will be liable
to the Indians in the same way and to the same extent as if
such a trust were in effect."
Thus, the fiduciary obligation on the Crown, rooted in the extinguishability
of traditional title, is in the nature of the obligation
of a constructive
trustee(624) The situation where a particular traditional title is dealt with
by the Crown is distinguishable.
This may occur where a parcel of land is
alienated to a third party by the Crown with the consent of the traditional
titleholders,
as in Guerin. In such a case the Crown is clearly a trustee
with respect to the particular traditional titleholders: see Guerin
SCR, per Wilson J. at p 355; (1984) 13 DLR (4th), at p 361.
(iii) Content of the obligation
89. The content of a fiduciary obligation or constructive trust will be
tailored by the circumstances of the specific relationship
from which it
arises. But, generally, to the extent that a person is a fiduciary he or she
must act for the benefit of the beneficiaries(625)
Hospital Products Ltd.;
Finn, Op Cit, p 15. Moreover, this general mandate comprises more particular
duties with respect to, first,
the procedure by which a fiduciary makes a
decision or exercises a discretion and secondly, the content of that decision.
one hand, a fiduciary must not delegate a discretion and is under a
duty to consider whether a discretion should be exercised. And
on the other
hand, a fiduciary is under a duty not to act for his or her own benefit or for
the benefit of any third person(626)
Finn, ibid., pp 15-16. The obligation on
the Crown in the present case is to ensure that traditional title is not
impaired or destroyed
without the consent of or otherwise contrary to the
interests of the titleholders. For example, the Crown could not degazette the
Islands, thereby terminating the reserve, or simply alienate the Islands
contrary to the interests of the Islanders; nor could it
take these or any
other decisions affecting the traditional title without taking account of that
effect. If it did, it would be
in breach of its duty and liable therefor.
90. The content of the fiduciary obligation in this case will be different
from that of an obligation arising as a result of particular
promises by the Crown. For example, in Delgamuukw McEachern C.J. found(627)
(1991) 79 DLR (4th), at p 482 the content
of the Crown's fiduciary obligation
"to permit aboriginal people, but subject to the general law
of the province, to use any unoccupied or vacant Crown land
for subsistence purposes until such time as the land is
dedicated to another purpose. The Crown would breach its
fiduciary duty if it sought arbitrarily to limit aboriginal
use of vacant Crown land."
But that is not the kind of duty which is relevant here. Delgamuukw differed
from the present case significantly in that both the
nature of the protected
rights and the source of the Crown's obligation were different. McEachern
C.J. held that the Indians' traditional
title had been extinguished prior to
Confederation(628) ibid., at pp 464, 477-478; that this unilateral
extinguishment was, in part,
the source of the Crown's obligation; and that
the rights of the Indians protected by the obligation were those invoked by
made by the Crown after extinguishment, to permit the Indians to use
land not used for other purposes. In the present case, extinguishment
impairment of traditional title would not be a source of the Crown's
obligation, but a breach of it.
91. A fiduciary has an obligation not to put himself or herself in a position
of conflict of interests. But there are numerous
examples of the Crown
exercising different powers in different capacities. A fiduciary obligation on
the Crown does not limit the
legislative power of the Queensland Parliament,
but legislation will be a breach of that obligation if its effect is adverse
interests of the titleholders, or if the process it establishes does
not take account of those interests.
Interim summary
92. It is convenient at this point to summarise the conclusions so far
reached in this judgment. They are that the traditional
title of the Meriam
people survived the annexation of the Islands; that the title is capable of
extinguishment by clear and plain
legislation or by an executive act
authorised by such legislation; that extinguishment would involve a breach of
a fiduciary obligation
owed by the Crown to the Meriam people; but that
extinguishment of that title has not occurred. These conclusions accept what
the primary aspects of the plaintiffs' case.
93. It should be noted that the plaintiffs seek no more than recognition of a
fiduciary duty or a trust; they do not ask the Court
to spell out the
consequences of a breach of that duty or trust. In particular they do not
seek compensation or damages in respect
of any past interference with the
rights and interests of the Meriam people in the Islands. Whether there
should be a declaration,
even on the terms sought, depends in part upon the
operation of the
Racial Discrimination Act
. I shall explain what I mean by
later. It is convenient at this point to turn to the other form of title
claimed by the plaintiffs.
Common law aboriginal title
(i) The plaintiffs' case
94. The plaintiffs did not argue for an adverse title against the Crown but
for a possessory title by reason of long possession.
Such a title must, of
course, be shown to exist at the present time to be of use to the plaintiffs.
But the inquiry focuses on the
point of annexation. It must, as was clear
from the plaintiffs' written submissions, be shown that such a possessory
title arose
immediately after annexation and continues today. To succeed, the
plaintiffs must show that the Crown never had title to the Islands;
concerns the law at the time of annexation.
95. The plaintiffs' submissions with respect to possessory title may be
summarised in this way. The common and statute law of England
applied in a
settled colony, where applicable to local conditions. English land law applied
in the Colony of Queensland. According
to common law then, as now, possession
of land gives rise to a title which is good against all the world except a
person with a better
claim. Such a possessor is "seised" of the land so that
he or she acquires an estate in the land which is an estate in fee simple.
is a fee simple because the interest acquired is presumed to be such until
shown otherwise. Therefore, even a wrongful possessor
acquires a fee simple
(sometimes called a "tortious fee simple")(629) See Pollock and Wright, An
Essay on Possession in the Common
Law, (1888) (hereafter "Pollock and
Wright"), p 94, effective against all the world except a person with a better
right. But, in
addition, the title arising from possession is presumed to be
lawful and by right (that is, it is presumed to be the best right to
possession) unless the contrary is proved.
96. According to the plaintiffs' submissions, the Crown could not show that,
on acquisition of New South Wales or Queensland, it
had a better claim to
possession of occupied land and so the presumption of a fee simple title in
the indigenous possessors of land
was left undisturbed. Such a title would
have been held of the Crown, however, which held a radical title to all
acquired territory.
In order to establish such a possessory title, the
indigenous inhabitants would have to prove occupation by their ancestors at
time of settlement, such that it amounted in law to possession of
particular areas of land. This, they said, could be proved by reference
findings of Moynihan J.
97. In the absence of argument to the contrary, it may be accepted that New
South Wales and subsequently Queensland were settled
colonies. It may also be
accepted that English land law and its two fundamental doctrines, estates and
tenures, applied in these
colonies(630) Attorney-General v. Brown (1847) 1
Legge, at p 318, though, as we have seen, Stephen C.J. understood its
application
to have a different effect. The issues which arise for
consideration, therefore, are:
(a) the validity of the proposition that possession gives
rise to a presumption of a fee simple title against all
but a better claimant;
(b) the validity of the claim that the Crown was not, at the
time of annexation, a better claimant to possession; and
(c) the question of what, as a matter of law, amounts to
possession of land.
98. As the plaintiffs put their case, there would be no more favourable
consequences flowing from acceptance of their submissions
as to possessory
title than from acceptance of their submissions as to traditional title.
After contending for the existence of a
possessory title, the plaintiffs
relied on the same line of argument as they did for traditional title.
Significantly, they conceded
that a possessory title is extinguishable by
"clear and plain" legislation. And the argument as to fiduciary duty and
not focus on the existence of a possessory title. It may have been
too great a concession that a fee simple arising from possession
"extinguishable" in the same way as traditional title. But, given my
conclusions as to traditional title and, especially, those
as to the existence
of a fiduciary obligation on the Crown arising from it and given what follows
concerning the
Racial Discrimination
, there is no need to express a firm
opinion on the plaintiffs' arguments concerning possessory title.
99. Nevertheless, those arguments raised important issues which have not been
examined before in this area of the law, and something
should be said about
the principles of law on which they rested. The plaintiffs' case in this
regard owed much to McNeil; so too
does this portion of my judgment.
(ii) The relationship between possession and title:
Does possession give rise to a presumptive title?
100. "Possession" is notoriously difficult to define(631) See Pollock and
Wright, pp 1-42; Tay, "The Concept of Possession in the
Common Law:
Foundations for a New Approach",
[1964] MelbULawRw 17
; (1964) 4 Melbourne University Law Review 476
but for present purposes it may be said
to be a conclusion of law defining the
and status of a particular relationship of control by a person over
land. "Title" is,
in the present case, the abstract bundle of
associated with that relationship of possession. Significantly, it is also
to describe the group of rights which result
from possession but which
survive its loss; this includes the right to possession.
101. In the thirteenth century Bracton wrote(632) Bracton on the Laws and
Customs of England, (Thorne Tr.) (1977), vol.III, p 134:
"(E)veryone who is in possession, though he has no right,
has a greater right (than) one who is out of possession
and has no right".
It is said that possession is the root of title(633) Asher v. Whitlock (1865)
1 QB 1; Perry v. Clissold (1907) AC 73; Calder (1973)
SCR, at p 368; (1973) 34
DLR (3d), at p 185; Megarry and Wade, The Law of Real Property, 5th ed. (1984)
(hereafter "Megarry and Wade"),
pp 105-106; Pollock and Wright, pp 22,94-95.
Cf. Holdsworth, A History of English Law, 2nd ed. (1937), vol.VII, (hereafter
"Holdsworth,
vol.VII"), pp 64-65, but see analysis of Holdsworth, vol.VII, in
Allen v. Roughley (1955) 94 CLR 98, at pp 134ff.
To understand
this statement
it is necessary to have regard to the history and development of actions for
the recovery of land.
In the present
context, it is enough to recall that
through the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries ejectment became
the most popular
action for the recovery of interests in land - both leasehold
and freehold(634) Holdsworth, vol.VII, p 9. And despite
its abolition
1852, its principles remain the basis of present actions for the recovery of
land(635) Bristow v. Cormican (1878)
3 App Cas 641,
at p 661; Megarry and
Wade, pp 105, 1158-1159. It is therefore the focus of the present inquiry, the
principles on
which it is based
being relevant both at the time of the
acquisition of the Islands and now. Ejectment was a response to the growing
cumbersomeness
and ineffeciency of the old real actions. The real actions, so
named because they provided specific recovery of interests
damages(636) Holdsworth, A History of English Law, 5th ed. (1942), vol.III
(hereafter "Holdsworth, vol.III"),
Holdsworth, vol.VII, p 4., emerged
in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. The nature and history of these
forms of action
canvassed by Holdsworth(637) Holdsworth, vol.III, pp 3-29
and by Pollock and Maitland(638) The History of English Law, 2nd ed.
vol.II (hereafter "Pollock and Maitland"), pp 46-80; it is unnecessary to
repeat what is said by those writers.
(iii) Ejectment: The relationship between possession and title
102. One view(639) See Holdsworth, vol.VII, pp 62-64 is that the advent of
ejectment represented a fundamental change in the concept
of ownership in
English law, involving the idea of absolute title divorced from its radical
attribute, possession. But the other
view(640) See Hargreaves, "Terminology
and Title in Ejectment", (1940) 56 Law Quarterly Review 376; Pollock and
Wright, pp 93-97;
Megarry and Wade, pp 104-105; Asher v. Whitlock (1865) 1 QB,
at p 5, which is more persuasive, is that the basic relationship between
possession and ownership of land established by the earlier real actions,
involving the idea of relative claims to possession, was
maintained or even
emphasised in the action of ejectment. A successful claim to an interest in
land comprised the better claim to
possession and its associated rights as
between the parties.
103. In order to show a title which would defeat the defendant in possession,
the plaintiff in ejectment had to prove a right of
entry; the defendant could
rely on possession. Therefore, the plaintiff was put to proof of the strength
of his or her title and
could not rely on the weakness of the defendant's
title(641) Roe d. Haldane v. Harvey
[1769] EngR 17
; (1769) 4 Burr 2484, at p 2487
[1769] EngR 17
; (98 ER 302,
p 304); Goodtitle d. Parker v. Baldwin
[1809] EngR 457
; (1809) 11 East 488, at p 495 (103 ER
1092, at p 1095). The central issue, therefore, in an
action for ejectment,
and on which opinions
have differed, was what circumstances gave a right of
entry. Was proof by the plaintiff
of mere prior possession sufficient to found
a right of entry against the defendant, indicating that possession gave rise
to an enforceable
"title", or was more required? Did
possession give rise to
a title which survived the loss of possession? The relevance of this
is that it points up the nature
of the entitlements arising from the mere
possession which would, subject to proof, have
existed immediately on
annexation.
104. So long as it is enjoyed, possession gives rise to rights, including the
right to defend possession or to sell or to devise
the interest(642) Asher v.
Whitlock; Ex parte Winder (1877) 6 ChD 696; Rosenberg v. Cook (1881) 8 QBD
162. A defendant in possession
acquires seisin even if possession is
tortiously acquired. That is, a person in possession has an estate in fee
simple in the land;
it is this interest on which a defendant in an action for
ejectment could rely. The disseisee loses seisin and acquires a right
entry in its stead(643) Wheeler v. Baldwin
[1934] HCA 58
; (1934) 52 CLR 609, at pp 631-633;
Elvis v. Archbishop of York (1619)
Hob 315, at p
[1792] EngR 2252
; (80 ER 458, at p 464);
Pollock and Wright, pp 93-94; Maitland "The Mystery of Seisin" (1886) 2 Law
Quarterly Review
482-486. A possessor acquires a fee simple
estate because the fullest estate known to the law is presumed until a lesser
is proved(644) Wheeler v. Baldwin (1934) 52 CLR, at p 632. And, in the
circumstances under consideration, there is no possibility
of a leasehold
estate at the time of annexation or of some other lesser estate. Applied to
these circumstances, prima facie all indigenous
inhabitants in possession of
their land on annexation are presumed to have a fee simple estate.
105. But what does English land law have to say if possession of land is
lost? The seisin and fee simple enjoyed as a result of
possession would also
be lost because each successive possessor must enjoy the rights directly
associated with possession. According
to this analysis, the last possessor
only in any succession would enjoy the entitlements. If the Crown
dispossessed an indigenous
people, its title arising from possession would be
the best claim. This was the effect of Holdsworth's analysis of land law. He
concluded that proof of prior possession was insufficient in itself to provide
a right of entry in the plaintiff against a defendant
who was a mere
possessor(645) Holdsworth, vol.VII, pp 61-68; Stokes v. Berry
[1795] EngR 3275
; (1699) 2 Salk
421 (91 ER 366); Doe d. Wilkins v. Marquis
of Cleveland (1829) 9 B. and C. 864
[1829] EngR 57
; (109 ER 321). That is, possession of itself gives rise to no title which
survives dispossession.
106. The better understanding is, I think, that if no other factors come into
play, then, regardless of the length of time, as between
mere possessors prior
possession is a better right(646) Allen v. Rivington
[1845] EngR 2
; (1670) 2 Wms Saund 111
(85 ER 813); Doe d. Smith and Payne
v. Webber (1834) 1 AD. and E 119 (110 ER
1152); Doe d. Hughes v. Dyeball
(1829) M.and M. 346 (173 ER 1184); Asher v.
Whitlock; Perry
v. Clissold; Oxford Meat Co Pty. Ltd. v. McDonald (1963) 63
SR(NSW) 423;
Spark v. Whale Three Minute Car Wash (1970) 92 WN (NSW)
Allen v. Roughley; Wheeler v. Baldwin (1934) 52 CLR, at pp 624, 632-633;
Pollock and Maitland, p 46. Possession is protected
against subsequent
possession by a prima facie right of entry.
107. The proposition that possession of itself gives rise to a right in the
plaintiff to recover possession, if lost, is supported
by principle. In
losing possession, a plaintiff has lost the rights associated with possession,
including the right to defend possession
as well as an estate in the land.
But nothing has upset the presumption that the plaintiff's possession, and
therefore his or her
fee simple, was lawfully acquired and hence good against
all the world. "Possession is prima facie evidence of seisin in fee
simple"(647)
Peaceable d. Uncle v. Watson
[1811] EngR 375
; (1811) 4 Taunt 16, at p 17 (128 ER
232, at p 232); Wheeler v. Baldwin (1934) 52 CLR, at p 632; see also
Stansbury v. Arkwright
(1833) 5 Car. and P 575
[1833] EngR 481
; (172 ER 1105); Denn d. Tarzwell
[1777] EngR 3
; (1777) 2 Cowp 595 (98 ER 1259);
Asher v. Whitlock (1865) 1 QB, at p
6; Allen v. Roughley (1955) 94 CLR, at p 108. Without evidence
contrary, nothing has
displaced the presumption arising from proof of the
plaintiff's possession that he or she had lawful
title amounting to a fee
Thus, although a dispossessed plaintiff in ejectment must prove the
strength of his or her own
title and cannot rely on the weakness
defendant's title, the presumption of lawfulness arising from prior possession
is positive
evidence in that regard(648) cf.
note (a) in Allen v. Rivington
(1670) 2 Wms Saund, at p 111 (85 ER, at p 813).
108. It follows from this, however, that a person's title arising from prior
possession can be defeated either by a defendant showing
that he or she (or
another person, in so far as it undermines the plaintiff's claim) has a
better, because older, claim to possession
or by a defendant showing adverse
possession against the person for the duration of a limitation period.
109. In sum, English land law, in 1879 and now, conferred an estate in fee
simple on a person in possession of land enforceable
against all the world
except a person with a better claim. Therefore, since the Meriam people became
British subjects immediately
on annexation, they would seem to have then
acquired an estate in fee simple. This is subject to the question whether the
people could be said to be in possession. The question then arises -
does the Crown have a better title? Put another way, did the
defendant have a
better claim to possession when it acquired sovereignty in 1879 or 1895?
(iv) Did the Crown have a better claim to possession?
110. The defendant argued that upon annexation the Crown became the absolute
owner of and was, in law, in possession of the Islands
and that this precludes
any possessory title in the plaintiffs. Furthermore, it says, since 1882 the
possession of the plaintiffs
and their predecessors in title (if any) has, in
law, been attributable to the fact that the Crown has permitted them to occupy
reserve created for the benefit of Aboriginals and of Islanders of the
State. It follows, so the argument runs, that the plaintiffs'
possession now
cannot constitute good title against the State of Queensland.
111. The position of the Crown resulting from annexation was discussed
earlier in this judgment. There is no foundation for the
conclusion that by
annexation the Crown acquired a proprietary title or freehold possession of
occupied land. It acquired a radical
title only. This may dispose of the
defendant's answer. However, it should be considered further in the context of
English land law
and the doctrine of tenures.
112. As McNeil observes(649) McNeil, p 85:
"The Crown must prove its present title just like anyone else."
The Crown could not have acquired original title by occupancy as a matter of
fact because it had no presence in the colony before
settlement and occupation
of land by indigenous inhabitants would have excluded occupancy by the Crown
after annexation, except in
land truly vacant(650) See "Annexation - its
consequences" above; McNeil, pp 216-217. However, underlying the doctrine of
is the proposition that landholders hold their land either mediately
or immediately of the Crown(651) See Blackstone, Commentaries,
(1830), vol.II, pp 50-51. And a legal fiction justifies this feudal theory:
that all land was, at one time, in the possession
of the King who had granted
some of it to subjects in return for services. Therefore, it is said in answer
to the claim for a possessory
title, at the commencement of the realm - on
annexation - possession to all land was vested in the Crown.
113. However, the effect of the fiction of past possession by the Crown is to
secure the paramount lordship or radical title of
the Crown which is necessary
for the operation of feudal land law. And since fictions in law are only
acknowledged "for some special
purpose"(652) Needler v. Bishop of Winchester
(1614) Hob 220, at p 222
[1792] EngR 49
; (80 ER 367, at p 369); Mostyn v. Fabrigas
[1774] EngR 104
[1774] EngR 104
; (98 ER 1021, at p 1030); Anon., Considerations on the Law
of Forfeitures, for High Treason, 4th ed. (1775), pp 64-65, cited
84, that should be taken to be the extent of the fiction. So far as the system
of tenures is concerned, on which English
is based, no more is
114. Furthermore, the fiction of a lost Crown grant(653) The idea of a
presumption of a Crown grant to make good a title where possession
is referred to in Doe d. Devine v. Wilson in the Privy Council on appeal from
New South Wales: (1855) 10 Moo 502, at pp
[1855] EngR 708
; (14 ER 581, at pp 589-591)
answers the fiction of original Crown ownership and in so doing protects
titleholders. As McNeil
out(654) McNeil, p 84:
"The Crown cannot, on the strength of its fictitious
original title, require a person who is in possession of
land to prove his right by producing a royal grant, for
in most cases no grant exists. The grant is deemed in law
to have been made, if not to a predecessor of the present
possessor, then to someone else."
115. Therefore, if the fiction that all land was originally owned by the
Crown is to be applied, it may well be that it cannot operate
without also
according fictitious grants to the indigenous occupiers.
(v) Possession
116. Possession is a conclusion of English law, a law alien to indigenous
inhabitants before annexation. Therefore, before annexation
the Meriam people
would not have been in possession. Occupation on the other hand is a question
of fact. In some cases the person
in occupation is not the possessor of land,
for example, where he or she is an agent of the possessor. But it may be
presumed, in
the absence of circumstances which show possession is in another,
that the occupier of land is also in possession(655) Pollock and
Wright, p 20;
Doe d. Stansbury v. Arkwright. As we have seen, the Crown could not show it
had possession of occupied land after
annexation.
117. At common law conduct required to prove occupation or possession will
vary according to the circumstances including, for example,
whether the
claimant enters as a trespasser or as of right(656) Stanford v. Hurlstone
(1873) LR 9 Ch App 116. And the nature of the
land will to a large extent
dictate the use that might be made of it. For example, conduct amounting to
possession will be different
in relation to a dwelling and to uncultivated
land(657) Lord Advocate v. Lord Lovat (1880) 5 App Cas 273, at p 288; Johnston
(1911) AC 552, at p 583; Kirby v. Cowderoy (1912) AC 599, at pp
602-603. Some land is barren and unproductive so that it cannot
people all the year round. It may be necessary for occupiers to seek water
and sustenance elsewhere for part of the year,
returning to "their" land as
soon as it is possible.
118. These are matters which are discussed at some length by McNeil(658)
McNeil, pp 196-204. It is unnecessary to pursue evidentiary
matters in the
present case because the nature of the occupation of the Islands by the Meriam
people, already discussed in relation
to traditional title, points clearly
enough to possession according to English law.
119. The defendant argued that the occupation enjoyed by the Meriam people
today is by permission from the Crown, due to the creation
of a reserve in
1882, and therefore cannot amount to possession in the relevant sense. In
answer to this, first, since occupation
by the Meriam people is, and was,
apparent, the onus lies on the defendant to show possession is not in the
occupiers. Secondly,
there is no documentary evidence to prove the 1882
reserve. Assuming for the defendant that it was created, if annexation
in 1879 the reserve would amount to dispossession, unless the
defendant can show that it and not the Meriam people acquired the right
possession on annexation. Subject to the limitation of actions and the
question whether possession by the Crown was adverse,
the Meriam people may
well be entitled to recover possession according to the principles discussed
above. If annexation occurred
in 1895, the Crown in right of Queensland may
have prevented the Meriam people acquiring possession on annexation. But it
is unlikely
that the creation of the reserve in 1882, or subsequently in 1912,
affected the Meriam people's common law possession since that
did not diminish
enjoyment but ensured it remained with the people.
(vi) Possessory title - conclusions
120. It follows from this analysis that the Meriam people may have acquired a
possessory title on annexation. However, as I have
said, the consequences
here are no more beneficial for the plaintiffs and, the argument having been
put as an alternative, it is
unnecessary to reach a firm conclusion. In any
event, it is unlikely that a firm conclusion could be reached since some
the creation of the reserve for example, were not fully explored.
Racial Discrimination Act
121. The effect of this judgment is that the traditional title of the Meriam
people survived annexation. Anything done by the defendant
constituting
interference with that title would, on the view I have taken, be a breach of a
fiduciary obligation owed by the defendant
to the Meriam people. Earlier in
this judgment I have referred to possible implications of the
Discrimination Act
now explain what I mean.
122. Ordinarily, land is only acquired for a public purpose on payment of
just terms, whatever may be the precise statutory language
employed(659) See
for instance
Lands Acquisition Act 1989
Land Acquisition (Just
Terms Compensation) Act 1991
Land Acquisition and Compensation
Acquisition of Land Act 1967
Acquisition Act 1969
Public Works Act 1902
Lands Resumption Act 1957 (Tas.), Pt IV; Lands Acquisition Act 1978 (N.T.), Pt
VII. If the defendant sought to interfere with the
Meriam people's enjoyment
of the Islands which their traditional title gives them and failed to do so on
just terms, a question arises
whether that action would be in contravention of
Racial Discrimination Act
relevantly provides:
" (1) It is unlawful for a person to do any act
involving a distinction, exclusion, restriction or
preference based on race, colour, descent or national or
ethnic origin which has the purpose or effect of nullifying
or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an
equal footing, of any human right or fundamental freedom
in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other
field of public life.
(2) A reference in this section to a human right or
fundamental freedom in the political, economic, social,
cultural or any other field of public life includes any
right of a kind referred to in Article 5 of the
Convention."
" (1) If, by reason of, or of a provision of, a law of
the Commonwealth or of a State or Territory, persons of a
particular race, colour or national or ethnic origin do not
enjoy a right that is enjoyed by persons of another race,
colour or national or ethnic origin, or enjoy a right to a
more limited extent than persons of another race, colour or
national or ethnic origin, then, notwithstanding anything
in that law, persons of the first-mentioned race, colour or
national or ethnic origin shall, by force of this section,
enjoy that right to the same extent as persons of that
other race, colour or national or ethnic origin.
(2) A reference in subsection (1) to a right includes
a reference to a right of a kind referred to in Article 5
of the Convention.
(3) Where a law contains a provision that:
(a) authorizes property owned by an Aboriginal or a
Torres Strait Islander to be managed by another person
without the consent of the Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander; or
(b) prevents or restricts an Aboriginal or a Torres
Strait Islander from terminating the management by
another person of property owned by the Aboriginal or
Torres Strait Islander;
not being a provision that applies to persons generally
without regard to their race, colour or national or ethnic
origin, that provision shall be deemed to be a provision in
relation to which subsection (1) applies and a reference in
that subsection to a right includes a reference to a right
of a person to manage property owned by the person."
125. In Mabo v. Queensland Brennan, Toohey and Gaudron JJ. said of
(1988) 166 CLR, at p 216:
proscribes the doing of an act of the
character therein mentioned. It does not prohibit the
enactment of a law creating, extinguishing or otherwise affecting
legal rights in or over land: Gerhardy v. Brown(661)
[1985] HCA 11
; (1985) 159
CLR 70, at pp 81, 120-121. It is arguable that the operation of a
law which brings into existence or extinguishes rights in or over
land is not affected by
merely because a consequence of the
change in rights is that one person is free to do an act which
would otherwise be unlawful or another person is no longer able to
resist an act being done."
126. But, as the judgment continued,
relates to the enjoyment of a
right, not to the doing of an act and the right referred
not be a legal right. Rights referred to in Art.5 of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
Discrimination, the
Convention referred to in
"(d)(v) The right to own property alone as well as in
association with others;
(vi) The right to inherit."
The right to be immune from arbitrary deprivation of property is a human
right, if not necessarily a legal right, and falls within
s.10(1) of the Act,
even if it is not encompassed within the right to own and inherit property to
which Art.5 refers.
127. The question here is whether extinguishment of the traditional title of
the Meriam people without the compensation provided
Acquisition of
Land Act 1967
(Q.) means that, by reason of a law of Queensland, persons of a
particular race, colour or national or ethnic origin do not enjoy
a right that
is enjoyed by persons of another race, colour or national or ethnic origin or
enjoy a right to a more limited extent
than those persons. If the traditional
title of the Meriam people may be extinguished without compensation, they do
not enjoy a right
that is enjoyed by other titleholders in Queensland or, at
the least, they enjoy a right to a more limited extent. A law which purported
to achieve such a result would offend
Racial Discrimination Act
and in turn be inconsistent with the Act within the
Constitution
Racial Discrimination Act
would therefore prevail and the
proposed law would be invalid to the extent of the inconsistency.
128. While this action raises questions of great importance, the answers
which it is possible to give to those questions necessarily
speak in general
terms rather than deal with particular aspects of the traditional title of the
Meriam people. This is not a criticism
of the way in which the plaintiffs'
claim was formulated; it is simply a recognition that the claim for
declaratory relief does speak
in general terms. Consistent with the general
nature of the claim made and the reasons underlying this judgment, I would
declaration in the following terms:
1. Upon the annexation of the Murray Islands to Queensland, the
radical title to all the land in those islands vested in the
Crown in right of Queensland.
2. The traditional title of the Meriam people to the Murray Islands,
being their rights to possession, occupation, use and enjoyment
of the Islands, survived annexation of the Islands to Queensland
and is preserved under the law of Queensland.
3. The traditional title of the Meriam people to the land in the
Islands has not been extinguished by subsequent legislation or
executive act and may not be extinguished without the payment of
compensation or damages to the traditional titleholders of the
4. The land in the Murray Islands is not Crown land within the
meaning of that term in s.5 of the Land Act 1962 (Q.)
129. For the reasons that appear in this judgment, I would not make any
declaration as to the consequences of the lease to the London
Society in 1882 and the consequences of the lease granted over Dauer and Waier
in 1931. It may be appropriate to grant
liberty to apply in respect of each of
those matters if any of the parties seeks an order to this effect.
In lieu of answering the questions reserved for the consideration of the
Full Court,
(1) declare that the land in the Murray Islands is not Crown land within
the meaning of that term in s. 5 of the Land Act 1962
(2) putting to one side the Islands of Dauer and Waier and the parcel of
land leased to the Trustees of the Australian Board of
Missions and those
parcels of land (if any) which have validly been appropriated for use for
administrative purposes the use of which
is inconsistent with the continued
enjoyment of the rights and privileges of the Meriam people under native
title, declare that the
Meriam people are entitled as against the whole world
to possession, occupation, use and enjoyment of the lands of the Murray
(3) declare that the title of the Meriam people is subject to the power of
the Parliament of Queensland and the power of the Governor
in Council of
Queensland to extinguish that title by valid exercise of their respective
powers, provided any exercise of those powers
is not inconsistent with the
laws of the Commonwealth.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter