Murray & Cooke [2025] FedCFamC2F 1139 (19 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Murray & Cooke
[2025] FedCFamC2F
File number(s):
CSC 69 of 2024
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– De Facto Property -
where the husband received a post-separation inheritance, where modest asset
pool – where husband’s
inheritance largely either wasted or
unavailable – where husband transferred the remaining significant asset to
second respondent
- where wife seeks a s106B order – where husband and
second respondent allege transfer made in payment of a debt - s 106B order
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Part VIIIAB
Cases cited:
Bevan & Bevan
[2013] FamCAFC 116
(2013) FLC 93-545
Bishop & Bishop
[2013] FamCAFC 138
Bonnici & Bonnici
[1991] FamCA 86
Calvin & McTier
[2017] FamCAFC 125
Dickons v Dickons
(2012) 50 Fam LR 244
[2009] FamCA 227
Ferguson & Ferguson
[2022] FedCFamC2F 1194
Hickey and Hickey
[2003] FamCA 395
(2003) FLC 93-143
Mallett v Mallett
[1984] HCA 21
(1984) 156 CLR 605
Mayhew & Fairweather
[2022] FedCFamC1A 53
(2022) 64 Fam LR 633
Pierce v Pierce
(1998) FLC 92-844
[2005] FamCA 40
Wallis & Manning
[2017] FamCAFC 14
(2017) FLC 93-759
Weir & Weir
[1992] FamCA 69
(1993) FLC 92-338
Wilde & Wilde
[2007] FamCA 1044
Yang & Gian and Ors
[2014] FamCA 934
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
1 November 2024, 15 November 2024, 20 January
2025, 29 January 2025
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Townsville Lawyers
First Respondent:
Self-Represented
Solicitor for the Second Respondent:
Adams Legal Pty Ltd
CSC 69 of 2024
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
First Respondent
Second Respondent
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
section 106B
Family Law Act 1975
the transfer of Motor Vehicle
1, VIN number ... Queensland Registration ... (the “Motor Vehicle
1”) to Mr Holmes be set
De Facto Wife (“the Wife”) be declared the sole owner of Motor
De Facto Husband (“the Husband”) shall bear all costs associated
with the collection and/or transfer of Motor Vehicle
1 to the Wife including any
registration or transfer fees as required by Transport and Main Roads for the
transfer of Motor Vehicle
1 and any key cutting services (should they be
necessary) to give effect to these Orders.
Second Respondent shall forthwith attend to the following:
(a) Do all such acts and things and sign all documents as are necessary for the
registration for Motor Vehicle 1 to be transferred
to the Wife.
(b) Forthwith deliver Motor Vehicle 1 to the Wife along with all paperwork,
keys, insurance documents, mechanical/ service documents,
logbooks in his
control or possession.
Husband shall forthwith deliver up to the Wife any paperwork, keys, insurance
documents, mechanical/ service documents, logbooks
relating to Motor Vehicle 1
that he retains in his control or possession.
the transfer to the wife, the Second Respondent is restrained and an injunction
issue restraining the Second Respondent from
dealing with Motor Vehicle 1
registration number ... in any way, including but not limited to encumbering,
selling, transferring,
obtaining finance secured against it or in any other way
dealing with Motor Vehicle 1 that impacts ownership or value of same. The
Respondent must also keep the vehicle comprehensively insured at all times.
Husband and the Second Respondent shall indemnify the Wife and keep her
indemnified with respect to Motor Vehicle 1 up to and
including the date that it
is delivered into her possession including any financial liabilities and
otherwise provided for in this Order, the Wife will retain as her absolute
property, and the Husband forthwith relinquish and/or
transfer to the Wife all
right, title and claim (if any) in and to the following:
(a) Any bank accounts or investments held in the Wife’s sole name or
jointly with any other person other than the Husband;
(b) Motor Vehicle 2 registration number ... VIN ...;
(c) All furniture, tools chattels, and personal effects currently in the
Wife’s possession;
(d) The benefit and ownership of all life insurance policies effected with
respect to the life or disability of the Wife (including
any shares issued or
that may be issued pursuant to any such policy) and any other insurance
policy/ies the Wife may benefit from
(e) Any property or monies inherited by the Wife or gifted to her or held in
trust for her or for her beneficial interest or receivable
by her in consequence
of any personal injuries claim or other compensation or damages or in respect of
any games of chance or lottery
prizes; and
(f) All other assets, interest in property and financial resources of whatsoever
nature of which the Wife is the legal or equitable
owner or in which she has an
interest or controls as at the date of these Orders.
otherwise provided for in this Order the Husband will retain as his absolute
property, and the Wife forthwith relinquish and/or
transfer to the Husband all
right, title and claim (if any) in and to the following:
(a) Any bank accounts or investments held in the Husband’s sole name or
jointly with any other person other than the Wife;
(b) The Husband’s motor vehicles with the exception of Motor Vehicle 1
described in clause 1 & 2;
(c) All furniture, tools chattels, and personal effects currently in the
Husband’s possession;
(d) The benefit and ownership of all life insurance policies effected with
respect to the life or disability of the Husband (including
any shares issued or
that may be issued pursuant to any such policy) and any other insurance
policy/ies the Husband may benefit from
(e) Any property or monies inherited by the Husband or gifted to him or held in
trust for him or for his beneficial interest or receivable
by him in consequence
of any personal injuries claim or other compensation or damages or in respect of
any games of chance or lottery
prizes; and
(f) All other assets, interest in property and financial resources of whatsoever
nature of which the Husband is the legal or equitable
owner or in which he has
an interest or controls as at the date of these Orders.
to any other clause to the contrary, the Husband and Wife are solely, legally
and beneficially responsible for all liabilities
held in their sole name at the
date of these Orders and must at all times indemnify, and keep indemnified, the
other party with respect
fourteen (14) days of the date of these Orders, the Wife and the Husband do all
such acts and things and sign all documents
necessary to close all joint bank
accounts with the balance held in those accounts (if any) to be divided
outstanding applications be removed from the pending cases list.
AND THE COURT NOTES THAT:
November 2024 pursuant to
section 90RG
the court made a declaration that a de
facto relationship existed between the parties and that the date of final
separation was 2
February 2022.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
property proceedings are between the de facto wife as the applicant and the de
facto husband as the respondent. I may refer
to the parties as “the
wife” and “the husband” for ease of reference but I am under
no misapprehension; the
parties were not married but were common law husband and
wife seeks a
order to transfer into her name a vehicle that was previously
owned by the husband but is currently in the name of a third party,
husband’s brother Mr Holmes. That third party was joined to the
proceedings as the second respondent on 15 November
are two children of the relationship, X born in 2014 and Y born in 2015. The
boys were 10 and 8 years of age at the time of
trial. The wife is their primary
the wife’s evidence the parties first started living together in October
2009 and final separation occurred on 2 February
2022. She concedes separations
during the relationship, with periods of cohabitation from October 2009 to
November 2011, then from
December 2012 until January 2020, and then from
December 2020 to 2 February 2022. Overall, on her evidence, their on/off
relationship
spanned some 12 years with their time together exceeding ten
husband’s evidence is that the parties were in a relationship from October
2009 until November 2011 and then again from
December 2012 to January 2019. On
his evidence they did live together at other times but were separated under the
one roof at those
times, living on the same property for the sake of the
children, but in separate residences.
section 90RG
, a declaration was made on 1 November 2024 that a de facto
relationship existed between the parties and that the date of final separation
was 2 February 2022.
the time of trial there were no orders in place regarding the children. The
wife’s evidence is that the boys see their father
on an ad hoc basis. Due
to the husband’s alleged drug and alcohol abuse the wife expresses
concerns about his capacity to care
for the children.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
proceedings were commenced by the wife on 1 February 2024. The husband filed a
Response and supporting material on 5 April 2024.
1 November 2024 the matter was listed for a final hearing, with the express
intention for it to proceed undefended if the husband
continued to fail to
engage. The husband failed to attend court on 1 November 2024 and the court made
determinations including as
(1) The wife be granted leave to rely on material filed out of time;
(2) The matter proceed undefended with the husband’s Response filed on 5
April 2024 dismissed; and
(3) The date of separation was determined to be 2 February 2022. As a
consequence of that declaration the wife’s application
was not out of
the matter progressed on 1 November 2024, however, it became clear that the
husband and his brother had not been afforded procedural
fairness as regards the
final orders sought by the wife. The Amended Initiating Application filed on
29 October 2024 sought radically
different orders to the previous
Initiating Application, and the Further Amended Application was made an exhibit
on the day. In particular,
orders were sought by the wife binding the
husband’s brother, who had not been served and was not a party to the
proceedings
at that time.
matter was adjourned to 15 November 2024 to allow service to occur. The husband
and his brother, Mr Holmes, both attended court
on the day and both sought an
adjournment to allow them to file material. That application was successful and
orders were made for
material to be filed and for disclosure of relevant
matter was adjourned part heard and listed on 20 January 2025 for determination
application and thereafter to ascertain the just and
equitable division of the asset pool.
ISSUES REMAINING FOR DETERMINATION
are two factors that lift this matter above the norm for de facto property
matters with a modest asset pool. Firstly, the husband
received a significant
inheritance post-separation of $775,701.51 and, on his evidence, the majority
has simply been wasted. What
makes that even more tragic than usual is that
setting aside that inheritance there are no significant assets of the
relationship.
Secondly the husband used some of that inheritance to
purchase Motor Vehicle 1, on his evidence, for $94,000. Then part way though
these proceedings he transferred Motor Vehicle 1 to his brother, claiming that
he did so in repayment of a debt in the sum of around
from those facts are two legal questions:
(a) Is the inheritance, or what remains of the inheritance, part of the de facto
asset pool available for distribution between the
(b) If so, can or should Motor Vehicle 1 be clawed back from the husband’s
making this determination the court will consider:
(c) Should the remains of the husband’s inheritance be part of the asset
pool available for distribution between the husband
and the wife?
(d) Should a
order be made in relation to Motor Vehicle 1, a vehicle
purchased by the husband using his post-separation inheritance and subsequently
transferred to the second respondent?
(e) Is it just and equitable to make a property order?
(f) If so, then what is the asset pool available for distribution? In
particular, is Motor Vehicle 1 in or out of the pool available
for distribution
between the husband and the wife?
(g) What are the contributions of each party?
(h) What are the future needs of each party?
(i) What if any orders should the court make?
background is based largely on the wife’s evidence, noting that I have
elsewhere in these reasons made findings that where
their evidence is at odds I
prefer that of the wife.
to a police application a Temporary Protection Order was made in early 2024. The
wife was named as the aggrieved and the
husband the respondent. The children
were named on the order. The court was advised that those proceedings are
finalised and there
is no final Protection Order in place.
parties lived in Town B in 2013. In 2014, the wife received a personal injury
compensation payout in the sum of $30,000 from an
accident in 2011. During
2015-2017, the parties lived in Town C.
wife started a business called “D Business”.
During 2015/2016, the
wife received an inheritance from her grandfather in Country E in the sum of
$121,251.90.
2017 to 2022 the parties lived in Town F. During this time they argued and the
husband would often stay with friends. On 14 February
2021, the parties were
together for Valentines Day. In May 2021, the Wife gives evidence that the
parties resumed the relationship
living together at the Town F property. Then,
in July 2021, they separated for a few weeks however the husband returned and
the relationship
continued. In late 2021 the wife sent an email to the school
seeking school fee help and stated, “
we are happy and proud to say that
we are now reconnected as a family
”. On 25 December 2021, the parties
argued and the husband committed acts of domestic violence by destroying
2 February 2022 the wife left the Town F property with the children. This is the
date of final separation.
2022, the husband’s paternal grandfather passed away. Between late 2022
and early 2023, the husband received an inheritance
by way of instalments
totalling almost $780,000.
late 2022, the husband gave the wife $50,000 which she used to purchase Motor
Vehicle 2 vehicle and otherwise for the benefit of
the family. In late 2023, the
wife and children travelled to Country G where she has family.
Motor Vehicle 1
his PPP Financial Summary the husband disclosed that he owned Motor Vehicle 1
valued at $120,000. This is the vehicle which he
gave evidence he purchased in
September 2022 for $94,000. The ownership of this asset is of significance given
the size of the asset
pool. In her Outline of Case document the wife values the
asset pool at $214,000 and later in these reasons I make findings that
Motor Vehicle 1 the asset pool is less than $60,000.
31 October 2024, the day prior to the original trial date, the wife received a
report advising that Motor Vehicle 1 had been transferred
to one Mr Holmes. Mr
Holmes is the husband’s brother. The wife’s evidence at that time
was that the transfer occurred
on an unknown date and for an unknown amount of
money. I accepted the wife’s submission however that it was not a sale
at arm’s length to an unrelated third party. Unsurprisingly the wife
is suspicious that this transfer was intended to defeat
her claim for a property
adjustment.
the hearing on 1 November 2024 the wife made an oral application that the court
make an order under s 106B to claw back that asset.
The difficulty was, as noted
earlier, through no fault of the wife, neither the husband nor the
husband’s brother were at court,
and neither was on notice as to the s
106B application. There was no procedural fairness accorded to them. The matter
therefore had
to be adjourned part heard to allow that procedural fairness to be
accorded and orders were made accordingly.
trial resumed on 15 November 2024, the husband and Mr Holmes attended as
self-represented litigants, an adjournment was granted
and directions made to
continue the trial.
single expert valuation was obtained placing the value of Motor Vehicle 1 at
$95,000. That valuation was unchallenged in the legal
sense although each of the
respondents expressed dissatisfaction with the valuation.
ORDERS SOUGHT
summary the wife proposes a 79:21 division of the asset pool in her favour. This
involves transferring Motor Vehicle 1 into her
name so that she can sell that
The husband
first respondent has no application before the court as his Response was
The second respondent
second respondent has not filed a Response however he opposes the s106B
application.
LEGAL PRINCIPLES
Date of Separation
parties were in dispute as to the date of separation. In his material the
husband contended that the wife was out of time to file
proceedings.
declaration was made on 1 November 2024 in the husband’s absence, as the
matter was listed for an undefended hearing, that
the date of separation was 2
February 2022. No application was made to set aside that order. The focus of the
husband in engaging
in these proceedings was the support of his brother in his
application to retain Motor Vehicle 1.
s 106B application
106B of the legislation allows the court to make orders setting aside
transactions which are made or are proposed to be made
to defeat an existing or
anticipated claim. Relevantly the
Family Law Act
(1) In proceedings under this Act, the court may set aside or
restrain the making of an instrument or disposition by or on
behalf of, or by
direction or in the interest of, a party, which is made or proposed to be made
to defeat an existing or anticipated
order in those proceedings or which,
irrespective of intention, is likely to defeat any such order.
(2) The court may order that any money or real or personal
property dealt with by any instrument or disposition referred to
subsection (1), (1A) or (1B) may be taken in execution or charged with the
payment of such sums for costs or maintenance as the
court directs, or that the
proceeds of a sale must be paid into court to abide its order.
(3) The court must have regard to the interests of, and shall
make any order proper for the protection of, a bona fide purchaser
person interested.
(4) A party or a person acting in collusion with a party may be ordered to pay
the costs of any other party or of a bona fide purchaser
or other person
interested of and incidental to any such instrument or disposition and the
setting aside or restraining of the instrument
or disposition.
is clear that the wife carries the onus of proof and that the court’s
ability to make the order sought by the wife is discretionary.
Importantly the
Act gives the court the power to make orders that are binding upon third
parties. Section 90AF relevantly provides
the court’s powers in that
De Facto Property
final part of the matter is the determination as to the de facto property
division. That is governed by the provisions of Part
VIIIAB of the Act and will
be determined in accordance with an approach laid down by the Full Court in
Hickey and Hickey
[2003] FamCA 395
(2003) FLC 93-143.
relevant principles are set out in the High Court’s decision in
Stanford v Stanford
(2012) 247 CLR 108, noting subsequent Full Court
decisions. In following the required pathway, the just and equitable requirement
is “one permeating the entire
is no starting point or presumption of equality of contributions or entitlement
to the asset pool.
That may be
where the justice and equity of a matter ends up, but each case must be
determined based on the unique contributions
and future needs of the
Wallis & Manning
[2017] FamCAFC 14
(2017) FLC 93-759
, the Full Court referred to and
approved the Court in
Dickons v Dickons
(2012) 50 Fam LR 244 at [21]
where the Full Court said:
...the requirements of the section are met by approaching the assessment of
contributions holistically and by analysing the nature,
form, characteristics
and origin of the property currently comprising that to which s 79 applied, and,
in tum, analysing the nature,
form and extent of the contributions (of all
have considered the Full Court decision in
Pierce v Pierce
92-844 which confirms that the impact of significant contributions, whether
initial contributions or through gifts or
some other manner, are not lost solely
due to the passage of time.
have considered the determination of the Appeal Division in
Fairweather
[2022] FedCFamC1A 53
(2022) 64 Fam LR 633
The usual way in which defective disclosure is taken into account is either by
adding a sum to the pool, reflective of an estimate
of the value of undisclosed
property ... , or under s 75(2)(0) of the Act. ...
this case the equivalent provision for de facto property matters is s 90SF(3)(r)
being “any fact or circumstance which, in
the opinion of the court, the
justice of the case requires to be taken into account”. In the case of
Weir & Weir
[1992] FamCA 69
(1993) FLC 92-338
at 79,590, the Full Court expressed the
the court’s jurisdiction to make an order going beyond the identified
property arises once there is sufficient evidence to
support a finding that the
party has not made a full disclosure of his or her asset.
court further propounded that there is no requirement to place a value or amount
on the assets that were not disclosed.
am also assisted by the case of
Yang & Gian and Ors
[2014] FamCA 934
- where Justice Aldridge stated at [143]:
Where there has been deliberate non-disclosure the court should not be unduly
cautious about making findings in favour of the innocent
party. It may well be
appropriate to err on the side of generosity.
Black & Kellner
[1992] FamCA 2
Weir and Weir
[1992] FamCA 69
(1993) FLC 92-338
[2002] FamCA 1150
(2002) 172 FLR 464.
The husband’s non-disclosure is deliberate and extensive. The evidence
suggests that he has earned a substantial income and
holds assets that exceed
the assets the subject of these proceedings. The appropriate adjustment,
therefore, is one that would see
the wife receive all, or nearly all, of the
available assets in Australia.
this case the husband and his brother have failed to provide disclosure as to
money in the form of cash and gold alleged to be
loaned by the second respondent
to the husband.
Material Read by the Parties
the commencement of the trial on 1 November 2024 the Applicant Wife read the
material set out in the Outline of Case document filed
on 31 January 2024
together with the affidavit of service filed on 30 January 2024:
the continuation of the trial the wife further read the following material:
The Amended
Initiating Application filed on 3 November 2024.
The affidavits
of service filed on 11 and 12 November 2024.
The affidavit of
Ms Murray filed on 7 January 2025.
first respondent relied on:
Statement filed 19 December 2024.
Affidavit of Mr
Cooke filed 13 December 2024.
second respondent relied on
Affidavit of Mr
Holmes filed 13 December 2024.
Affidavit of Mr
H filed on 18 December 2024.
Affidavit of Ms
J filed 17 December 2024.
documents tendered were reviewed and considered in accordance with the Exhibit
L. That includes transcripts of the evidence of
the husband and the second
respondent as given on 15 November 2024. In reaching this determination the
court has considered the filed
documents relied upon by each party, the
documents tendered, the evidence given under oath and the written and oral
submissions of
the parties.
The Witnesses
Wife gave evidence when this matter first came before the court for final
hearing on 1 November 2024. She confirmed the contents
of her Affidavit
material was true and correct.
Wife gave evidence as to her knowledge of Motor Vehicle 1 summarised as
(a) The husband has two siblings one of whom is Mr Holmes;
(b) The husband and Mr Holmes have different surnames as they have different
(c) They have the same mother;
(d) She knows Mr Holmes well as they met at family gatherings and their children
are cousins;
(e) She last saw Mr Holmes about 5 - 6 months prior to the first day of trial
when he and his partner supervised the husband’s
time with the
(f) The husband purchased Motor Vehicle 1 not long after he got his inheritance
in late 2022, he travelled to Brisbane in late 2022
to get the car;
(g) He was very excited about it and told her and the children about the car;
(h) He purchased the car outright using his inheritance;
(i) He told her that he purchased it for $100,000. He said that he purchased it
as an investment and that it would increase in value
as there are not many of
(j) About a month prior to the trial the children told her the husband had sold
the car to his brother Mr Holmes;
(k) The children said the car was now at their uncle Mr Holmes’s;
(l) She drove past the second respondent’s place and the car was there.
She took a photo of the licence plate. The number is
(m) She then hired someone to investigate the ownership of the car; and
(n) On 31 October 2024 she received the report. That report reflects the vehicle
is now registered in Mr Holmes’ name.
wife was a consistent and impressive witness. I accept her evidence.
The Husband
husband failed to attend court on 1 November 2024. He did however attend on
15 November 2024 and gave evidence briefly to assist
with the determination
as to the adjournment application.
was cross-examined in detail on 20 January 2025. He was not a persuasive
witness. His evidence changed about several matters. While
he advised the court
that he was dyslexic and was overwhelmed at times, it was his own affidavit that
gave him significant trouble
– and his evidence was that he and Mr H, his
long-term friend, had worked on that together.
of the husband’s changing and/or incredible evidence include the
(a) While in his affidavit the husband gave evidence that he used his
inheritance to fuel his drinking and gambling habit, which
he blamed on the
wife, his evidence in the witness box was that the suggestion seemed unfair and
he described himself as not being
(b) While in his affidavit he talks of a long-term gambling problem starting in
his evidence in the witness
box was that this was a problem for a short period only;
(c) His evidence that the wife should take responsibility for the expenditure of
his inheritance and his outright refusal to take
any responsibility himself;
(d) His evidence in the witness box that he had stayed for two years in hotels
as he was, as he phrased it, “running for my
life” from the wife.
While his affidavit makes allegations that the wife perpetrated family violence
against him, it does not
go the extent of alleging he was in fear of his life
such that he stayed in hotels for two years to protect his personal safety;
(e) His affidavit does not include the evidence he gave in the witness box that
the wife gave him three options - that she would
stress him to death, put him in
jail or they could reconcile. His evidence was that he asked for another option.
So rather than seek
expert assistance from lawyers or the police his evidence is
that he instead chose to pay for hotels for two years as a safety measure.
not accept that evidence as there is a superb illogicality that even the kindest
of judicial officers would struggle to accept;
(f) The husband denied that the wife was the primary carer for the children but
also called her a stay-at-home mum;
(g) The husband’s evidence that he took the children on a spending spree
as the only way he could stop them hurting was to
spoil them; not counselling,
not quality time, not mediation or litigation but extravagant expenditure of
(h) His inclusion of Motor Vehicle 1 at a value of $120,000 in his PPP financial
summary filed on 5 April 2024, contrasted to his
advice to the wife that the
purchase price was $100,000, his affidavit evidence that the purchase price was
$94,000 and then the
sale of this asset to his brother in August 2024 for
(i) His responses under cross-examination to questions about this discrepancy
including that he felt like he was being tricked, that
even worth $81,000”, that parts are not good, that it was a big risk for
his brother to take it on, that
he had a lot to learn when he put the higher
value down, that he is not a mechanic, that he is semi-literate, and that it was
to get rid of it as he knew he would have problems with it. There were
just too many reasons to be believable. Then despite all that
evidence he
accepts the single expert valuation of the car at $95,000;
(j) His evidence that he did not tell the wife about the sale of Motor Vehicle
1; that he did not feel he needed to as it was not
her business. This is despite
the inclusion of this asset in all court documents for both parties and her
application has always
to retain that asset in the property settlement; and
(k) Although he alleges he had a significant debt to his brother he did not
include that in the PPP summary filed in April 2024.
I do not accept his
evidence that he was still trying to figure out what was deemed a liability.
do accept the husband’s evidence that his brother loved his father, and
that the wife did not so “why should she get
it” – meaning the
inheritance. And yet he did in fact give her money from the inheritance. He gave
her $50,000 which
she used to buy a car, he paid school fees and for a short
time he paid regular child support of $250 per week. Whilst he estimates
payments to total $100,000 I do not include school fees, child support and money
paid for the benefit of the children as money
for the benefit of the wife.
the husband’s evidence he equally contributed to childcare and to the
household income during the relationship but gives
no specificity as to those
contributions in his affidavit or through documents tendered and it is contrary
to his own evidence as
to his limited working capacity. I prefer the
wife’s evidence about those matters due to the generally unreliable nature
the husband’s evidence.
court’s view that the husband’s evidence was unreliable was further
reinforced by the evidence of his brother to the
effect that he had loaned money
to the husband after the husband received his inheritance because his brother
told him the inheritance
funds had been frozen by the court. This was not the
case, and the second respondent gives evidence of being shocked to learn that
the money had been wasted.
The second respondent – Mr Holmes
husband’s brother attended court on 15 November 2024 and gave evidence
briefly to assist with the determination as to the
adjournment application.
gave evidence that the respondents and some friends had engaged in gold
prospecting over the last ten years. When the husband’s
lawyer ceased to
act for him, the second respondent started lending him money and also took him
into his home. His evidence is that
the funds gifted or loaned to the husband by
him amount to the value of the car. It was clear from his evidence that these
or gifts were provided to the husband post-separation; that is, it is the
husband’s post-separation liability. These funds
were, on his evidence,
recorded on a whiteboard that was cleared off after the debt was repaid. There
is no existing documentary
evidence of the funds loaned or repaid.
second respondent gave confusing evidence about his financial circumstances. His
main employment is as a tradesman, but he gives
evidence that he works almost
every other waking hour doing a variety of additional work including:
(a) cash jobs - including servicing vehicles in his shed;
(b) buying cars, fixing them up and selling them on for a profit;
(c) refining and melting gold which is then sold at the pub to unnamed third
persons or sometimes made into jewellery and sold on
in that form; and
(d) various other jobs for friends.
does not really explain how he had such significant sums of money that in the
space of some six years, between 2018 and 2024 on
the husband’s evidence,
he and his partner loaned the husband about $160,000, while still maintaining
their own household.
Over the six-year period that is on average about $28,000
each year. Few people have access to such large cash funds and if they
would be willing to loan those funds to a third party.
have further considered that there is no independent evidence that such
significant funds existed or that the loans were made. I
have considered
that just about every unexplained cash amount in the husband’s bank
statements has been identified by the husband
as a loan from his brother. I have
considered that the amount of $1,495.99 paid into the husband’s account on
2 July 2024 could
not possibly have been cash despite the husband’s
allocation of it as such.
Ms J – the second respondent’s
witness gave evidence confirming the second respondent’s evidence; that
money had been loaned to the husband. She accepted
the table prepared by the
husband as a true reflection of the money that had been loaned by them to the
husband. She was aware of
the loans made and agreed that she personally had paid
four amounts to the husband.
gave evidence that she had seen the whiteboard in the second respondent’s
shed on which he recorded the money loaned to
the husband but that it was
cleaned off shortly after the car was transferred into his name. She gave
evidence there was no other
contemporaneous record of the loans.
evidence is that she and the second respondent consulted about the loans made to
the husband, but she also gave evidence that
she was not consulted about all of
them. She conceded that some of the sums involved were significant, giving
evidence that her husband
did cash jobs and there can be large sums of cash in
their home.
witness confirmed that he had assisted the husband to prepare his court
documents. The husband is lucky indeed to have such a
friend. His evidence is to
the effect that he recorded the husband’s instructions and then converted
that to the appropriate
format. I am not critical that he accepted what his
friend told him.
FINDINGS ABOUT DISPUTED FACTS
Was Motor Vehicle 1 transferred by the husband to the second
respondent in payment of a debt?
am not satisfied that a debt existed or if it did that it was to the extent
alleged by the respondents. There are several reasons
why I doubt the evidence
of the husband, the second respondent and his partner including:
(a) The husband did not declare the debt to his brother on his PPP Financial
Summary filed on 5 April 2024. To suggest that he was
confused about what
constituted a liability is hard to accept and I do not accept it;
(b) The second respondent is a tradesman and his spouse is an administrative
officer. They provided no independent evidence of high
level income or high
level savings;
(c) The husband gave evidence of the second respondent keeping notes then later
changed his evidence to say that the loans had been
recorded on a white
(d) The second respondent gave affidavit evidence that the transfer of Motor
Vehicle 1 had paid the debt in full while the husband
gave evidence under
cross-examination that he owed still more money to the second respondent.
Despite that, the remaining alleged
debt is not included in the Financial
Statement filed on 19 December 2024;
(e) I have difficulty accepting that the second respondent had $160,000 spare
cash to loan to his brother. In the event that I overcome
that doubt, then I
have difficulty accepting that he would then loan the husband that hard earned
cash. That difficulty is exacerbated
by the time frame alleged. That the second
respondent would continue to loan such significant sums over a six year period
evidence harder to accept. I do not accept it;
(f) I do not accept that if indeed the second respondent had loaned his brother
$160,000 he would not keep a permanent record of
that money, particularly
knowing that his brother was involved in family law property litigation;
(g) The changing evidence of the husband and the second respondent about when
money was repaid;
(h) There being no evidence that the husband and/or his brother undertook any
due diligence as to the value of the vehicle before
transferring it;
(i) The value attributed to Motor Vehicle 1 on the transfer documents was
$10,000. That value is far from the true value of the vehicle
anyone’s evidence. This meant that the amount of stamp duty paid by the
second respondent was significantly reduced
from about $3,200 (if the value the
husband alleges was agreed of $81,000 was used) to about $400. Dodgy is a kind
word to use for
such conduct;
(j) The husband’s affidavit evidence that the vehicle was transferred at a
value of $81,000 to pay his debt to his brother,
when in April 2024 he was
alleging on court documents that it was worth $120,000 and the single expert
valuation came in at $95,000;
(k) The fact that after the single expert valuation the second respondent then
sought out the Redbook valuation at a different value
again, in effect seeking
to undermine the expert evidence;
(l) The husband’s evidence about how much the car meant to him does not
marry well with giving it to his brother at a significant
shortfall from what he
believed it was worth;
(m) The husband’s evidence that the wife did not love his father and
therefore she should not have the inheritance is persuasive
that there were
other motivations at play;
(n) The husband’s evidence that after he received the inheritance he
commenced borrowing money from his brother again in January
2024. The inference
being that the inheritance had been expended in full by then when the last
instalment was received in April 2023
– only some eight months earlier
– and the inheritance itself was of such a significant amount;
(o) I have considered that on 15 November 2024 the husband and the second
respondent were ordered to provide disclosure including
to produce documents in
their possession regarding the alleged amount of gold and cash provided to the
husband by the second respondent.
They have each failed to do so, with the
husband’s best evidence being a table of amounts
with the noted “To
explain?” regarding Gold/Cash received in the sum of between $50,000 and
$70,000. That has not been
satisfactorily explained by the husband or indeed by
the second respondent. They provide vague statements of sales at pubs and the
like, but no detail has been provided as to how much gold, estimated value, when
obtained, any receipts from sales. It is not persuasive
in this very general
form, the required standard of proof on the balance of probabilities has not
been met. I accept the submission
that this evidence is simply nonsense that has
been made up in an unsuccessful attempt to satisfy the court; and
(p) I accept the applicant’s submission that the maths does not add up,
and that even on the husband’s figures, as adopted
by the second
respondent, there was an overpayment made in the alleged repayment process.
do not accept the text sent by the wife on 18 August
constitutes consent on her
part to the sale of the car to the husband’s brother. The relevant
statement is in the context of
a long rant as follows:
I don’t even know why I try so hard to push up hill.
maybe go and be all out. You said that so many times. Mabe you should explore
what that feels like. You are an adult. It’s
your choice. What would being
all out mean? Out of what? Out of [City K]? Out of Feeling uncomfortable? Out of
parenting responsibilities?
Out of conflict? Out of making mistakes?
What do you want to be out of? Do you know?
I am not willing anymore to give you resistance. I don’t want to play that
role anymore. Do what you want to do. You are free.
Free to find out if being
all out is really what you want.
Free to contest, you are free to sell your car. Free to take drugs. Free to be
you, free to create, free to start over again, free
to think I’m a slut
and a lier. Whatever you want. All of it. You can be angry with me if you like.
I’m ok with that.
I honestly let you free.
Be free beautiful man. I’m not a cage
is a message sent in what appears to be despair. It references more that she is
letting go of the husband rather than letting
go of the property application. I
accept her evidence that it was said out of frustration. I accept that she does
not say the husband
can transfer the car to his brother and receive no money for
it, but by 24 August 2024 that is what had happened. I accept that the
clearly not aware the car had been transferred to the second respondent; she had
to employ a private investigator to find
do not accept that the purchase of Motor Vehicle 1 by the second respondent was
made in good faith and after making enquiries. The
second respondent was well
aware that there were property proceedings on foot – even on his own
evidence he was funding the
legal fees. Asking your brother’s mate whether
the car was subject to a claim by the wife does not constitute making all
enquiries. On his own evidence the second respondent thought there
were assets frozen by the court so why he thought the car was
transferred is illogical. I do not accept that evidence.
wife does not go so far as to argue that a fraud was committed but the
consequences of the apparent wastage by the husband and
his prioritising of his
alleged debt to his brother over his obligations to the wife and the children
mean that if the transfer were
allowed to lie as is, then the wife’s claim
would be defeated. I am satisfied that would not be just and equitable.
accept that the second respondent has a level of bitterness about being dragged
into these proceedings, but it does not follow that
he is coming into this court
with clean hands. I am satisfied that the husband has lied to his brother about
the money and taken
advantage of him, but I do not accept that the second
respondent is an independent third person who bought the vehicle at arm’s
length for fair market value. Quite the reverse.
was also confused by the second respondent’s evidence that he was planning
to race Motor Vehicle 1, that it will end up some
sort of hot rod that he will
“drift” in. Either it is a valuable car transferred in payment of a
significant debt, or
it is a toy and it does not matter if it is completely
trashed and devalued. It cannot be both.
short, I am not satisfied by the evidence of the first and second respondents. I
am of the view that their evidence about the money
loaned and re-paid and the
records kept is inconsistent and unreliable.
Who was the primary financial contributor?
wife’s evidence is that she was the primary financial contributor. The
husband conceded her contributions through employment.
addition to her income, the wife contributed two significant lump sums to the
relationship being the personal injury payout of
$30,000 received in 2014 and
the inheritance of $121,251.90 received in 2015 or 2016. In the witness box the
husband gave evidence
that he did not accept the wife’s inheritance was a
significant contribution on the basis that it was her money and she bought
“her own stuff.” There was however no evidence of the wife spending
outside the norm and I accept her evidence that this
money was contributed to
the relationship and met living and related expenses for the family.
husband gives evidence that he was the main financial contributor but during the
trial he gave evidence of having been ill prior
to the diagnosis of a medical
condition in 2015, and unable to work full-time. He also gave evidence that
despite having worked as
a tradesman, his diagnosis meant that he was not
allowed to be in the sun. He was unable to tell the court when he last received
a wage and at best would concede he had not worked as an employee since February
2022. I do not accept that he was the primary financial
contributor as it is
contradicted by his own evidence as to his inability to work. He has certainly
provided no evidence or documents
to support that he made any significant or
regular financial contributions.
husband pays minimal child support. Post-separation he did make contributions
from his inheritance including payment of school
fees, contributions to the
costs of organic food for the children and regular more significant child
support payments. That was however
for a limited period of time, and those
contributions are a drop in the ocean of the expenses incurred by three
children. For those
reasons I am satisfied that the wife was the primary
financial contributor to the relationship and indeed post-separation.
The money borrowed from the second respondent
there even a debt to the husband’s brother? It was not included in the
husband’s PPP Financial Summary in April 2024.
The wife argued that it was
invented to defeat her claim.
is submitted for the wife that for the purpose of these proceedings the husband
has identified all cash payments in his bank statements
as a loan from his
brother. Although the husband denied this, the court was not shown any entries
of cash that were not so identified.
The spread sheet that the husband, the
second respondent and his partner all agreed was accurate was also questioned by
the husband
as being incomplete; on his own evidence there was more debt than
had been disclosed.
shortfall between the spreadsheet created by the husband and the value of the
money alleged to be loaned or given by the second
respondent was said to be
payments made in the form of cash and gold that was not banked. We are talking
in the context of the asset pool; $11,000 in the
first three months of 2024 alone.
is however some genuine bitterness in the evidence of the second respondent. I
accept his evidence that the husband lied to
him, telling him that his money was
frozen by the court and based on that he loaned him money but I do not accept
the amount of the
money loaned due to the inconsistencies in evidence set out
earlier in these reasons.
do not accept that a tradesman and administrative officer had such large sums of
money lying around as is alleged by the second
respondent. I accept the second
respondent’s evidence that he earned cash money in addition to his income
but I do not accept
that it would be enough to take out of his family budget
close to $30,000 per annum for six years.
I asked the husband why he had not repaid his brother in full from the
inheritance when he received the first $200,000 in October
2022 his evidence was
he knew there was “more coming”. It was unsatisfying evidence.
Interestingly
the brothers agreed that through a payment to the second respondent on 5 June
2023 the husband had repaid the second
respondent in full as at that date. Each
of them then recanted from that position in the witness box when seeking to
explain how
the transfer of the car to the second respondent at a value of
$81,000 was justified to repay funds borrowed in the following year
on the husband’s own evidence came to significantly less. Although this
discrepancy was later explained by the amorphous
and unspecified gold and cash
given by the second respondent to the husband that never saw a bank account,
that was not persuasive
relation to the money borrowed from his brother before 2023, on the
husband’s evidence that totalled $82,000. The husband
gave evidence that
his brother kept proper records and gave evidence of a “shared note”
and when asked where that note
was he gave evidence that he
“wouldn’t be surprised” if his brother still had it. That
evidence then changed in
the very next breath to the records being kept on a
white board that had since been wiped clear. I am satisfied that the husband
just making his evidence up as he went along. He was not a witness of
considered those matters, wherever the evidence of the wife is at odds with
either of the respondents I shall always prefer
the evidence of the
CONSIDERATION & DETERMINATION
Section 106B
court was assisted by the submissions made for the wife and the case of
Ferguson & Ferguson
[2022] FedCFamC2F l194.
In review of the
requirements of the legislation the court determines as follows:
“Proceedings under this Act”:
Wife having commenced VIIIAB proceedings, this element is satisfied.
“The making of an instrument or
disposition”:
this case the completing and lodging of forms to transfer Motor Vehicle 1 from
the husband to the second respondent falls within
the definition at 106B(5),
noting the tender of the transfer registration.
“By or on behalf of, or by direction and in the
interest of, a party”:
element has been satisfied as a party to the de facto marriage, the husband,
transferred Motor Vehicle 1 to his brother, the
second respondent.
“Which is made or proposed to be made to defeat an
existing or anticipated order in those proceedings or which, irrespective
intention, is likely to defeat any such order”:
key words here are “irrespective of intention.” This is different
from the cases in other jurisdictions. This court
does not need to be satisfied
that the husband acted deliberately to defeat the wife’s claim, but simply
that the transfer
was likely to do so. I am satisfied that the transfer was
likely to defeat a de facto property order for the following collective
(a) the limited nature of the known asset pool;
(b) the value of Motor Vehicle 1 being the most valuable asset in the pool
proposed by the wife;
(c) the extent of the husband’s wastage or disposal of the inheritance;
(d) the fact that Motor Vehicle 1 was always included on any list of assets in
the husband’s possession by both parties; and
(e) from the very first Initiating Application filed on 1 February 2024 the wife
has sought to retain Motor Vehicle 1.
the light of those matters, it is ludicrous for the husband to submit that what
he did with Motor Vehicle 1 was none of the wife’s
business. He well knew
it was her business and that she sought to have that vehicle transferred to her
as part of the property settlement.
This became particularly apposite in
circumstances where the husband’s evidence is that he retains nothing else
in his possession
from his inheritance.
clearly, transferring Motor Vehicle 1 to a third person in those circumstances
for whatever reason was likely to defeat the
wife’s claim. I am satisfied
that the elements of section 106B have been satisfied and the power to make
orders under that
provision has been enlivened.
Determining the assets and liabilities
husband asserts that there is no joint Balance Sheet and the court should simply
consider the assets each party has in their possession
– with the wife
holding assets to the value of $30,000 and the husband to the value of
wife’s Outline of Case sets out an asset pool as
Description
Applicant’s Value
Respondent’s Value
Cash at bank
Motor Vehicle 1
Motor Vehicle 3
Trades Equipment
Motor Vehicle 2
Cash at bank
Assets sub-total
LIABILITIES
SUPERANNUATION
FINANCIAL RESOURCES
closing submissions however each party instead referred to the parties’
sworn Financial Statements, as they did not assist
the court by providing a
joint Balance Sheet. Each appeared to accept the other’s estimated values,
noting that the asset pool
was minimal. Neither has superannuation, though the
wife’s Financial Statement reflects $10,000 in liabilities.
to each party’s Financial
then they have the
following assets and Liabilities available for
distribution:
Description
Cash at Bank
Motor Vehicle 3
Household contents
Other personal property – gold, personal effects, work equipment, bike
Husband’s Total
Cash at Bank
Cryptocurrency
Motor Vehicle 2
Household contents
L Organisation - liability
Wife’s Total
is the best evidence that the court has as to each party’s current
financial circumstances. I accept this as the asset
pool, aside from the issue
as to the inclusion or otherwise of Motor Vehicle 1. That is a total asset pool
of $53,729.
The Husband’s inheritance
wife argues that the husband’s inheritance should be included in the asset
pool - at least what remains of the inheritance.
She submits the asset pool
should include:
Her car which
she purchased with money the husband gave her from his inheritance. The
inclusion of this asset in the pool was not
disputed by the husband;
Motor Vehicle 1
which the husband purchased from the inheritance. This will be addressed later
in these reasons; and
husband’s savings of $10,000 which were what remained of his inheritance
in early 2024 but which has now been dissipated.
The wife sensibly did not press
for this amount to be included.
husband opposes the application to include Motor Vehicle 1 giving evidence that
Motor Vehicle 1 is now his brother’s asset
and that the wife’s
application is, in reality, fruitless.
Determining
the question as to whether the husband’s post separation inheritance
should be included in the asset pool is assisted
by reference to the cases of
Calvin & McTier
Bonnici & Bonnici.
authorities make it clear that the court has the power to include a post
separation inheritance in an asset pool and make it
available for distribution
between the parties;
section 79(1)
Family Law Act 1975
definition of “property” make that abundantly clear.
Specifically in
Calvin & McTier
the Full Court stated:
The last sentence of [41], emphasised by us, points to the need for the court to
find a principled reason for interfering with the
existing legal and equitable
property rights of the parties. How that is to be done is made clear by [42].
There is nothing in
to indicate that after-acquired property is
to be treated in a different way and that a specific and separate determination
its inclusion is required. Indeed, the closing words of [41] apply to all
of the property of the parties. As we have said, the trial
magistrate undertook
this express consideration
In short, we consider that the court retains a discretion as to how to approach
the treatment of after-acquired property. The trial
magistrate could have
included the inheritance amongst the property to be divided or dealt with it
separately. The trial magistrate
was not obliged to follow one course or the
am satisfied that it is an exercise of the court’s discretion based on the
factual matrix of each case. Turning to the facts
of this case, it is undisputed
that between late 2022 and early 2023 the husband received an inheritance
amounting in total to about
$780,000. This was paid in five instalments with the
smallest being $28,815.98 and the largest being $240,000.00.
the inheritance he received, the husband has not accounted for about $500,000.
The PPP Financial Summary
he completed together with the funds he gave to the wife and paid towards
outstanding school fees account for only a limited
portion of his inheritance.
His evidence is that it has been spent. It seems incredible that the husband has
wasted that amount of
money but having seen some of his bank statements and the
almost daily withdrawals of amounts of between $500 and $2,000 it becomes
feasible. Certainly, the statements tendered showed withdrawals of varying
amounts totalling about $300,000 in a six-month
There is however no
independent evidence of what was done with those funds.
husband gave examples of mismanagement of the money by him. For example, that he
invested in Bitcoin, and that on one occasion
he got $20,000 out of the bank to
buy a truck so that he could take gold prospecting more seriously, but did not
proceed with the
purchase and did not return the funds to his bank account. No
evidence was given about where he would be allowed to prospect with
without buying a lease. If the husband was gambling, investing in Bitcoin, and
staying in hotels, drinking to excess, and
possibly doing drugs, though I note
that he denies the latter other than medicinal cannabis, that could account for
the wastage.
It is certainly either significant and almost total wastage or an
attempt to hide funds from the wife.
5 April 2024 the husband’s evidence was that he had $10,000 in savings,
Motor Vehicle 1 valued at $120,000, Motor Vehicle
3 valued at $8,000, an
electric bike valued at $8,000, some gold valued at $10,000, $10,000 in
household content and about $27,000
in equipment including work equipment and
metal detectors. In his Financial Statement filed on 19 December 2024, his
evidence is
that the cash and Motor Vehicle 1 are gone, though interestingly he
estimated that Motor Vehicle 3 has increased to value to $10,000.
In summary, on
his evidence the inheritance is gone save for, arguably, Motor Vehicle 1 and the
car purchased by the wife with the
funds that he gifted to her.
husband did give the wife $50,000 from that inheritance and paid some child
support and some school fees. The wife has included
in the asset pool the value
of the car that she purchased with those funds. While the husband gives evidence
of having provided over
$100,000 to the wife, it is apparent from his affidavit
evidence that he includes the payments of child support and school fees in
calculation. That is improper as those are not payments to the wife but properly
payments for the support of his children in
circumstances where he had received
a significant inheritance.
husband has not properly accounted for that money - at least $500,000 is
unaccounted for. In the one breath he tells me that he
has gambled it away
either directly or through the stock market and spent it on the high life in
hotels. But in the next breath he
objects to being labelled as having long term
gambling and drinking issues and goes on to blame the wife for driving him into
The wife sought to include the $10,000 that was in the husband’s
bank account in April 2024
there is no evidence those funds still exist. I do not propose to add that back
into the pool as to do so is illogical in the
context of $500,000 having gone
the same way and in any event that was not pressed.
wife does not seek to include in the asset pool the $500,000 odd that was either
spent or has been secreted by the husband. That
is persuasive to my
determination that what remains should be included. But for the husband’s
conduct the parties to the relationship
would be in a very different position
to the extent the evidence permitted any conclusion, the husband’s debt to
the second respondent was a personal debt acquired
substantially
post-separation. I am unable to make findings as to the quantum of that debt
other than to say that I reject the quantum
as argued by the husband and the
second respondent. The husband did not need money; certainly not after October
2022. He had more
than enough to establish himself and meet his liabilities. He
chose not to. The court is not bound to include personal post-separation
liabilities in the pool available for
distribution.
It should not be
included in the Balance Sheet in this matter due to the uncertainties around the
quantum and the circumstances of
the liability.
considered those matters, the case of
is particularly persuasive
where the Court
If for example, in the present case, there had been no other assets than the
husband’s inheritance, but the wife had, as his
Honour found, clearly
carried the main financial burden in support of a family and also performed a
more substantial role as a homemaker
and parent than the husband, then it would
clearly be open and indeed incumbent upon a Court to make a property settlement
favour from such an inheritance.
have made findings elsewhere in these reasons that the wife carried the main
financial and non-financial burden both during the
relationship and post
separation. I have made findings elsewhere in these reasons that, excluding
Motor Vehicle 1, the parties have
less than $60,000 in known or locatable
assets, despite the significant inheritance received by the husband. I have made
elsewhere that the transfer of Motor Vehicle 1 to the second respondent
was not a transaction made at arm’s length for fair
market value.
those reasons I propose to exercise the power available to the court under
and set aside the transfer of Motor Vehicle 1 to the second
respondent.
Motor Vehicle 1
parties obtained a valuation of the vehicle from a single expert appointed in
accordance with court directions. That value is
J noted to the court that the valuation was based on photos of the exterior of
the car only. As the car was in the possession of
the second respondent he
provided the photos for the valuation. For what it’s worth, noting that
she is not a party to the
proceedings, she did not dispute the valuation.
documents tendered by the second respondent included the following:
(a) The transfer registration of the vehicle to the second respondent dated 24
August 2024 with the value reflected at $10,000. There
was sensibly no effort to
persuade the court that this was a true reflection of the vehicle’s
(b) The insurance for the vehicle for the period 26 August 2024 to 26 August
2025 with the vehicle insured at “market value”;
(c) An undated online market valuation from Redbook with a value range to sell
of $77,900 - $84,750; and
(d) A desk top valuation from M Company dated 3 December 2024 placing the market
value at $95,000.
accept the value of the single expert as the best evidence before the
Asset Pool available for distribution
made those determinations the asset pool available for distribution between the
parties is as set out by the wife in her case
outline documents and is as
Description
Cash at Bank
Motor Vehicle 3
Household contents
Other personal property – gold, personal effects, work equipment, bike
Motor Vehicle 1
Husband’s Total
Cash at Bank
Cryptocurrency
Motor Vehicle 2
Household contents
L Organisation liability
Wife’s Total
makes a total asset pool for distribution between the parties of
Determining the Approach
Submissions
were made for the second respondent that the court should adopt a two pool
approach and the court was asked to consider
authorities in support of that
approach. I have considered that it is possible for the court to adopt a two
pool approach, however
I am of the view that a global approach is more
appropriate for the following collective reasons:
(1) This is not a short-term relationship rather a relationship of about ten
(2) There are two children of the relationship;
(3) During the relationship the wife received an inheritance and a compensation
payout both of which were contributed to the relationship;
(4) The wife was the primary carer for the children during the relationship and
post-separation;
(5) I accept the wife’s evidence that after the husband’s diagnosis
of an illness in 2015 he made minimal financial contributions;
(6) Despite receiving an inheritance of about $780,000 post-separation the
husband is unable to account for the majority of those
(7) The part of the inheritance given to the wife by the husband was used for
the benefit of the children and the purchase of a car,
she can sensibly account
for it and is content to include what remains in the asset pool; and
(8) The most valuable remaining or known asset, Motor Vehicle 1, was in the
husband’s possession until the transfer to the
second respondent in the
face of these proceedings.
Determining whether it is just and equitable to make
am of the view that it is just and equitable to make property orders for the
same reasons that I have adopted the global approach.
Without the court’s
involvement I am satisfied there would be a significant injustice.
Evaluation of
section 79(4)
- Contribution Issues
have considered the issue of contributions and in doing so reviewed again the
parties’ affidavits, their evidence under cross-examination
and documents
tendered. The significant factors that I have considered include the following,
noting that I prefer the wife’s
evidence as to the husband’s
contributions for the reasons outlined earlier in this determination:
(a) At the commencement of the relationship the wife had the greater
contributions with $25,000 in savings;
(b) In 2010, the wife commuted to Perth for approximately three months working
as an entertainer and earning approximately $10,000;
(c) In 2011 the wife suffered an injury at work;
(d) In November 2011, the parties separated and the wife moved to Perth to work
as an entertainer;
(e) In December 2012, the parties reconciled and resumed cohabitation at Suburb
N. The wife brought $15,000 into the relationship
from savings accumulated
during separation;
(f) In about 2014 the wife received a personal injury about of $30,000 that she
contributed to the relationship;
(g) In about 2015/2016 the wife received an inheritance of about $121,251.50
which she contributed to the relationship;
(h) The wife was the primary care giver for the children during the
relationship;
(i) The wife worked and contributed financially. I accept her evidence and am
satisfied that she carried the greater part of the
financial burden for the
(j) The husband also made financial contributions through employment however
experienced health issues from at least 2015 and after
his diagnosis the husband
rarely worked and did not work after 2018;
(k) I do not accept the husband’s submission that he was the primary
financial contributor as that is not supported by the
evidence. There is in fact
very little evidence about his financial contributions during the relationship
and what evidence there
is points to ad hoc and unreliable income;
(l) Post-separation the husband received an inheritance valued at about
$780,000. From those funds he gifted $50,000 to the wife
and paid outstanding
school fees. The wife used the funds she received to buy her car and to
contribute to living expenses. The remaining
funds were most likely wasted;
(m) The husband’s PPP Financial Summary reflects that at that date he had
only $10,000 left from the inheritance and Motor
Vehicle 1. The wife submits
that there is about $500,000 unaccounted for and in accordance with the
authorities the court should
adjust the remaining asset pool in her favour given
the husband’s failures in disclosure and the “disappearing”
financial resource. I accept the court has that power;
(n) The wife has remained the primary carer for the children post-separation. At
the time of trial that was a period of almost three
years. Since November 2024
the husband has spent limited time with the children; and
(o) Post-separation the husband has paid limited child support, with brief
periods of regular payments and a contribution to school
fees. I do not consider
funds paid for the benefit of the children in this way are a partial property
settlement as seems to be suggested
by the husband. There is no evidence of the
husband providing regular reliable assistance with the children’s
considered those matters I am of the view that the wife made the primary
financial as well as the primary non-financial contributions.
contributions at 70:30 in the wife’s favour.
Evaluation of
Section 75(2)
factors - Future Needs
parties are of a similar age.
husband has a diagnosis of an illness.
wife remains limited by the injuries that led to her compensation payout in
wife is the primary carer for the children of the relationship with the husband
having limited time with them.
CSA has assessed the husband’s provisional income at $4,000. His most
recent Financial Statement reflects his income as
$200 per week from investment
income. I am uncertain what investments he has – he has certainly not
declared any investments.
He gave oral evidence of disability support and ad hoc
work or partnership with others but certainly nothing concrete. Despite the
level of declared income the Financial Statement reflects that he pays rent of
$510 per week and has a total weekly expenditure
of $843 – more than four
times his alleged income. I can only regard his Financial Statement as a work of
fiction in those
circumstances.
accept the submission that the husband is likely to live week to week in future
and the wife cannot rely on him to assist in the
support of the children in
either a financial or practical way.
wife’s taxable income for the year ended 30 June 2024 was $33,872. Her
financial statement reflects her weekly income as
$1,025 being mainly government
benefits and $300 from her business.
current Child Support assessment is $9.45 per week.
children were 10 and 8 years at the time of trial. That means the mother has
another ten years ahead of her before both children
are adults, and in which
time she can expect little to no support from the husband based on his conduct
husband’s apparent wastage leaves him in a position where he has little in
the way of financial resources. In my view future
needs must be assessed
generously in favour of the wife due to the husband’s failures to disclose
and his wastage and/or disposal
of that money.
considered those circumstances, I make a 7% adjustment in favour of the
Just and Equitable
means a 77:23 split of the asset pool in favour of the wife. If such an order is
made that means the wife retains the assets
and liabilities in her possession
and control and in addition Motor Vehicle 1 is transferred into her name.
husband argues that with the payment he has already made to the wife she is in
receipt of 13% of the pool which it was submitted
was not inconsistent with the
authorities of
Bishop & Bishop
[2013] FamCAFC 138
[2009] FamCA 227
[2005] FamCA 40.
I do not accept
that submission because:
(a) The $100,000, or $85,899 that the husband has found in bank statements,
which the husband identifies as being paid to the wife
consisted in part of
informal child support – being irregular weekly payment - and school fees.
(b) Aside from her car, the money paid to the wife has been spent and I am not
satisfied that it should be added back into the pool.
The husband has not
established or indeed argued wastage by the wife – particularly not in
comparison to the sum of about $500,000
which he claims himself to have wasted
– and I am satisfied that the money the wife received no longer exists
aside from her
(c) Even if the parties had an informal agreement to allocate the funds as a
partial property settlement, which I do not accept,
it is a matter for the trial
judge to make findings as to the nature of the payment. I am satisfied that the
payments made by the
husband to the wife were not partial property settlements
aside from the current value of her car.
(d) This case may be further distinguished from those authorities by the fact
that we do not know if the husband’s inheritance
still exists - it is a
disappearing asset which appears to have been wasted.
(e) Each of those cases involved far more significant asset pools, noting again
that if the car is excluded the asset pool in this
matter is less than $60,000.
am not comforted by the suggestion that what the husband has wasted was in
effect his to waste, that the wife would have had no
further entitlement to that
inheritance over that which is already in her possession and control. I do not
agree, and I am not satisfied
that justice and equity has already been
therefore propose to make orders in terms proposed by the wife. I have amended
the orders sought by the wife to reflect the ownership
of Motor Vehicle 1 by the
Second Respondent and his joinder to these proceedings.
have varied the order sought so as to protect the wife from any liability
secured to the car by either or both the husband and the
second respondent up to
the date of delivery of the car to the wife; to protect her against any
liability incurred by them that is
outside the extent of the asset pool I have
considered in these reasons.
noted earlier, I will not make an order that the husband pay to the wife the
$10,000 that he had at the commencement of these proceedings.
have corrected a typographical error where the wife seeks to retain the
husband’s bank accounts as that is clearly an error
on the face of the
document. It will also not make orders regarding payment to the wife of any
insurance refund as that insurance
money was paid by the second respondent
rather than the husband.
am satisfied that the proposed division and the orders set out at the
commencement of these reasons are just and equitable.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
forty-four (144) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment
Dated: 19 August 2025
Bevan & Bevan
[2013] FamCAFC 116
[1984] HCA 21
(1984) 156 CLR 605
Exhibit W23 page 79 of 79
Exhibit R2-1
Wife’s filed
1 February 2024 and Husband’s filed 9 December
[2017] FamCAFC
[1991] FamCA
[2017] FamCAFC 125
[2017] FamCAFC 125
PPP Financial Summary
filed 5 April 2024
[2007] FamCA
[1991] FamCA 86
RTF format (970 KB)
Signed PDF/A format