R Lawyers v Mr Daily [2025] HCA 41 (5 November 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAGELER CJ,
EDELMAN, JAGOT AND BEECH‑JONES JJ
R LAWYERS APPELLANT
MR DAILY & ANOR RESPONDENTS
R Lawyers v Mr Daily
[2025] HCA 41
Date of Hearing: 12 June 2025
Date of Judgment: 5 November
leave to the appellant to file an amended notice of appeal.
aside orders 2, 3 and 4 of the orders made by the Full Court of the Federal
Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 1)
on 17 October 2024 and,
in their place, order that:
(a) the appeal be dismissed; and
(b) the appellant pay the second respondent's costs of the appeal.
first respondent pay the appellant's costs of the appeal.
On appeal from the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
Representation
J T Gleeson SC with R J May for the appellant (instructed by Barry Nilsson
A L Tokley KC with A S Hillary for the first respondent (instructed by
Charlton Rowley)
Submitting appearance for the second respondent
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
R Lawyers v Mr Daily
Negligence – Proof of loss and damage – Negligence by solicitor
– Financial agreement under
Family Law Act 1975
entered before marriage – Financial agreement provided
how property and financial resources dealt with on breakdown of marriage
Where financial agreement prepared by solicitor void for uncertainty –
Where financial agreement prepared by solicitor
set aside on hardship grounds
– Where solicitor breached duty of care to take reasonable care in giving
advice – Whether
client failed to adduce evidence establishing loss
– Whether negligence claim statute barred – When loss first
Words and phrases – "binding financial agreement", "cause of action
accrued", "character of the alleged loss", "compensable
loss", "compensatory
damages", "consequential losses", "damages", "date of separation", "did not get
what he should have got", "failed
to prove any further loss or damage",
"financial agreement before marriage", "financial agreement prepared with
reasonable care and
skill", "in the event of the breakdown of the marriage",
"lack of any evidence", "loss of chance", "loss or damage in tort", "lost
opportunity", "no force or effect until a separation declaration is made",
"properly characterising the claimed loss", "provision
for the birth of a child
or children", "provision of advice", "recovery of damages for the legal costs",
"set aside for uncertainty",
"spouse parties", "statute barred", "substantial
prospect of a beneficial outcome", "terms or scope of a financial agreement
with reasonable care and skill", "unless and until the marriage breaks
down", "void, voidable or unenforceable", "wasted legal fees",
"would not have
entered into the marriage".
Limitation of Actions Act 1936
Family Law Act 1975
GAGELER CJ, JAGOT AND BEECH-JONES JJ.
his marriage, the first respondent to this appeal, Mr Daily
(a pseudonym), purported to enter into a financial agreement under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) ("the FLA") with his
prospective spouse, Ms Daily (also a pseudonym), providing for how their
property and financial resources
were to be dealt with in the event of a
breakdown of the marriage (the so-called
The appellant,
R Lawyers, is the firm of solicitors that advised and acted for
Mr Daily in relation to the preparation of the BFA.
the marriage ended many years later, on the application of Ms Daily the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division
Division 1 Court") set aside the BFA on the grounds that the
Division 1 Court was satisfied that it was void for uncertainty
since the time the BFA was made there had been a material change in
circumstances relating to the care, welfare and development
of children of the
marriage the result of which would occasion hardship if the agreement was not
Division 1 Court also upheld part of a claim brought by Mr Daily in
negligence against R Lawyers in relation to the advice it
gave about the
drafting of the BFA.
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 1) Appellate
Mr Daily against
the Division 1 Court's dismissal of the balance of his claim against
R Lawyers in negligence and remitted that balance
for a further hearing at
first instance.
Appellate Court rejected R Lawyers' contention that the claim in negligence
against it was statute barred under the
Limitation of Actions Act
question of principle argued in this appeal is whether Mr Daily's claim
against R Lawyers for negligence is statute barred because
loss or damage
caused by the negligence as found occurred at the time the BFA was entered into
or at the time of his marriage on
the one hand (as R Lawyers contend), or
when Mr Daily and Ms Daily separated on the other (as Mr Daily
the reasons that follow the answer is that, on the evidence in this case,
R Lawyers' negligence did not cause Mr Daily to incur
any loss or
damage until the time he separated from Ms Daily. Accordingly,
Mr Daily's action is not statute barred and the grounds
contending that the Appellate Court erred in concluding to that effect should be
oral argument in this appeal R Lawyers applied for leave to amend its
notice of appeal to include a further ground that raises
another issue, namely
whether that part of Mr Daily's claim for negligence against R Lawyers
that was remitted for a further hearing
was bound to fail because Mr Daily
did not adduce evidence of the terms or scope of a financial agreement drafted
with reasonable
care and skill addressing the contingency that there might be
children of the marriage.
the reasons that follow R Lawyers should be granted leave to amend its
notice of appeal and the additional ground of appeal should
be upheld. Orders
should be made accordingly.
procedural history of this matter is unduly complicated. These reasons will not
record every complexity of that history.
and VIIIA of
is necessary to note only the following aspects of
and VIIIA of
financial agreement can be entered before
The parties to the
proposed marriage, the marriage, or the former marriage (the "spouse
) are necessary
parties to a financial agreement but other persons can also be
A financial
agreement entered into before marriage can address how the property or financial
resources of either or both of the parties
at the time the financial agreement
is made, or at a later time before divorce, are to be dealt with in the event of
a breakdown
of the marriage,
as well as the maintenance of either spouse during the marriage, after divorce
distinguishes between a "binding" financial agreement and a financial agreement
that is of force and
preconditions to a financial agreement becoming "binding", including that the
financial agreement must be signed by all
and that each
spouse party must have received independent legal advice about the financial
agreement's effect as well as the advantages
and disadvantages to that party of
making the financial
To the extent
that a binding financial agreement deals with how, in the event of the breakdown
of the marriage, all or any of the
property or financial resources of either or
both of the spouse parties, at the time the financial agreement is made or at a
time before divorce, are to be dealt with, that part of the financial
agreement "is of no force or effect until a separation declaration
separation declaration must be signed by at least one of the spouse parties to
the financial agreement
and must state that the spouse parties "have separated" and are living
separately and apart at the time of making the declaration
and, in the opinion
of the spouse parties making the declaration, "there is no reasonable likelihood
of cohabitation being
Clearly no such
declaration can be made until the spouse parties to the financial agreement are
separated. To address the issues
in this appeal it is not necessary to consider
whether there is any relevant difference between the time of separation of the
parties to a financial agreement and the time at which such a declaration
was or might have been made.
court with jurisdiction under the FLA may set aside a financial agreement "if,
and only if," the court is satisfied of one or more
specified circumstances
including (relevantly) that the "agreement is void, voidable or
unenforceable"
the making of the agreement, a material change in circumstances has occurred (
... relating to the care, welfare and development
of a child of the marriage)
and, as a result of the change, the child or, if the applicant [seeking to set
aside the financial agreement]
has caring responsibility for the child ... , a
party to the agreement will suffer hardship if the court does not set the
("hardship grounds").
, s 90KA provides that the "principles of law and equity" that
are applicable to determining the "validity, enforceability and effect
contracts and purported contracts" are applicable in determining whether a
financial agreement is "valid, enforceable or
effective".
Section 90KA(a) also provides that, in proceedings relating to a financial
agreement, a court has the same powers, and may grant
the same remedies, as this
Court has and may grant in proceedings "in connection with contracts or
purported contracts, being proceedings
in which the High Court has original
with jurisdiction may order that the financial agreement or a specified part of
it "be enforced as if it were an order of
of the FLA deals with property, spousal maintenance and maintenance agreements.
Section 79 confers power on a court "[i]n property
proceedings"
orders, in proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the
marriage, altering the interests of the parties
to the marriage in that
does not apply to "financial matters" or "financial resources" to
which a financial agreement "that is binding on the parties to
the agreement
"[F]inancial
matters" in relation to the parties to a marriage are matters with respect to
the maintenance of one of those parties,
the property of the parties or of
either of them, or the maintenance of children of the
"[F]inancial
resources" are not defined.
appeal is concerned only with that part of a financial agreement entered into
before marriage
purporting to make provision for how, in the event of the breakdown of the
marriage, the property or financial resources of the spouse
parties at the time
when the financial agreement was made and up until the time of divorce are to be
dealt with.
That part of
a financial agreement would be of no force or effect until a separation
declaration had been made (after
separation).
separation declaration had been made, and the financial agreement were binding
(including because it was not set aside by an
order of a court), then the
financial agreement could be enforced by a court under s 90KA. In that
of the FLA, including s 79, would not apply in respect
of those "financial matters" and "financial resources" to which the financial
agreement applies.
financial agreement were not "binding", or if it were set aside, then the
exemption from
would not apply and instead
, including
s 79, would apply to the financial matters and financial resources that
were the subject of the financial agreement.
the relevant events occurred in South Australia.
Mr Daily and
Ms Daily met in 1996 and started living together the following year.
Between 2002 and July 2005, R Lawyers provided advice
to Mr Daily
and prepared a draft financial agreement. On or around 21 July 2005,
Mr Daily and Ms Daily signed a deed. That deed recited
the parties'
intention to "contract out" of
of the FLA and to enter into a
"binding financial agreement under s 90B" within
(ie, the BFA). The BFA's intended effect under the FLA has already been
described. Mr Daily and Ms Daily were married
later that year. They
had a child in 2006 and another in 2009. They separated in September 2018.
December 2019 Ms Daily commenced proceedings in the Division 1 Court
against Mr Daily. She sought a declaration under s 90G that
was not binding, an order under s 90K that the BFA be set aside, and an
order under s 79 for the alteration and settlement
of property. In August
2021, and against the contingency that the BFA might be set aside or
unenforceable, Mr Daily filed an application
joining R Lawyers to the
proceedings and seeking damages for breach of contract and negligence. The
particulars of breach concerned
the drafting of the BFA, the provision of advice
FLA. R Lawyers denied negligence and breach of contract, and pleaded
that the claims against it were statute barred.
Division 1 Court's reasons
31 March 2023, the Division 1 Court found that the BFA was void for
uncertainty and unenforceable. The Division 1 Court also found
that the BFA
was liable to be set aside on hardship grounds (ie, s 90K(1)(d) of the
FLA). The Division 1 Court made an order setting
aside the BFA on both
The Division 1 Court undertook an "indicative" assessment of
each party's entitlements under s 79 of the FLA, subject to further
consideration
of whether that outcome was just and
Division 1 Court also found that, by the provision of "cursory,
nonspecific" advice that, inter alia, failed to advise Mr Daily
two bases that might warrant the BFA being set aside, R Lawyers breached
the duty of care it owed to take reasonable care
in advising Mr Daily. In
particular, the Division 1 Court found that the duty was breached by
R Lawyers' failure to provide "specific
advice" to Mr Daily as to
"what would happen upon the birth of a child and whether that might represent a
material change in circumstances"
and to advise Mr Daily as to the risks
"to the integrity of the [BFA] namely, whether there was a risk that it could be
as void for
uncertainty".
Division 1 Court did not accept that the action against R Lawyers in
negligence was statute barred, finding that the cause of
action accrued at the
"earliest [on] the date of separation" or "at the date of the notification
and/or institution of proceedings"
by Ms Daily.
Division 1 Court's further reasons
a further judgment dated 9 February 2024, the Division 1 Court
addressed the balance of the issues arising from Mr Daily's claim
component of Mr Daily's claim was for the recovery of damages for the legal
costs he incurred in litigating whether the BFA was
void for uncertainty which
had been wasted given the setting aside of the BFA on that ground ("the first
component"). The Division
1 Court allowed that component of the claim and
assessed damages for that component as $38,000. In awarding that amount, the
1 Court found either a further breach of R Lawyers' duty to
Mr Daily or further particularised the breaches that had already been
found, namely a failure to draft a financial agreement that would not be set
aside for uncertainty.
second component of Mr Daily's claim was that, by reason of R Lawyers'
breaches of duty, he was financially worse off as a result
of the outcome of
Ms Daily's application for orders under s 79 of the FLA ("the second
component"). With this second component, Mr
Daily accepted before the
Division 1 Court that he needed to "prove on the balance of probabilities
that there was available to him
an opportunity or opportunities of securing a
better financial result than that which was delivered to him under the judgment
the Court". Proceeding from the premise that, had R Lawyers discharged
its duty to Mr Daily, his financial agreement with Ms Daily
have been liable to be set aside for uncertainty, Mr Daily's written
submissions before the Division 1 Court articulated
the basis for the
second component of his claim as follows:
" ... there are only two realistic possibilities open. Either the [h]usband
would not have reached agreement with the [w]ife on a
financial agreement and
would not have entered the marriage
the [h]usband would have reached
agreement with the [w]ife on the terms of a financial agreement consistent with
his instructions
to [R Lawyers] but including a sufficient provision for
any child of the marriage, in the event of a breakdown in the marriage, so
the agreement was not vulnerable to being set aside under s 90K(1)(d)."
(emphasis added)
Division 1 Court rejected this second component of Mr Daily's claim
and declined to award any further "compensatory damages"
against R Lawyers
beyond the $38,000 for the first component in respect of wasted litigation costs
as outlined above. The Division
1 Court made three critical factual
findings in rejecting the second component of the claim.
the Division 1 Court found that Mr Daily did not establish that he
gave a clear instruction to R Lawyers as to "what he wanted"
with respect
to the BFA, being a financial agreement that "was effectively bullet proof
against the application" of the hardship
grounds in s 90K(1)(d) of the FLA.
The Division 1 Court found that, instead, Mr Daily understood that
"absolute certainty of outcome
could not be guaranteed".
the Division 1 Court found that Mr Daily did not demonstrate "the type
of clauses that could have been considered ... [to
be] a reasonable attempt to
avoid a potential application of s 90K(1)(d)" of the FLA.
the Division 1 Court was not satisfied that, absent an assurance of
certainty with respect to the effectiveness of the BFA,
Mr Daily "would not
have entered into the marriage".
findings were clearly fatal to the first of the "only two realistic
possibilities" that Mr Daily raised with respect to this
component of his
claim, namely that he would not have married Ms Daily. Whether those
findings are fatal to the second possibility
will be considered below.
The Appellate Court
appealed to the Appellate Court against (relevantly) the Division 1 Court's
finding that he suffered no compensable loss
beyond the amount of $38,000
awarded for wasted legal fees in Mr Daily unsuccessfully defending the
validity of the BFA.
R Lawyers (relevantly) cross‑appealed
against the Division 1 Court's refusal to dismiss the entirety of the
action against it
as statute barred.
Appellate Court allowed Mr Daily's appeal against the Division 1 Court's
refusal to award any compensation for the second component
of Mr Daily's
claim and dismissed R Lawyers' cross‑appeal. The Appellate Court
remitted the assessment of the second component
for a further hearing at first
upholding this aspect of Mr Daily's appeal, the Appellate Court reviewed
Mr Daily's pleading and submissions at trial and before
the Appellate
Court, and characterised the second component of his case as a claim for a "loss
of chance", specifically the "lost
opportunity to negotiate a BFA which made
provision for the birth of a child or children". The Appellate Court concluded
Division 1 Court did not address that component and remitted it
for "assessment".
Proceedings in this Court − amendment of
the Notice of Appeal
to a grant of special leave to appeal, R Lawyers contended that the
Appellate Court erred in finding that Mr Daily's claim
against it was not
statute barred, because the Appellate Court should have found that Mr Daily
sustained loss and damage upon his
entry into the BFA.
during the hearing of the appeal an issue emerged as to whether the Appellate
Court had correctly characterised the basis
upon which Mr Daily sought
damages in respect of the second component of his claim. The issue arose because
one of R Lawyers' submissions
in this Court took as its premise the
Appellate Court's holding that the Division 1 Court erred in not addressing
Mr Daily's claim
for damages for the "lost opportunity [or chance] to
negotiate a BFA which made provision for the birth of a child or children".
R Lawyers contended that opportunity must have been lost in 2005 when the
BFA was signed and hence loss or damage accrued at that
point in time. According
to R Lawyers there is a resulting "disconnect" in the Appellate Court
characterising Mr Daily's loss as
the loss of an opportunity and concluding
that Mr Daily's claim was not statute barred.
this Court, Mr Daily disavowed any characterisation of his case as
involving a loss of a chance even though the Appellate Court
recorded his case
to that court as being that the Division 1 Court failed to address whether
he suffered "loss comprising the loss
of a chance to negotiate a binding"
financial agreement. Instead, in this Court, Mr Daily contended that his
case was that he suffered
a loss in the form of a diminution of his interest in
securing a binding financial agreement that was not liable to be set aside
the FLA and that was effective upon his separating from Ms Daily, and that
the diminution or infringement of that interest
was purely contingent until at
least when he and Ms Daily separated (citing
Wardley Australia Ltd v
Western Australia
To that end, Mr Daily contended that the scope of the remittal contemplated
by the Appellate Court was unrestricted and enabled
him to adduce further
evidence proving the amount of that loss. R Lawyers contended that the
Appellate Court's order for remittal
resulted from error (in that it should have
held that Mr Daily's claims were statute barred) and, if not, was
restricted to an assessment
of the value of the lost opportunity to have agreed
upon a different financial agreement.
the conclusion of the hearing, Mr Daily was granted leave to file a notice
of contention to reflect his case as it was put in
this Court. His notice of
contention contended that the Appellate Court erred to the extent that it
characterised his claim as including
a lost opportunity to negotiate a different
financial agreement. Mr Daily contended, however, that the orders of the
Appellate Court
should be maintained on the basis that the Division 1 Court
should have assessed (although it did not) Mr Daily's loss by "undertaking
[a] comparison between the position Mr Daily would have enjoyed but for the
negligence of R Lawyers, and the position Mr Daily actually
himself in at separation because of R Lawyers' negligence".
the hearing of the appeal and having regard to the apparent recalibration of
Mr Daily's case in this Court, the Court invited
the parties to address the
basis on which Mr Daily might be permitted on a remittal in accordance with
the Appellate Court's orders
to lead evidence of what a financial agreement
prepared with reasonable care and skill would or might have been, how this
component of Mr Daily's claim could have succeeded without evidence
to that effect, and whether these issues were raised by R Lawyers'
response, R Lawyers filed an application for leave to amend its notice of
appeal to include a ground contending that, given that
Mr Daily did not
adduce evidence of what the terms of a financial agreement prepared with
reasonable care and skill would or might
have been, the Appellate Court erred in
attributing to the Division 1 Court an error of failing to properly address
the second component
of Mr Daily's claim and in remitting the assessment of
that component for a further hearing.
noted, R Lawyers should be granted leave to amend its notice of appeal.
Mr Daily submitted that the amended notice of appeal purports
to introduce
a ground of appeal that was not raised before the Appellate Court by way of
notice of contention and does not reflect
an argument that was before the
Division 1 Court. So far as proceedings before the Division 1 Court
are concerned, the onus was on
Mr Daily to prove his case and, if the
proposed additional ground of appeal is upheld, he failed to do so. It is
correct that R Lawyers
filed no notice of contention to this effect in the
Appellate Court, but this issue only emerged out of the Appellate Court's
and (supposedly, on Mr Daily's case) the unconfined remittal
question of the
of the alleged loss suffered is related (and
generally anterior) to an assessment of
that loss was suffered. The
difficulties in characterising the character of Mr Daily's alleged loss
only emerged during argument
in this Court about when that loss arose. It was
that debate which prompted the grant of an indulgence to Mr Daily to allow
file his notice of contention even though in that notice he appears now
to have retracted the characterisation of his loss that he
urged on the
Appellate Court.
result is that, if this Court were to address and reject only the existing
grounds of appeal, the Appellate Court's remittal
order would be undisturbed.
The scope of that remittal would remain uncertain, such that Mr Daily would
seemingly seek to rerun or
supplement his case by evidence that he should have
adduced at trial. R Lawyers should be granted leave to amend its notice of
to avoid the proceedings being left in such an unsatisfactory state.
The Appellate Court erred in upholding and remitting
Mr Daily's claim for further compensatory damages
R Lawyers' contention as to the "disconnect" in the Appellate Court's
reasons, it is appropriate first to address the additional
ground of appeal
before determining whether Mr Daily's claim was statute
establish his case against R Lawyers in negligence, it was necessary for
Mr Daily to prove on the balance of probabilities that
the breaches of the
duty of care owed to him by R Lawyers were a cause of loss or damage "(in
the sense of detrimental
difference)".
standard of proof is not exacting and "does not require certainty or
precision",
that standard
is not discharged by merely proving the loss of a
chance of a
better outcome.
contexts, a lost opportunity may constitute loss or damage in
but, even in those
cases, the opportunity must itself be of some value; that is, it must be shown
that there was a "substantial prospect
of a beneficial outcome" but for breach
of the duty of care.
argument in this Court did not address whether the second component of
Mr Daily's claim
be framed as a claim for a lost opportunity.
Instead, the argument in this Court addressed how Mr Daily
this second component of his case. That framing is encapsulated in
the paragraph of his submissions before the Division 1 Court noted
Although that
paragraph of those submissions is prefaced by a reference to proving an
"opportunity or opportunities of securing a
better financial result", the
submissions contended that, in the context of receiving advice about entry into
a hypothetical financial
agreement that was not liable to be set aside under the
FLA, there were "only two realistic possibilities". According to those
submissions,
those two possibilities represented an exhaustive statement of the
counterfactual scenarios; they were not two examples of valuable
opportunities amongst other possibilities.
the Division 1 Court concluded that it was not satisfied that Mr Daily
"would not have entered into the marriage" unless absolutely
certain that the
BFA would be held to be valid if it were to be challenged, the only possible
remaining basis for establishing loss
that Mr Daily articulated was that he
"would have reached agreement with [Ms Daily] on the terms of a financial
agreement consistent
with his instructions to" R Lawyers which made
"sufficient provision for any child of the marriage" so that it was not
to being set aside under s 90K(1)(d) of the FLA. That is,
Mr Daily's case before the Division 1 Court was that he
agreed upon a financial agreement and it
such a challenge and been effective upon separation (and been more favourable
than the orders made against him under s 79
of the FLA).
a plaintiff may seek to frame their case as they choose, the nature of their
loss and the time at which loss occurs is a matter
which a defendant may contest
and, ultimately, is for the court to determine. Until the hearing before the
Appellate Court, Mr Daily's
claim was not framed as a loss of chance case.
Nor is it apparent that Mr Daily could have proved the loss of a chance of
given that, irrespective of the invalidity of the BFA for uncertainty
as found below, the BFA was always vulnerable to be set aside
on any of the
other grounds in s 90K(1) of the FLA which include contingencies (such as
s 90K(1)(c) and (d)) that could not be known
or assessed at the time the
BFA was executed. As such, Mr Daily's case should have risen or fallen
before the Appellate Court on
the basis of his alleged loss as put before the
Division 1 Court.
noted, one ground of Mr Daily's notice of contention is that, even if the
Appellate Court erred in properly characterising the
claimed loss, it was
correct to conclude that the Division 1 Court did not properly consider
Mr Daily's loss. However, as also noted,
the Division 1 Court found
that Mr Daily did not instruct R Lawyers to the effect that he wanted
a financial agreement that "was
effectively bullet proof against the application
of s 90K(1)(d)" of the FLA and otherwise noted the absence of any evidence
terms of a financial agreement that even amounted to a "reasonable
attempt to avoid a potential application of s 90K(1)(d)". Those
findings were
fatal to the second component of Mr Daily's case.
any event, the second component of Mr Daily's claim was bound to fail by
reason of Mr Daily's failure to adduce evidence establishing
of loss beyond the litigation costs wasted in unsuccessfully
defending the validity of the BFA as not void for uncertainty. At trial
Mr Daily did not adduce any evidence as to a form of financial agreement
that a lawyer in 2005, exercising reasonable care and skill,
would (or might)
have drafted to avoid that financial agreement being set aside and to have that
financial agreement be effective
upon separation, including a financial
agreement that addressed the potential that Mr Daily and Ms Daily
might have had children.
Nor did Mr Daily adduce any evidence from which it
could have been inferred that Ms Daily would (or might) have agreed to such
financial agreement around that time.
this Court, Mr Daily asserted that there was such evidence but did not
identify what it was beyond pointing to the Division 1
Court's finding of
negligence on the part of R Lawyers, and part of Mr Daily's evidence
of his instructions to the effect than he
wanted the BFA to "include our plans
and scenarios, including children". The Division 1 Court's findings of
negligence on this topic,
however, went no further than that R Lawyers
failed to advise Mr Daily "what would happen upon the birth of a child and
whether that
might represent a material change in circumstances".
some lawyer negligence cases a court can infer the particular steps that might
have been taken had the lawyer discharged their
However, the lack
of any evidence about what such a financial agreement should have provided in
this case if there were children
of the marriage could not be so
may be that a finding that Mr Daily suffered loss as a consequence of
R Lawyers' failure to exercise reasonable care and skill
would not have
required the precise terms of the counterfactual financial agreement to have
been identified, but Mr Daily would have
had to identify at least the
scope, nature and likely monetary amount or range of monetary amounts that any
provision for children
would have entailed. Unless that was done there could not
be any assessment of whether Ms Daily would (or may) have agreed to such
financial agreement, whether it would or may have survived a challenge on
hardship grounds many years later and, if so, whether
it would have secured
a better outcome for Mr Daily compared to the orders the Division 1
Court made under s 79 of the FLA.
additional ground of appeal must be upheld.
Mr Daily's claim
against R Lawyers was not statute barred
remain to be considered R Lawyers' original grounds of appeal concerning
whether Mr Daily's claim against it was statute barred.
contended that the wasted legal fees Mr Daily incurred in litigating about
the uncertainty of the BFA was consequential
loss he suffered after incurring
direct loss on entry into the BFA in 2005. If that argument were to be accepted
it would mean that,
subject to any extension of the limitation period, an action
for the recovery of damages for those wasted legal fees would be statute
However, by its amended notice of appeal, R Lawyers did not seek to
challenge the award of $38,000 in damages for those wasted
legal fees. Even so,
as the limitation issue was fully argued it should be addressed
noted, Mr Daily sued R Lawyers in contract and tort. The
Division 1 Court had accrued jurisdiction to hear and determine that
relevant events the subject of the claim took place in South Australia, the
Limitation of Actions Act
was picked up and required to be applied to
Mr Daily's claim.
Subject to any extension of the limitation period, actions founded upon contract
or tort must be commenced within six years of the
accruing of the cause of
action in contract accrued upon the breach of the standard imposed upon
R Lawyers under Mr Daily's contract of
with it, and
therefore became statute barred by around
However, time did
not start to run for his cause of action founded on the tort of negligence until
that cause of action was complete,
which would occur "only if and when damage
[was] sustained".
this Court held that, where a misrepresentation caused the
injured party to enter into an agreement which exposed that party to a
the subsequent occurrence of contingencies, such as an indemnity, no loss was
suffered until those contingencies were
particular aspects of
relevant to the present context should be
Mason CJ, Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ observed
that, for actions in negligence, "[t]he kind of economic loss which is sustained
and the time when it is first sustained depend upon the nature of the
interest infringed
and, perhaps, the nature of the interference to which
it is subjected".
significance of identifying the nature of the interest infringed was emphasised
The Commonwealth v Cornwell
where it was held that actual loss was not
sustained by an employee who was advised in 1965 that he was not eligible to
join a superannuation
fund created by a public service statutory superannuation
scheme until his retirement in 1994, when he received a lesser benefit
which he would have received had he joined the scheme in
In 1976 the fund
had been closed so that after that time the employee could not join the fund and
make up the benefits he would otherwise
have obtained through extra
contributions.
the employee joined a different fund that conferred lesser
entitlements.
majority in
did not accept that loss accrued in either 1976 or
1987 because the employee's entitlements under the fund he would have joined in
1965 were always "prospective and contingent upon the falling in at a future
time of the statutory criteria", the relevant statutory
criterion being the fact
of the employee's retirement in
An important step
in the reasoning to that conclusion was the identification of the "interest"
that was infringed, not as a proprietary
interest or a liability, but instead
"an 'entitlement' conferred by federal statute
which required
fulfilment of the statutory criteria (relevantly, retirement) to accrue.
Mason CJ, Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ
distinguished various English
that suggested that
a plaintiff sustains loss at the time of entry into an agreement even if many
aspects of the agreement are
contingent.
Their Honours
described those English cases as "proceed[ing] according to the view that, where
the plaintiff is induced by a negligent
misrepresentation to enter into a
contract and the contract, as a result of the negligence, yields property or
contractual rights
of lesser value, the plaintiff first suffers financial loss
on entry into the
Their Honours
rationalised the outcome in those cases on the basis that the plaintiffs had
"sustain[ed] measurable loss at an earlier
time, quite apart from the contingent
loss which threatened at a later
Law Society
v Sephton & Co (a
Lord Hoffmann agreed with
and Mason CJ, Dawson, Gaudron
and McHugh JJ's analysis of those English cases.
with this approach, in
Brennan J explained the difference
between, on the one hand, entering into an agreement which imposed burdens and
conferred benefits
and, on the other, suffering
"But if a benefit is acquired by the plaintiff, it may not be possible to
ascertain whether loss or damage has been suffered at the
time when the burden
is borne – that is, at the time of the payment, the transfer, the
diminution in value of the asset or
the incurring of the liability. A
transaction in which there are benefits and burdens results in loss or damage
only if an adverse
balance is struck. If the balance cannot be struck until
certain events occur, no loss is suffered until those events occur."
involved a misrepresentation inducing the innocent party to enter
into an agreement that subjected that innocent party to a contingent
namely an indemnity. Mason CJ, Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ in
Lord Hoffmann in
a potential difference between that circumstance and the circumstance where,
through the negligence of a defendant, a
plaintiff did not obtain the rights
they should have obtained under an agreement had it been properly drafted,
albeit that the accrual
of benefits and the suffering of burdens under such an
agreement are subject to
contingencies.
, Lord Hoffmann identified that class of case as one in which
it "may be relatively easy ... to infer that the plaintiff has suffered
immediate damage, simply because he [or she] did not get what he [or she] should
Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ made a similar observation in
although their Honours appear to have confined that observation to the
circumstance in which the contractual measure of damages
applicable.
v Adelaide Petroleum NL
Brennan J observed that the loss of a right to
obtain a benefit is itself a loss in respect of which an amount may be
was of significance in
Burton v Thom
bears a superficial factual similarity to the present case. In
, a firm of solicitors negligently failed to have a prenuptial
agreement, purporting to contract out of the effect of some provisions
Matrimonial Property Act 1976
(NZ), properly executed and it was
thereby held invalid. As a result, the provisions of the
Matrimonial Property
applied to the solicitors' client's house such that, much later after
the couple separated, the client's former spouse was awarded
a one‑third
interest in the house. Had the agreement been valid and enforced the house would
have remained the client's separate
property and outside the reach of the
Matrimonial Property
Davys Burton
Elias CJ held that the client suffered an immediate loss
on his marriage without the protection of a valid agreement because "he did
get what he should have got" and thus his claim was statute
Her Honour noted
Lord Hoffmann's observations in
as to the point in time at
which loss in such circumstances might be more readily
The remaining
members of the Court in
Davys Burton
also found that the client had
suffered an immediate detriment upon receiving a
or "damaged"
such that the
limitation period commenced to run upon receipt of the asset.
Davys Burton
and contended that the present case is analogous
in that, as a result of its negligence and the consequential invalidity of the
Mr Daily "did not get what he should have got" from the performance of
R Lawyers' duty and thus it can be readily inferred that he
suffered loss
when the BFA was executed or no later than the time at which he married
Ms Daily with an inadequate financial agreement
explained, identifying the interest that is said to be infringed is critical to
an application of the limitation periods to actions
founded on the tort of
negligence causing economic
appeared to treat Mr Daily's interest in securing a financial agreement not
liable to be set aside under the FLA that was
effective upon separation as
equivalent to a flawed contract or "damaged asset" which, had it been properly
drafted, would have operated
in a similar manner to the intended operation of
the prenuptial agreement in
Davys Burton
. That characterisation of
Mr Daily's interest is inapposite.
a financial agreement has features of an agreement or simple contract, it is
also very much a creature of statute. Insofar
as a financial agreement deals
with how property or financial resources of the parties to a marriage are to be
dealt with in the
event of a breakdown of the marriage, the financial
agreement's ultimate function is to define rights and obligations enforceable
an order made under s 90KA and avoid the operation of s 79.
Critically, those parts of a financial agreement are not enforceable
until after
separation.
Those parts
of a financial agreement do not operate or attach any consequence to any
property of a party to the financial agreement
or have any other relevant effect
at the time of the marriage. Unlike the statutory scheme in
Davys Burton
the relevant parts of the FLA do not "attach[] immediately upon ...
Further and
unlike many classes of agreement, a financial agreement is also liable to be set
aside on various grounds that relate
to unknowable material changes in
circumstances that have arisen after entry into the financial agreement,
including circumstances
relating to "the care, welfare and development of a
child of the
Ultimately,
the "interest" of Mr Daily that was infringed as a consequence of
R Lawyers' negligence as found, namely Mr Daily's interest
in securing
a financial agreement not liable to be set aside under the FLA so that it was
enforceable on and after separation, is
of a kind similar to the interest of the
employee in respect of the statutory scheme considered in
not of a kind similar to a party's interests in a bundle of contractual rights
in a commercial agreement.
statutory context in which a financial agreement operates involves a limitless
variety of individual circumstances not all of
which can be known or even
anticipated in a meaningful way at the time of entry into the financial
agreement, including but not restricted
to variations in lengths of
relationships, the number and needs of any children of the relationship and the
financial, health and
other needs of the parties to the relationship. The
potential variations in personal circumstances that may occur from the time of
marriage until it ends are so innumerable that it is not "possible to ascertain
whether loss or damage has
sustained by reason
of a person's entrance into or failure to enter into a binding and effective
financial agreement at the time
of entry (or marriage).
than a decade after he married Ms Daily, Mr Daily considered it was in
his interests to seek to enforce the BFA. However, there
are numerous
permutations of events that might have occurred between the date of execution of
the BFA and the separation of the parties
to the marriage, such as radical
changes in one or both of Mr Daily's and Ms Daily's respective
financial circumstances or health,
which may have rendered Mr Daily worse
off financially if the BFA had been binding and effective than if orders were
made under s
79 of the FLA.
is true that, as a result of R Lawyers' negligence, Mr Daily "did not
get what he should have got", in that he was denied entry
into a binding and
enforceable financial agreement. However, the process of reasoning identified by
Lord Hoffmann in
that was approved in
Davys Burton
from that denial that Mr Daily "suffered some
immediate damage".
doubt in many contexts it will be inferred that a party who retained a solicitor
to draft and advise upon an agreement that was
found to be void and ineffective
suffered loss or damage when that agreement was purported to be executed.
However, a finding that
a party suffered loss at that time is not inevitable. In
this particular statutory and factual context, it is an inference that cannot
otherwise submitted that the fact that Mr Daily could have recovered legal
costs for remedying the defects in the BFA on
or after execution of the BFA in
2005 demonstrated that the loss or damage was suffered in 2005. That might have
been so if Mr Daily
had incurred legal costs to remedy the defects in the
BFA on or after 2005 but that did not
difference between, on the one hand, identifying when loss or damage first
accrues in the events that happened even if
that is not the loss that is claimed
in the action and, on the other, merely speculating about loss that might have
been suffered
or recovered if the events had been
submission of R Lawyers is in the latter category.
Accordingly,
Mr Daily's cause of action in negligence against R Lawyers did not
accrue until (at least) the time of his separation
from Ms Daily. It
follows that Mr Daily's claim against R Lawyers was not statute
barred. The original grounds of the notice of appeal
Disposition
orders proposed by Gordon and Edelman JJ should be made.
AND EDELMAN JJ. A financial agreement entered into between the first
respondent, Mr Daily (a pseudonym), and the second respondent,
his wife, Ms
Daily (also a pseudonym), under s 90B in Pt VIIIA of the
(Cth) ("the FLA") was set aside for uncertainty by the Federal
Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 1). The appellant,
R Lawyers, who acted for Mr Daily in preparing the financial
agreement, was held liable to Mr Daily in negligence. There is no challenge
in this Court to the finding of negligence.
question raised by the initial grounds in this appeal is whether Mr Daily's
claim in negligence against R
was barred by the
Limitation of Actions Act 1936
Limitation Act
Section 35(c)
Limitation Act
provides a defence to a claim in negligence that is
brought more than six years from the date on which the cause of action accrued.
Whether Mr Daily's claim in negligence was barred by
Limitation Act
he suffered loss as a result of the
defective financial agreement ("the BFA").
these reasons will show, however, it was not established that any actual loss
that Mr Daily suffered as a result of the negligence
of R Lawyers arose
before a separation declaration was made within the meaning of s 90DA(1) of
the FLA. The appeal must be allowed
on the basis of a proposed additional ground
of appeal raised after the hearing by R Lawyers that, other than $38,000 in
awarded to him by the primary judge for his legal fees in relation to
the claim that the BFA was uncertain and not in issue in this
Court, Mr Daily
failed to prove any further loss or damage caused by the negligence of R
Lawyers. Consequential orders should be
made setting aside the orders of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 1) in its appellate
Full Court") of 17 October 2024 and, in their place, it
should be ordered that the appeal to that Court be dismissed and that Mr
pay R Lawyers' costs of that appeal.
reasons will identify the relevant provisions of the FLA which provide the
framework for determining the validity and enforceability
of a financial
agreement entered into under
, then set out,
in some detail, the history of the proceedings, including the decisions of the
lower courts (Pt 2). The reasons will
then turn to consider the
several ways in which a client may suffer and then prove loss or damage as
a result of the negligent conduct
of a solicitor
, before dealing
with the issues raised in this Court
Family Law Act
) of the FLA deals with the property of parties to
a marriage, spousal maintenance and maintenance agreements. Under
of the FLA, the court may make such orders as it considers
appropriate as to the division of property in property settlement proceedings.
does not apply to financial matters and resources "to
which a financial
binding on the parties to the agreement
of the FLA deals with financial agreements. A financial agreement may
be made before marriage,
during marriage
a divorce order is made.
A financial agreement is only binding on the parties if certain conditions are
and a provision of a
financial agreement that relates to the maintenance of a spouse party to
the agreement or a child or children
is void unless it specifies certain
matters, including the party, or the child or children, for whose
maintenance provision is made
and the amount provided for, or the value of the
portion of the relevant property attributable to, the maintenance of
the party or
the child or each
financial agreement before
is a written
agreement with respect to any of the following matters: (a) "how, in the event
of the breakdown of the marriage, all
or any of the property or financial
resources of either or both of the spouse parties at the time when the agreement
is made, or
at a later time and before divorce, is to be dealt
"maintenance of either of the spouse parties" during the marriage, after divorce
or both during the marriage and after
A financial
agreement may also contain matters incidental to those
Importantly,
a number of provisions address when a financial agreement is, or particular
provisions of a financial agreement are,
of force and effect. Whether an
agreement is, or particular provisions are, of force and effect primarily
depends on two matters
– the subject matter of particular provisions of
the financial agreement and then, in relation to that subject matter, the
occurrence of a specified event.
financial agreement "that is binding on the parties to the agreement,
to the extent to which it deals with how, in the event of
the breakdown of
the marriage, all or any of the property or financial resources of either or
both of the spouse parties: (a) at
the time when the agreement is made; or (b)
at a later time and before the termination of the marriage by divorce; are to be
with, is of no force or effect until a separation declaration is
A separation
declaration
a written declaration that must be signed by at least one of the spouse
parties to the financial
and must state
that the spouse parties have separated and are living separately and apart at
the declaration time
in the opinion of the spouse parties making the declaration, there is no
reasonable likelihood of cohabitation being
before a separation declaration is made, a financial agreement will be of force
and effect in relation to the other matters
it deals with (except for any
matters covered by
Section 90DB(2)
then provides that a financial agreement that is binding on
the parties to the agreement, to the extent that it provides for the
matters" in
s 90B(3)(b)
s 90C(3)(b)
, is of no force or effect
"unless and until the marriage breaks
combined effect of
is that a financial agreement
entered into before marriage is of no force or effect in relation to
the property or financial resources
of either or both of the spouse parties
until a separation declaration is made and, in relation to other matters,
unless and until
the marriage breaks down.
a court may make an order setting aside a financial agreement if satisfied of
certain matters, including that the agreement
is void, voidable or unenforceable
or, since the making of the agreement, a material change in circumstances has
occurred (being
circumstances relating to the care, welfare and development of a
child of the marriage) and, as a result of the change, the child
or a party to
the agreement who has caring responsibility for the child will suffer hardship
if the agreement is not set
history of the litigation is long, tortured and complex. It is hoped it is
never repeated. The complexity is in part the result
of the imprecision with
which Mr Daily pleaded, argued and sought to prove the loss arising from R
Lawyers' negligence. Not all of
that complexity is recorded in these
Daily and Ms Daily met in 1996. Over the course of 2002 to July 2005, R Lawyers
provided advice to Mr Daily and ultimately drafted
On 21 July 2005, Mr Daily and Ms Daily entered into the BFA, in
the form of a deed.
BFA recited that the parties wanted "so far as possible to contract out of the
provisions of [Pt VIII of the FLA]" and "to enter
into a binding financial
agreement under [s 90B of the FLA]".
BFA commenced upon the parties' marriage. The parties confirmed
the accuracy of the recitals. The BFA recorded that it was made
of the FLA.
Later events
and Ms Daily married in late 2005. They had one child in 2006 and another in
2009. They separated in September 2018.
December 2019, Ms Daily sought to set aside the BFA and, in the event that
occurred, to claim a property settlement under
of the FLA.
Mr Daily opposed that application. The proceedings were bifurcated. The
validity of the BFA was determined first. In
June 2020, the BFA was set
successfully appealed to the Full Court, which remitted the question of the
validity of the BFA to the primary judge for
Mr Daily's claim against R Lawyers
August 2021, prior to the rehearing about the validity of the BFA, Mr Daily
joined R Lawyers to the proceedings claiming, in the
event that the BFA was
not enforceable or was set aside, or in the event that it did not provide for
the division of the assets of
the parties in accordance with Mr Daily's
instructions, damages, costs and interest for breach of contract and negligence.
necessary to set out Mr Daily's claim in some detail.
Daily alleged that R Lawyers breached its duty of care to Mr Daily by, among
other things: not informing Mr Daily that the BFA
would not result in
the division of the assets of the parties in accordance with his
instructions; not advising Mr Daily that the
terms of the BFA were not
specifically enforceable because they lacked certainty; failing "to further
amend" the BFA such that its
terms were more certain and capable of specific
enforcement; and failing to advise Mr Daily that the effect of
s 90K(1)(d)
of the FLA was that a "material change in circumstances" was "either/or the
birth of a child or separation,
simpliciter
the event that the Court found that the BFA was not enforceable for want of
certainty of its terms, Mr Daily alleged that he had
suffered, or would
suffer, loss and damage by reason of R Lawyers' negligence because, among other
things: Mr Daily would be liable
to pay Ms Daily more by way of property
settlement than he would have been required to pay her pursuant to the BFA; Ms
a claim to spousal maintenance that should have been excluded by
and Mr Daily had incurred, and was liable to his advisers
for, the costs of the proceedings, including the appeal to the Full Court.
Mr Daily claimed that he was unable to provide particulars of what property
settlement might be determined by the Court, save to
say that the monetary
amount of the property orders must by definition be greater than that which
would be due to Ms Daily under
the BFA where the Court had determined that
Ms Daily would suffer "hardship" within the meaning of
s 90K(1)(d)
of the FLA if the BFA were not set aside.
other aspects of Mr Daily's claim should be noted. First, Mr Daily pleaded
that, if R Lawyers had informed him that the terms
of the BFA were not
enforceable because they lacked certainty, then Mr Daily would have insisted
that the BFA be amended to reflect
his instructions and re-executed by the
parties in compliance with the FLA. He also pleaded that, if Ms Daily had
refused to sign
the BFA as amended, then Mr Daily would not have married her or
had the children with her. The "no marriage" claim was rejected by
the primary
Those claims – that Mr Daily would not have
married Ms Daily and that he would not have had children with Ms Daily
no longer pressed.
Mr Daily pleaded that, to the extent he required an extension of time within
which to make the claim against R Lawyers (which
was not admitted), he
s 48(3)(b)(i)
Limitation Act
on the basis that
he first ascertained the following material facts at the following times: (1)
that the BFA might be set aside because
of the birth of the children – on
receipt of the judgment at first
(2) that the
BFA might be unenforceable for uncertainty of
terms – on receipt of the judgment on
alternative, the judgment at first
and (3) that
the BFA may not reflect the instructions that he gave to R Lawyers for the
division of the assets of the parties upon
separation – on receipt of the judgment on
pleaded that it was just and equitable that the time within which his action
might be commenced be extended to 31 May 2021.
Lawyers' pleaded response denied Mr Daily's claim in negligence,
denied that he suffered the pleaded loss or damage and further
in the event the BFA was not enforceable (which was not admitted), the BFA was
liable to be and would be set aside on
the grounds of a material change in
circumstances relating to the care, welfare and development of a child of the
marriage and hardship
to Ms Daily if the BFA was enforced.
answer to Mr Daily's request for an extension of time, and in answer to the
whole of Mr Daily's claim, R Lawyers said that the
claims were statute barred
and that, if Mr Daily suffered any loss or damage, the cause of action arose on
or about 21 July 2005.
R Lawyers pleaded that Mr Daily did not satisfy
the requirements of
Limitation Act
extension of time and denied that any new material fact was ascertained
following the expiration of the time period, such
that Mr Daily was
not entitled to an extension of time as alleged or at
Primary judge – rehearing on validity of BFA and
hearing on liability of R Lawyers
the primary judge, there were therefore two issues – whether the BFA was
binding and, in the event that it was not binding,
the liability of
primary judge upheld Ms Daily's claim that the BFA was void for uncertainty and
set aside the BFA. The primary judge held that
the interests of Mr Daily
and Ms Daily were to be considered pursuant to s 79 of the FLA.
was common ground that the Court had accrued jurisdiction to determine Mr
Daily's claim against R Lawyers with the challenge to
the validity of the
BFA but Mr and Ms Daily disagreed as to how the separate actions should be heard
and determined and the impact,
if any, on the s 79 proceedings should there
be a finding that R Lawyers was liable to Mr Daily for damages.
The concern was that
there would be a cycle of proceedings under s 79
of the FLA, following which there would be further argument as to how the
should be treated in the s 79 proceedings. The primary judge approached
the issue on the basis that a consideration of any award
of damages was a
relevant factor in determining the appropriate order to make in the
property settlement proceedings under s 79(4)(e)
to that issue, the primary judge identified the net pool of assets as $2,168,151
and, on the basis that Ms Daily was entitled
to 50 per cent, awarded her an
"indicative settlement sum payable to her of $741,634, subject to further
consideration of whether
the outcome is just and equitable taking into account
any successful damages claim" by Mr Daily against R Lawyers.
primary judge then turned to address Mr Daily's claim against
R Lawyers. After recording the finding that the BFA was void for
uncertainty, the primary judge turned to address R Lawyers' contention that
Mr Daily's claim was statute barred by
primary judge upheld Mr Daily's pleaded duty of care and his allegations of
breach of duty of care. In particular, the primary
judge held that
R Lawyers fell short of the applicable standard of care both in respect of
the risk of the BFA being held to be void
for uncertainty and the risk of it
being set aside on hardship grounds. The primary judge concluded that the
loss and damage claimed
by Mr Daily was not sustained until, at the earliest,
the date of separation when the parties may have considered the application
the BFA, and that Mr Daily's claim in negligence was thereby within time
and not statute barred. In any event, the judge also
considered that there
had been a material change in the circumstances relating to the care,
welfare and development of the children
and, as a result, Ms Daily would suffer
hardship if the Court did not set aside
the agreement.
primary judge recorded that, "[b]roadly speaking", Mr Daily
"would seek damages to be assessed on the difference between his
expectation of the payment to [Ms Daily] pursuant to the BFA and the settlement
sum ordered following a consideration of [Ms Daily's]
entitlement pursuant to
s 79 of the [FLA]". The primary judge noted that the assessment of
damages was "made more complex by the
uncertainty of the terms of the BFA
and how that would translate or be capable of certain determination pursuant to
it appears that at the conclusion of the evidence the judge heard detailed
submissions from the parties as to the question
of damages that might flow from
the decision of the Court to set aside the BFA on the basis of uncertainty,
neither Mr Daily nor
R Lawyers made submissions on the question of the
of damages. Instead, the primary judge set aside the BFA
and ordered the matter to "be listed for further submissions on the question
the quantum of damages".
the primary judge subsequently recorded, whilst Mr Daily sought leave to
make further submissions as to "a more precise calculation
of the quantum of
damages", his "initial position" stated in July 2022 was that, if the Court
found that the BFA was not enforceable
for want of certainty of terms, he had
suffered, or would suffer, loss and damage by reason of R Lawyers'
negligence because he would
be liable to pay Ms Daily more by way of property
settlement than he would have been required to pay her pursuant to the BFA.
Mr Daily's application to adduce further evidence
4 September 2023, Mr Daily applied to adduce further evidence including,
relevantly, updated particulars of his legal
conceded that the relevant component of Mr Daily's costs relating to the
negligence of R Lawyers' conduct was a relevant
consideration in the
assessment of damages and did not oppose further evidence being
Given those
circumstances, the primary judge granted Mr Daily leave to introduce
evidence of his legal fees that he considered relevant
to the determination of
However, the
primary judge stated that at that stage, "and as a result of the lack of
particularity provided by [Mr Daily], the extent
of the further evidence to be
led and the extent of any cross-examination, if any, [was] not to be
determined".
concluded that aspect of his reasons by stating that "[b]ut for the concession
of [R Lawyers], the paucity of evidence
provided by [Mr Daily] would
have been a factor to
Primary judge – quantum of damages
On 9 February
2024, the primary judge made final property settlement orders between
Mr Daily and Ms Daily and, subject to the question
of damages (if any)
arising from Mr Daily's legal fees, made a finding that Mr Daily had not
suffered any compensable loss and damage
because of the negligence of
R Lawyers. It is this latter finding that lies at the heart of the issues
in this Court.
contended that he was entitled to damages that were to be assessed by reference
to the amount payable under the BFA and
the amount now payable to Ms Daily,
having regard to the indicative settlement sum, and his legal fees of $821,000
as damages. Mr
Daily's initial position in terms of calculation was beset with
difficulties. He submitted that Ms Daily may have wished to negotiate
terms of a financial agreement prepared reasonably and competently,
which was a contingency the Court was required to
take into account.
Mr Daily submitted that there were two possibilities: either he would not
have entered into any financial agreement or the marriage,
or he would have
entered into a financial agreement that made sufficient provision for any child
of the marriage in the event of
a breakdown in the marriage.
Daily submitted that, once he had established on the balance of probabilities
the existence of one or other of those opportunities,
the Court should then
value the extent or degree of the opportunity and its worth by a process of
informed estimation, referring
Sellars v Adelaide Petroleum
Had Mr Daily
and Ms Daily entered into a financial agreement that made sufficient
provision for any child of the marriage, "then
the financial result, put
broadly, would have been something in the order of $250,000". "[S]winging a
broad axe",
Mr Daily submitted that he was worse off as a result of R Lawyers'
negligence "in an amount something in the order of $991,634 (representing
sum of $250,000 already paid to [Ms Daily] and the indicative property
settlement sum", in addition to his legal costs.
primary judge described Mr Daily's claim as being "distilled to [him] seeking
that his damages be assessed as to the extent to
which he would have been better
off if he had not entered into a marriage with [Ms Daily]". At the hearing, Mr
Daily maintained that
his loss was "a loss of opportunity", again citing
for the proposition that there was "a loss of opportunity of some
value" so that the value should "be ascribed or ascertained by
reference to
degrees of probabilities and possibilities".
response, R Lawyers submitted that Mr Daily "did not plead (or otherwise
articulate) much less prove":
"(1) the content of the more detailed or specific advice that a reasonably
competent family law practitioner should have ... given
... the only pleading relevant to [t]his was in general terms at ... [45.6] [of
the statement of claim]);
(2) that [Mr Daily] would have taken particular steps to mitigate
the hardship risk by proffering any particular instructions that
immunised the BFA from the risk of being set aside for hardship grounds in the
circumstances that ultimately unfolded;
(3) that those steps would have rendered the BFA
invulnerable to be [set] aside in the events that ultimately occurred".
submitted that Mr Daily had therefore suffered no loss or damage caused by the
negligence of R Lawyers. R Lawyers rejected
Mr Daily's primary position
that, unless there was a reliable financial agreement in place, he would
not have entered into the marriage
with Ms Daily. R Lawyers submitted that
the only area where damages
be awarded was in respect of Mr Daily's
legal fees which had properly arisen from the finding that the conduct of
R Lawyers had resulted
in the setting aside of the BFA for uncertainty and
that the total damages arising from Mr Daily's legal fees in relation
uncertainty claim should be limited to no more than $38,000.
primary judge rejected most of Mr Daily's arguments. As to Mr Daily's claim
for damages representing the difference between a
financial agreement drafted
with reasonable care and the property settlement in fact obtained, the judge
made the following findings.
he found that Mr Daily was entitled to expect that the solicitor was
"definitely" skilled in the ability to draft a financial
agreement that would
not be set aside for uncertainty.
it was not controversial that Mr Daily had received written advice from R
Lawyers on 30 September 2002, setting out five possible
bases on which
a financial agreement may be set aside.
Mr Daily acknowledged that the BFA referred to s 90K(1)(d) of the FLA.
the evidence of the solicitor, as to her advice to Mr Daily regarding what
may happen should the parties decide to have children,
should be preferred to
the evidence of Mr Daily; in particular, Mr Daily did not accurately recall
the discussion with his solicitor
on 21 July 2005.
Mr Daily did not establish on the balance of probabilities that a clear
instruction was given to his solicitor as to what
he wanted as opposed to what
he would have liked to happen: namely, that his solicitor draft a financial
agreement that was effectively
bullet proof against the application of s
90K(1)(d) of the FLA.
Mr Daily understood that absolute certainty of outcome could not be
guaranteed and no case was prosecuted by Mr Daily which
demonstrated the type of clauses that could have been considered by his
solicitor in 2005 evidencing a reasonable attempt
to avoid a potential
application of s 90K(1)(d) of the FLA.
Mr Daily's evidence did not permit a finding that he required absolute certainty
of outcome, in the absence of which he
would not have entered into the marriage.
a finding of hardship did not inform or derogate from the determination
that the BFA should be set aside as a result of being
void for uncertainty. The
finding of hardship was not informed by the terms and conditions of the BFA but
was rather reached in light
of the circumstances of the parties 15 years
after the BFA was executed.
the primary judge made the following important finding:
"In the absence of [Mr Daily] being able to identify what could or should have
been done by the solicitor, there is merit in the
argument of [R Lawyers]
that given the solicitor's oral and written advice that the [BFA] could not
provide certainty of outcome
in respect of a bar to any future challenge by
[Ms Daily], [Mr Daily] is not able to establish on the balance of
probabilities that
his preparedness to enter into the marriage with
[Ms Daily] was conditional on not just entering a financial agreement that
be binding but also that [Ms Daily] would have no redress to bring an
application pursuant to s 90K(1)(d) of the [FLA]."
the judge rejected Mr Daily's assertion that the solicitor had given him
unconditional and unqualified advice that the BFA
provided a certain outcome,
namely that, first, it was binding and, second, there was no possibility of a
challenge generally but
in particular pursuant to s 90K(1)(d) of the
the primary judge concluded the assessment of compensable damages representing
the difference between a financial agreement
drafted with reasonable care and
the property settlement in fact obtained as follows:
"The unchallenged finding of hardship and the acceptance by [Mr Daily]
that the [BFA] is void for uncertainty, subject to the question
of damages if
any arising from [Mr Daily's] legal fees, permits of a finding that [Mr
Daily] has not suffered any compensatory damages."
primary judge then addressed the component of Mr Daily's damages claim
arising from his legal fees. The primary judge recorded
the "somewhat surprising result [was] that in circumstances" where Mr
Daily had not presented evidence as to the breakdown of
his costs referable to
the issues in dispute, R Lawyers conceded that $38,000 should be awarded as
damages, and the judge ordered
R Lawyers to pay that sum to Mr Daily.
The conceded amount represented Mr Daily's legal costs in litigating against Ms
Daily resulting
from the BFA being void for uncertainty. In relation to the
property settlement orders, the primary judge said that, given Mr Daily's
"significant latitude in terms of the evidence" upon the various
applications, his affidavit material and his updated financial statements,
judge did not consider that there should be any downward adjustment to the
determination of the property settlement sum in favour
appealed to the Full Court against the property settlement orders and the award
of damages, relevantly contending that the
primary judge erred in finding that
Mr Daily suffered no compensable loss beyond the $38,000 awarded for legal fees.
R Lawyers, by
notice of contention,
sought to restrict any award of
damages to $38,000 on a basis not relied upon by the primary judge. In addition,
R Lawyers cross‑appealed
contending, among other things, that
Mr Daily's claim against it was statute barred on the basis that the loss
and damage claimed
by Mr Daily arose by no later than the date of marriage
("ground 1 of the cross‑appeal"). Mr Daily's appeal against the
settlement orders was dismissed and may be put to one side.
Daily's appeal against R Lawyers succeeded, the award of damages was set
aside and the reassessment of damages remitted to a judge
the primary
relation to the primary judge's decision that Mr Daily suffered no compensable
loss, in oral submissions Mr Daily submitted that
the primary judge "got
sidetracked" into considering the contingency of the BFA being set aside on
hardship grounds as a barrier
to compensable loss, when in fact contingencies
like hardship "go towards the assessment of loss, as opposed to causation".
Mr Daily submitted that "the loss that is suffered flows from the loss
of opportunity to get the correct advice" and that "[h]aving
proved some loss,
you then ascertain or assess the quantum of that loss by reference to
possibilities and probabilities, consistent
Daily submitted that his case remained his case as pleaded – that, if the
BFA was not enforceable, Mr Daily would be liable
to pay more to Ms Daily than
he would have been required to pay pursuant to a properly drafted
its written submissions filed before the hearing in the Full Court,
R Lawyers again submitted (as it had done before the primary
that Mr Daily's case did not reflect and was in fact inconsistent with
his pleaded case and the basis on which the trial was conducted.
The Full Court
addressed R Lawyers' cross‑appeal. It is only necessary to address
ground 1 of the cross‑appeal that Mr
Daily's claim against R Lawyers
was statute barred on the basis that the loss and damage claimed by Mr
Daily arose by no later than
the date of marriage.
Full Court properly recorded that a cause of action in negligence is complete
when damage is first sustained. The Full Court
then addressed what loss was
suffered by Mr Daily by considering whether to characterise the negligently
drawn BFA as analogous to
a defective asset or rather to regard any loss as
merely contingent until events precipitated the loss itself. In this
regard, the
Full Court referred to this Court's decision in
Wardley Australia
Ltd v Western
The Full Court rejected the first characterisation of the BFA before
concluding that, under the FLA, the BFA only became of force
and effect upon a
separation declaration being made and, accordingly, as the primary judge found,
the loss suffered by Mr Daily as
a result of the negligence of
R Lawyers was first suffered, at the earliest, at the time of the
declaration.
The Full Court sought to apply the reasoning in
approach adopted by the Full Court was in error.
the Full Court addressed the issues in the wrong order and, as a result, failed
to consider the issues correctly. The Full
Court incorrectly addressed whether
Mr Daily's claim was statute barred before addressing the question of loss.
That was wrong. The
proper order for the Full Court was to first identify
what the claimed loss was and when that claimed loss was first incurred by
Mr Daily, and then to address the question of causation – whether,
but for the negligence of R Lawyers, Mr Daily would have
particular outcome or, but for the negligence of R Lawyers, Mr Daily
lost the chance of obtaining a different financial
agreement and thereby
securing a particular better outcome.
relation to when the claimed loss was incurred, the Full Court correctly
identified that, under the FLA, the BFA only became of
force and effect upon
a separation declaration being made and, accordingly, as the primary judge
found, the loss suffered by Mr Daily
as a result of the negligence of
R Lawyers was first suffered, at the earliest, at the time of the
declaration.
Full Court's analysis of
actual loss was first suffered said nothing
of the loss Mr Daily claimed that he suffered or whether
he had pleaded and proved such loss. As will be explained, there are several
ways in which a client may incur loss or damage as a result of the negligent
conduct of a solicitor in providing advice in relation
to a financial
Reliance on
the principles identified in
was not the way in which
Mr Daily had pleaded or sought to prove the actual loss he had suffered.
Indeed, in the context of considering
the limitation period issue, the Full
Court said that, as recognised in
, the assessment of damages
before separation would be "almost farcical" as "there would be so many
imponderables, with a distinct
risk of under compensation". If damages were
assessed in relation to an intact marriage, the assessment may bear no
resemblance to
any actual loss eventually suffered. Those "imponderables" arose
because of the statutory framework in relation to financial
agreements,
because of what was set out in
Full Court then turned to Mr Daily's remaining appeal grounds which were said to
"challenge the assessment of damages against
[R Lawyers]".
The Full Court described Mr Daily's pleading as a loss of chance
claim and then referred to the later particularisation
of that claim by Mr Daily
in his written submissions, which "simply relied upon characterisations of the
evidence and earlier findings".
setting out the relevant findings of the primary judge as to R Lawyers'
liability, the Full Court said that what the primary
judge then did in the
quantum of damages reasons was "a little difficult to follow". Two aspects of
the primary judge's quantum reasons
that the Full Court isolated for particular
criticism were, first, the judge's rejection of Mr Daily's claim that he
would, if told
that a financial agreement could not be drawn so as to avoid the
risk of it being set aside under s 90K(1)(d), have insisted on "absolute
certainty"; and, second, the judge's rejection of Mr Daily's claim that,
without "absolute certainty of outcome and in the absence
of such advice and
assurance from the solicitor, he would not have entered into the marriage";
leading to the primary judge concluding that "[t]he unchallenged
finding of hardship and the acceptance by [Mr Daily] that the [BFA]
for uncertainty, subject to the question of damages if any arising from [Mr
Daily's] legal fees, permits of a finding that
[Mr Daily] has not suffered any"
compensable loss or damage.
Full Court then stated:
"It is clear that, notwithstanding the quite specific findings in
the [primary judge's liability reasons], in the [quantum] reasons
primary judge failed to grapple with [Mr Daily's] case that his
compensatory damages claim
included a claim for damages for the lost
opportunity to negotiate a BFA
which made provision for the birth of a
child or children
That seemingly accepted negligence ... required the primary judge to engage
with the difficult tasks of:
evaluating the
likelihood that [Ms Daily] would have agreed to include such terms in the BFA,
and if so, what those terms might have
been; and in that event
consider the
prospects that the BFA would nonetheless have been susceptible to being set
aside under s 90K(1)(d); and then
to consider what
additional sum beyond that payable under the BFA would have been ordered under s
79." (emphasis added)
view of the Full Court was that Mr Daily's claim for compensable damages
survived, that the primary judge had misconceived the
nature of Mr Daily's
case being the loss of a chance to negotiate a financial agreement which would
survive s 90K(1)(d), that it
was unnecessary for the primary judge to
determine the hardship claim in order to assess damages against the solicitors,
by doing so the primary judge lost focus on the distinction
between causation and damage.
is apparent from the lengthy description earlier in these reasons of
the course of proceedings at first instance and the findings
made by the
primary judge, it is far from clear that Mr Daily pleaded his case, or conducted
his case at trial, based on a loss of
opportunity to obtain a financial
agreement and thereby obtain a more favourable property settlement, even if that
is how his case
was argued at the quantum hearing and on appeal to the Full
Court. The Full Court misunderstood and misstated the way in which Mr
put his case at trial and why the primary judge had rejected that case.
relation to Mr Daily's claim for damages based on his legal costs,
the Full Court concluded that the primary judge should have
damages in relation to Mr Daily's legal costs not only in relation to the
BFA being uncertain, but also in relation to the
BFA being set aside on hardship
grounds. The Full Court therefore remitted the assessment of damages relating to
Mr Daily's legal
Principles relevant to loss caused
by solicitor's negligence
turning to the appeal in this Court, it is necessary to address the measure
of damages in tort and contract and the ways in
which a client may prove loss by
reason of the negligence of their solicitor.
Measure of damages
in tort and contract
an action in tort or contract, the compensatory principle entitles
the injured party to damages in a sum which, so far as money
can do, will
put that party in the same position as they would have been in had the wrong not
Part of the
compensatory principle requires the award of damages for consequential losses,
such as those claimed by Mr Daily. In
general, and subject to the rules that
limit the awards of damages, when awarding damages for consequential losses the
court awards
compensation for all losses that the plaintiff would not have
suffered but for the defendant's wrong.
actions in tort, damages for consequential losses are intended to put
the plaintiff in the same position as they would have been
in, so far as
money can do, had the tort not been
negligence requires that the defendant's breach of a duty of care caused
loss or damage to the plaintiff within the scope
of that duty with damages
recoverable where they are not too remote. As loss or damage is an element of
the cause of action, the
plaintiff bears the onus of proving loss or damage and
negligence is not actionable until it results in actual damage to the
as distinct
from potential or likely
What qualifies
as actionable damage is a question of fact and
The onus then
shifts to the defendant to exclude or limit the extent of liability or to
establish any relevant
contrast, damages for breach of contract aim to put the plaintiff in
the same position they would have been in had the defendant
the contract.
essence, the court asks how much it costs the plaintiff to obtain
a pecuniary substitute for the primary performance of the contractual
obligation together with any consequential losses. For a claim for breach of
contract, the onus is on the plaintiff to prove that
the plaintiff has a cause
of action for breach of
claim for negligence, in the absence of proof of actual loss a defendant
will still be liable to pay nominal damages for
tort, the onus is on the defendant to exclude or limit the extent of liability
including proving that the plaintiff has failed
to take reasonable steps to
mitigate loss.
Heads of loss or damage for negligence by solicitor
are several ways in which a client may suffer and then prove loss or damage as a
result of the negligent conduct of a solicitor.
the one hand, the client may have incurred loss by reference to events that
allegedly would have occurred but for the solicitor's
negligence – that
is, a past hypothetical. In such a case, there are two ways in which the
client might formulate their claim.
First, the client might claim to have lost
an identified benefit or interest that they would have obtained but for the
solicitor's
negligence. As a matter of causation, the client would need to
prove, on the balance of probabilities, that they would have obtained
identified benefit or interest but for the solicitor's negligence. This might be
described as a case based on the loss of a particular
outcome. So, for example,
if a solicitor failed to ensure that a financial agreement was signed by all
or failed to
record the agreement of the parties to a financial agreement with
sufficient certainty, the client might contend that,
but for the
solicitor's negligence, they would have had an enforceable financial agreement
and thereby obtained a more favourable
property settlement.
the case of a client's claim for loss of a particular outcome caused by
negligent drafting of a financial agreement, the client
would need to prove, on
the balance of probabilities, that (a) the financial agreement, including
the substance of the terms of that
have been agreed;
(b) that agreement
have been set aside; and (c) that
have secured for the client a better outcome than
that which they in fact achieved. It would be necessary for the client to prove
the amount of the loss, but they would be entitled to recover the loss in
Alternatively,
the client might claim that, as a result of the solicitor's negligence, they
"lost the chance or opportunity" to enter
agreement and
thereby secure a more favourable property settlement, and recover damages "by
reference to the court's assessment of
the prospects of success of that
opportunity had it been
be described as a case based on the loss of a chance. As a matter of
causation, the client would need to prove, on the
balance of probabilities,
that the solicitor's negligence caused them to suffer the loss of a chance or
opportunity to secure a better
outcome, and that that chance or opportunity was
a "significant chance"
or a "substantial
value (not being a negligible
In a loss of
chance case, therefore, the client is usually required to plead at least that
the loss they have suffered is a loss
of a valuable opportunity,
identifying that opportunity with some particularity, as well as what the client
might have done but for
the solicitor's negligence where that is necessary to
prove causation.
the case of a defective and negligently drawn financial agreement entered into
under the FLA, proof of causation of the loss of
of obtaining
a different financial agreement might depend on proof, on the balance of
probabilities, of matters such as whether there
was a substantial and valuable
chance that the client and the other party would have agreed to a different
financial agreement, including
the substance of the terms of that
client has proved that there was a substantial and valuable chance that they and
the other party would have entered into
a different agreement, their loss
is then valued by reference to "the degree of probabilities or possibilities",
often expressed
as a percentage, of the chance or opportunity
succeeding.
assessment would take into account matters such as the likelihood that the
different agreement would not have been set aside
and that it would have secured
a better outcome for the client than that which they in fact achieved.
course, a client also may have incurred loss that may be proved by reference to
actual past events. For example, the client may
have expended money in
litigating against a third party with respect to the loss or damage suffered due
to the solicitor's negligence.
The costs of litigation that are reasonably
incurred in an attempt to reduce losses caused by wrongdoing are
recoverable.
In such a case, provided that the client can prove, on the balance of
probabilities, that the solicitor's negligence caused the actual
past loss, the
client will be entitled to recover the full amount of that loss (subject to
defences and limits including remoteness
mitigation).
The appeal in this Court
Lawyers was granted special leave to appeal from that part of the judgment
of the Full Court which dismissed ground 1 of the cross-appeal
in the Full
Court. On the hearing of the appeal, R Lawyers had two appeal grounds:
(a) the Full Court should have found that, if
a party to a contract has received
less than they should have done as a result of their solicitor not performing
their duty, damage
is sustained when the contract is entered into; and
(b) the Full Court should have found that loss and damage was sustained by
Daily upon entry into the BFA, so that his claim was statute barred.
the hearing of the appeal, R Lawyers applied to amend its notice of appeal to
include an additional ground. By the additional
ground, R Lawyers contended that
the Full Court erred in finding that the primary judge failed to consider
Mr Daily's claim for damages
for the loss of a particular outcome or
the loss of a chance and in remitting the assessment of damages.
R Lawyers contended that the Full Court erred in light of the primary
judge's unchallenged finding that Mr Daily adduced no evidence
at trial that
would establish the terms of an alternative agreement. In other words, Mr Daily
had failed to prove any loss or damage
(other than the $38,000) that was caused
by the negligence of R Lawyers.
Lawyers' application to amend its notice of appeal should be granted. Before
determining
any loss accrued, it is necessary to determine the
of the claimed loss, which in turn requires consideration of
whether Mr Daily adduced evidence sufficient to establish the claimed
proposed ground of appeal is closely related to the question on which the
parties have already joined issue and its determination
is necessary to ensure
that an already lengthy and complex proceeding may be finally resolved.
will be explained, the appeal must be allowed because, regardless of whether Mr
Daily's claim was for the loss of a particular
outcome or the loss of
a chance, the primary judge was correct to find that, subject to the award
of damages of $38,000 for his legal
fees, Mr Daily suffered no compensable
loss because of the negligence of R Lawyers.
appeal may be resolved by answering two questions.
what was Mr Daily's claimed loss? In answering this question, it will be
necessary to deal with the ground of Mr Daily's notice
of contention by
which he submitted that the Full Court erroneously stated that his compensable
damages claim included a claim for
damages for the lost opportunity to negotiate
a financial agreement.
did Mr Daily prove that he suffered loss? Answering that question will require
dealing with the other ground of Mr Daily's
notice of contention,
being that the Full Court was correct to find that the primary judge did
not engage in the proper process of
measuring Mr Daily's loss in so far as the
primary judge failed to undertake the relevant comparison between the position
would have enjoyed but for R Lawyers' negligence and the position
he actually found himself in as a result of the negligence.
was Mr Daily's claimed loss?
was a lack of clarity in the manner in which Mr Daily's claim for damages
for negligence was pleaded, conducted in the courts
and decided. Sometimes, the
argument for Mr Daily was framed in terms suggesting that his loss was the loss
of a particular outcome.
But at other times, those arguing Mr Daily's case
used the language of the loss of a chance. This confusion has persisted in the
argument in this Court where counsel for Mr Daily denied that he ever made
a loss of chance case and counsel for R Lawyers submitted
that was the only
case he had ever advanced since the quantum hearing.
has been explained, the Full Court misunderstood and misstated the way in which
Mr Daily had put his case at trial and why the
primary judge had rejected that
However, that
misunderstanding is explained to some extent by the fact that, by the quantum
hearing, Mr Daily's case had shifted
to being one expressed in terms of the loss
of an opportunity to obtain a financial agreement on terms that would not have
been vulnerable
to being set aside on hardship grounds. In any event, as will be
explained, regardless of whether Mr Daily argued a case based on
the loss of a
particular outcome or the loss of a chance, the primary judge was correct to
find that Mr Daily did not prove that
he had suffered any loss (apart from his
legal fees in relation to the uncertainty claim).
Did Mr Daily
prove that he suffered loss?
Daily contended that his "claim as pleaded identified his damages as, inter
alia, the difference between the Court's division
of property and what he would
have been required to pay upon separation pursuant to an enforceable financial
agreement", referring
to his statement of claim against
may be accepted that, as Mr Daily submitted in this Court, "[s]imply put,
damages should have been assessed as at the date of
separation by undertaking
a comparison of the position Mr Daily would have enjoyed but for the
negligence of R Lawyers and the position
that he found himself in as a result of
such negligence". But, regardless of the basis on which Mr Daily sought or now
seeks to put
his case, Mr Daily simply did not prove that loss. In the Full
Court, Mr Daily did not challenge the primary judge's finding that
adduced no evidence at the trial of what the terms of an alternative
financial agreement would have been. The primary judge was
correct to find that
he adduced no such evidence.
to Mr Daily's submissions, the primary judge did not err in failing to separate
out the issues of causation of loss and
the assessment of damages. The task
of the primary judge, after he correctly found that loss accrued, at the
earliest, on separation,
was to determine what position Mr Daily would have
enjoyed but for R Lawyers' negligent advice
and, therefore, how much
worse off he was. The difficulty for Mr Daily was and remains that found by
the primary judge – the
failure by Mr Daily to prove loss caused by
the negligence of R Lawyers other than the legal costs of the uncertainty
position is reinforced by Mr Daily's submissions in this Court that
the orders of the Full Court could and should be upheld
on the basis of the
facts and submissions made before this Court. None of the facts and matters
identified by Mr Daily, whether taken
singularly or collectively, provide any
basis for upholding the orders of the Full Court.
four identified facts and matters were:
(1) the primary judge found that the intent of the parties was to contract out
of the jurisdiction of the Court pursuant to s 79
of the FLA and to
determine their separate interests to property settlement and division
consequent upon a breakdown of their
relationship;
(2) the primary judge found that Mr Daily's loss arose upon separation or
the institution of proceedings and that finding was upheld
by the Full
Court by way of the dismissal of R Lawyers'
cross-appeal;
(3) Mr Daily sought damages to be assessed on the difference between his
expectation of payment to Ms Daily pursuant to the BFA and
the settlement sum
ordered following a consideration of Ms Daily's entitlements pursuant to
s 79 of FLA;
(4) had the primary judge undertaken that task (also identified by
the Full Court),
then the primary judge would have undertaken the comparison of the position
that Mr Daily would have enjoyed but for the negligence
and the position he
actually found himself in as a result of the negligence – "that is, how
facts and matters are not in
acceptance of those facts and matters does not lead to the orders of the Full
Court being upheld.
Daily's central premise was that he would have secured a financial agreement
that reflected his instructions in certain terms
and he was entitled to damages
for the difference between that financial agreement and the position he now
finds himself in. That
was the case which Mr Daily put to the primary judge and
which was rejected. Mr Daily has maintained this central premise, although
times he has framed his case as a lost opportunity to obtain a financial
agreement that would not have been set aside on hardship
grounds. On either
case, Mr Daily failed to prove that head of
At no point in
the proceedings did Mr Daily demonstrate that a different financial
agreement would or
have been agreed
with Ms Daily. He did not prove: the substance of the terms of that
agreement; that that agreement would or might
not have been set aside; and that
it would or might have secured a better outcome than the position he found
himself in after the
Court made orders under s 79 of the FLA.
Daily claimed that he suffered loss in the amount of the difference between what
the Court ordered he pay Ms Daily and what a
financial agreement properly
prepared in accordance with his instructions would have fixed as the amount
he could be obliged to pay
on the breakup of the marriage. But whether there was
a difference between these two sums depended on identifying the amount which
properly prepared financial agreement would or might have fixed as
the amount he could be obliged to pay Ms Daily. As the primary
judge found,
Mr Daily led no evidence at trial of what R Lawyers could or should
have done to prepare a financial agreement of the
being no evidence at trial of what that hypothetical financial agreement would
or might have been, Mr Daily led no evidence
that an agreement of that kind
would or might have been agreed with Ms Daily. On the contrary, at trial
his central contention was
that, unless a financial agreement had been prepared
that would have fixed the amount he would be obliged to pay, there would have
been no marriage and he and Ms Daily would have had no children.
the primary judge found (as noted above) that: (a) Mr Daily was told
he could not have a bullet proof agreement; (b) Mr
Daily was told that
there were five bases on which a financial agreement could be set aside
(including hardship); and (c) this was
a case of hardship.
In these circumstances, to the extent to which
Mr Daily pleaded a case based on the loss of a particular outcome, the case
proved; it failed for want of evidence of the terms that the financial
agreement should have contained, evidence that Ms Daily would
have agreed
to those terms prior to separation, and evidence that that financial agreement
would have remained on foot and been enforceable
at separation.
different result would follow if it were accepted that Mr Daily had argued
that he had lost an opportunity to obtain a
financial agreement
that would not have been set aside on hardship grounds. Such a claim would also
have failed for want of evidence:
(a) of the substance of the terms that
the financial agreement would or might have contained; and (b) that Ms Daily
would or might
have agreed to those terms prior to separation. If those
matters had been proved to the requisite standard, then there would have
further difficulty that Mr Daily had failed to establish that loss valued by
reference to "the degree of probabilities or
possibilities" that that agreement
would or might have remained on foot and been enforceable at separation.
kinds of cases would have likely encountered a further
difficulty – that the evidence would need to have addressed what
terms were required in the financial agreement to avoid it being set aside
under s 90K(1)(d) of the FLA on hardship grounds. For
a case based on the
loss of a particular outcome, that difficulty was insuperable. For a case
based on the loss of a chance, the
difficulty was at least very large, if
not insuperable. Mr Daily failed to lead any evidence to prove that he
would have secured,
or that he would have had a substantial prospect of
securing, an enforceable agreement which would have provided Ms Daily with
than the amount awarded.
follows that the primary judge was correct to confine the assessment of damages
in respect of Mr Daily's legal fees to the amount
conceded by
R Lawyers – that is, the costs of Mr Daily's proceeding
against Ms Daily in so far as they related to the uncertainty
claim. As Mr Daily
failed to prove that he and Ms Daily would or might have entered into an
alternative financial agreement that
would or might not have been set aside on
hardship grounds, he was not entitled to damages referable to his legal costs in
the hardship issue against Ms Daily. The Full Court was
therefore wrong to remit the assessment of damages as they pertained to Mr
Daily's legal fees.
those reasons, the appeal must be allowed on the basis of R Lawyers' new ground
Was Mr Daily's claim statute barred?
conclusion that the appeal must be allowed on the basis of R Lawyers' new ground
of appeal logically precedes the analysis of,
and obviates the need to
substantively consider, R Lawyers' initial appeal grounds. That approach is
reinforced by R Lawyers' concession
in the courts
maintained in this Court, that Mr Daily should be awarded $38,000 as
damages in respect of his legal fees and the fact
that, in the proposed amended
notice of appeal, if R Lawyers succeeded on the new ground of appeal,
it did not seek to disturb the
award of damages in the amount of $38,000.
The issue of whether a cause of action to recover that $38,000 falls within the
Limitation Act
questions, including as to the nature of the interest represented by the $38,000
in legal fees and whether it was separate
not the subject of the initial grounds of appeal or argument in this Court.
if Mr Daily had proved, as is necessary to establish loss, that Ms Daily would
or might have entered into an alternative beneficial
financial agreement at a
time or times prior to the separation declaration, on the proper construction of
the BFA in issue in these
proceedings, which was purportedly made under
of the FLA, no loss or damage was sustained by Mr Daily
until, at the earliest, the date of separation. No other conclusion is
has been explained,
Limitation Act
prevents a claim in
negligence being brought more than six years from the date on which the cause of
action accrued. A cause of action
in negligence is complete when damage is first
seen, the combined effect of ss 90B, 90DA and 90DB of the FLA is that a
financial agreement entered into before marriage
is of no force or effect in
relation to the property or financial resources of either or both of
the spouse parties until a separation
declaration is made and, in relation
to other matters, unless and until the marriage breaks
sum, in so far as the BFA in issue in this appeal made provision for
the division of property on separation, the loss or damage
solicitor's negligent conduct that rendered that BFA void did not and could not
crystallise until separation. Put in different
terms, it is not until separation
that a party unprotected by a financial agreement is exposed to s 79 of the
Section 79 does
not operate like the legislation in New Zealand which identifies the property
affected from the time of
until the time of separation, the couple's circumstances will vary over time. An
assessment of whether loss or damage was
occasioned to a party by entry into a
financial agreement could not be undertaken until separation. Even if one could
point in time prior to separation when it was clear that no financial
agreement could have been entered into then that would still
not mean that loss
or damage was suffered then. From that point until separation, the parties'
circumstances could still have changed
so that no assessment could have been
made as to whether compensable loss or damage was occasioned (for example,
children born, financial
harm or gain or personal misfortune).
any loss or damage suffered by Mr Daily was not suffered until, at the earliest,
separation remains true even if his case was
framed as the loss of a chance.
Although the loss of a chance of an economic benefit is itself a loss which has
been actually
context of a financial agreement under the
that loss of a
chance is not ordinarily suffered until there is a separation declaration. The
assessment of the value of that loss
of a chance would proceed in accordance
with the analysis by Brennan J in
was adopted by Lord Hoffmann in
Law Society v Sephton & Co (a
those reasons, R Lawyers' initial appeal grounds must be rejected.
Conclusion and orders
the above reasons, R Lawyers' application to amend its notice of appeal should
be granted and the appeal must be allowed. Orders
2, 3 and 4 of the orders of
the Full Court of 17 October 2024 should be set aside and, in their place,
it should be ordered that
the appeal to that Court be dismissed and that Mr
Daily pay R Lawyers' costs of that appeal. Mr Daily is to pay R Lawyers'
of the proceedings in this
FLA, s 90B(2)(a).
Daily & Daily
FedCFamC1F 222
; FLA, s 90K(1)(b), (d).
Daily & Daily
[2024] FedCFamC1A 185.
FLA, s 90B.
FLA, s 90C.
FLA, s 90D.
FLA, ss 90B(1), 90C(1),
FLA, s 90B(2)(a).
FLA, s 90B(2)(b).
FLA, ss 90DA, 90DB,
FLA, s 90G(1)(a).
FLA, s 90G(1)(b).
FLA, s 90DA(1).
FLA, s 90DA(3).
FLA, s 90DA(4)(a)-(b).
FLA, s 90K(1)(b).
FLA, s 90K(1)(d).
FLA, s 90KA.
FLA, s 90KA(a).
FLA, s 90KA(c).
FLA, s 79(1)(a).
FLA, s 71A(1), save for
the proceedings referred to in s 71A(2).
FLA, s 90B.
FLA, s 90B(2)(a).
FLA, s 90DA(1).
FLA, s 71A(1).
FLA, s 79(2).
The Appellate Court
characterised Mr Daily's case as being an allegation that R Lawyers
was negligent in failing to advise him (1)
that the BFA was void for uncertainty
and (2) that the BFA was liable to be set aside under s 90K(1)(d).
Daily & Daily
[2024] FedCFamC1F 47.
[1992] HCA 55
; (1992) 175 CLR 514.
Tomasetti v Brailey
[2012] NSWCA 399
[2010] HCA 12
; (2010) 240 CLR 537 at 564
; see also at 562 [58], 575 [101].
[2010] HCA 12
; (2010) 240 CLR 537
[2010] HCA 12
; (2010) 240 CLR
, 564 [68]-[69], 575 [101], 587 [143], 589 [152].
See especially
Adelaide Petroleum NL
(1994) 179 CLR 332 at 364;
[2010] HCA 12
; (2010) 240 CLR
Badenach v Calvert
[2016] HCA 18
; (2016) 257 CLR 440 at 454
(1994) 179 CLR 332 at
364, quoted in
[2010] HCA 12
; (2010) 240 CLR 537
See [23] above.
[2016] HCA 18
257 CLR 440 at 452
, 453 [31]-[33]. See also
Attard v James Legal
[2010] NSWCA 311
; (2010) 80 ACSR 585 at 611
Howe v Fischer
ASTLR 66 at 80 [80].
CGU Insurance Ltd v
(2008) 235 CLR 103 at 122 [72].
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia Act 2021
Judiciary Act
Limitation of Actions
[2010] HCA 12
; (2010) 240 CLR 537
The Commonwealth v Cornwell
[2007] HCA 16
; (2007) 229 CLR 519 at
, referring to
HTW Valuers (Central Qld) Pty Ltd v Astonland Pty
[2004] HCA 54
; (2004) 217 CLR 640 at 649-650
Limitation of Actions
[2010] HCA 12
; (2010) 240 CLR 537
[2007] HCA 16
; (2007) 229 CLR 519 at 523
[1992] HCA 55
; (1992) 175 CLR
514 at 527, 533, 536, 543-545, 558-559.
[1992] HCA 55
; (1992) 175 CLR
514 at 527 (emphasis added).
[2007] HCA 16
; (2007) 229 CLR 519 at 524-525
[2007] HCA 16
; (2007) 229 CLR
[2007] HCA 16
; (2007) 229 CLR
, 528 [27].
[2007] HCA 16
; (2007) 229 CLR
[2007] HCA 16
; (2007) 229 CLR
Melton v Walker &
(1981) 125 SJ 861;
Baker v Ollard & Bentley (a firm)
(1982) 126 SJ 593;
D W Moore & Co Ltd v Ferrier
[1988] 1 WLR 267;
[1988] 1 All ER 400;
Islander Trucking Ltd (In liq) v Hogg Robinson &
Gardner Mountain (Marine) Ltd
[1990] 1 All ER 826;
Bell v Peter Browne
[1990] 2 QB 495.
[1992] HCA 55
; (1992) 175 CLR
514 at 530.
[1992] HCA 55
; (1992) 175 CLR
514 at 530.
[1992] HCA 55
; (1992) 175 CLR
[2006] UKHL 22
; [2006] 2 AC 543 at 550
[1992] HCA 55
; (1992) 175 CLR
at 536 (footnote omitted), citing
Swingcastle Ltd v Gibson
[1990] 1 WLR 1223 at 1236; [1990] 3 All ER 463 at 473.
[1992] HCA 55
; (1992) 175 CLR 514
[2006] UKHL 22
; [2006] 2 AC 543 at 551-552
Davys Burton v Thom
[2008] NZSC 65
; [2009] 1 NZLR 437 at 450
[2006] UKHL 22
; [2006] 2 AC 543
[1992] HCA 55
; (1992) 175 CLR
(1994) 179 CLR
332 at 362.
[2008] NZSC 65
; [2009] 1 NZLR 437.
Davys Burton
[2008] NZSC 65
NZLR 437 at 442
, 444-445 [9].
Davys Burton
[2008] NZSC 65
NZLR 437 at 451
Davys Burton
[2008] NZSC 65
NZLR 437 at 449
Davys Burton
[2008] NZSC 65
NZLR 437 at 452-453
Davys Burton
[2008] NZSC 65
NZLR 437 at 459
[2007] HCA 16
; (2007) 229 CLR
FLA, s 90DA.
Davys Burton
[2008] NZSC 65
NZLR 437 at 451
FLA, s 90K(1)(d).
[1992] HCA 55
; (1992) 175 CLR
514 at 536.
[2006] UKHL 22
; [2006] 2 AC 543
Davys Burton
[2008] NZSC 65
; [2009] 1 NZLR 437 at 449
Davys Burton
[2008] NZSC 65
1 NZLR 437 at 452
[2007] HCA 16
; (2007) 229
CLR 519 at 531-532
Mr Daily's claim was brought in
August 2021.
of the FLA defines
"financial agreement" as an agreement that is a financial agreement under
s 90B, s 90C or s 90D, but the term
does not include
an ante-nuptial or post-nuptial settlement to which s 85A applies.
FLA, s 71A(1).
FLA, s 90B.
FLA, s 90C.
FLA, s 90D.
FLA, s 90G.
FLA, s 90E.
FLA, s 90B.
FLA, s 90B(2)(a).
FLA, s 90B(2)(b).
FLA, s 90B(3)(a).
FLA, s 90B(3)(b).
FLA, s 90DA(1).
FLA, s 90DA(2).
FLA, s 90DA(3).
FLA, s 90DA(4)(a).
FLA, s 90DA(4)(b).
Note to s 90DA(1) of
In a proceeding instituted
by an application for a divorce order, a marriage is held to have broken down
irretrievably if the court
is satisfied that the parties separated and
thereafter lived separately and apart for a continuous period of not less than
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application
for the divorce order: FLA,
FLA, s 90K(1)(b) and
Daily v Daily
[2020] FamCA 486
61 Fam LR 75.
Daily & Daily
[2020] FamCAFC 304
; (2020) FLC 93-999.
Daily v Daily
[2020] FamCA 486
61 Fam LR 75.
Daily & Daily
[2020] FamCAFC 304
; (2020) FLC 93-999.
Daily v Daily
[2020] FamCA 486
61 Fam LR 75.
Daily & Daily
[2020] FamCAFC 304
; (2020) FLC 93-999.
[2014] FamCAFC 189
; (2014) FLC 93-611 at 79,556
, 79,569 [97].
An appeal by Mr Daily
limited to the terms of the order setting aside the BFA (pursuant to
s 90K(1)(d) and/or s 90KA of the FLA)
was dismissed in August 2023:
Daily & Daily [No 2]
(2023) FLC 94-151.
Daily & Daily
[2023] FedCFamC1F 858
Daily & Daily
[2023] FedCFamC1F 858
, [63]-[64].
Daily & Daily
[2023] FedCFamC1F 858
Daily & Daily
[2023] FedCFamC1F 858
Daily & Daily
[2023] FedCFamC1F 858
(1994) 179 CLR 332 at
Whitfeld v De Lauret
[1920] HCA 75
; (1920) 29 CLR 71 at 81.
Daily & Daily
[2024] FedCFamC1A 185.
Mr Daily also filed an application in an
appeal seeking leave to adduce further evidence and to commence an appeal from
made by the primary judge refusing his previous application to adduce
further evidence. The application was dismissed given the Full
Court remitted
the assessment of damages.
See [112] above.
[1992] HCA 55
; (1992) 175 CLR 514.
See [103] above. See also [174] below.
See [103] above. See also
[174] below.
See [145]-[150] below.
See [77]-[84] above.
Livingstone v Rawyards
[1880] UKHL 3
; (1880) 5 App Cas 25 at 39;
Butler v Egg and Egg Pulp Marketing
[1966] HCA 38
; (1966) 114 CLR 185 at 191;
Haines v Bendall
[1991] HCA 15
; (1991) 172 CLR
v Metro North Hospital and Health Service
[2025] HCA 34
99 ALJR 1348 at 1354
; 424 ALR 468 at 475.
[1966] HCA 38
; (1966) 114 CLR
185 at 191;
[1991] HCA 15
; (1991) 172 CLR 60 at 63.
Williams v Milotin
[1957] HCA 83
; (1957) 97 CLR 465 at 474;
Alcan Gove Pty Ltd v Zabic
[2015] HCA 33
; (2015) 257 CLR 1 at
[1992] HCA 55
; (1992) 175
CLR 514 at 526-527.
[2015] HCA 33
; (2015) 257
Watts v Rake
[1960] HCA 58
108 CLR 158 at 159.
Commonwealth v
Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 54
; (1991) 174 CLR 64 at 80-81, 161.
In relation to proof of loss
or damage, see
Amann Aviation
[1991] HCA 54
; (1991) 174 CLR 64 at 80, 99, 118,
Luna Park (NSW) Ltd v
Tramways Advertising Pty Ltd
[1938] HCA 66
; (1938) 61 CLR 286 at 300‑301, 305, 312.
TC Industrial Plant Pty
Ltd v Robert's Queensland Pty Ltd
[1963] HCA 57
; (1963) 180 CLR 130 at 138.
FLA, s 90G(1)(a).
CLR 332 at 355. See also
Amann Aviation
[1991] HCA 54
; (1991) 174 CLR 64 at 119.
CLR 332 at 356.
CLR 332 at 365. See also
Badenach v Calvert
[2016] HCA 18
; (2016) 257 CLR 440 at 454-455
CLR 332 at 355 (emphasis in original).
Lantrak Holdings Pty Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 156
, [289], citing
Graham & Linda
Huddy Nominees Pty Ltd v Byrne
[2016] QSC 221
[2016] HCA 18
; (2016) 257
CLR 440 at 454-455
, 467 [98]. See also
(1994) 179 CLR
332 at 355-356, 368-369.
CLR 332 at 355, 368. See also
Malec v J C Hutton Pty Ltd
(1990) 169 CLR
638 at 643;
Thompson v Schacht
[2014] NSWCA 247
; (2014) 53 Fam LR 133 at 135-136
Talacko v Talacko
[2021] HCA 15
; (2021) 272 CLR 478 at 502
Gray v Sirtex Medical Ltd
[2011] FCAFC 40
; (2011) 193 FCR 1 at 11
, [26], in turn quoting
Berry v British
Transport Commission
[1962] 1 QB 306 at 321.
See [139] above.
See [93] above.
See [114]-[125] above.
See [87] above.
See [103] and [131]
See [93] above.
See [114]-[125] above.
In relation to the third
matter, R Lawyers contends that Mr Daily has argued a loss of chance case
since the quantum hearing.
See [146]-[149] above.
In relation to the case
based on the loss of a particular outcome, see [146]-[147] above. In relation to
the case based on the loss
of a chance, see [148]-[149] above.
See [114]-[125] above.
See [126]-[127] above.
Wallsend Local Board
[1891] UKLawRpKQB 17
; [1891] 1 QB 503;
Christie v Purves
[2007] NSWCA 182
; (2007) Aust
Torts Reports 81-899 at 69,897-69,898
See [143] above.
See [80]-[83] above.
See [80]-[83] above.
Davys Burton v
[2008] NZSC 65
; [2009] 1 NZLR 437 at 451
[1992] HCA 55
; (1992) 175 CLR 514 at 544.
See [80]-[83], [174]
[1992] HCA 55
; (1992) 175 CLR 514 at
[2006] UKHL 22
; [2006] 2 AC 543 at 551.
RTF format (822 KB)
Signed PDF/A format