Ezzy Fit Pty Ltd v B3 Corp Pty Ltd [2025] APO 31 (30 September 2025)
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Ezzy Fit Pty
Ltd v B3 Corp Pty Ltd
[2025] APO 31
Patent Application: 2022279431
Title: A Retaining Wall System
Patent Applicant: B3 Corp Pty Ltd
Opponent: Ezzy Fit Pty Ltd
Delegate: Xavier Gisz
Decision Date: 30 September 2025
Hearing Date: 23 April 2025; further submissions filed 6 June 2025 and 30
Catchwords:
- opposition to the
grant of the patent under s 59 – inventive step, clarity, sufficiency,
best method – reg 5.23 –
support considered pursuant to s 60(3)
– some claims do not comply with s 40(3) – opportunity to amend
Representation:
Counsel for the Applicant: Angus Lang
Patent attorney for the Applicant: Dr. David Tso of MBIP
Patent attorney for the Opponent: Trevor Dredge of Intellepro
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Patent Application: 2022279431
Title: A Retaining Wall System
Patent Applicant: B3 Corp Pty Ltd
Date of Decision: 30 September 2025
Claims 9 and 10 lack support.
The Applicant is given 2 months to amend the specification to overcome the
lack of support.
No award of costs is made.
REASONS FOR DECISION
application 2022279431 (the Application) in the name of B3 Corp Pty Ltd (the
Applicant) is a divisional of PCT/AU2021/051196
(publication number
WO2022/077061) which claims priority from AU 2020903708 with a priority
date of 13 October 2020.
Application was accepted on 31 March 2023. The Applicant proposed amendments on
17 April 2023. The amendments were allowed on
was advertised on 20 April 2023. A Notice of Opposition was filed by Ezzy Fit
Pty Ltd (the Opponent) on 19 July 2023. A
Statement of Grounds and Particulars
(the SGP) was filed on 19 October 2023.
Opponent requested to amend the SGP on 12 August 2024 and the amendments to the
SGP were allowed on 28 August 2024.
Applicant’s written submissions before the hearing included a copy of US
patent 5,435,669 (Weber).
Applicant noted in their submissions at paragraph 14:
“That Patent was particularised as novelty-defeating (SGP Section
A.1.(a)(i)), though that allegation has not been pressed.”
note that US 5,435,669 (Weber) was acknowledged as prior art in the description
of the Application (at page 1 line 17-21).
5,435,669 (Weber) was not in the evidence from either party nor in the
“mentioned documents” of the SGP. The Applicant
requested at the
hearing that US 5,435,669 (Weber) be considered under regulation 5.23. The
Opponent agreed that it should be considered
under reg 5.23 and also agreed
that they had already had an opportunity to make representations about the
document, thus no further
submissions and/or evidence would be required for
complying with reg 5.23(2)(c).
US 5,435,669 (Weber) discloses hollow plastic sleepers for retaining walls. The
Applicant refers to US 5,435,669 (Weber) in their
submissions in relation to
inventive step. The Opponent also refers to US 5,435,669 (Weber) in relation to
inventive step; in particular,
to set up the ‘hypothetical task’.
This hypothetical task is presented to an expert to determine what obvious steps
be taken by a person skilled in the art in designing a retaining
consider that US 5,435,669 (Weber) is important to the consideration of the
inventive step and so I will rely on this document under
Subsection 60(3)
8 May 2025 I exercised the power of s 60(3) in relation to s 40(3) and requested
submissions from the parties. I queried whether
the features of the claims of
“lies against” and “stacked” were supported by the
specification. The parties
were given the opportunity to make further
submissions on this issue. The Applicant provided their further submissions on 6
2025. The Opponent provided their responding further submissions on 30 June
Evidence in support
Evidence in Support comprises:
a declaration by
Trevor Dredge dated 18 January 2024 and accompanying Exhibits TJD1 to
a declaration by
Heath Braid dated 16 January 2024 and Exhibits HMB-1
Evidence in answer
Evidence in Answer comprises a declaration by Duncan Pratt dated 18 April 2024
with Exhibit DP-1.
Evidence in reply
Evidence in Reply comprises:
a declaration by
Rolf Bytschewsky dated 18 June 2024 and accompanying Exhibits RB1 and RB2.
a declaration by
Trevor Dredge dated 21 Jun 2024 and accompanying Exhibits TJD11 to
Applicable Law and Onus
Application is governed by the Patents Act 1990 (the
amended by the
Intellectual Property Laws Amendment (Raising the Bar)
as the Application was filed after 15 April
Opponent has the onus to satisfy me, on a balance of probabilities, that a
ground of opposition to grant exists. Then, if satisfied,
I may refuse the
application or, where appropriate, give the Applicant a reasonable opportunity
to amend the relevant specification
to remove any ground of opposition, as per
subsections 60(3A) & (3B) of the
Grounds of Opposition
amended Statement of Grounds and Particulars opposes the grant of the patent on
the following grounds: novelty, inventive step,
clarity. Although the SGP
includes the grounds of s 40(2), s 40(3), s40(3A), the SGP does not provide
any particulars for these grounds
aside from clarity (s 40(3)).
Opponent’s submissions press the grounds of clarity and inventive step.
The Opponent’s submissions also make comments
regarding sufficiency
[40(2)(a)] and best method [40(2)(aa)].
Opponent notes in their submissions:
The Opponent acknowledges that some arguments presented in these submissions,
particularly in respect of clarity and sufficiency under
section 40(2) and (3),
extend beyond the detail of the original Statement of Grounds and Particulars.
However, these arguments are
properly made in response to matters arising from
the evidence filed by the Applicant, including explanations of the
operation and construction details not apparent on the face of
the specification. It is appropriate and permissible for an Opponent
and amplify its submissions in light of the Applicant’s evidence, and
these points are directly responsive to issues
raised in the course of the
evidence stages.
purpose of the Statement of Grounds and Particulars is to make the Applicant
aware, at the start of the opposition, of the reasons
the Opponent believes the
patent application is invalid.
the Opponent realises that there are other reasons why they believe the patent
application is invalid (for example, as a result
of evidence in the opposition),
then the Statement of Grounds and Particulars can be amended with additional
particulars. Indeed,
the Opponent amended the Statement of Grounds and
Particulars on 13 August 2024 to include more prior art. Another amendment to
SGP could have been made as soon as the Opponent became aware of additional
particulars in relation to clarity and sufficiency.
new particulars at the submissions to the hearing, is outside of the correct
procedure of an opposition. I have considered
these new particulars in this
decision for completeness, even though I was under no obligation to do so. I
note that none of these
new particulars contributed to a ground of opposition
being successful and consequently I consider that the Applicant has not been
disadvantaged in the approach I have taken.
The experts
Declaratory
evidence has been provided by Trevor Dredge, Heath Braid, Duncan Pratt, and Rolf
Bytschewsky.
Dredge is an attorney and is not an expert in retaining walls. His declarations
were made as a means to introduce evidence
into the opposition.
Braid is the Managing Director of a building company. Mr Braid is well
acquainted with retaining walls generally and concrete
sleeper retaining
Pratt has been a structural engineer for 30 years and is well acquainted with
retaining walls and retaining wall structures.
Bytschewsky is the director and owner of the Opponent, Ezzy Fit Pty Ltd. Mr
Bytschewsky has been a fully licensed landscape professional
with over 36 years
of expertise in building retaining walls, landscape gardening, and irrigation
techniques.
Braid, Pratt and Bytschewsky each provide expert evidence regarding the
invention and common general knowledge at the priority
date. I am satisfied that
they have provided relevant evidence. I will assess the evidence according to
its relevance to particular
aspects of the analysis.
The Specification
Field of the invention and
description provides a good summary of the field of the invention at page 1
lines 9 to 25:
A sleeper wall is a type of retaining wall that is used to retain the
movement of earth. Often retaining walls are erected on a side
of a hill or
slope to prevent migration of soil down the slope. In general, sleeper walls
comprise a plurality of vertical, or angled,
posts that retain horizontally
stacked horizontal members, generally referred to as “sleepers”,
therebetween. The posts
are typically of steel and the sleepers typically of
concrete or timber.
A problem that arises in the building of a sleeper wall is that concrete or
timber sleepers are heavy and labour intensive to move
and to install. Attempts
have been made to fabricate sleepers out of lighter materials. For example, in
US patent No. 5,435,669 to
Weber, there is described a soil retention wall
system that includes a plurality of hollow polymeric sleepers, which are
to as “lagging members”. The members that are described are
bulky and take up considerable volume, which is disadvantageous
from the point
of view of transporting them to site.
The present invention seeks to provide an improved retaining wall system,
which will overcome or substantially ameliorate at least
some of the
deficiencies of the prior art, or which will at least provide an alternative.
The invention
invention is sleepers with a trapezoidal cross section. The ends of the sleepers
slot into the channels of vertical H-section
posts. The sleepers are stacked
onto top of each other, edge-on-edge. Because the sleepers have trapezoidal
cross section, they will
not naturally stack edge-on-edge without some kind of
support. The assembled retaining wall system is shown in figure
specification does not explicitly state there are different embodiments of the
invention. However, in light of the submissions
of both parties to this effect
and my own analysis, I consider it necessary to identify two distinct
embodiments of the invention.
First embodiment
first embodiment shown in top plan view in figures 3 and 4 shows that there is
very little gap between the front and rear surfaces
of the sleeper and the front
and rear planar surfaces of the channel formed in the vertical H-section post.
This would cause the
sleepers to stack edge-on-edge.
Second embodiment
second embodiment shown in figures 6-9 shows that there is a significant gap
between the front and rear surfaces of the sleeper
and the front and rear planar
surfaces of the channel in the vertical posts as shown in Figures 6 to
the sleepers are thinner/narrower than the channels, the sleepers would not rest
vertically as they are dropped into the channels
of the vertical posts, as is
shown in figure 7. To align the sleepers vertically, after one sleeper is
slotted into the channels
of the vertical posts, soil is filled to press the
sleeper against the front surface of the channel; this process keeps the planar
front of the sleeper in a vertical orientation, allowing the next sleeper to be
stacked on top. This is described at page 13 lines
To install a retaining wall system 100, holes 80
are dug into the ground 78 to receive lower portions 104 of posts 101 and the
portion 104 is inserted into the hole as shown in Figure 6. Concrete
may be applied to the hole around the post to improve fixing
of the post 101 as
is well known in the field of wall post installation. With reference to Figure
7, a first sleeper 109 is then
slid down between two vertical posts 101 so that
it rests on ground level as shown in Figure 7. Since the distance between front
planar portions 105A and rear planar portions 105B may be greater than the width
W of the sleeper, the sleeper may initially be tilted
as shown in Figure 7. In
Figure 8 it can be seen that by backfilling with earth 78A against the rear of
the sleeper 102, front face
109 of the the [sic] sleeper is forced flush against
the front planar portion 105A of post 101. Further sleepers are then added,
additional earth backfilled, to make a stack 98 as shown in Figure 9 to thereby
complete the retaining wall system 100.
independent claims are as follows:
1. A retaining wall system comprising:
a plurality of vertical posts,
wherein the plurality of vertical posts comprise a plurality of vertical
H-section posts, each comprising planar parallel portions
spaced by an
orthogonal central planar web therebetween, the vertical H-section posts located
in alignment and orientated to form
vertical channels therebetween,
a plurality of horizontally stacked sleepers stacked between adjacent posts
with distal ends thereof received within respective channels
wherein the sleepers comprise plastic, wherein each of the sleepers defines a
planar front and a rear structural formation which lies
against opposite planar
portions of the adjacent posts, wherein the rear structural formation defines a
planar rear,
wherein the planar rear is narrower than the planar front and wherein the
rear structural formation comprises oppositely orientated
diagonals spanning
from opposite edges of the planar rear to the planar front.
28. A retaining wall system comprising:
a plurality of vertical posts for installation in a vertical orientation,
wherein the plurality of vertical posts comprise a plurality of vertical
H-section posts, each comprising planar parallel portions
spaced by an
orthogonal central planar web therebetween, the vertical H-section posts
locatable in alignment and orientable to form
vertical channels
therebetween,
a plurality of horizontally stackable sleepers for stacking between adjacent
vertical posts with distal ends thereof received within
respective channels
wherein the sleepers comprise plastic, wherein each of the sleepers defines a
planar front and a rear structural formation which lies
against opposite planar
portions of the adjacent posts in use, wherein the rear structural formation
defines a planar rear,
wherein the planar rear is narrower than the planar front and wherein the
rear structural formation comprises oppositely orientated
diagonals spanning
from opposite edges of the planar rear to the planar front.
29. A sleeper adapted to be used as a horizontal member of a retaining wall
system, the sleeper defining a planar front and being
comprised of fibre
reinforced plastic and being elongate wherein an earth retaining side of the
sleeper is formed with a rear structural
formation including a longitudinal
hollow, wherein the rear structural formation defines a planar rear, wherein the
planar rear is
narrower than the planar front and wherein the rear structural
formation comprises oppositely orientated diagonals spanning from
opposite edges
of the planar rear to the planar front, and wherein the sleeper includes
complementary male and female connections
extending vertically upwardly and
vertically downwardly in use for vertical stacking of a multiplicity of the
entire claim set is in the annex of this decision.
Construction
Legal principles
the rules of construction for an Australian patent specification are well
summarized in
Decor Corp v Dart Industries
[1988] FCA 399
, the correct
application of these rules to the construction of claims was discussed by
Bennett J in
H Lundbeck A/S v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2009] FCAFC 70
paragraphs 118-120:
“... the words in a claim should be read through the eyes of the
skilled addressee in the context in which they appear ... while
define the monopoly claimed in the words of the patentee's choosing, the
specification should be read as a whole ... it
is not permissible to read into a
claim an additional integer or limitation to vary or qualify the claim by
reference to the body
of the specification ... terms in the claim which are
unclear may be defined or clarified by reference to the body of the
specification.”
Legal principles
40(3) of the
requires that the claims be clear. In
BlueScope Steel
Limited v Dongkuk Steel Mill Co., Ltd (No 2)
[2019] FCA 2117
explained at [705]:
A valid claim is required to define with sufficient certainty the scope of
the monopoly being claimed. Given that a patent is a public
instrument, the
claim must be defined in such a way that it is not reasonably capable of being
misunderstood so that others know
the ‘exact boundaries of the area within
which they will be trespassers’:
Electric & Musical Industries Ld v
(1939) 56 RPC 23
at 39 per Lord Russell of Killowen. A claim will
lack clarity if a person skilled in the relevant art cannot ascertain whether
he proposes to do falls within the claim’s ambit.
it is impossible to ascertain the scope of invention the claims should be found
to lack clarity (see
Martin v Scribal Pty Ltd
[1954] HCA 48
at 12). However, “any purely verbal or grammatical question that
can be resolved according to ordinary rules for the construction
documents, does not, once it has been resolved, leave uncertain the ambit of the
monopoly claimed” (
Welch Perrin and Co Pty Ltd v Worrel
(1961) 106 CLR 588).
was cited from
Blanco White, Patents for Inventions
4-701 with approval in
Austal Ships Sales Pty Ltd v Stena Rederi Aktiebolag
[2008] FCAFC 121
Flexible Steel Lacing Co v Beltreco Ltd
Certainly a claim is not invalid merely because it might have been better
drafted, nor merely because the patentee puts forward a
construction that the
court is not prepared to adopt; nor merely because it is capable of more than
one construction, even though
it be difficult to decide which is the right
Consideration
‘Lies against’ – front
and rear of sleeper or just the rear of sleeper
1 and 28 contain the following feature:
“wherein the sleepers comprise plastic, wherein each of the sleepers
defines a planar front and a rear structural formation
which lies against
opposite planar portions of the adjacent posts”
is notable that this feature was amended in the post-acceptance amendments of 17
April 2023 with the words “a planar front
and” added to claim 1 as
shown in underline below:
“wherein the sleepers comprise plastic, wherein each of the sleepers
a planar front and
a rear structural
formation which lies against opposite planar portions of the adjacent
comments accompanying these amendments stated:
The Applicant wishes to request leave to file post acceptance amendments, to
improve the clarity of the claims.
Specifically, claim 1 has been amended to clarify that each of the sleepers
define “a planar front”, so that there is
appropriate antecedence
for the term “the planar front” in claim 1.
Claims 6, 28 and 29 have been amended accordingly.
claims at acceptance (i.e. prior to the post-acceptance amendments) had the
feature of:
a rear structural formation which lies against opposite planar portions of
the adjacent posts
“opposite planar portions” in this case would be the rear planar
surfaces of the channels of the two adjacent posts
that are opposite the rear
structural formation of the sleepers.
have added red lines to the plan view of the invention in figure 3 to show the
location of “a rear structural formation which
lies against opposite
planar portions of the adjacent posts”:
prior to the post-acceptance amendments, this aspect of the claims was
the post-acceptance amendments (which added the words “a planar front
and”), this feature of the claims has
two possible
interpretations.
first interpretation is that it is
the rear structural
formation (of the sleeper) which lies against the opposite (i.e. rear) planar
portions of the adjacent posts.
This interpretation has the advantage that it is
grammatically correct because the word lie
[with the letter “s”] implies that it is only referring to a
singular object (the rear structural formation).
second interpretation is that
a planar front
rear structural formation lie against opposite planar portions (i.e. front
rear portions) of the adjacent posts. This interpretation has the
disadvantage of being grammatically incorrect because of the word
[with the letter s] implies that it is
only referring to a singular object (the rear structural formation) and not two
planar front
a rear structural
formation).
light of the comments accompanying the amendments and grammatical analysis, I
consider that the first interpretation is correct.
That is, I construe the
claims such that it is only the rear structural formation (of the sleeper) which
lies against the opposite
(i.e. rear) planar portions of the vertical
‘Lies against’ – during assembly or after
assembly of the retaining wall
Opponent states in their submissions at paragraph 20:
Inconsistency between Claim 1 and Claims 9/10 – if Claim 1 requires the
sleeper to "lie against opposite planar portions of
the adjacent posts", but
9/10 imply a gap or offset, there’s arguably a contradiction.
Applicant states in their submissions at paragraphs 96 and 97:
Taking the practical approach required by the authorities, there is no
contradiction. Claims 9 and 10 contemplate the possibility
that the depth of the
sleeper may be less than the distance between the planar portions of the posts,
and claim 10 provides for a
difference of approximately 10mm. That is not
inconsistent with the requirement in claim 1 that the sleeper lies against
planar portions of the adjacent posts. This is illustrated for example
in Figure 7 as follows:
That shows an embodiment in which the depth of the sleeper is less than the
distance between the adjacent posts, but it nevertheless
lies against them, at
least prior to filling the small gap with infill. Consistently with that, the
specification allows for the
presence of some play between the sleeper and the
posts which locate it by describing that "the rear structural formation may
a planar rear 11 [sic – 111] which locates adjacent rear planar
portions 105B of adjacent posts 101" (page 9 lines 15-16).
The disclosure of
"locating" and "adjacency" does not require a tight fit entirely devoid of play;
and as Figure 7 shows, the requirement
of "lying against" does not require that
either. Indeed, to take an approach which allows for no play between those
elements would
be contrary to the claim structure, to the disclosure of the
specification and to a practical construction.
already noted, there are two distinct embodiments of the invention. The first
embodiment shown in figures 3 and 4 discloses either
no gap or a very small gap.
The second embodiment shown in figures 7-9 discloses a gap.
Applicant points to figure 7 as an example of the sleeper lying against the rear
surface. Thus, the Applicant argues that
during assembly
, the sleepers
are tilted such that they touch the rear planar portions of the vertical
channels. I do not accept this argument. The
claims define a retaining wall
system in its
assembled form
for two reasons. Firstly, the claims define
a plurality of sleepers that are stacked with the rear structural formation of
the sleepers
lying against the posts. This arrangement is only possible after at
least two sleepers have been assembled. Secondly, the language
of the claims
uses past tense verbs suggesting that the assembly is complete. Furthermore, the
claims do not alternatively or additionally
define the relative
position/orientation of the components of the retaining wall
I construe the term ‘lies against’ to mean that the rear surfaces of
the sleeper abuts the rear planar surface portions
of the channel of the
vertical posts,
when the retaining wall is in its assembled form
disclosed in the first embodiment, but not in the second embodiment. With this
construction I consider this aspect of the
claims to be clear.
Clear enough and complete enough disclosure – s 40(2)(a)
- Legal principles
40(2)(a) of the
requires that the complete specification
must disclose the invention in a manner which is clear enough and complete
enough for the
invention to be performed by a person skilled in the relevant
Building Products Limited v United States Gypsum Company
[2015] APO 72
a Deputy Commissioner determined that the steps involved in assessing
whether the disclosure requirement is satisfied are:
(i) Construe the claims to determine the scope of the invention as
(ii) Construe the description to determine what it discloses to the person
skilled in the art; and
(iii) Decide whether the specification provides an enabling disclosure of all
the things that fall within the scope of the claims.
[2017] APO 57
, another Deputy Commissioner reformulated the
third question stated in
as a two-step
consideration:
(a) Is it plausible that the invention can be worked across the full scope of
(b) Can the invention be performed across the full scope of the claim without
undue burden?
approaches taken in
approval with the Federal Court in
Cytec Industries Inc. v Nalco Company
[2021] FCA 970.
Best Method s 40(2)(aa) - Legal principles
relevant principles for the best method
of performance requirement are
set out in in the decision of the Full Federal Court in
Les Laboratoires
Servier v Apotex Pty Ltd
[2016] FCAFC 27.
confirmed that the best method
performance requirement is separate and additional to the requirement of
paragraph 40(2)(a). The basis of the obligations of disclosure
is to provide
members of the public with the knowledge on how practically to obtain the
benefit of the invention when the patent
is expired. The Court
“... a patentee was held to be bound to give the best information in
his (or her) power as to how to carry out the invention.
This was an element of
the required good faith on the part of the patentee and the requirement to give
to the public the consideration
of knowledge of the best method
corresponds with the obtaining of the benefit of monopoly.”
order to appreciate what is required of an inventor by way of disclosure in the
specification, it is necessary to understand the
invention itself. This
understanding requires taking into account the nature of the invention being
described and claimed, and involves
a question of fact; that fact being
knowledge of the patent applicant.
noted the approach of in
Danmark A/S v Buono-Net Australia Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2011] FCA 710
Bennett J stated:
“... it must be established that there was a better method known to the
applicant as at the date of filing of the patent than
the one described in the
specification. This is clearly a subjective question.”
“... it is necessary first to understand what the invention is. Indeed,
this is perhaps the first question that needs to be
other words, it is necessary to determine what method is disclosed in the
specification, and then to ask whether there is any evidence
that the applicant
was aware of a better method of performing the invention.
Consideration
Opponent’s submissions state at paragraph 19:
The claims and specification fail to provide clear and sufficient guidance in
the context of a pultruded FRP sleeper on how to construct
the claimed sleeper
system, particularly in relation to the following aspects:
a) Rear structural formation geometry: While Claim 1 and the figures refer to
oppositely orientated diagonals spanning from the rear
to the front, this is not
limited to the trapezoidal form described in terms of the pultruded FRP, the
specification does not explain
the functional advantage of this configuration,
nor how it differs from conventional ribbing (e.g., Braid HMB-5, TJD2, TJD4).
skilled person is left to speculate as to how this might be made using
pultrusion.
b) Tongue-and-groove features: The specification lacks precision in describing
the interlocking mechanism in relation to pultrusion.
Claim 7 and related claims
reference texturised surfaces (how is this made using pultrusion) and
interconnections but provide no
detail on tolerances or engagement forces
necessary for structural integrity. By contrast, standard designs in TJD13,
and TJD6 provide full detail.
c) Best method: The specification does not disclose any best method of
manufacturing the sleepers or posts. No pultrusion parameters,
specifications, or assembly tolerances are provided, notwithstanding the
availability of such knowledge in the field (TJD6,
TJD7–TJD10). This
omission is significant given the reliance on pultruded FRP in the claims.
Applicant’s submissions state at paragraph 98:
“The unpleaded grounds should not be permitted to be advanced, in
particular because the Applicant has not had an opportunity
to consider whether
to adduce evidence in relation to them. In any event they would
I have already mentioned, the SGP lists one of the grounds of opposition as s
40(2), however provides no particulars for that ground.
completeness I will consider the viability of these ‘unpleaded
grounds’ if they were to be introduced under s 60(3).
I note that the
Applicant is not at a disadvantage since these grounds of opposition are
ultimately without any possibility of being
successful.
Rear structural formation geometry
purpose of the rear structural formation geometry is given in the description at
page 10 lines 5 to 15 which is read with reference
to Figure 5:
The oppositely orientated diagonals 112A, 112B
may connect the planar front 109A between the interconnections. Preferably the
structural formation 110 comprises an isosceles trapezoid. Preferably the
planar front 109 makes an internal angle θ of about
65 degrees with a first
of the diagonals and an internal angle of about 65 degrees with a second of the
diagonals. Setting θ
to 65 degrees or thereabouts, e.g. in the range of 70
to 60 degrees, has been found to produce a sleeper which has good structural
strength whilst minimising the amount of material used. Making the angle θ
equal 90 degrees makes the structural formation 110
assume a square or
rectangular cross section, which the Inventor has found has a slightly greater
strength than for θ equals
65 degrees, but which uses more material than
warranted by the strength increase.
5 is reproduced below:
am satisfied that this part of the description explains that the diagonals
(112A, 112B) provide a good compromise between strength
and minimising material
used. I am satisfied that the embodiments disclosed in the specification provide
a best method.
Applicant’s submissions state at paragraph 99-101:
In relation to sufficiency, OS 19 states that there is insufficient guidance
as to how to construct a "pultruded FRP sleeper". The
assertion appears to be
that it is necessary to disclose matters such as tolerances and engagement
forces in order to manufacture
the rear structural formation and the tongue and
groove features using pultrusion without invention or undue experimentation.
are a number of difficulties with this. First, as a matter of the claims,
contrary to OS 19 there is no requirement in the claims
that the technique of
pultrusion be used; indeed they do not refer to pultrusion at all. Rather, the
claims are pure product claims.
They require the use of plastic, and some the
use of fibre-reinforced plastic (and some exemplary specifications are disclosed
Table 1), but none require any particular method of manufacture. In those
circumstances, based on the authorities set out above,
there is no requirement
that the specification disclose every way of making the product, and in
particular tolerances and parameters
to be used if pultrusion is chosen as a
method of manufacture.
Secondly, in any event, there is no evidence from any person skilled in
pultrusion fabrication to say that they need to be specifically
matters in order to manufacture a sleeper within the claims without invention or
undue experimentation. To the contrary,
OS repeatedly submits in the context of
inventive step (see eg 21 (a), 28, 32(e), 33) that that exercise would be
straightforward.
Ultimately it appears that OS’ position on insufficiency is sought to
be put on the basis of the evidence of the Applicant's
expert, Mr Pratt. OS 16
says "Mr Pratt's declaration has some serious consequences for the Applicant, if
the skilled person has no
or even limited knowledge of pultrusion then the
description is insufficient on a number of key issues set out as follows in
That is misconceived. Mr Pratt merely says that he has no knowledge of
pultrusion: Pratt [12]. But a person instructed to design
a sleeper to be
manufactured using pultruded plastic may need to engage a pultrusion fabricator
to assist her or him. Indeed, that
is precisely what Mr Braid said he would do
when given his hypothetical task (Braid [16]). No doubt he would do the same
reading the specification of the Opposed Application (eg at page 8
line 23), he wished to make an embodiment using pultruded plastic.
Pratt states at paragraph 23 of his declaration:
As mentioned above, I have not heard of pultrusion prior to this exercise. In
addition to this, I do not believe that plastic or fibre
reinforced plastic
would have been considered as a material to form panels utilised in retaining
Braid states at paragraph 16 of his declaration:
The hypothetical sleepers herein may all be assumed that they are all options
for hollow thin-walled sleepers made by protrusion [sic]
as fibre reinforced
composites although I would have to team up with a pultrusion fabricator. Unless
specified internal bracing has
been omitted but would be added as advised. This
would all have to be experimented on striking a balance between performance and
pulls materials through a die, while extrusion pushes them. Pultrusion is used
for fiber-reinforced composites, while extrusion
can be used for a wider range
of materials.
TJD6 “Bedford reinforced plastics – design guide” describes
pultrusion as follows:
Pultrusion is the continuous processing of raw materials by pulling
resin-rich reinforcements through a heated steel die to form profiles
constant cross section of continuous length.
Pultrusion gets its name from the method by which the profiles are made. Raw
materials are literally pulled by what is called the
“puller.” The
puller is the machine made of pulling pads, which grip the product, and a drive
system that keeps the product
moving. The puller is located just before the
cut-off saw.
description provides details about material, strength, and other properties of
the sleepers at Table 1 (on page 12) in the description.
The Opponent’s
argument appears to be that more details about the process of manufacturing the
sleepers should have been provided.
consider that a person skilled in the art would be a team including an engineer
knowledgeable of plastic product manufacturing.
Such an engineer would have
knowledge of pultrusion. I consider that any parameters not explicitly specified
would be arrived at
by the PSA through routine experimentation.
consider that a clear enough and complete enough disclosure of producing the
sleepers has been disclosed. I also consider that a
best method of producing the
sleepers has been provided.
Support – s 40(3)
noted above, the ground of support was not raised by the Opponent. However, I
consider that there may be support issues and I will
consider these support
issues under the powers of s 60(3). The parties were given an opportunity to
provide submissions on support.
Legal principles
40(3) requires that the claim(s) must be supported by matter disclosed in the
specification. In
Merck Sharp & Dohme Corporation v Wyeth LLC (No 3)
[2020] FCA 1477
), Burley J explored the requirement of support at
[546]-[547]:
CSR Building Products Ltd v United States Gypsum Company
, Dr S D Barker adopted the summary provided by Aldous J in
Schering Biotech
at 252 – 253, which has been often followed in the
United Kingdom:
...to decide whether the claims are supported by the description it is
necessary to ascertain what is the invention which is specified
in the claims
and then compare that with the invention which has been described in the
specification. Thereafter the court’s
task is to decide whether the
invention in the claims is supported by the description. I do not believe that
the mere mention in
the specification of features appearing in the claim will
necessarily be a sufficient support. The word “support” means
than that and requires the description to be the base which can fairly entitle
the patentee to a monopoly of the width claimed.
That approach encapsulates broadly the claim support obligation under s
40(3). To it may be added the requirement that the technical
contribution to the
art must be ascertained. Where it is a product, it is that which must be
supported in the sense that the technical
contribution to the art disclosed by
the specification must justify the breadth of the monopoly claimed.
CSR Building Products Limited v United States Gypsum Company
) that was referred to with approval in
, the delegate
Dr Barker formulated the following process in order to determine whether a claim
is supported by matter disclosed in
the specification.
Construe the
claims to determine the scope of the invention as claimed,
Construe the
description to determine the technical contribution to the art, and
Decide whether
the claims are supported by the technical contribution to the
Calix Limited v Grenof Pty Ltd
[2023] FCA 378
at 128 Nicholas J commented
on support issues which arise from an inconsistency between the claims and the
description rather than
the claims being too broad:
Although discussion of s 40(3) is often focused
on the breath of the claim, there may be some claims which lack support not
they are too broad, but because they define an invention that is
materially different to what is described in the body of the specification.
Hence, a claim that includes a feature not disclosed in the specification, or
omits a feature that is disclosed, may lack support
because the invention
claimed is materially different from the invention disclosed. Whether or not the
claim will lack support in
such circumstances will depend on the proper
characterisation of the invention disclosed in the body of the specification and
invention claimed. See, for example, the invention described in the relevant
priority document and the invention claimed in
AstraZeneca
at [254]-[255]
which were characterised by the Full Court of the Federal Court as
“fundamentally different” inventions.
It is difficult to see how a
claim to an invention that is fundamentally different from that which is
disclosed in the specification
could be “supported by matter
disclosed” in accordance with s 40(3) of the Act.
Consideration
in this decision I have construed the claims such that claims 1 and 28 define a
retaining wall system that has the rear support
structure of the sleepers that
lies against the vertical posts when in assembled form. The analysis of support
is largely coterminous
with the determination of construction.
Planar rear structural formation which lies against opposite
planar portions of the adjacent posts
claims define (with my emphasis in underline):
1. A retaining wall system comprising:
a plurality of vertical posts,
wherein the plurality of vertical posts comprise a plurality of vertical
H-section posts, each comprising planar parallel portions
spaced by an
orthogonal central planar web therebetween, the vertical H-section posts located
in alignment and orientated to form
vertical channels therebetween,
a plurality of horizontally stacked sleepers stacked between adjacent posts
with distal ends thereof received within respective channels
wherein the sleepers comprise plastic, wherein each of the sleepers defines a
planar front and a rear structural formation which lies against opposite
planar portions of the adjacent posts
, wherein the rear structural formation
defines a planar rear,
wherein the planar rear is narrower than the planar front and wherein the
rear structural formation comprises oppositely orientated
diagonals spanning
from opposite edges of the planar rear to the planar front.
my letter of 8 May 2025 I stated:
Planar front and a rear structural formation which
lies against
opposite planar portions of the adjacent posts
The claims 1 and 28 define the feature of:
each of the sleepers defines a planar front and a rear structural formation
which lies against opposite planar portions of the adjacent
The description and drawings disclose that during assembly (but before the
soil is added) one sleeper tilts (page 9 lines 11-14, page
13 lines 4-8, figure
7) such that lateral movement of the bottom portion of the sleeper is
constrained by the inside surface of the
front planar portion of the vertical
post. Lateral movement of the top portion of the sleeper is constrained by the
planar rear as
it rests against the inner surface of the back planar portion of
the vertical post.
The drawings show that after the soil is retained to the depth of the top
sleeper (figures 8 and 9), the top sleeper is pushed by
the soil into a vertical
orientation with the planar front surface against the inside surface of the
front planar portion of the
vertical post.
I have concerns as to whether the feature of “planar front and a rear
structural formation which lies against opposite planar
portions” is
supported by the specification. More specifically, I have concerns whether the
feature of “rear structural
formation ... lies against [back planar
portion]” is supported by the specification.
In the hearing I questioned the Applicant about [sic – this] issue. The
Applicant provided two alternative explanations.
Firstly, the Applicant argued that during assembly each sleeper starts in a
configuration where it is touching the inner surface of
the planar front and
back positions of the vertical post (as shown in figure 7).
Secondly (alternatively), the Applicant argued that in the assembled
retaining wall (including the retained soil), the rear structural
formation of
the sleeper is close to the inside surface of the planar back portion of the
vertical post. Thus, I understand the Applicant’s
argument to be that in
the assembled retaining wall system, the rear structural formation of the
sleeper is close enough to be considered
lying against the inside surface of the
planar back portion of the vertical post.
their further submissions the Applicant stated (italics and underlining in
The Hearing Officer raises concerns regarding whether the feature of a
‘planar front and a rear structural formation which lies
against opposite
planar portion’ is supported by the specification. More specifically, the
Hearing Officer raises concerns
as to whether the feature of ‘rear
structural formation.... lies against [back planar portion] is supported by the
specification.
As an initial point, it is respectfully submitted that there is no basis
under Australian law to suggest that the claims must be restricted
to only the
preferred embodiments exemplified in the specification. Rather, claims should be
considered supported when the scope
of the claims is commensurate to the
contribution of the specification to the art.
The Applicant respectfully submits that the claims encompass within their
scope both situations whereby the distance between a planar
front and a rear
structural formation is substantially the same as the distance between the
opposite planar portions of the post
and where this distance is less than the
distance between the opposite planar portions and the post such that, in both
embodiments,
at some point, the
planar front and a rear structural formation
lies against opposite planar portions of the adjacent posts
Particularly, the Applicant submits that the specification shows that the
distance between a planar front and a rear structural formation
is substantially
the same as the distance between the opposite planar portions of the post in
Figures 3 and 4. Furthermore, the specification
additionally teaches that
‘[s]ince the distance between front planar portions 105A and rear planar
portions 105B
be greater than the width W of the sleeper, the sleeper
initially be tilted as shown in Figure 7’ (emphases added,
specification, pg. 13, lns 6-8). The Applicant submits that the
specification
also teaches that the distance between a planar front and a rear structural
formation may be substantially the same
as, or less than, the distance between
the opposite planar portions of the post.
The Applicant submits that, in the embodiment where the distance between a
planar front and a rear structural formation is substantially
the same as the
distance between the opposite planar portions of the post, the planar front and
the rear structural formation will
always be in contact with the opposing planar
portions of the posts and thus lie against them. The Applicant submits that the
skilled in the art armed with the knowledge of the specification would
appreciate this and readily understand that both embodiments
are possible and
able to achieve the promise of the invention without undue burden. Furthermore,
in such a situation, the sleepers
will neatly stack on top of one another.
The Applicant submits that the person skilled in the art armed with the
knowledge of the specification would appreciate that in the
situation whereby
the distance between the planar front and the rear structural formation of each
sleeper is less than that between
planar portions of the posts (e.g., claims 9
and 10), then this orientation will be utilized as discussed in the
specification. In
this situation, during the assembly of the retaining wall
system, a sleeper may be placed in the tilted orientation which touches
front and back planar portion of the posts and then backfilled which should push
the sleepers forward.
In relation to the Hearing Officer’s comments:
In the hearing I questioned the Applicant about issue. The Applicant
provided two alternative explanations.
Firstly, the Applicant argued that during assembly each sleeper starts in
a configuration where it is touching the inner surface of
the planar front and
back positions of the vertical post (as shown in figure 7).
Secondly (alternatively), the Applicant argued that in the assembled
retaining wall (including the retained soil), the rear structural
formation of
the sleeper is close to the inside surface of the planar back portion of the
vertical post. Thus, I understand the Applicant’s
argument to be that in
the assembled retaining wall system, the rear structural formation of the
sleeper is close enough to be considered
lying against the inside surface of the
planar back portion of the vertical post.
The Applicant submits that both interpretations are applicable depending on
the situation.
Opponent states in their further submissions (italics and underlining in
The attorney for the Applicant asks that claim interpretation rely upon the
skilled person interpreting the otherwise plain words
of the claim to the effect
The Applicant submits that the specification also teaches that the
distance between a planar front and a rear structural formation
substantially
the same as, or less than
, the distance between the
opposite planar portions of the post.
The claims do not include these alternatives. Further:
The Applicant respectfully submits that the claims encompass within their
scope both situations whereby the distance between a planar
front and a rear
structural formation is substantially the same as the distance between the
opposite planar portions of the post
and where this distance is less than the
distance between the opposite planar portions and the post such that, in both
embodiments,
at some point
, the planar front and a rear structural
formation lies against opposite planar portions of the adjacent posts.
Claims 1 and 28 define the final position of the stacked sleepers. This
interpretation of the claims creates more problems, as it
imports a method step
into these claims.
This is betrayed by the following statement:
In this situation,
during the assembly
of the retaining wall
system, a sleeper may be placed in the tilted orientation which touches both the
front and back planar portion
of the posts and then backfilled which should push
the sleepers forward.
A similar argument (but not that there were two versions covered) was also
advanced by the Counsel for the Applicant at the hearing
albeit “off the
cuff”. The problems become even greater for the sleeper to be able to tilt
inside the channel during
assembly as this method can not apply to claims 1 and
28 in their present form which require a tight fit. What angle of tilting is
required during assembly so that in the tongue and groove version the tongue can
rotate into the groove.
It appears that the only embodiment that has the tilting action is the tongue
and groove version especially now that the new issue
has arisen and further
complicated by the quite unexpected submissions that there can be different
cleanly stacked” (whatever that means in
terms of claim certainty).
Determination on the support for the ‘lies
against’ feature
noted by the Applicant there are two embodiments of the invention. The first
embodiment shown in figures 3 and 4 where the distance
between the front and
rear planar portions of the vertical channels of the vertical posts is
substantially
as the width of the sleeper.
second embodiment shown in figures 7-9 where the distance between the front and
rear planar portions of the vertical channels
of the vertical posts is
greater than
the width of the sleeper.
First embodiment
1 is supported by the first embodiment shown in figures 3 and 4. Because the
distance between the front and rear planar portions
of the vertical channels of
the vertical posts is substantially the same as width of the sleeper, the
sleeper would slot into the
channel causing the front and rear of the sleeper to
lie against the planar front and rear (respectively) of the vertical
Second embodiment
noted in my letter, there are two possible arguments that the second embodiment
provides support to claim 1.
their further submissions the Applicant states:
“...[I]n the situation whereby the distance between the planar front
and the rear structural formation of each sleeper is less
than that between
planar portions of the posts (e.g., claims 9 and 10), then this orientation will
be utilized as discussed in the
specification. In this situation, during the
assembly of the retaining wall system, a sleeper may be placed in the tilted
orientation
which touches both the front and back planar portion of the posts
and then backfilled which should push the sleepers forward.”
the applicant argues that
during assembly
, the sleepers are tilted such
that they touch the front and rear planar portions of the vertical channels of
the vertical.
do not accept this argument. As set out in the construction of terms I have
found that the claims define a retaining wall system
. The claims do not alternatively define the relative
position/orientation of the components of the retaining wall
Close enough
Applicant confirmed that what I set out in my letter as my understanding of
their alternate argument was correct. That is, that,
in the second embodiment,
in the assembled form
the rear surface of the sleeper could be
“close enough” to the rear planar portion of the vertical channel of
the vertical
post to be considered lying against it. I do not accept this
description provides only a single example of the distance between the planar
front and planar rear of each sleeper being less
than that between planar
portions of the posts at page 4 lines 13 to 14. This distance is given as
“approximately 10mm”.
Claim 10 defines the distance as
might be plausible (though not discussed in the description) that a distance of
a few millimetres (1-3 millimetres) between the
surface of the sleeper and the
surface of the rear planar portion of the channel would be enough to allow for
such that the sleeper was close enough to be considered lying
against the channel. However, a distance of 10mm is beyond a reasonable
for the sleeper to be considered lying against the channel.
Claims 9 and 10
9 and 10 are as follows:
9. The retaining wall system as claimed in any one of claims 6 to 8, wherein
a distance between the planar front and the planar rear
of each sleeper is less
than that between planar portions of the posts.
10. The retaining wall system as claimed in any of claims 6 to 9, wherein a
distance between the planar front and the planar rear
of each sleeper is less
than that between planar portions of the posts by approximately 10mm.
invention shown in figures 3 and 4 shows a very small gap between a) the planar
front of each sleeper and the planar front portion
of the vertical post, and b)
the planar rear of each sleeper and the planar rear portion of the vertical
a claim specific to a small gap limited to just a few millimetres may fall
within the scope of the term “lie against”.
However, claim 9 does
not specify how small the gap is and could include a gap of any size. Gaps of
greater than a few millimetres
do not have support from the specification, so
claim 9 is not supported.
10 is specific to a gap of 10mm as exemplified in the second embodiment shown in
figures 6-9. The description has a consistory
clause that states at page 4 lines
13-14 that the gap is 10mm. I have found this embodiment does not fall within
the scope of claim
1 (see construction of ‘lies against’), and thus
a claim specific to this embodiment is not supported.
Conclusion support - ‘lies against’
1 and 28 define a retaining wall system in its assembled form wherein the rear
structural formations of the sleepers lie against
the vertical posts. Claims 1
and 28 are supported by the first embodiment of the invention shown in figure 3
and 4 where the distance
between the front and rear planar portions of the post
is substantially the same as the width of the sleeper. The same applies to
6, which also supported by the first embodiment.
1 and 28 are not supported by the second embodiment of the invention shown in
figures 6-9 where the distance between the front
and rear planar portions of the
post is greater than the width of the sleeper.
9 and 10 are predicated on claim 1 being supported by both the first and second
embodiments. However, I have found that claim
1 is only supported by the first
embodiment and not the second embodiment. Claims 9 and 10 are specific to (i.e.
encompass) only
the second embodiment and not the first embodiment, so claims 9
and 10 are not supported by the invention disclosed.
my letter of 8 May 2025 I stated:
Related to the “lies against” issue discussed above is the issue
of how the sleepers are stacked.
Independent claims 1, 28, and 29 define that the sleepers are stacked.
Although not defined in simple terms, a result of the claims
is that the
trapezoidal sleepers are stacked edge-on-edge. Because the sleepers have
trapezoidal cross section, they will not naturally
stack edge-on-edge. There are
two things that enable the sleepers to be stacked edge-on-edge.
Firstly, the sleepers have a tongue and groove on their edges. This is shown
in the figures (e.g. Figure 5). The tongue is at the
bottom edge of the sleeper,
while the groove is at the top edge of the sleeper.
Secondly, after the ends of one sleeper are slotted into the channels of the
vertical H-section posts, soil is filled to press the
sleeper against the front
surface of the channel; this process keeps the planar front of the sleeper in a
vertical orientation allowing
the next sleeper to be stacked on top. This is
shown in figures 6-9 and described at page 13 lines 1 to 13:
To install a retaining wall system 100, holes 80 are dug into the ground 78
to receive lower portions 104 of posts 101 and the lowermost
portion 104 is
inserted into the hole as shown in Figure 6. Concrete may be applied to the hole
around the post to improve fixing
of the post 101 as is well known in the field
of wall post installation. With reference to Figure 7, a first sleeper 109 is
slid down between two vertical posts 101 so that it rests on ground level
as shown in Figure 7. Since the distance between front
planar portions 105A and
rear planar portions 105B may be greater than the width W of the sleeper, the
sleeper may initially be tilted
as shown in Figure 7. In Figure 8 it can be seen
that by backfilling with earth 78A against the rear of the sleeper 102, front
109 of the the [sic] sleeper is forced flush against the front planar
portion 105A of post 101. Further sleepers are then added,
and additional earth
backfilled, to make a stack 98 as shown in Figure 9 to thereby complete the
retaining wall system 100.
From the description it appears that the sleepers must be stacked and soil
placed behind the sleeper
sequentially
to build up the retaining wall.
Alternatively, although not stated in description explicitly, it appears
plausible that the retaining
wall could be assembled by stacking all the
sleepers by connecting sleepers with the tongue and groove joints and then
filling soil
behind the retaining wall.
For a claim to be supported, features essential to the invention must be
defined in the claim.
It appears that at least one of:
a) The sequential laying of the sleepers and soil; or
b) The interconnecting the sleepers as they are stacked
is essential to the invention.
The absence of either of these features from claim 1 and 28 appears to lead
to a lack of support because these claims extend beyond
the technical
contribution. Claim 29 includes the feature of complementary male and female
connections which may provide sufficient
support from the specification of how
the sleepers are stacked.
Applicant’s further submissions state:
The Examiner also comments on the interpretation or how the sleepers are
stacked. In this regard, the Examiner notes that claims 1,
28 and 29 recite
sleepers that are stacked. The Examiner comments that the claims generally
relate to trapezoidal sleepers which
are allegedly stacked edge-on-edge and it
is alleged that such sleepers will not naturally stack edge-on-edge because they
trapezoidal cross section.
The Examiner contends that there are allegedly two things that enable the
sleepers to be stacked edge-on-edge:
1. The sleepers having a tongue and groove on their edges; and
2. Backfilling with soil after each sleeper is slotted into the channels of
The Applicant respectfully disagrees.
As an initial point, the Applicant submits that the definition of stacked
should be considered ‘piled into a stack’ where
should be considered as ‘a pile, heap or group’. The Applicant
submits that the person skilled in
the art armed with the knowledge of the
specification would appreciate that stacked sleepers would refer to sleepers
that are received
in the channel one after another and that these sleepers being
place one on top of the other are stacked.
The Applicant submits that the present invention relates to a retaining wall
system that is utilized to retain earth. Whilst a ‘cleanly’
pile of sleepers (edge-on-edge) would be preferable in a retaining wall, a less
cleanly stacked pile of sleepers will still
retain dirt. In this regard, even if
the sleepers were stacked and slightly offset or angled, the Applicant submits
that these sleepers
would still be considered ‘stacked’ as each
sleeper is placed one on top of the preceding sleeper. Whilst it is preferable
that the sleepers are stacked uniformly, there is no requirement that the claims
be limited to such an orientation nor should the
Applicant be limited to such an
interpretation.
Finally, the Applicant submits that the addition of the tongue and grooves
can assist with ‘clean’ stacking of the sleepers.
However, the
absence of such features will still allow the sleepers to be stacked in the
posts by virtue of the combination of the
vertical H-section posts.
Opponent’s further submissions state:
The attorney's submissions create further uncertainty.
Contrary to the Applicant’s present submission, Counsel for the
Applicant at the hearing argued that compared to the acknowledged
prior art, US
5,435,669, which has a flat top surface for stacking, the claimed sleepers are
inventive, by reason of the rear structural
formation not stacking
(antistacking).
The attorney now wants to give the stacking feature a wide ambit, meaning one
above the other whether aligned or not, but stacking
is only disclosed in the
context of the alignment of the front faces and an inability to stack as Counsel
for the Applicant described.
The Applicant’s submissions:
As an initial point, the Applicant submits that the definition of stacked
should be considered ‘piled into a stack’ where
should be considered as ‘a pile, heap or group’. The Applicant
submits that the person skilled in
the art armed with the knowledge of the
specification would appreciate that stacked sleepers would refer to sleepers
that are received
in the channel one after another and that these sleepers being
place one on top of the other are stacked.
The Applicant submits that the present invention relates to a retaining
wall system that is utilized to retain earth. Whilst a ‘cleanly’
stacked pile of sleepers (edge-on-edge) would be preferable in a retaining wall,
a less cleanly stacked pile of sleepers will still
retain dirt. In this regard,
even if the sleepers were stacked and slightly offset or angled, the Applicant
submits that these sleepers
would still be considered ‘stacked’ as
each sleeper is placed one on top of the preceding sleeper. Whilst it is
that the sleepers are stacked uniformly, there is no requirement that
the claims be limited to such an orientation nor should the
Applicant be limited
to such an interpretation.
This completely recasts the Applicant’s submissions at the hearing that
the sleepers do not naturally stack. In the second paragraph
the attorney
appears to be widening the “edge on edge” at the front face to
something else.
There is no disclosure anywhere of this so-called “less cleanly
stacked” version. The only “stacking” described
is that where
the planar fronts form a substantially planar and continuous surface as is
illustrated in Figure 1.
While this is in the preferred embodiment there is no other option described
as far as the front face is concerned that would be a
“less cleanly
stacked” version. As far as the tilting action is concerned the only
version supported is where the “antistacking”
feature works in
combination to rotate into the tongue and groove. This combination is
structurally necessary according to the description
in this version since there
are now two versions.
questions I asked in the letter were specific to the second embodiment of the
invention (where the width of the sleeper is less
than the distance between the
front and rear planar portions of the channel of the vertical
am satisfied that the first embodiment (where the width of the sleeper is the
same as the distance between the front and rear planar
portions of the channel
of the vertical post) would cause the sleepers to be stacked edge-on-edge.
Because the sleepers are confined
in movement to the vertical direction and no
movement in the horizontal, the sleepers would be unable to tilt. Thus, the
would stack edge-on-edge.
have already found that the second embodiment of the invention does not provide
support to claim 1, so it is moot as to whether
other aspects of the second
embodiment provide support to claim 1.
Conclusion support – stacked
first embodiment provides support for claims 1 and 28 as to how the sleepers are
29 defines that the sleepers are “for vertical stacking of a multiplicity
of the sleepers”, however claim 29 does
not define the vertical posts and
thus does not define the positional relationship (e.g. whether the sleeper
‘lies against’
the surfaces of the vertical posts) between the
sleepers and the vertical post.
29 defines the sleepers alone (though “adapted to be used as a horizontal
member of a retaining wall system”) and
not a ‘retaining wall
system’. Claim 29 defines the following features of the sleepers which are
not defined in claims
The sleepers
have “complementary male and female connections” (which is a broader
way of defining tongue and grooves)
for vertical stacking of the
The sleepers are
fibre reinforced
The sleepers
include a longitudinal hollow
consider sleepers with the features defined in claim 29 to be supported by the
specification.
Conclusion support
first embodiment of the invention provides support for the features of
‘lies against’ and ‘stacked’ and
all other features of
claim 1. Claim 1 is thus supported by the first embodiment of the
9 and 10 are not supported by the invention disclosed.
Inventive step
Inventive step legal principles
is a requirement of subsection 18(1) of the
invention, so far as claimed in any claim, involves an inventive step.
Subsection 7(2) states that an invention is taken to
involve an inventive step
unless it would have been obvious to a person skilled in the art in the light of
the common general knowledge,
considered alone or together with the prior
For the purposes of this Act, an invention is
to be taken to involve an inventive step when compared with the prior art base
the invention would have been obvious to a person skilled in the relevant
art in the light of the common general knowledge as it
existed (whether in or
out of the patent area) before the priority date of the relevant claim, whether
that knowledge is considered
separately or together with the information
mentioned in subsection (3).
7(3) prescribes the information that may be considered as:
The information for the purposes of subsection (2) is:
(a) any single piece of prior art information; or
(b) a combination of any 2 or more pieces of prior art information that
the skilled person mentioned in subsection (2) could, before
the priority date
of the relevant claim, be reasonably expected to have combined.
art information is information that is part of the prior art base, and the prior
art base is information in a document that
is publicly available and information
made publicly available through doing an act. Once the common general knowledge
and prior art
information have been identified, the question is whether the
claimed invention would have been obvious. Various verbal tests have
out to explain this question. In
Wellcome Foundation Ltd v V.R.
Laboratories (Aust.) Pty Ltd
[1981] HCA 12
(1981) 148 CLR
Aickin J stated:
"The test is whether the hypothetical addressee faced with the same problem
would have taken as a matter of routine whatever steps
might have led from the
prior art to the invention, whether they be the steps of the inventor or
Consideration
The problem
description states at page 1 lines 15 to 25:
“A problem that arises in the building of a sleeper wall is that
concrete or timber sleepers are heavy and labour intensive
to move and to
install. Attempts have been made to fabricate sleepers out of lighter materials.
For example, in US patent No. 5,435,669
to Weber, there is described a soil
retention wall system that includes a plurality of hollow polymeric sleepers,
which are referred
to as “lagging members”. The members that are
described are bulky and take up considerable volume, which is disadvantageous
from the point of view of transporting them to site.
The present invention seeks to provide an improved retaining wall system,
which will overcome or substantially ameliorate at least
some of the
deficiencies of the prior art, or which will at least provide an
alternative.”
the Applicant didn’t make submissions on what they believed to be the
problem the present invention sought to solve, I take
the above excerpt from the
description to be the Applicant’s formulation of the
Opponents submissions state at paragraph 32 the problem addressed by the
Objective technical problem
applicant acknowledges that its solution to heavy concrete is not making a
hollow lightweight plastic one because that is known
from US 5,435,669 (p1 line
lagging members are considered to be “bulky and take up considerable
volume, which is disadvantageous from the point of
view of transporting them to
the objective technical problem is the problem of optimising the profile to
reduce volume while still being able to swap out (similarly
modular) with the
concrete or timber sleeper.
view of the description and the Opponent’s submissions I consider the
problem the present invention addresses is a lightweight
sleeper that occupies a
relatively small volume when transported.
The hypothetical task
evidence adduced by the Opponent in relation to the inventive step of the
invention included the question posed to Mr Braid to
design a retaining wall
using a pultruded imitation concrete sleeper (Braid [8]).
Braid first sketched a commonly known concrete sleeper system (Braid [14]-[15],
Braid then sketched in HMB-2 a sleeper which is rectangular in cross-section,
but hollow:
Braid then observed that, because the pultruded panels are lightweight, they may
benefit from interlocking. He drew two structures
in HMB-3 and HMB-4 having
interlocking elements. HMB-3:
is as follows:
being shown the US 3,614,870 (Furlong) patent Mr Braid goes onto to sketch
of the proposed ideas from Mr Braid have hollow sleepers with planar internal
walls (HMB-2 and HMB-4), while the other two do
not (HMB-3 and HMB-5). Three of
the proposed ideas from Mr Braid have interlocking features on the sleepers
(HMB-3, HMB-4, and HMB-5),
while one does not (HMB-2).
of the proposed sleepers have a trapezoidal cross-section. The closest Mr Braid
comes to suggesting a sleeper with a trapezoidal
cross section is in HMB-5 where
the sleeper has a recess that resembles a trapezoid.
of the proposed ideas from Mr Braid fall within the scope of the
I am not satisfied that the evidence establishes that a person skilled in the
art would, as a matter of routine, envisage
an invention that falls within the
scope of the claims. I consider the presently defined invention is inventive in
light of the common
general knowledge.
US 3,614,870 (Furlong)
3,614,870 discloses a retaining wall formed from stringer members (20) that are
connected to vertical members (14) with bolts.
Opponent states in their submissions at paragraphs 26-28:
Furlong teaches that a trapezoidal profile gives strength to horizontally
stacked wall panels. The same engineering logic, resisting
earth pressure using
geometric rigidity drives the invention.
While US3614870 (Furlong) discloses horizontally stacked, interlocking wall
panels with diagonal reinforcement, it does not disclose
a planar front face
typical of concrete sleepers. The panels in Furlong are recognised by Braid as
effectively the same as vertical
shuttering but running horizontal as would
sleepers but unlike sleepers which have a defined front for aesthetic
presentation and
alignment within H-posts. This reinforces that the objective
technical problem was not to replicate the appearance of Furlong but
the visual and structural form of a concrete sleeper while reducing weight and
minimising the material used in the FRP
solution. The only differences between
the claimed invention and Furlong as applied to the modular concrete system are:
a. the substitution of pultruded FRP for metal;
b. use of vertical H-section posts (although Furlong does have channels);
c. specific interlocking profiles (tongue and groove);
d. packaging the structure as a plastic modular sleeper wall.
Each of these differences is either explicitly within CGK or trivial.
Pultruded FRP was a well-established material in civil structures
(TJD6–TJD10), and its substitution was a standard engineering response to
weight, corrosion and handling concerns. H-section
posts and tongue-and-groove
joints were also well known (TJD13; Braid 19). Modularisation of known
structural units is not inventive.
The concrete system and the acknowledged
prior art was already modular.
Applicant states in their submissions at paragraphs 85:
First, the list of features not disclosed by the 870 Patent is substantially
all of the features of the claimed invention of the Opposed
Application. OS 27
concedes that the 870 Patent does not disclose the use of plastic materials, the
use of vertical H-section posts,
the tongue and groove interlocking profile or
indeed sleepers or a sleeper wall at all. Further, though OS does not
acknowledge it,
the 870 Patent also does not disclose the feature the rear
structural formation defines a planar rear, wherein the planar rear is
than the planar front and wherein the rear structural formation comprises
oppositely oriented diagonals spanning from opposite
edges of the planar rear to
the planar front. Those matters are unsurprising, since the 870 Patent relates
to a different type of
system, being a bin type. Indeed, they beg the question
as to why one would be deploying the 870 Patent in a design of a sleeper
system at all.
are several differences between ‘870 and the present
The sleepers are
not slotted into the channels of vertical posts. Instead, the sleepers are
bolted onto a planar vertical post.
The sleepers are
not stacked on top of each other.
The sleepers are
not trapezoid in cross section. Instead, the sleepers are “hat-shaped in
cross section”. Although a hat-shaped
cross section resembles a trapezoid,
it is missing a front face, thus has an open-curve cross section rather than a
closed curve
(that a trapezoid is).
Opponent’s argument is that all the features missing from ‘870 that
are present in the presently claimed invention
would be “CGK or
consider that the Opponent’s approach is
ex post facto
The starting point for inventive step analysis should not be a comparison
between the claimed invention and the prior art.
Instead, the correct approach
is asking, in light of the problem, what obvious modifications a PSA would make
to the invention disclosed
in the prior art document.
problem the present invention addresses is a lightweight sleeper that occupies a
relatively small volume when transported. The
evidence does not show that a
person skilled in the art when presented with the problem and the ‘870
patent would make modifications
such that it fell within the scope of the
claimed invention.
I consider the Opponent’s arguments in relation to inventive step
unpersuasive. Claim 1 is inventive in light of ‘870.
claims are clear and are inventive in light of the prior art raised by the
specification provides: a) a complete enough and clear enough disclosure, and b)
the best method for performing, the claimed invention.
9 and 10 lack support.
opposition is successful. Although costs typically follow the event, I have
departed from this practice in this case.
this case, the successful ground of opposition was not raised by the Opponent,
and instead I had raised it under s 60(3). Although
claims have been found
invalid, the Opponent has not been successful in
opposition.
award of costs is to be made.
Xavier Gisz
Delegate of the Commissioner of Patents
Annex - claims
1. A retaining wall system comprising:
a plurality of vertical posts,
wherein the plurality of vertical posts comprise a plurality of vertical
H-section posts, each comprising planar parallel portions
spaced by an
orthogonal central planar web therebetween, the vertical H-section posts located
in alignment and orientated to form
vertical channels therebetween,
a plurality of horizontally stacked sleepers stacked between adjacent posts
with distal ends thereof received within respective channels
wherein the sleepers comprise plastic, wherein each of the sleepers defines a
planar front and a rear structural formation which lies
against opposite planar
portions of the adjacent posts, wherein the rear structural formation defines a
planar rear,
wherein the planar rear is narrower than the planar front and wherein the
rear structural formation comprises oppositely orientated
diagonals spanning
from opposite edges of the planar rear to the planar front.
retaining wall system as claimed in claim 1, wherein the sleepers comprise fibre
reinforced plastic.
3. The retaining wall system as claimed in claims 1
or 2, wherein the vertical H-section posts comprise plastic.
retaining wall system as claimed in claim 3, wherein said posts comprises fibre
reinforced plastic.
5. The retaining wall system as claimed in any one of
claims 1 to 4, wherein each sleeper is longitudinally hollow.
retaining wall system as claimed in any one of claims 1 to 5, wherein the planar
front lies against respective planar portions
of the adjacent posts.
The retaining wall system as claimed in claim 6, wherein a surface of the planar
front is texturised.
8. The retaining wall system as claimed in claim 7,
wherein each planar front forms male and female interconnections and wherein the
diagonals meet between the interconnections.
9. The retaining wall system
as claimed in any one of claims 6 to 8, wherein a distance between the planar
front and the planar rear
of each sleeper is less than that between planar
portions of the posts.
10. The retaining wall system as claimed in any of
claims 6 to 9, wherein a distance between the planar front and the planar rear
of each sleeper is less than that between planar portions of the posts by
approximately 10mm.
11. The retaining wall system as claimed in claim 6,
wherein each planar front forms interconnections.
12. The retaining wall
system as claimed in claim 11, wherein each the interconnections comprise male
and female interconnections.
13. The retaining wall system as claimed in
claims 11 or 12, wherein the interconnections interconnect when the sleepers are
together within the vertical channels.
14. The retaining wall
system as claimed in claim 12 or claim 13, wherein the male and female
interconnections slot together.
15. The retaining wall system as claimed
in claim 14, wherein each interconnection comprises a length along the planar
front, wherein
the length is 20 mm or more.
16. The retaining wall system
as claimed in any one of claims 11 to 15, wherein the interconnections are
spaced approximately 100
17. The retaining wall system as
claimed in any one of claims 1 to 16, wherein the rear structural formation
comprises an isosceles
18. The retaining wall system as
claimed in claim 17, wherein the planar front makes an internal angle of about
65 degrees with a
first of the diagonals and an internal angle of about 65
degrees with a second of the diagonals.
19. The retaining wall system as
claimed in any one of claims 12 to 17, wherein the male and female
interconnections extend vertically
upwardly and vertically downwardly or vice
versa, in use.
20. The retaining wall system as claimed in claim 19,
wherein the female interconnections comprise a pair of opposed fins defining
groove therebetween.
21. The retaining wall system as claimed in claim
20, wherein the male connections comprise a single tongue which complements the
22. The retaining wall system as claimed in claim 21, wherein the
tongue is dimensioned to extend fully into the groove.
23. The retaining
wall system as claimed in any one of claims 21 to 22, wherein the tongue is
non-hollow and each of the opposed fins
are non-hollow.
24. The retaining
wall system as claimed in claim 20, wherein each of the sleepers includes a fin
spacing portion which spaces the
opposed fins from the rear structural
25. The retaining wall system as claimed in claim 24 wherein,
each of the sleepers includes a tongue spacing portion which spaces
from the rear structural formation.
26. The retaining wall system as
claimed in claim 25, wherein the tongue is horizontally offset from the tongue
spacing portion.
27. The retaining wall system as claimed in claim 26,
wherein the tongue is horizontally offset from the tongue spacing portion a
distance corresponding to a thickness of a corresponding one of the fins whereby
upon interconnecting adjacent ones of the sleepers
a front face of said fin is
flush with a front face of the groove spacing member.
28. A retaining wall system comprising:
a plurality of vertical posts for installation in a vertical orientation,
wherein the plurality of vertical posts comprise a plurality of vertical
H-section posts, each comprising planar parallel portions
spaced by an
orthogonal central planar web therebetween, the vertical H-section posts
locatable in alignment and orientable to form
vertical channels
therebetween,
a plurality of horizontally stackable sleepers for stacking between adjacent
vertical posts with distal ends thereof received within
respective channels
wherein the sleepers comprise plastic, wherein each of the sleepers defines a
planar front and a rear structural formation which lies
against opposite planar
portions of the adjacent posts in use, wherein the rear structural formation
defines a planar rear,
wherein the planar rear is narrower than the planar front and wherein the
rear structural formation comprises oppositely orientated
diagonals spanning
from opposite edges of the planar rear to the planar front.
29. A sleeper
adapted to be used as a horizontal member of a retaining wall system, the
sleeper defining a planar front and being
comprised of fibre reinforced plastic
and being elongate wherein an earth retaining side of the sleeper is formed with
a rear structural
formation including a longitudinal hollow, wherein the rear
structural formation defines a planar rear, wherein the planar rear is
than the planar front and wherein the rear structural formation comprises
oppositely orientated diagonals spanning from
opposite edges of the planar rear
to the planar front, and wherein the sleeper includes complementary male and
female connections
extending vertically upwardly and vertically downwardly in
use for vertical stacking of a multiplicity of the sleepers.
RTF format (17.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format