DECISION NO: 343/96
INDUSTRIAL LAW - TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT - SERIOUS MISCONDUCT -
allegation of supplying marijuana
to employees - whether proper
investigation or sufficient inquiry into the circumstances - ONUS OF
Industrial Relations Act 1988
Byrne -v- Australian Airlines Ltd
[1994] FCA 888
(1994) 47 FCR 300
Bio-Lo Pty Ltd -v- Hooper
(1994) 53 IR 224
Briginshaw -v- Brignishaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
STEPHEN JAMES PERKINS -v- GRACE WORLDWIDE (AUST) PTY LTD
No. NI 1208 of 1996
COURT: WALKER JR
PLACE: SYDNEY
DATE: 30TH JULY
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT
OF AUSTRALIA
SYDNEY REGISTRY
No. NI 1208 of 1996
STEPHEN JAMES PERKINS
GRACE WORLDWIDE (AUST) PTY LTD
BEFORE: WALKER JR
PLACE: SYDNEY
DATE: 30TH JULY 1996
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Stephen James
Perkins was employed by the respondent for
approximately eight and a half years. At the time of the
termination, he was the Sydney
Metropolitan Fleet Controller for
Grace Worldwide Australia Pty Ltd. He said that during his
employment he had never been formally
questioned or warned in anyway
concerning his work performance. However on the 22 January 1996, he
was called into the office of
Mr Stuart Pepper, the Branch Manager
and was summarily dismissed.
Mr Perkins gave the following evidence,
"At approximately 5.30,
Stuart Pepper called me into his office and
there was just he and I there and he said to me that he'd spent
most of the day at head
office as I was probably aware and I
said, well yes I had heard he'd been there, although I wasn't
formally notified that he was
down there. He said that he was down
there because of two accusations that I was dealing in drugs at
Grace Removals and the company
and himself thought that this was a
gross misconduct and it was an illegal activity that I was involved
in and he handed me a letter
of dismissal and told me to leave
the premises."
The applicant said this meeting lasted for about five minutes, he
had said to Mr
Pepper that the allegations were, "bullshit". He was
then driven home by Mr Stuart Pepper and the supervisor Mr Simon
When asked if he was made aware of these allegations prior to the
22 January 1995, the applicant said,
"I heard on the grapevine
through the employees that work at Grace
Removals, that there were discussions that certain persons in the
company were trying to
set me up for drugs. I thought it was a
big joke and you know, there was obviously somebody disgruntled out
there, wasn't happy with
what had transpired in the past and it
wouldn't be the first time, that I've had, you know-- a disgruntled
driver or somebody out
in the field that was unhappy with a
decision that I'd made and tried to get rid of me. But I just
laughed it off....."
The allegations
The allegations against the applicant are in the form of Statutory
Declarations, sworn by Mr Jonathan L'Strange Harris and Mr Jason
James Abbott, on the
19 January 1996. Mr Abbott was called as a witness in these
proceedings, but Mr Harris was not called. I can
only infer from
this that his evidence would not have been of benefit to the
respondent's case.
The declaration of Mr Harris, is
that about six months prior to
his declaration, he had been injured at work. Before leaving to go
him a home rolled cigarette and
said, "here take this, it might help you with the pain".
Mr Harris says he took the cigarette believing
it to be marijuana
and when he smoked it the next day, he confirmed that it was. He
also said that this was the first and the last
time that the
applicant had ever given him a marijuana cigarette.
Mr Jason Abbott, in his Statutory Declaration says, that in early
September or October 1995, he had a discussion with the applicant
good stuff and that he would bring him some in.
Mr Abbott declares that about one week later,
"I do not remember the day, at about
lunch time, Steve Perkins was
sitting at his desk at Botany Branch when he and I had a further
conversation. I said, "Did you bring
it in for me?". Steve did not
answer. He put his hand inside the bag he carries around his waist
and handed me a home rolled cigarette
over the desk.
There is nothing in these allegations that infer the applicant
actually sold the cigarettes to these men, it appears
were given freely and both the declarants say that they have never
seen the applicant smoke or give cigarettes to any other
On the basis of these allegations the applicant was summarily
dismissed for gross misconduct.
The letter of terminations
is as follows,
Mr Stephen Perkins
Representations have been made to the management of Grace Removals
that you have been engaged in illegal activities whilst working for
our Botany depot.
Subsequent investigations have conclusively
validated these
representations.
As a result of these allegations, the Company finds no alternative
but to terminate your employment
immediately, for gross misconduct.
Yours faithfully
SOUTHERN REGIONAL MANAGER.
The investigations
Mr Pepper, gave
evidence that on the 23 December 1995, a supervisor
Mr Simon Reynolds had approached him in the yard saying he had
heard rumours
to the effect that the applicant had been distributing
marijuana on site. Mr Pepper was then asked by his Counsel what he
and he replied,
"Well upon resumption of work after Christmas break I took those
matters up with my State Manager, Owen Russell,
and the person who
- who we - the information had come from, we - we interviewed
him. At that stage during the interview it was apparent
was hearsay evidence, there was nothing factual to it and that
stage we'd - we basically dropped the investigation .... I
not to pursue the matter at all."
When asked who was the man you interviewed, Mr Pepper said it was
Mr Peter Kearns, and
he further said, that in early January he
received information that an employee was prepared to come forward
to verify the allegations
made by Mr Peter Kearns. This employee,
was Mr Jason Abbott who said to him,
"...that he was aware that we had made some enquires
effect that Mr Perkins had been giving dope. He came to me and
said that he had no problem making a statement to the that
because Mr Perkins had - had given him marijuana at one point in
time whilst at work."
When asked in cross examination, if
Mr Abbott had approached him,
Mr Pepper said that he had and agreed that his approach was "just
out of the blue". Mr Pepper said
that during his interview with Mr
Abbott, Abbott had informed him that another employee, Mr Jon Harris
had also received marijuana
from the applicant, and Mr Harris was
then approached about the subject.
In cross examination the following proposition was put
to Mr Pepper,
"That is the extent of the investigation into the matter that you
undertook. You spoke to Mr Harris and Mr Abbott
and then they
filled out the statutory declarations?"
Mr Pepper answered,
"That's right."
Mr Pepper also agreed that at no stage
did he approach the
applicant with the allegations prior to the termination.
When asked why not he answered,
"No, I believe that
would more than likely be upsetting."
Mr Abbott's evidence
The statutory declarations of Mr Abbott and Mr Harris were marked
(Exhibit R1). Mr Abbot in his evidence in chief said that in
late September or early October 1995, he had a conversation with
applicant and it was agreed that the applicant was to bring
some marijuana into work for him. He then said that about a week
he again approached the applicant and asked him if he had
brought the marijuana into work. The applicant had said that he
had given it to Jon Harris. This evidence contradicts the
statutory declaration of Jon Harris. Mr Harris says that he only
marijuana from the applicant on one occasion and that was
six months prior to swearing the declaration, which would make it
He also says in his declaration, that when he asked the applicant,
"Did you bring it in for me?, Steve did not answer".
In his evidence before the Court, he was asked in evidence in
"Did he say anything to you?"
And he replied,
Added to the contradictory evidence of Mr Abbott, is the evidence
of Mr Pepper, that he was approached out of the blue by
Abbott, to give this evidence when it is clear that this was not
so. I must say, that I am left with a great deal of suspicion,
surrounding the way the Statutory Declarations were obtained.
Particularly in light of the fact that they were never shown to
applicant and the fact they were drafted by Mr Smith the
respondent's accountant rather that by the deponents.
The termination
Mr Pepper gave evidence that on the 22 January 1995, at about
5.00pm, he asked the applicant to come into his office. There was
the applicant and Mr Pepper present at the meeting.
Mr Pepper's evidence was as follows,
".....from recollection my words were,
no doubt you're aware that
there's been some serious allegations made about you?", To which he
responded, "Yes, I've heard rumours".
I then went on to say that,
"Well, we've received two stat decs to that effect that you've been
supplying or giving marijuana whilst
on site". From memory his
response was, "That's bullshit.".....To which I responded, "Well, it's
our view with the two Stat Decs
as senior management of the
company has investigated this matter and they have no alternative or
we've no alternative but to terminate
your services."
When asked if the decision to terminate was made prior to that
meeting, Mr Pepper agreed that it was, he also said
that no matter
what was said by the applicant the decision had been made. The
termination letter had been prepared and was handed
applicant. There was no specific allegations made, other that those
as set out in the letter. The Statutory Declarations were
provided or any other details concerning the allegations and no
explanations were asked for or allowed to be given.
a valid termination?
In Byrne v. Australian Airlines Ltd
[1994] FCA 888
(1994) 47 FCR 300
356, Gray J was of the opinion that,
"Plainly, it would be harsh, unjust and unreasonable to dismiss an
employee for an
offence which he or she had not committed. In a
proceeding, in which a breach of the clause is claimed, the Court
is required to
determine whether as a matter of fact, the clause
which the employer advanced as the ground for dismissal existed. The
determine that issue on the evidence before the that
tissue, the Court must inevitably take into account the credit of
the various
witnesses called. As Gregory illustrates, the Court may
even take into account facts which have occurred since the
dismissal, in
determining what possible developments ought to have
been taken into account by the employer."
Beaumont and Heerey JJ were of the
opinion that it was not
necessary for the employer to prove that the employee actually stole
the goods and at 331 said,
"It is well
established that, for present purposes, where a
dismissal is based upon alleged misconduct, the employer will breach
the Award if
it is demonstrated that in so far as it was within
the employer's power before dismissal, the employer conducted as full
and extensive
an investigation into all of the relevant matters
surrounding the alleged misconduct as was reasonable in the
circumstances (see
Bi-Lo Pty Ltd v. Hooper).
In Bi - Lo Pty Ltd v. Hooper
(1994) 53 IR 224
Industrial Commission of South Australia, considered an appeal by the
employer against a finding that the dismissal of
their Assistant
Manager, for allegedly stealing a carton of cigarettes was harsh,
unjust and unreasonable. The Trial Judge had found
at first instance
the employer had failed to prove that the employee had been guilty
of the theft. The Full Bench, although saying
that it was not
necessary for the employer to prove, on the balance of probabilities
that the employee actually stole the goods,
said at pages 229-230,
"An employee is entitled to both substantive and procedural fairness
in respect of a dismissal. Substantive
fairness will be satisfied if
the grounds upon which dismissal occurs are fair grounds. Broadly
speaking a dismissal will be procedurally
fair if the manner or
process of dismissal and the investigation leading up to the
decision to dismiss is just. Where the dismissal
is based upon the
alleged misconduct of the employee, the employer will satisfy the
evidentiary onus which is cast upon it if it
demonstrates that
insofar as was within its powers, before dismissing the employee, it
conducted as full and extensive investigation
into all of the
relevant matters surrounding the alleged misconduct as was reasonable
in the circumstances; it gave the employee
every reasonable
opportunity and sufficient time to answer all the allegations and
respond thereto; and that having done those things
the employer
honestly and genuinely believed and had reasonable grounds for
believing on the information available at that time that
employee was guilty of the misconduct alleged; and that taking into
account any mitigating circumstances either associated with
misconduct or the employee's work record, such misconduct justified
dismissal. A failure to satisfactorily establish any of those
will probably render the dismissal harsh, unjust or
unreasonable...............The gravity of the alleged offence will
the nature and extent of the inquiry which the employer
must conduct. An employer must ensure that the employee is given as
particulars of the allegations against him/her as is
possible, an opportunity to be heard in respect of such allegations,
and a chance
to bring forward any witnesses he/she may wish to
answer those allegations."
In the present case, it has been alleged that the applicant
guilty of a serious criminal offence, of supplying a prohibited drug
to fellow employees. In fact the termination letter says
representations had been made to the respondent that the applicant
had engaged in illegal activities and that subsequent investigations
have conclusively validated these representations.
It has been admitted by Mr Pepper, that the extent of these
investigations, were
that he had interviewed Mr Peter Kearns, the
person who he said told of the rumours, and the two people that
had signed the Statutory
Declarations. There was no evidence that
any other people were interviewed.
Of course, in light of the applicant's position in the
of work and his evidence that disgruntled drivers had tried to get
him before, the procedure of interviewing other employees
scotched any conspiracy theory against him. Even more baffling is
the failure of the respondent to bring these allegations
attention of the applicant as part of their investigation which they
say "conclusively validated these representations". At
no stage was
the applicant ever told of, or shown the Statutory Declarations,
which were the basis of his termination, prior to or
even at the
termination meeting. Nor was any explanation asked for, or expected
from him by the respondent, at the termination meeting
decision to terminate had already been made and the letter of
termination prepared prior to the meeting.
All this suggests
to me is that there was a very unsatisfactory
and superficial inquiry carried out regarding these very serious
allegations. To blindly
accept the truth of the two removalists
without consultation with the applicant, a senior member of the
staff with eight years service
is to make a very unsafe finding
In applying the test as set out in Bi - Lo Pty Ltd v. Hooper,
the respondent in this case,
has clearly failed on all counts. The
termination of the applicant's employment is therefore harsh, unjust
and unreasonable. How
the respondent could honestly and genuinely
believe, that the applicant was guilty of the alleged offence
without even attempting
to bring the allegations to his notice is
beyond comprehension. For Mr Pepper to offer by way of explanation
for his failure to do
so was because, he, "believed that would
more than likely be upsetting", is astounding.
In applying the test of Gray J, as set out
in Byrne v. Australian
Airlines, it is also necessary for the respondent in the carriage
of the burden of proof pursuant to
(1) (a) to satisfy this Court, not on the balance of
probability, but on a higher standard of proof, because of the
gravity of the
allegations (Briginshaw v. Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
60 CLR 336.).
Having considered the evidence, I am satisfied that the respondent
has failed to prove that there was a valid reason for the
termination
of the applicant's employment and therefore the
termination was in contravention of s. 170DE(1).
I make the following orders,
That the respondent reappoint the applicant to the position in
which he was employed immediately before the termination or to
position on terms and conditions no less favourable that
than those on which he was employed immediately before the
termination.
(2) That the respondent pay to the applicant the remuneration lost
by the applicant because of the termination.
I certify that
this and the preceeding Eleven (11) pages are a
true copy of the reasons for judgment of Judicial Registrar Walker.
Legal Assistant:
Claire McAuley
Date: 30th July 1996
Appearances:
Counsel for the applicant: Mr P.J. Newell
Representative for the respondent: G.
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT
OF AUSTRALIA
SYDNEY REGISTRY
No. NI 1208of 1996
STEPHEN JAMES PERKINS
GRACE WORLDWIDE (AUST) PTY LTD
BEFORE: WALKER JR
PLACE: SYDNEY
DATE: 30th JULY 1999.
MINUTES OF ORDER
THE COURT ORDERS
(1) That the respondent reappoint the applicant to the position in
which he was employed immediately before the termination
another position on terms and conditions no less favourable that
than those on which he was employed immediately before the
termination.
(2) That the respondent pay to the applicant the remuneration lost
by the applicant because of the termination.