McDonald v Il Migliore Pty Ltd T/A Il Migliore [2012] FWA 10828 (21 December 2012)
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Act 2009
—Unfair dismissal
Miss Kelly McDonald
Il Migliore Pty Ltd T/A Il Migliore
(U2012/405)
COMMISSIONER RYAN
MELBOURNE, 21 DECEMBER 2012
Termination of employment - dismissal harsh, unjust or unreasonable - compensation granted.
Ms Kelly McDonald (the Applicant) made application to Fair Work Australia for unfair dismissal remedy against Il Migliore Pty Ltd
(the Respondent). The application was made pursuant to
section 394
Fair Work Act 2009
I delivered an ex tempore decision in this matter in proceedings today and full reasons for decision were given orally on transcript
in those proceedings. The following are my findings.
Pursuant to
the Tribunal is required to decide certain initial matters. I decide as follows:
(a) The application in this matter was made within the period required in
of the Act.
(b) The Applicant is a person who was protected from unfair dismissal.
(c) The Respondent is not a Small Business Employer.
(d) The dismissal was not a case of genuine redundancy.
Pursuant to
a person has been unfairly dismissed if FWA is satisfied of certain matters. I am satisfied that:
(a) The Applicant has been dismissed within the meaning of
(b) Having taken into account the criteria set out in
that the dismissal was harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
(c) The Small Business Fair Dismissal Code was not relevant in this matter
(d) The Dismissal was not a case of genuine redundancy.
Pursuant to s.390 the Tribunal may grant a remedy where the Tribunal is satisfied that the Applicant is protected from unfair dismissal
and that the Applicant has been unfairly dismissed.
I am satisfied that reinstatement of the Applicant is inappropriate.
I consider an order for payment of compensation is appropriate in all the circumstances.
Having taken into account all the circumstances of the case including the matters specified in s.392 I determine that an amount of
compensation of $15,851.00 be paid by the Respondent to the Applicant within 28 days.
An order to reflect the decision in this matter will be issued separately.
COMMISSIONER
Appearances
K. McDonald
on her own behalf
for the Respondent
Hearing details:
October 12, 23
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code A, PR532734>
No downloadable files available