Cowell v A School (No 2) [2000] HREOCA 48 (14 November 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS & EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION ACT 1992
No. H97/168
Mrs Cowell and Fleur Cowell
Complainants
REASONS FOR DECISION OF INQUIRY COMMISSIONER
THE HON WILLIAM CARTER QC IN RELATION TO A SUPPRESSION
Date of Decision: 14 November 2000
On 10 October 2000 Commissioner McEvoy handed down her decision in respect of
this inquiry. The Commissioner dismissed the complaints
the subject of the
There is one outstanding issue remaining in relation to a suppression order
and, following the expiration of the term of Commissioner
McEvoy, I have been
appointed as Inquiry Commissioner to consider this issue.
The progress of this matter, including its remitter by the Federal Court for
rehearing by the Commission, is set out in Commissioner
McEvoy’s decision
of 10 October 2000 and I do not need to repeat it here. In her decision,
Commissioner McEvoy described the
situation in respect of the suppression orders
in this case as follows:
In relation to the suppression orders, Mansfield J, in separate reasons for
decision, also published on 11 November 1998, made the
“Pursuant to section 50, [of the
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth)] I make an order forbidding until further order the publication of the
names of the applicant and of the second respondent
to these proceedings, and
the names of the teachers at the school who were involved in the matters about
which the complaint to the
Commission was concerned, and the name of the House
at the school to which the younger respondent was attached upon her enrolment
the school. I give liberty generally to the parties, and any person showing a
proper and sufficient interest in so doing, to
apply to vary or discharge that
In the course of the public hearing which I conducted in this matter, on
application by Mrs Cowell I indicated that I would vary the
Commission’s
suppression order to the extent that it would no longer apply to the identity of
Fleur. However, I indicated
to Mrs Cowell that in my view she had still to make
application to the Federal Court of Australia to have Mansfield J’s order
discharged or varied. Mrs Cowell has advised that she has made an application
to the Federal Court of Australia to vary the order
of Mansfield J insofar as it
related to the second respondent to the proceedings before him and that, by
consent, this variation
has been granted. I have been provided with a copy of
the order of Mansfield J dated 19 January 2000 to this effect. Under these
circumstances the order suppressing the publication of the names of Fleur and
Mrs Cowell no longer applies. I have made no order
in relation to the name of
the School and the teachers and to this extent the Commission’s
suppression order and that of the
Federal Court continues to apply. However, in
light of my findings I can see no reason why the entirety of the suppression
should not be lifted and I give either party leave to make application to
the Commission for this to occur. Of course, further variation
of the order of
Mansfield J of 11 November 1998 would also be necessary.
On 13 October 2000 Mrs Cowell made application to the Commission for the
lifting of the suppression order on the name of the school
and the teachers. On
31 October 2000 she provided written submissions in support of that
application.
Mrs Cowell argued that the school’s name was suppressed only because
Fleur’s name was suppressed and that a suppression
order on the respondent
was no longer appropriate. She submitted that no hardship or prejudice would be
caused to the school and
that it was in the public interest that questions such
as discrimination in education be generally known and discussed.
On 8 November 2000 the respondent provided written submissions to the
Commission opposing the lifting of the suppression order. The
school argued that
it would be prejudiced if its name were to be published before the allegations
were finally determined, in circumstances
in which judicial review might be
sought. In the respondent’s view, the maintenance of the suppression order
would be in the
interests of the administration of justice and would have the
effect of bringing litigation between the parties to finality.
I have taken into account all of the material in the submissions made to me
and I am of the opinion that the suppression order on
the name of the school,
the teachers and the house should be lifted. I am of the view that, in
circumstances in which the respondent
is the successful party before the
Commission, its name and the names of members of its staff should be available
publicly. The usual
position in regard to a Commission hearing is that it be
conducted in public and that evidence be made publicly available. In the
of any compelling reasons to the contrary, and in the circumstances where the
complainant’s name is in the public domain,
I do not consider it
appropriate to continue with the suppression orders in this case.
However, I note that the name of the school, the teachers and the house
remain the subject of a Federal Court suppression order. His
Honour Mansfield J
was specific as to the process whereby the parties could approach the court for
the variation or lifting of this
order. Until the Commission is advised that
that order is lifted in its entirety or is varied to the extent necessary to
publication of the relevant names, the Commission will not publish the
name of the school, any teachers or the house. Any party or
other person wishing
to publish the names should also be aware of the terms of the Federal Court
order and should act in compliance
Insofar as Commissioner McEvoy suppressed the name of a student witness
(referred to in the decision as “Mr PX”) I think
that the situation
is somewhat different. He was a student at the school, he came voluntarily to
give evidence at the behest of Mrs
Cowell in the context of finding a
“comparator” and he was in no way connected with the alleged
discrimination. In the
circumstances, and given that Mrs Cowell has not
specifically applied for the lifting of the suppression order on his name, I
that the Commission’s suppression order on his name should be
maintained.
Dated this day of November 2000
___________________________
The Hon William Carter QC
Commissioner
RTF format (19.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format