Review Applicant: Katar Taouk Visa Applicant: Zoubir Kouhail IRT Reference: N98/01601 #number 13399 [1999] IRTA 13399 (29 January 1999)
IMMIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS FOR DECISION
IRT DECISION: N98/01601 13399.doc
REVIEW APPLICANT: Katar TAOUK
VISA APPLICANT: Zoubir KOUHAIL
TRIBUNAL: Patti WARN
Presiding Member
DATE: 29 January 1999
PLACE: Sydney
DECISION: The Tribunal affirms the decision under review.
INTRODUCTION
This is a review of a decision to refuse the grant of a Subclass 300
Prospective Marriage visa to Mr Zoubir Kouhail, a citizen of
Algeria, born on
26 April 1960.
Mr Kouhail applied for this visa on 8 December 1996, sponsored by Ms Katar
Taouk, an Australian citizen since 9 August 1976.
The application was refused by the Department of Immigration and Multicultural
Affairs on 25 January 1998 because the delegate did
not consider it a genuine
relationship, Mr Kouhail having left Australia in October 1989 and there being
little evidence of contact
since then, noting also that Ms Taouk had previously
sponsored him in February 1994, later withdrawing the sponsorship.
On 31 March 1998 Ms Taouk applied to the Migration Internal Review Office for a
review of this decision, but MIRO affirmed the decision
on 20 May 1998.
On 9 July 1998 Ms Taouk applied to the Immigration Review Tribunal.
LEGISLATION
The criteria governing the grant of a Subclass 300 Prospective Marriage visa at
the time of this application are set out in Schedule
2 of the Migration
Regulations. At application, of relevance in this case, the applicant must
intend to marry an Australian citizen
(300.211). The prospective spouse must
not be prohibited from being a sponsor (300.212) and must be sponsored by the
prospective
spouse (300.213).
The parties must have met and be known to each other personally (300.214) and
the applicant must establish that the parties genuinely
intend to marry and
that the marriage is intended to take place within the visa period
The Minister must be satisfied that the parties genuinely intend to live
together as spouses (300.216).
As the time of decision the applicant must continue to satisfy the criteria in
300.211 and 300.214 to 300.216 (300.221). There should
be no impediment to the
marriage under Australian law (300.221A). The sponsorship must have been
approved and be still in place
Public interest criteria must be satisfied (300.223), special return criteria
apply if the applicant has previously been in Australia
(300.224) and if
requested, an assurance of support should have been given and accepted
The Tribunal had access to Department File F96/035374 and IRT File N98/01601.
The Department File contained, inter alia:
* Mr Kouhail's application and Ms Taouk's sponsorship form lodged on 8 December
* A copy of Ms Katar Taouk's Australian Citizenship Certificate granted on 9
August 1976 showing her birth date as 24 April 1955.
* A copy of Mr Kouhail's Algerian Birth Certificate for 26 April 1966.
* A notice of intended marriage, dated 5 August 1996, filled out only in part,
in relation to Ms Taouk, noting that she was a widow
whose husband died on 6
April 1991, but containing no details at all of the intended bridegroom.
* Another application lodged by Mr Kouhail on 2 February 1997 which appears to
be a duplicate of that lodged on 8 December 1996.
* Department cable, dated 10 March 1997, noting a previous subclass 300
application for Mr Kouhail with same sponsor, subsequently
* Record of Department interview dated 21 May 1997, with Ms Taouk, noting that
Ms Taouk appeared genuinely committed to long term
relationship.
* Copies of Optus accounts showing calls to Algeria in August and September
* Several photos of Mr Kouhail, undated.
* Movement records for Mr Kouhail showing he overstayed as a visitor, arriving
in Australia on 3 January 1988, permitted to stay
until 2 February 1988 and not
leaving until 27 October 1989.
* Department decision refusing application on 25 January 1998.
* MIRO application lodged 24 March 1998 including submission from Re Quest
International with translations of six letters from Mr
Kouhail and three
* A Statutory Declaration, dated 28 April 1998, from Mariam Taouk testifying to
the relationship.
* MIRO decision, dated 20 May 1998 affirming refusal.
The IRT File contained telephone accounts for Ms Taouk for January, May and
June 1998, a copy of her bank statement and Rates Notice
and a statutory
declaration supporting a fee waiver subsequently granted on 31 July 1998.
A preliminary meeting was held on 30 November 1998 attended by Ms Taouk and a
Lebanese interpreter.
The Department's decision and Tribunal procedures were explained. Ms Taouk
outlined her relationship with Mr Kouhail who had boarded
at her home while her
husband was alive. He had returned to Algeria in October 1989 and her husband
had died in 1992. She confirmed
she had sponsored Mr Kouhail in 1997 but
withdrew her sponsorship because of trouble with her son who had left home.
The Tribunal asked Ms Taouk if any of her five children aged 18 to 25 might
like to give evidence at hearing but she said the matter
had nothing to do with
them. She was asked to bring any additional documentation including her
husband's death certificate to a
hearing and provided telephone accounts for
March, July and October 1998 showing one call to Algeria on 13 March, one on 2
one on 28 September 1998
A hearing was held on 7 January 1999, attended by Ms Katar Taouk and Mahmoud
Fawzi, an Arabic interpreter. Ms Taouk provided further
accounts for November
and December 1998 showing calls on 10 and 11 November to Algeria and seven
between 19 November and 3 December
Ms Taouk and Mr Zoubir Kouhail gave evidence, the latter via telephone from
Algeria using the interpreter, as did Ms Taouk on occasion.
Ms Taouk told the Tribunal she had been born in Lebanon on 25 April 1955. She
had married Antonious Taouk there in 1971 and came
to Australia in December
They had had five children and it was a happy marriage. Her husband had died
in 1991 and she had had 15 operations, including seven
for hernia in the last
few years. She lived now with her children at Merrylands but had lived
previously in Guildford.
Asked how she had met Mr Kouhail, Ms Taouk said she had started talking to him
in Arabic in a Bondi cafe about ten years ago. She
had learned he was a
visitor but said she did not know how long he had been here. He was looking
for a job and somewhere to live.
She said she would ask her husband to help
him and he had agreed Mr Kouhail could stay for a few days. He had actually
stayed with
them for six months, leaving in October 1989. He had offered to
pay $50 for his room but her husband would not accept this. They
had both been
friendly with him; he was not married.
He had not had a relationship with any other women here. Although she was five
years older they got on very well but there was no
serious relationship between
them because her husband was still alive.
Asked why Mr Kouhail had left Australia, Ms Taouk said he wanted to go back to
Algeria even before Immigration found him at their
place and took him to the
airport. It was only then that she knew he was illegal because they could not
go to the airport to say
goodbye. After he left they kept in touch through
letters and cards and some calls because they missed him from the family.
Questioned by the Tribunal, Ms Taouk said that her husband had been very sick
with high blood pressure before he died on 2 April
1991. She had told Mr
Kouhail and he was sad because he was her husband's friend, too, and the
children liked him.
Ms Taouk confirmed that she had first sponsored Mr Kouhail as a prospective
spouse in 1994. He had proposed to her three years after
her husband died and
she had accepted and sponsored him to come here.
However, she had problems with her eldest son who had left home with his
girlfriend, also in 1994 and this was to much for her to
cope with. She had
been angry and upset with her son and her other children were also angry and
upset. It was all too hard and
she had told Mr Kouhail not to come, despite
the fact that she still liked him in her heart.
Questioned further, Ms Taouk said she could not forget him and he did not get
married. They had remained in touch with phone calls
and letters. It was not
a problem that she was older than him because her own sister was older than her
husband and that worked
well. She had sent him some cassettes and he had sent
her T-shirts and a handbag but the post office there lost things.
Ms Taouk said she still had three sons at home; the eldest had never returned
and one was to become a priest next month. They did
not care one way or
another about her proposed marriage. They had never said that they thought he
was using her to return here.
She said she liked Mr Kouhail. He was important
to her. Her heart would love only one, not a hundred. She wanted to spend the
rest of her life with him.
Asked when and where they planned to have their wedding, Ms Taouk said she did
not know. They had not discussed what sort of wedding.
She did not care
whether it was church or Mosque or anywhere.
Asked whether she thought her sons would be happy for him to move into their
Asked whether she would be able to support him if he came here and could not
get a job, given that she had been granted a fee waiver
for the IRT
application, Ms Taouk said that they had not talked about this and she knew he
could get a very good job as a painter.
Mr Zoubir Kouhail told the Tribunal he was an Algerian citizen, born there in
1960. He had come to Australia as a visitor in January
1987, with permission
to stay for one month. He had stayed for two years. He had met Ms Taouk at
Bondi in 1988 in summer, going
to stay at the Taouk home in late 1988. He had
left Australia in October 1989 because he wanted to go back home after his visa
He had been in Algeria ever since. He had not had a relationship
with any other woman in Australia and he did not have any children
here because
he was not married. He was close to Ms Taouk and kept in touch with letters
and calls. He had heard her husband had
died after he returned home.
Asked when he had asked her to marry him, Mr Kouhail said that he had wanted to
marry her from the beginning but she had actually
asked him after her husband
died and he had accepted.
Asked what year this had happened, he said it was late 1988 but it was hard to
remember as it was a long time ago.
Mr Kouhail confirmed that Ms Taouk had sponsored him in 1994 but had troubles
at home and he had not applied again until 1996.
Asked if it was an important relationship, Mr Kouhail said it was a love
relationship for him.
Asked if they had started a sexual relationship before he left Australia, he
said that they had. Ms Taouk interpolated that this
was not true.
Mr Kouhail agreed that he had not seen Ms Taouk since leaving Australia in 1989
but they kept writing and phoning. She had not sent
him any money because he
did not need it. He had not sent her any. He did not think she needed any
money. He said that he had
paid for his immigration application.
Asked whether he got on with her sons, Mr Kouhail said they loved him too much.
He thought they could live happily in the same house.
He would be able to get
a job here because he worked hard, although he knew about high unemployment.
He said he would not ask for
unemployment benefits.
Asked where they planned to get married, Mr Kouhail said he did not understand
the question. Asked his religion, he said he was
Muslim and Ms Taouk was
Christian but this was not a problem. They would get married in a registry
office straight away and live
in her house at Merrylands.
Asked whether Ms Taouk had any health problems he said she had had two or three
operations in recent years.
He said her husband had not known that he loved her. He had not had any women
friends since going back.
Asked whether there was still the same attraction between them after being
apart for more than nine years, Mr Kouhail said that he
had the feeling still
and she loved him. If it was God's will they would be married and together for
the rest of their life. He
would look after her if she got sick.
Asked if he had any savings in Algeria, Mr Kouhail said he did and could bring
money with him. It did not matter to him that she
did not have a lot of
Mr Kouhail denied that he only wanted to marry Ms Taouk in order to return to
Australia. He wanted to come certainly, but only because
he loved her.
Asked if she might come to Algeria to live with him if his application were
rejected, Mr Kouhail said she would not like to go there
because she could not
leave her children.
The Tribunal gave Ms Taouk the opportunity to explain apparent discrepancies in
their answers. She said they had asked each other
to marry and she did not
mind if it was in registry office. She had not told Mr Kouhail about all her
operations because she did
not want to worry him. She had been very sick and
upset in hospital but had not told him until after her husband died. That was
why he thought she had only had two or three operations since he returned but
it was maybe eight. She said she would be happy to
live wherever he lived, now
her boys, aged from 26 to 18, were older but it was better for him to come here
because she had a big
house and a granny flat. She and three sons shared the
house and one had the flat and she believed they could all live together.
Ms Taouk said she loved Mr Kouhail. She had no doubts they would have a
lasting marriage. She agreed to provide a copy of her husband's
certificate which she had omitted to bring to the hearings. This had not been
provided two weeks after the hearing.
FINDINGS AND REASONS
The Tribunal has taken extensive oral evidence in this case because there is
little documentary material supporting this prospective
marriage application
save for Ms Taouk's phone accounts in 1997 and 1998, and a small number of
letters from Mr Kouhail including
a few photos of himself.
The Tribunal is not convinced that this is a genuine relationship between two
people with a mutual commitment to marriage and a life
together to the
exclusion of others.
The Tribunal is prepared to accept that there might have been some attraction
between the couple while Mr Kouhail resided at Ms Taouk's
there is conflicting oral evidence on whether this became a sexual
relationship. He says it did. She says it
did not because this was just not
appropriate while her husband was alive.
It was apparent that the couple had not discussed where they would marry, a
clearly important consideration for a prospective marriage
application. Ms
Taouk said she did not know but it did not matter, although in her Notice of
Intended Marriage on file, she nominated
Maronite Catholic church whereas Mr
Kouhail, a Muslim, settled at hearing for marriage in a registry office.
Noting that Ms Taouk had withdrawn her sponsorship of an earlier prospective
marriage application, made in 1994, because of trouble
with her eldest son
because he ran off with his girlfriend, she seems to be curiously unconcerned
application might have on her home life. She
was positively unwilling to involve any of her adult sons in the hearing,
was none of their business, whereas Mr Kouhail claimed they all loved
him 'too much', which might suggest they would be supportive.
While the Tribunal acknowledges that there is a sense in which it is not the
sons' business whether their mother sponsors a prospective
marriage visa
application from Mr Kouhail, it is reasonable to suppose that the match would
be more likely to succeed with their
support, especially since four of them
share the house with her.
The Tribunal was also concerned that the couple had not discussed finances,
given that Ms Taouk appears to be in some financial difficulty,
apply for a fee waiver, and notes too that she had been less than frank with Mr
Kouhail about her health problems in recent
years, his estimate of two or three
operations contrasting markedly with the 15 she admitted to undergoing.
In summary, the Tribunal considers there are too many questions begged in this
application to be able to accept that this is a genuine
application for a
prospective marriage visa.
The Tribunal has no doubt that Ms Taouk believes in this relationship which she
has been pursuing for over four years since first
sponsoring Mr Kouhail for
this kind of visa; her telephone accounts show that she has attempted to
maintain contact with him, albeit
spasmodically, until the IRT application.
Equally, the Tribunal has no reason to doubt that Mr Kouhail wants to return to
Australia, where he overstayed as a visitor in 1988/89.
His insistence,
however, that Ms Taouk would not want to go and live in Algeria with him,
suggests something less than true love
all around.
The Migration Regulations require that the parties must have met and be known
to each other with a genuine intention to marry within
the visa period.
While the Tribunal accepts that the couple have met and are known to each
other, there is an additional requirement that at the time
of application the
Minister must be satisfied that the couple genuinely intend to live together as
spouses. The Tribunal is not
so satisfied, which means that the requirements
for the grant of a Subclass 300 Prospective Marriage visa cannot be met.
The Tribunal affirms the decision under review.
I certify that this and the 10 preceding pages are a true copy of the decision
and reasons for decision of this Tribunal.
DATED: 29 January 1999 for DEPUTY REGISTRAR
RTF format (28.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format