Shields v Carlton United Breweries (NSW) Pty Ltd [1998] IRCA 28 (12 August 1998)
GENERAL DISTRIBUTION
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF
TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT - alleged unlawful
termination of employment - SUMMARY DISMISSAL
VALID REASON - not
satisfied valid reason for termination of employment established by employer -
ABUSE OF ALCOHOL – unlimited
supply of alcohol provided by employer at
sales conference on Island Resort- CONDUCT AND PERFORMANCE - OPPORTUNITY TO
No opportunity given to respond to allegation of misconduct or to make
representations about future conduct- EVIDENCE -
Evidence Act 1995
- application
granted to cross examine witness during Examination in Chief - Direction to
witness under
section 128
to answer questions regarding his role in the incident
- former employee objected to answering question on basis of possible self
incrimination – question not pressed after objection taken - PRACTICE AND
PROCEDURE - Certificate pursuant
to be issued to witness -
REINSTATEMENT – PRINCIPAL REMEDY REINSTATEMENT – NOT IMPRACTICAL to
reinstate the applicant
if agrees to attend counselling
Workplace Relations Act (Cth) 1996 (formerly known as
Industrial Relations Act 1988
) ss 170DB,
DE(1), 170DC
Evidence Act
Occupational Health &
Safety Act, 1983 (NSW) ss.15, 19
Selvachandran v Peteron Plastics Pty
(1996) 62 IR 371
Gibson v Bostik Pty Ltd
(1995) 60 IR
Perrin v Des Taylor Pty Ltd
(1994) 58 IR 254
Liddell v Lembke (1994) t/a Cheryls Unisex Salon, 56 IR
Nicholson v Heaven & Earth Galleries Pty Ltd
(1994) 1 IRCR
McGeehan v Hazelton Air Services Pty Ltd (1997) (McIlwaine JR,
decision number 118/97)
Garside v Hazelton Air Services Pty Ltd (1997)
(McIlwaine JR, decision number 119/97)
Sophie Caroline Lethern v
Beresfield Pty Limited t/a Titan Ford Brookvale (1995) (McIlwaine JR, decision
number 542/95)
Allied Express Transport Pty Ltd v Michelle Anderson
1997 FED 796
MCLEAN V TEDMAN & ANOR
[1984] HCA 60
(1984) 56 ALR 359
ERIC CLARENCE SHIELDS V CARLTON UNITED BREWERIES (NSW) PTY LTD
MCILWAINE JR
IN THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
NI 1438 OF 1996
NEW SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
ERIC CLARENCE SHIELDS
CARLTON UNITED BREWERIES (NSW) PTY
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
MINUTES OF INTERIM ORDERS
THE COURT DECLARES THAT:
1. The applicant was an employee
of the respondent from 1 August 1988 to 5 February 1996.
2. The applicant
was seconded by the respondent to work for Guinness Australia Pty Ltd from May
1995 to 2 February 1996.
3. The Respondent has contravened Section 170 DC
of the Act.
4. The respondent has contravened Section 170 DE(1) of the
Act in that it did not have a valid reason for the termination of the employment
of the Applicant on 5 February 1996.
5. Subject to a written agreement
being given to the respondent and a copy being filed in the court, within 7 days
of today, by the
applicant, undertaking to satisfactorily attend a recognised
educational and counselling program on Alcohol and Drug addiction over
of one year nominated by his Employer (including the
monitoring of
his Alcohol and Drug Usage if required by the program), it is not impractical to
reinstate the applicant to the position
he formerly held with the
Respondent.
6. The period between the date of termination and the date of
his reinstatement be treated as continuous employment of the applicant
respondent for all purposes.
7. The respondent pay to the applicant the
remuneration lost by the employee because of the termination from 5 February
1996 to the
date of signing of the agreement within twenty-one days of the date
of receiving the signed agreement referred to in paragraph 5
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
8. The respondent
re-appoint the applicant to the position he formerly held with the respondent
prior to his secondment on terms and
conditions no less favourable than those on
which he was employed on 1 February 1996.
9. The respondent pay to the
applicant the remuneration lost by him because of his termination within
twenty-one days of the date
of receiving the signed agreement referred to in
paragraph 5 from the applicant.
THE COURT DIRECTS THAT:
10. The applicant is to provide the respondent with details of
his income from paid employment including the amounts earnt as a part
Jockey within 7 days to enable the calculation of “lost
remuneration”. The respondent is to have the benefit
of the 4 weeks
salary paid to the applicant in lieu of Notice.
11. Upon application being made to the District Registrar of the NSW Registry Mr
Nicholls is to have the benefit of a certificate
issued pursuant to
Evidence Act, 1995
. That part of his testimony which may be covered by the
certificate is contained in pages 24 to 55 inclusive of the transcript of
proceedings conducted by videolink on 1 November
12. Liberty to Mr Nicholls or either of the parties to
apply as to the extent of coverage of the certificate ordered in paragraph
13. In the circumstances, I am directing counsel for the applicant to
bring forward for consideration by the court, draft orders in
accordance with
these minutes. Those orders should be filed with the court by 4.00 pm 19 August
1998. It will preferable if they
can be agreed with counsel for the respondent,
if they cannot be agreed then I shall provide a time commencing in the week
24 August 1998 to hear and finalise the orders in this
14. In the event that the parties are unable to agree on the
amount to be paid or other proposed orders by 4 pm on 19 August 1998,
liberty to apply to the court to relist the matter at an earlier
Kate Benson
Legal Assistant to
Judicial Registrar
IN THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
NEW SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
ERIC CLARENCE SHIELDS
CARLTON & UNITED BREWERIES (NSW) PTY LTD
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
APPLICATION
This is an application by Eric Clarence Shields
claiming unlawful termination of his employment under Division 3
Industrial Relations Act 1988
,(“ the Act”), now known as the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
, against his former employer, Carlton & United
Breweries (NSW) Pty Ltd.
The applicant, was 43 years of age, at the time
of his dismissal and in his claim records the work performed for his employer as
representative”. The applicant started work with the
respondent on 1 August 1998 and completed his employment on 5 February
The remedy sought by the applicant in his application is
reinstatement. The application was received by the Australian Industrial
Commission. There is no claim by the respondent that written notice was given
to the applicant. The court has a
certificate issued by Deputy
President Drake of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission at Sydney
dated 23 April, 1996 in the
following terms:
In accordance with subsection 170ED(1) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
the Commission hereby certifies:
(i) that it has been unable to settle this matter by conciliation, within a
reasonable period; and
(ii) that the parties in this
matter, having been invited to elect to have the matter dealt with by consent
arbitration, have not
so elected.
There was no objection to the
certificate made by either party. In addition, no issue was raised during the
hearing as to the timing
of the lodgment of the application. I therefore find
the matter is properly before the Court.
At the outset , I make it clear
that nothing I say in these reasons should be taken to mean that I hold any view
of the conduct of
the applicant on the evening of Thursday 1 February 1996 and
morning 2 February 1996 which can in any way be seen as condoning supporting,
approving or encouraging his behaviour as admitted by him in his evidence to the
The respondent, “Carlton & United Breweries (NSW) Pty Ltd”,
which I will refer to in future as “Carlton United”,
brewing company operating in New South Wales and elsewhere. It is not in
dispute that the applicant commenced his duties
with Carlton United on 1 August
1988, and he was terminated from his employment at the initiative of his
employer on 5 February 1996.
The job of the applicant was to market the liquor
supplied by the respondent and its associated companies, complete the sales and
then to oversee and assist where possible the delivering of the product. The
respondent had an arrangement with Guinness Australia
Pty Ltd (“Guinness
Australia”), whereby it effectively leased experienced sales personnel
from Carlton United to complement
the workforce of Guinness Australia. The
normal period of secondment was a minimum of two years. In May 1995 the
applicant had
been seconded to Guinness Australia as part of that arrangement.
The applicant, immediately prior to his dismissal, was still working
secondment in a similar sales capacity with Guinness Australia, the suppliers of
a stout of Irish origins.
EVIDENCE OF THE
The applicant was first employed by Carlton United Brewery in August 1988 as an
Area Manager. In this position he was calling for
5½ years on bottle shops
and licensed premises and the rest of the time on hotels, clubs and bottle
shops. The applicant during
the course of his employment with Carlton United,
also worked as a casual Disc Jockey. His employer was aware of this employment
and his previous experience in this field.
Prior to working at Carlton United, he was employed as a sales manager for a
Poker Machine Company and he was licensed by the Liquor
Administration Board of
New South Wales for that purpose.
The applicant was seconded from the respondent to work for “Guinness
Australia” in May 1995. He had been to two sales
conferences with
Guinness. He said: “
I joined Guinness and went straight to the first
sales conference at Radisson and the next one was at Club Med
Before his transfer to Guinness Australia, he had attended many similar
conferences with Carlton United. Asked to amplify
his statement he
“Well, over a period of 8½ years we were required to attend
conferences, whether it be Melbourne, Coffs Harbour, Pelican
Shores Resort,
Jamberoo, a resort down at Jamberoo, many - when I first started at the company
I was given the job on a Friday and
over the weekend - on the Monday I had to
appear at my first conference at Wyong. So, yes, I have been to many sales
conferences
with Carlton United Breweries.”
At Carlton United in 1988 he was given a normal familiarisation. He was shown
around the different departments such as accounts,
sales distribution,
transportation, even to the Clydesdale Pavilion at the then showgrounds. The
applicant denied being given any
instruction on company policies. In particular
he maintained he was not given any instruction on company policy in relation to
consumption of company products, that is alcohol. Asked to describe what he
did, the applicant replied:
“Well, basically it was - a lot of it was public relations because over
a period of many years you become very close to a lot
of the customers you
called on. My job was to get taps on, like if Carlton bought out a new beer I
had to try and get a Tooheys
tap off which was our opposition to put one of ours
on, or extend the range of beers in the different outlets. Say, Carlton Cold
come out and I'd have to make sure that that went into different outlets and so
How would you go about that?---Well, I'd approach the licensee or the
owner of the - of the outlet and, you know, make it known to
him that we have
the new product; I'd show him the advertising, my detail to him what Carlton had
in place to back up the product
and - and then ask him if I could position our
product in his store, the new product in his store.
Now, in terms of public relations with those clients, did you undertake
any other kinds of activities?---On many, many occasions I
was required to go to
different social events, whether it be harness racing which we were sponsors of,
whether it was cricket which
we were sponsors of, golf events which we organised
and in some cases I even organised them myself, many, many times to the
Being the Area Manager in the Parramatta area on some occasions I
even had to go to the football on a Friday, Saturday and Sunday
when Parramatta,
Balmain and Canterbury were sharing Parramatta Oval, so many, many times my work
involved extreme hours of entertaining
the customers, yes.
Now, in the course of entertaining customers at these sporting events, was
it just a question of going and sitting and watching the
game or, you know, what
was involved?---The responsibility of the Area Managers was obviously to make
sure that the comfort and -
and - of our guests and to make sure that they were
entertained for the day which included obviously hospitality which Carlton
What kind of hospitality?---Food and obviously beverages.
And were they company product beverages?---No. As opposed to Tooheys that
just stock their own company products, Carlton had a policy
and I believe that
it was correct, that customers that enjoyed our hospitality could basically have
whatever they want, whether it
was wines, spirits or soft drinks, whatever they
cared to have.
And as the host as such of these social events with clients, did you
partake in the hospitality provided?---Many times.
And that included drinking alcohol?---Yes, it certainly did.
Now, in the course of these social events, who would actually
participate?---Well, everyone that was invited guests to the hospitality
Carlton was providing, whether it be boxes, private boxes, as a say golfing
events or football, whatever the particular function
was we provided hospitality
and food and beverages for all of our invited guests.
How many other CUB employees would be at those events?---On many occasions it
was myself but normally we try to have two. In the
case of the private boxes
which was mainly - which was Carlton's main hospitality way of looking after
people, because they had them
at all venues right around Sydney, we had
approximately 20 people to each box and we tried to have two reps there on most
to look after them.”
A regional sales manager was his immediate supervisor. After five and a half
years of his employment Carlton United joined its off
licence section with the
hotels and clubs division and all representatives were required to call on
bottle shops, hotels and clubs
in their respective areas. At that time he came
under the supervision of Mr David Hastie.
The applicant maintained that he did not receive any complaints about his work
except for standard complaints from the trade regarding
products, transportation
or non-deliveries. In the beginning of 1995 and prior to his transfer to
Guinness Australia he was given
a letter about poor work performance. The
letter was from Mr Reg Turner who was the New South Wales North West Sales
Manager and
the immediate supervisor of Mr David Hastie. Asked to describe what
happened when the letter was handed over to him he replied:
“Physically he stood over me, pointing at me, swearing at me and
threatening me.
When you say that he was threatening you
what did he threaten you?
That I should get the Sydney Morning Herald, that I should hand in my keys, I
wouldn't be getting a transfer to any other team because
nobody wanted me, my
days at Carlton were numbered and as far as he is concerned he's had enough of
me and everyone else had had
enough of me. I was completely taken by surprise,
having thought that when I went into the brewery that day it was the first day
back from holidays and I was going in - I was led to believe I was going in to
hear what had happened while I was on holidays and
to get briefed and instead I
copped this barrage of abuse and harassment. I was just - I was in shock, I
walked out of that meeting
crying, I have to say in all honestly. Well, a lump
in my throat at least.”
The applicant denied that:
"Previous instances of a similar nature were
raised with him on 12 October 1994.”
He also denied that:
“Previous instances of poor performance and or conduct were raised
formally with you on 25 August 1994, 8 June 1994, 25 May
1994, 21 February 1994,
7 January 1994, 29 November 1993 and 2 April 1993.”
(See paragraph 5 Exhibit 5.)
A review meeting was held at 9.00 am on 1
February 1995 with Mr Murray Waters chairing the meeting, Mr Phil Stowe, his new
Supervisor, Mr David Hastie and the applicant. The applicant described
that review meeting on 1 February 1995:
I walked into the meeting, I'd prepared documents such as awards,
such as references, because I was very concerned at what this meeting
This - over a six weeks period I had a chance to get a file together as to my
performance. During that time as well I
had also put a lot of time in answering
the complaints in this summary of counselling report and I also put a tape
recorder on the
table when I walked in and pressed "record" and I asked Murray
Waters if due to the way that I'd been spoken to at previous meetings,
be okay for me to tape this particular meeting and he
And what else happened in that meeting?---They sat down and they went through
the files that - that I'd given - I'd given them each
detailed files, four files
that they could read. I might add that I'd rung Phil Stowe the day before that
meeting and told him that
I was coming in tomorrow with these documents and
there are going to be a couple of people embarrassed and I wasn't going to be
No, please, what happened at the meeting?---Okay. At the meeting they read
them and then they said that my business - all of a sudden
everything had
changed, my business plans had improved, customers were saying how much my work
had improved, how much that Carlton
was happy with the work I was doing and that
And was there any plan put in place for future monitoring?---No - yes,
Phil - Phil Stowe - it was mentioned in the meeting that Phil
Stowe would go out
in the tray with me which he did a couple of times and a very good relationship,
not a problem as far as I could
The applicant described his relationship with Mr David Hastie as:
“He'd call me nicknames at meetings; never anyone present when he was
abusing me and belittling me; just a general downgrading
of spirit and no
support or enthusiasm or - just a very bad relationship, very
The applicant explained that the awards were those he had personally received
over an 8½ year period at Carlton United:
“Nominated for a liquor stores representative of the year and that was
commendation from John Ryan the regional director; and
a personal award which I
received from Dallas Haynes for achieved of excellence in sales; monthly awards
for rep for the month for
being the number one representative at Carlton, New
South Wales sales force; letters of commendation being part of the best sales
team in Australia from Reg Turner. Those types of
In contrast to Mr David Hastie, the applicant said about Mr Dallas
he had a very good relationship, quite
personal, I'd been out on the trade with Dallas. We'd had numerous talks; I'd
been in his
office a couple of times; we discussed personal things; we joked
together. I would say very good.”
He was informed whilst calling at the Blacktown Inn Hotel that he was to
be transferred to “Guinness Australia.” Subsequently
at a meeting
with Mr Murray Waters the applicant asked why he was being transferred to
Guinness and he was told he thought it was
best for him and he continued:
"Well, I - what happens if I don't want to go to Guinness?" and he said,
"If you don't" he said, "you're gone.
A couple of days later he started at Guinness Australia. When he arrived
at the Guinness office at Neutral Bay he was introduced
to Mr Geoffrey Plews the
Managing Director and then Mr Richard Darling his new supervisor. The applicant
denied being given any
information about company policies, generally. He
further testified about the use of alcohol in the business.
What information were you given, if any, in relation to company
policy on alcohol consumption?---None, none.”
“Were you given any reading material at that time as to company
policies on alcohol consumption?---No.
In the 12 month or so period that you were at Guinness were you at any time
given any reading material on alcohol
consumption?---No.
Now, can I ask you when you were at
Carlton United, in that 8½ years before you transferred to Guinness, what
was your usual
practice in relation to drinking alcohol in the work
environment?---It was generally accepted in your position, that if you had to
have a drink with a licensee, especially if a club or a hotel, that you would do
so in the course of building a relationship with
that particular
Were you given any guidance as to exercising your discretion in that
matter?---No.
Did you in fact drink or consume alcohol within the work
environment?---Many times.
When you attended staff conventions and conferences did you consume
alcohol during those periods?---Many times.
As to your observations at those conferences, were you the only employee
consuming alcohol in that environment?---Definitely not.
When you went to Guinness did your practice of drinking in the work
environment change?---No, it did not, but the brand of beer certainly
You gave evidence earlier that you attended two staff conferences when you
were at Guinness?---Yes.
Did that include the conference at Lindeman Island?---Yes, it did.
Where was the other?---The other was at the Radisson Hotel on the beach at
In the course of the conference at the Radisson Hotel did you consume
alcohol in that time?---Yes.
Did you stay on premises?---Different premises. At one - one evening we went
to a function at the Riverview Hotel which was one of
my outlets at Balmain.
Another time we went to the Woolloomooloo Bay Hotel. Yes, we did go to
different outlets to consume alcohol
and have a function,
I am satisfied that the written material which is now available from Guinness
Australia on abuse of alcohol was not brought specifically
to his attention.
This may have been an oversight caused by the timing of his
As part of the training aspect of the conference at the Radisson Hotel at Manly,
there was to be a social function including dinner
at the Woolloomooloo Hotel.
At this hotel the applicant drank about four glasses of the
“Guinness” which was in trays
when they arrived, before they sat
down to dinner. Then he had different wines and more Guinness over a dinner of
three hours duration.
It was also arranged that they were to attend other
hotels after the dinner to familiarise everybody with other Guinness outlets.
The applicant asked Jodie Matthews for a Cabcharge so he could go back to the
hotel. The applicant reported:
Jodie chastised me at
the actual venue, at the Woolloomooloo Bay and the next day Richard Darling
spoke to me and said that he'd been
asked by Jeff Plews to reprimand me for not
attending the hotels that night after we'd finished at the Woolloomooloo Bay
Mr Frize in his evidence expressed his disappointment that the applicant did not
continue on with the nights activities on this occasion
as they were to visit
one of his outlets.
The last Carlton United appraisal on the
applicant was done by David Hastie at the Kent Brewery in Sydney. Present at
the appraisal
meeting was Richard Darling, David Hastie and the applicant. The
applicant refused to sign the appraisal (Exhibit 7). It was agreed
he would go
away with Richard Darling and they would prepare a constructive response to the
appraisal. He and Richard Darling sat
down during the Guinness conference at
the Radisson Hotel and prepared the response. In September 1995 the applicant
wrote to Mr
M. Dallas Haynes the then General Manager Sales – New South
Wales complaining about his treatment by Mr David Hastie. Mr Haynes
a memorandum dated 11 September 1995:
I have read through the documents and memorandum that you presented to me
on Friday 8
September 1995 and returned them through Murray
I propose to take no action and prefer to close the matter for the present
time, and in doing so allow you to get on with your current
responsibilities
with Guinness. I suggest that you focus your attention on the future as matters
in the past will do you, or anyone
else, “no good”. I am not
impressed with super sensitivity or rumours on “bagging” (from you
both inside or outside this Company). I am also in no need of
testimonials regarding your character or performance from selected
If you wish to enjoy your career with this Company you will conform to
policy, follow your immediate supervisor’s direction
– NOT go your
own way or be rebellious and critical of your colleagues and customers. I am
very respectful of enthusiastic,
loyal and committed people who are eager to
support their team and Carlton. Whatever you may think you experienced in the
as far as I am concerned, over. I suggest you take a similar
The applicant along with a number of Guinness
employees attended a sales conference on Lindeman Island in late January, 1996.
arrival at the island he and the others at the conference were given a
laminated staff card which entitled each individual to obtain
Guinness free of
any charge or limitation of supply at any of the bars on Lindeman Island.
Complimentary Guinness was also included
in the fridges in their rooms.
Tuesday, 30 January at 2.30 pm the conference commenced with the first session,
being entitled “Introduction and Conference
Objectives”. The
applicant described this session as:
“just a talk from the different Guinness managers. An introduction by
Geoff Plews welcoming everyone there, such as the New
Zealand manager, Mark
O'Brien who was new, that was his first actual day with Guinness and - and Paul,
from Victoria.
................
When people first join Guinness at the conferences they were required to
stand up on a chair and let everyone know what it was that
they did and also to
tell a story which no-one else had heard
The applicant maintained that
in the course of that conference he did not receive any written documents about
the consumption of alcohol.
He also denied that there was any information
provided to delegates as to what was and was not appropriate behaviour whilst at
conference. The members of the conference all met for dinner at the buffet
restaurant at the same time every night and then had
drinks at the bar although
no social functions were organised. During the course of these meals wine was
provided in carafes. Similarly
at lunch in the course of the conference on the
Tuesday and Wednesday, they could also have had Guinness from the bar if they
or from the stock in the fridge in their rooms. The applicant says he
drank fruit juice at the Lunch Breaks.
When they finished the conference
each day he would meet other delegates and have a couple of drinks, usually
Guinnesses, before dinner.
He drank wine and beer during the dinners. He was
unable to recall the quantity of drinks he consumed. After dinner on the
he adjourned to the bar and drank with other representatives and later
on they went to the disco which was open every night. These
drinking activities
were repeated on the Wednesday night after the conference. After the dinner on
the Wednesday night he again
met other delegates at the bar and had a couple of
Guinnesses. The applicant says he went back to his room to watch one of the
movies which were showing on the island. Asked to describe the shout
on each of these nights he responded:
“Well, in - in the shouting sequence we didn't have to pay any money so
we had the card so we'd just take it in turns each going
to get half a dozen
Guinnesses for the different delegates who were in our shout with, yes
On the Thursday night there was a gala dinner with pre-dinner drinks beforehand.
The applicant arrived at those drinks around about
6.30 pm. He says that he did
not drink in between the time of the conference concluding and the pre-dinner
drinks commencing with
his arrival at the function area. During this period he
went back to his room, showered and changed to get ready and put a hat on
the Mad Hatter's cocktail party. This was referred to in the conference agenda
7.30 pm Gala Dinner at Nichollsons Restaurant –
Presentation of Prizes. Fancy headress (bring along something to wear on your
head! – Prize for the Perfect Head.”
The agenda was typed by Ms
Matthews. The Macquarie dictionary gives over 43 meanings for its definition of
the word “head”.
Relevantly these include: “collar, froth or
foam, as that formed on beer when poured,” or “colloquially”
person who used drugs regularly, especially marijuana and LSD. Ms Matthews
agreed the use of the phrase “Perfect Head”
could also have a sexual
connotation, she suggested it related to the pouring of the product into a
Upon arrival the applicant first drank a Bourbon and
Coke. During a conversation which lasted quite a while with Dallas Haynes they
were drinking
Bourbon and Cokes together. At least three of these
were consumed. It should not be forgotten that a single bourbon and coke is
equivalent of one standard drink. It is now an accepted guideline in NSW that a
male person needs to restrict himself to drinking
no more than three standard
drinks in the first hour to have any chance of staying below the prescribed
content of alcohol in the
blood which the parliament has determined as the level
at which it is an offence to drive a Motor Vehicle. Having consumed 7 standard
drinks in so short a period the senses of the applicant had to be impaired. Mr
Haynes was unlikely to have been much less impaired.
The applicant says
he said to Dallas Haynes:
“that I would appreciate if he - if he kept his lieutenants off me
that - that they didn't harass me any more.
Yes, and what did he say?---And he said to me, he said, well I didn't have to
worry about that obviously now that I was with Guinness
and to get on with my
After this conversation with Mr Haynes, they went straight from there to the
gala dinner at the restaurant. The applicant described
the situation at the
“there's a lot of fun - the atmosphere was very uplifting. We were
all in a very good mood. Everyone was joking”.
During the course of the
dinner they consumed anything that was there. There was everything, wines,
bourbon, Guinness. We had Baileys
at the end”.
The applicant denied an allegation that during the course of the dinner he went
to the toilet with Mr Tony Nicholls and urinated
in a hand basin. After the
dinner he went to the bar where the karaoke was in progress with the other
Guinness delegates. Asked
to explain what happened at the karaoke he
“A lot of the guests at the island were participating in the karaoke
and I said to Tony, "Well, get up and have a sing" - Tony
Nicholls, "Well, get
up and have a sing". He says, "I'm in, I'm with you" and we got up and sang
"Twist and Shout"; killed them.
...............
And killed them - - -?---Yes, the place went nuts and
Please, what do you mean by that, please?---Well, everyone was cheering
and Dallas come up to my bar and he said, "That was fantastic"
and I said to
him, "That's what I've been trying to tell you for the last couple of years" and
we had a joke and drink.
............
What did you drink?---Guinness. At those bars we were using out tickets to
drink Guinness.
Yes, and then what happened?---Then all the Guinness representatives - when I
say all, there would have been about 15 of us and -
including Geoff Plews and
Jody Matthews and Kate Suttie, we all got up as a group and sang, "If you're
going to San Francisco be
sure to wear flowers in your hair". At the end of
that I then yelled out, "Three cheers to the Guinness" and the whole ensemble
gave three cheers for Guinness Australia.
During this period the Guinness free drink system was still operating and the
applicant admitted having three or four Guinnesses.
He agreed that this was a
large amount of alcohol, and described his state of inebriation as:
“I was very happy and very
.............................
Were you drunk?---I would say that would be a fair description of my –
At this stage of his evidence a ‘voir dire’ was conducted on the
question as to whether an audio visual tape should be
admitted into evidence.
This interruption was necessary as the court had to be relocated to the Law
Courts Building for this purpose
as such equipment was no longer available in
the former Industrial Court premises. After the video had been viewed the
continued his evidence.
After about an hour at the
Karaoke the applicant went to the disco with the other Guinness personnel.
Asked to explain what happened
in the Disco he replied:
“The mood was very jovial but when we - we got there, especially after
singing karaoke and so forth, the music that was being
played was modern techno
style music, which is that dance sort of modern beat music and a lot of the
Guinness people there weren't
exactly sixteen years of age and we took exception
to the music that was being played”.
The applicant said he approached Mr Haynes to speak to the Disc Jockey
(“DJ”) to see if he could get up and do a show
for the people that
were there. Mr Haynes advised him:
"No mate, he doesn't want to let you on."
applicant says he went up as did other Guinness representatives such as Tony
Nicolls and Bob Beattie from Melbourne and spoke
to the DJ. The applicant said
he asked him if he had any other type of music besides the techno music and he
was told that he didn’t.
The applicant says the following exchange took
“Yes?---And he said, "No, I haven't." And I said, "Would you mind
if I had a go?" and he said I - no, he said, "I don't want
anyone behind the
booth here because they're worried about damage to the equipment."
Yes and what did you say?---Well, that was the basis of the conversation,
I mean he - - -
Did you say anything else?---No.
What did you do when he said that?---I walked away”.
applicant continued drinking throughout the night, he denied using abusive
language including four letter words but admitted that
he whistled and yelled at
the DJ from time to time as he was quite intoxicated. He also conceded that he
had used the expression
“he was the worst DJ in 27
. He acknowledged that it was a compact area with the bar
and the area occupied by the DJ within hearing distance. He admitted that
conduct continued from time to time over a few hours. During this period he
continued drinking with other Guinness personnel
and consumed quite a lot of
alcohol. He maintained he was spending more time with Tony Nicholls who was
very drunk. This is in
itself an interesting observation by the
During the course of the evening he says he was not approached
by any management personnnel from the company as to his behaviour.
in the company of Mr Plews who was talking to some of the office girls most of
the night. He denied speaking with him.
The Disco finished after 3 am with
Tony Nicholls and the applicant the only guests still present. He described the
I was standing at the bar talking with Tony and drinking and the barman,
Johnno, said, "That's it fellows, we've got to close up"
and I observed the DJ
who was packing away his gear at the time as well, so there was actually four of
us there at that time of closing.
What did you do?---I left through the - the glass doors, the entrance. When
I went the barman, Johnno, closed the doors behind him
and actually locked the
DJ in so Johnno had actually left when Tony and I were there and Tony started
banging on the doors, threatening
the DJ, yelling through the crack in the
middle of the door and yelling obscenities at him.
................
Yes, I am asking you what you can recall he said?---"Come out here you
effing C, I'm going to effing kill you. If I get my hands
on you I'll effing
strangle you and kill you" and so forth and so on. I was - I was standing away
from the door because I'd walked
through the door first. I was standing about
five minutes away where I was sitting on - like they had those smooth rock type
outside, away from the pavers - paving area, I was sitting there and I
observed all this. I observed the DJ came to the door and
he motioned to open
the door to have a go at Tony because he was obviously scared. I - I'd seen
Well, just stick to what you saw?---Okay. And he motioned: open the door,
which only incited Tony even more and he started banging
on the door and
threatening on him - threatening him. I got up - I got up - well, I got to my
feet and I went over to Tony and put
my arm around his neck and I said, "Mate,
you're having a shocker. Let's get out of here", you know, "before we get into
Now, can I ask you this. You have given evidence that over the period of
this event on the Thursday, you had consumed a fairly large
alcohol?---Yes, about ten hours straight.
You are still able to recall those events?---Actually, without - without
word or lie, I - I do remember things. I've been in the
entertainment industry
for many years. I have had the odd drink in my time and yes, I do remember
things very, very well when I'm
intoxicated. I - yes, I do, I do recall it
Thank you. Now, after you put your arm around Mr Nicholls' neck and
suggested you move away, what happened then, what did you do
then?---Well, he
was laughing, I pulled him away. We were both very drunk. We walked down the
stairs to go back to my room and
we're falling all over the place and Tony, at
one stage, fell up against the - it's like a grass wall which ran along the road
- near our accommodation and he dropped his pants
Yes?---And he pulled - he let his pants down and pulled out his penis and
fondled it.
MS RUDLAND: Yes?---And I said - once again I said, "Come on, let's get
back - let's get back to the room. We decided to have a
- to go for a swim.
Rob Phyllis was in the room at the time in a dead
The applicant said he was standing there getting undressed, ready to go
swimming when Tony Nicholls jumped onto Rob Phillis, and scared
daylights out of him:
“It was quite funny at the time and Rob woke up and he didn't know
where he was and yelling, "Get off me" - because Tony had
him in like a bear hug
in - with the blankets around him, so Rob couldn't move and Rob got up and he
got really upset and carried
on. It was - as I said, to us it was quite funny
and - - - “
Both of them left and went to the swimming pool dressed in their underpants with
towels wrapped around them. They had walked down
to the pool along a long
stairway which led down to the pool area. They passed a female staff member at
the reception. As might
be expected at 4.00 am there were no island staff
members or other resident guests in the swimming pool. However there were at
four Guinness personnel present being: Jody Mitchell, Kate Suttie, Mark
O’Brien and John Frize together with an Adelaide Representative
the applicant could not remember. According to the applicant Mr John Frize was
sitting quietly on the other side of the
pool talking so he was well away from
the applicant. The applicant says he sat up on a retaining wall. Only his own
words can best
describe what happened next:
“And were you still wearing your underpants?---At that time, yes, I was
- I sat on this lion ornament and I was trying to take
- take them off - I had
no trouble taking the towel off, I took the towel off, that flopped down and I
was trying to take my underpants
off while trying to sit on this lion ornament
and everyone was laughing at me.
When you say everyone was laughing at you, who in particular did you
observe to be laughing at you?---I - I couldn't - at that stage
I couldn't just
determine who was laughing and who wasn't, it was just a vocal form of laughter
coming from the Guinness people that
were there.
Yes, and did you actually get your underpants off?---Yes, eventually I did.
Very difficult on top of that lion but yes, eventually
I did and I - I walked
down the stairs and jumped in the pool”.
And what did you do in the pool?---Just swam around and - and mainly spoke
to John Frize, sat next to John and spoke to him.
Did anybody say anything to you?---No.
Can you recall any conversation that took place while you were in the
swimming pool?---No, just general conversation about how good
the night was and
the atmosphere was very jovial and very happy.
And how long were you in the swimming pool?---I can't say for sure off
hand, it would have been half an hour or so.
And then what did you do?---Tony and I went back upstairs. On walking
Can I just stop you. When you got out of the swimming pool you were still
naked, is that correct?---Yes, that's correct.
Yes, and then you went walking up to - - -?---Well, I grabbed my
towel and wrapped my towel around me and I - I went back upstairs
with Tony. Upon walking up the stairs there was a shop in the middle layer of
stairs just below where the office area
was and they had two small concrete type
ornaments outside of that and Tony went to pick up one of those to gesture to
throw it at
the window of the shop and I once again said: "Mate, you're having a
shocker", grabbed it off him and put it down. We walked past
the reception
area, we had our towels around us at all times. Once again I still didn't see
the DJ, if he was there he was hiding
from us. I then passed the reception
area, walked out on the road to go back to our accommodation and we run into
Cadelle Buzz before
we got to our room.
Yes, and - - -?---And Cadelle was - just spoke briefly with us
And what did he say, can you recall?---No, I don't, that was just
insignificant. He mainly spoke to Tony because I was still walking
Yes, and then what happened?---And then Tony run after me, we got back to
the room, I gave him a Fosters Light Ice t-shirt - no, I
take that back. When
we got back to the room Tony wanted to get back to his room to get some clothes
and I didn't know where his
room was but we walked down there which was only
- to go in with him because we were going to surprise his - his flatmate or
his Guinness mate that he was sharing a room with, who
was his supervisor from
Queensland, and Tony was banging on the wall pretty loudly. I was sitting back
on the rail and a woman in
the next door - it was in the door, like a little -
where the rooms are sort of right next to one another, she opened the door and
saw us standing there naked, smiled and closed the door.
Yes, and then what happened?---Well, Tony couldn't get into his
Yes, and so what then happened?---Well, we went back to my room, I then gave
him a Fosters Light Ice t-shirt and I went to bed and
he left, and that was my
involvement on that evening.”
Now, can you recall when you awoke that day?---I woke in the afternoon, I
went to - - -
As might be expected after drinking such a large amount of alcohol the applicant
did not wake until three in the afternoon. At that
time he received a message
from Mr Tony Nicholls which stated:
“The shit has hit the fan, call the legend.”When he arrived at
the pool most of the Guinness people were laughing, joking
and talking about the
events of the previous night.
Mr Nicholls said to him:
"Mate, like, you know, the shit's hit the fan, like, the management's going
off their brain and they've spoken to me about it". The
applicant says that
basically we just discussed the night before and different representatives from
Guinness were having a “jive”
at the two of
These included: Bob Beattie, Rob Phyllis, and John Frize. The applicant
maintained that everybody was laughing and thought it was
funny, as it was a
good natured conference. He maintained it wasn't anything
The applicant says that Mr Rick Chapman the Marketing Manager for Guinness
Australia, addressed them before dinner on Friday saying
that Mr Geoff Plews was
extremely angry, and thought that the behaviour was abominable. It was
suggested that none of the representatives
go up to the disco that evening and
that for the rest of their time on the Island, they behave themselves. The
applicant maintains
that Mr Rick Chapman played tennis with him at 7 o'clock on
the Saturday morning and did not discuss the incident.
The applicant left Lindeman Island on the Saturday on the way over in the
shuttle boat he had a conversation with Mr Nicholls about
the events on Thursday
evening. Asked to recall what was said he replied:
“Tony was very, very concerned about losing his job. I was actually
still in a jovial mood about the incident because I obviously
didn't think that
my involvement was going to warrant - I mean, a slap over the knuckles but I
didn't think it would come down to
what happened, and I said, I joked with Tony
in no uncertain terms, he said: "Mate can you - - -
No, I want you to say what you can recall him saying?---He asked me if I
could say that I was drunk, that drunk that I didn't see
or hear what had
happened outside the disco that evening with the DJ and I said: "As long as my
head isn't on the line, I would say
Now, when you went from Lindeman Island to Hamilton Island and caught a plane
to Sydney from Hamilton; is that right?---That's correct.
Now, did you have any conversation with anyone from management?---Yes, I did,
John Frize. As we were walking towards the plane I
put my arm around him -
because John and - John and I had been mates at Carlton for a long time and I
said, "I think I'm going to
need a bit of assistance in this." He didn't say
anything to me but when we got back to Sydney I was taking my bags off the
belt and John Frize and Rick Chapman approached at the airport on
Saturday morning and said: Mate, Guinness doesn't want you any
more, you're out.
And I said, "Well, what do I do now?" And he said, "Well, you'll have to get in
touch with Dallas." And that
was it, hop in a taxi and went
The applicant says he did not attempt to speak with Mr Geoff Plews as he had
gone to his a place in the country and he was told by
Kate Suttie he was upset
by the whole incident and didn't want to speak to anyone. The applicant then
rang Dallas Haynes on Monday
morning and said:
"Dallas, have you heard the news?" And he said, "Yes, I have." I said,
"Well, what do you want me to do?" And he said, "Meet me
in there at 10 o'clock
this morning."
After arriving at the brewery, at quarter to 10.00 am he was kept waiting until
approximately twenty minutes to 12.00 (noon) when
both Dallas and Alvin Freeman
escorted him into an office. The applicant described this interview which he
says lasted about one
half hour as follows:
“as soon as we walked into that office the first thing I said to Alvin
Am I going to have a chance to explain before this goes
Now, you say that you asked if you were going to be given the opportunity
to explain, what happened then?---Alvin said, "Yes, you
will", and we sat down
and I told him exactly the events as I've just described them to you and he
didn't seem to take any notice
of what I was saying. He had a pen and paper in
his hand, Dallas was observing and Alvin just put questions to me that he wanted
to know answers to.
Can you recall those questions?---Yes, based on the sequence of events. "Did
you bang on the wall and threaten the DJ?" "Were you
at the door banging on
when the woman opened the door?" "Were you naked in front of staff at the
reception?" "Did you go skinny-dipping?"
And I answered either yes or no to
the different questions that he put to me.
In relation to the telephone conversation that you had with Mr Haynes and
he asked you to come in, did he give any indication that
your job may be on the
line?---No, none whatsoever.
And at the beginning of the meeting between Mr Haynes, Mr Freeman and
yourself, did either gentlemen indicate to you that if your
answers were not
satisfactory your job may be on the line?---No, they did
Now, you say that Mr Freeman asked you questions and you gave answers,
what happened then?---Well, Mr Freeman said to me:
"We don't care to accept your explanation of - of happened - of the events
that happened, we care to accept the documents that we
have", of which I wasn't
allowed to see, "And you're terminated as of this point."
Mr Freeman also gave him a cabcharge docket. Thereafter he was escorted to his
car which he unlocked for Mr Murray Waters who also
saw him to the front
With a letter dated 13 February 1996 the applicant was paid a cheque for
$7,335.63 representing his final entitlements as at 5 February,
Annual Leave
February Salary
4 weeks pay in lieu
Long Service Leave
Less Advance
Since his termination from Carlton United on 5 February 1996, he had no
other employment apart from his engagement at Wentworthville
Leagues Club where
he had been for 4½ years. The hours normally worked by the applicant at
the Leagues Club were Friday evenings
starting at 9 and finishing at 1.30 whilst
on the Saturday evenings he started at 10 and finished at 2.30 pm. In this
position he
earnt $600.00 per week. The applicant applied for a number of other
positions for which he was unsuccessful. The applicant maintained
wanted reinstatement to his position with Carlton United Brewery. For the
reason that:
“I love the company.”
This case was
conducted differently from other cases as the applicant had the benefit in these
proceedings of listening to all the
other witnesses before giving his evidence.
He agreed with Mr Benson during his cross-examination that there were a number
in which he was in conflict with other witnesses. He agreed with the
assertion made by Mr Benson that he expected to be believed
on the basis of his
honesty. It was forcefully put to him that his version of the event differs to
that of Mr Nicholls regarding
the incident and their conversations. He agreed
that he thought he would get a slap over the knuckles. The following exchange
“And you say Mr Nicholls was a bit more concerned and he made this
overture to you try dissuade you to say, if you were asked
anything about his
actions outside the DJ, then you would say you did not see him?---Correct. No,
he said to me not to say anything,
to say that I was drunk and that I didn't
hear or see what was happening and I said I would do that as long as my head
the chopping block.”
He asked you, on the evidence you gave a bit earlier was: Can you say you did
not see me acting against the DJ outside the disco?---That's
correct - no, he -
he said to me to say that I was drunk and that I couldn't see or hear what he
was saying and I told him that as
long as my head on the chopping block - wasn't
on the chopping block that I would help him in that
Yes, in other words, you were prepared to lie to the company in its
investigation if there was one for the purposes of Mr Nicholls?---He
friend and, yes, I was prepared to do that.
So, the situation is, is it not, that in regard to your veracity, if there
is a reason why you see that you should lie to your advantage
then you will do
so?---Could you please explain that a bit?
If you see some advantage in lying and you will not get caught out, you
are prepared to do so?---I would say that would be furtherest
from the truth
based on my lifestyle, I wouldn't lie at all.”
Under cross
examination the applicant admitted coming under the supervision of David Hastie
on in their working relationship Mr
Hastie counselled him about various matters including about complaints he had
received about
the applicant. The applicant maintained the complaints weren't
necessarily about him but were about the service they were getting
from Carlton
United. He amplified this saying:
The customers felt that I couldn't help them because of my position
that I had at Carlton, pure and simple. I didn't have the authority
them in matters that were important to them.”
He was then asked
Hotel about his attitude and service.
He was also asked about a number of other
complaints. These questions were objected to on the ground of relevance and
that no evidence
of these complaints had been given by Mr Hastie. The questions
were allowed on the basis of an assurance by counsel that they were
The applicant complained about the way Mr David Hastie carried out his
supervision of him:
“David Hastie left on my - one of my reports one day a small little
piece of yellow paper that had one strike on it. It then
had: two more strikes
and you're out. I took great offence to that, I stuck it on the wall in front
of my desk where everyone could
see it and David came down and ripped it off the
wall. He was very concerned about it. Yes, he discussed a weekly report with
by sticking a small piece of paper on that report which highly offended
The applicant alleged that Mr David Hastie was not good at discussing issues of
concern with the representatives. Mr Hastie apparently
put little bits of paper
on his weekly reports from time to time. The applicant took the view they were
flippant remarks which didn't
deserve any acknowledgment. Asked about an annual
staff appraisal in mid 1993 completed by Mr Hastie he made it clear that he
accept the views of the author Mr Hastie although he signed the
appraisal. Some of the comments which the applicant disputed the
accuracy of
“Eric needs to pay more attention to listening
skills and stick to company systems and procedures instead of doing his own
“Eric is very outspoken and outsiders get the wrong impression.
Has good working rapport with most, needs to be more of a
The applicant did not accept those assessments by Mr Hastie and maintained that
he didn't have those shortcomings. Asked about another
complaint which resulted
in him being barred from the North Carlingford Cellars outlet he
There was a transfer of representatives. I
believe that Neil Harvey was - was put in to take over that particular outlet.
had known Peter Robinson for a number of years before I took over that
outlet and Peter preferred to deal direct with David and I
was relieved of that
In August 1994 the applicant says a complaint from Mr Bill Gerard, the owner of
East Toongabbie Cellars was dealt with:
“I took Dallas Haynes out on the field trip to East Toongabbie Cellars
where he met the owner and the licensee continued to
ring up Dallas whenever he
had a complaint. In the end Dallas refused to take his calls, didn't want to
speak to him, Dallas didn't
want to speak to
He was asked about other appraisals and the
response was similar. He pointed out that they did not see Senior Managers
comments as
part of the normal review process. The applicant denied meeting
with his supervisors on 23 December 1994. The applicant agreed
that he was
under no illusion from the meeting held on 30 January 1995 if there were any
further instances of poor work performance
or conduct without reasonable
explanation it would result in his termination:
I can assure you when I left that meeting with David and Reg I was
absolutely shellshocked. I was devastated.”
VIDEO EVIDENCE & VOIR DIRE
During the evidence of the applicant the court was adjourned to allow the
showing of a videotape in the Law Courts building as this
facility was no longer
available in the Industrial Court premises.
A video recording was tendered in evidence on behalf of the applicant. The film
shows a date of 18th January 1996 at 13.22 hours.
This is obviously a
reproduction as the original video was taken at a conference held by Carlton
United at Opal Cove Resort at
Coffs Harbour in 1991. There was no dispute that
the conference took place.
Before accepting the video into evidence questions were allowed
of the applicant as to the method of production. This examination
revealed that
the applicant acted as the main camera man assisted by Mark Hosford and possibly
a couple of other sales representatives
were involved in the filming side. The
concentration of the filming was on the actual performances of the people at the
rather than a recording of the entire event.
The applicant testified that the court saw an extract from the
film that was made in July 1991. An unedited version was marked for
identification and made available to the respondent. The applicant admitted
editing the film when these proceedings started. He
gave the edited version to
Ms Rudland counsel for the applicant.
On the basis of this evidence Mr Benson counsel for the
respondent objected to the film being shown on the basis:
“that it does not represent a continuous record of what was
occurring and therefore will present a distorted picture of the
events of that
evening. It is not an accurate record of the events and is therefore
prejudicial in its possible selection to my
He also objected on the grounds of relevance to the court viewing the tape.
That objection was not allowed as it was necessary to
see the film to determine
its relevance. Mr Benson later withdrew his general objection suggesting that
the court should give the
film little weight.
The video was allowed into evidence as it was considered relevant to
establishing a pattern of behaviour on behalf of the employer
and employee at a
similar function. The introductory titles and graphics including the specific
reference to Mr Plews were excluded
from the evidence as they are a reflection
of the opinions of the applicant and not a recording of the
conference.
During the presentation the following persons were identified:
(a) The applicant wearing a moustache and a striped shirt.
(b) Mr Plews on a few occasions including with his hands above his head holding
and waving a handkerchief aloft.
(c) Two female sales
representatives amongst a large number of male sales representatives performing
a number of karaoke type songs.
EVIDENCE OF DISC JOCKEY
The evidence of the twenty one year old “Disc Jockey”
(“DJ”)was to the effect that it was his first night
on the job as a
DJ and he was not aware of the provision made for security assistance on the
island. It is regrettable that he did
not make a complaint earlier than he did
as these events may not have taken place if the supply of liquor to the
applicant and Mr
Tony Nicholls had been cut off at this time. Part of his
evidence was to some degree in favour of the applicant. He was inclined
agree under cross examination that it was the younger person, (Mr Tony
Nicholls), who became more aggressive after they left the
disco. In some of his
written material he expressed a reservation about the severity of the punishment
given as a result of the
incident to the applicant. He did not resile from his
view that the two men walked passed the reception areas carrying their clothes
while otherwise naked. This accords with the description given by Mr Tony
Nicholls of events after they fell in the gutter but is
at odds with other
evidence that they were seen with towels. I am satisfied that whilst the events
of the night were distressing
for the young man it is unlikely that he suffered
any long term harm. On the other hand it was an introduction to the kind of
that some times occurs in his chosen profession as a lighting engineer
in the entertainment industry where alcohol is usually being
EVIDENCE OF SECRETARY TO THE GENERAL MANAGER OF GUINNESS
The twenty four old secretary to the General Manager Jodie Leigh Matthews
testified that she had started at Guinness Australia Proprietary
Ltd in May 1993
after completing a secretarial course at Williams business College and a Diploma
of Architectural drafting at North
Sydney TAFE. Ms Matthews also acted as
secretary to Mr Frize, National Key Accounts Manager and Mr Rick Chapman
Marketing Manager.
Her evidence was given in low almost hushed tones.
Initially she was concerned by the sarcastic way in which the applicant spoke
Mr Haynes at the start of the dinner.
When she arrived at the disco she
witnessed the disc jockey pointing his finger at the applicant and Tony Nicholls
and looking unhappy.
Ms Matthews got up and walked over to the two of them and
told them to calm down. The applicant told her to “
which left her both surprised and offended. Sometime during the night Mr Plews
had left saying goodnight to her and telling
When the disco ended she left with four others and went to the room occupied by
John Bawden and Paul Ursich. Also present
was Kate Suttie, John Frize and Mark
O’Brien, according to Ms Matthews they stayed in the room for about 10
minutes drinking
and then went to their respective rooms to get changed into
swimming costumes and went to the pool. Under cross examination she
admits that
they went to the room to have a drink and she was carrying a broken carton of
beer with approximately 12 cans in it and
some glasses. This asportation of
alcohol after normal trading hours had ceased may have constituted an offence in
some jurisdictions.
towel in front of his groin and no other clothes near the pool area. The
was straddling the lion Ms Matthews maintained she heard Mr Frize say
to the applicant along the lines of: “
guys , there are girls present.
Put your clothes on
.” Mr Nicholls denies that this was said. Ms
Matthews says she swam away so as not to see them. Under cross examination she
agreed that the others present were intoxicated but not to the extent of the
applicant. Ms Matthews conceded that other persons
were laughing at the
applicant and Mr Tony Nicholls. Her last sighting was of them with towels
wrapped around them walking away
with their clothes in hand. The next day the
applicant told her she was a pain in the arse for telling him what to do. Ms
prefaced her evidence about the amount of alcohol she had consumed on
the evening with the use of the word “approximately.”
She admitted
to consuming:
“two gin and tonics at the cocktail party and I had
approximately two wines at the dinner and during the rest of the evening
approximately three bourbon and cokes.”
Her evidence about the amount
of alcohol taken by her on this evening is, on the balance of probabilities,
severely underestimated.
The total loyalty which was shown by her to the
General Manager and her employer generally is to be commended. Nevertheless it
have affected her objectivity in giving her evidence. Ms Matthews could not
remember whether it was 15 or 20 cases of Guinness that
had been ordered for the
consumption of delegates at the conference.
EVIDENCE OF NATIONAL KEY ACCOUNTS MANAGER OF GUINNESS
The evidence of Mr John Stanley Frize, National Key Accounts Manager, did not
wholly confirm the evidence of Ms Matthews it differed
in terms of the amount of
time spent in the room occupied by Mr Bawden and the amount of alcohol consumed
there. He did maintain
that he told the applicant to put some clothes on. His
reaction to what was said and the language used by the applicant, as might
expected, was more tolerant:
”I know he was a little agitated, but I
mean it was the way it was”.
He confirmed that the applicant was
naked in the pool area although when leaving and arriving he had a towel or
other clothing draped
in front of him. He admitted that according to the amount
of alcohol that he and others had consumed they would all be very close
high range of the scale used to determine the level of the prescribed content of
alcohol in the blood for drink driving offences.
His ironic observation to
counsel for the applicant,
“They were not naked though,”
not made without a sense of humour on his part.
He had worked with the applicant previously and respected his achievement in
terms of sales and the industry generally. He admitted
that the applicant
“could easily rub people up the wrong way.”
Having observed
the applicant over two days giving evidence this statement is an accurate
observation. His evidence as to what was
said in their conversation at the
airport on their return to Sydney accords with that of the
EVIDENCE OF NATIONAL MARKETING MANAGER OF GUINNESS
The National Marketing Manager Mr Richard Kenneth Chapman had commenced with
Guinness Australia on 1 August 1994 and had a professional
relationship with the
applicant since he joined the company. At the Conference Gala Dinner the
applicant was presented by him with
“Mother Theresa”
award and he was given a book because of his
“shy retiring
”How To Win Friends and Influence
. He went on to describe the applicant as
aggressive blunt sort of character and so I guess the award was if you like an
ironic twist on that”.
He could only recall the name of one other
award that he presented. He saw nothing out of order at the dinner and
disclosed the
amount of alcohol he estimated that he consumed at the function as
being one or possibly two glasses of Guinness at the pre-dinner
drinks and three
glasses of red over dinner with another one or two glasses of Guinness
afterwards. He can only recollect a conversation
with the applicant at the
disco which was about the disc jockey. He felt the applicant was very
aggressive about the disc jockey
but he managed to calm him down by steering the
discussion towards the applicant’s own skill in this profession. As the
had ended Mr Chapman had arranged a round of 18 holes of golf
commencing at 9.30 am or 10.00 am on the Friday so he left the Disco
others. It was not until his return at lunch time that he heard the rumours:
“I hear a couple of your guys were
playing up and running around the place
naked last night”.
He went to see the manager of the resort as the two senior personnel Mr Plews
and Mr. Haynes had left earlier that morning for Sydney.
As he could not see
the manager he asked Mr Frize about the rumours who said :
and Eric running around naked”
He gave other details of his
investigation of the incident and his discussions with Mr Plews on the issue.
He played tennis with
the applicant at 7.00 am on Saturday 2 February 1996 and
did not mention the incident to him. His evidence confirmed there were
untoward incidents on the Friday or Saturday. There was no evidence that the
laminated drinking pass was withdrawn or any
other limitations placed on the
access to alcohol by the applicant or Mr Nicholls during this period.
Because of the way his evidence was given and his lack of detailed recall about
essential activities in which he was involved, such
as the presentation of
awards it is likely that, he too has grossly underestimated his intake of
alcohol on the evening. He confirmed
the account of the applicant and Mr Frize
EVIDENCE OF FORMER NEW SOUTH WALES SALES AND MARKETING
MANAGER OF RESPONDENT
Mr Sydney Dallas Herman Haynes known as Dallas Haynes gave evidence of being
a long standing employee of Carlton United for 16 years,
until he retired on 31
January 1997. He had held a number of senior positions with Carlton United
including from November 1991 as
its General Manager of Sales & Marketing.
He described the applicant as being responsible to his Area Manager who then
through the State Sales Managers to Mr Haynes. Prior to the transfer
of the applicant to Guinness Australia he had not directly
supervised the
applicant although he had completed a day in the trade with him. He received
reports in a Global way as to how all
the sales representatives were performing
as against budget sales figures. The applicant had a “dotted line”
responsibility
to Mr Haynes after he went to Guinness Australia, and Mr Haynes
signed his expenses and read his reports. He recalled there were
two notices
given to Mr Shields, one by Mr David Hastie, and the other by Mr Reg Turner, and
that this was part of the normal procedure.
Mr Shields was transferred to
Guinness Australia as part of a restructure. Mr Haynes could not say that there
was anything wrong
with his relationship with the applicant at any time. Asked
to explain the general policy of Carton United towards employees consuming
alcohol, he replied:
“Well, generally, it’s part of our business to consume alcohol
if we choose to, we don’t have to, but when we go
out to visit a customer
in the trade, a hotelier, who asks us to have a drink, we consider it prudent of
us to have a drink with
him; that might be one or two middies. Since the advent
of light beer, it’s been light beer. I am totally unaware of any
drinking by any of my staff.”
He was invited, by Mr Geoffrey
Plews, to attend the Guinness conference on Lindeman Island as an observer.
There were other Carlton
United staff there who reported to him on a similar
basis as did the applicant. On Tuesday 30 January 1996 he attended the opening
session and was asked along with others to stand up and say who they were, what
they did and make a comment. He could not recall
any specific comment about the
At the Thursday Pre-dinner drinks, he had one alcoholic drink.
At that stage his relationship with the applicant was quite good.
Although they
were drinking together for some time, he can only recall the applicant saying:
“I could drink you under the table”
and he replied:
“I don’t think you could, but we’re not going
He later conceded he might have had 2 or 3 bourbons & coke,
and 2 glasses of wine at dinner. He went with them to the disco
and only stayed
leave the island. He witnessed nothing
untoward while at the disco.
Saturday afternoon he telephoned Mr Plews at his request who told him about the
”. He received a telephone call from Mr Shields,on
the Monday morning and he told him: “
Come into the office.
He had again spoken to Mr Plews and Mr Freeman on the Monday morning. He had
also discussed it with Mr Ryan, Regional Director
of NSW, who had a meeting with
him and told Mr Freeman in his presence:
“If you believe these
circumstances to be correct, then you dismiss him”
. At an interview
between Mr Freeman, the applicant and himself the accusations of his conduct as
he had received then were made
to the applicant, some of which he denied. Mr
Freeman and Mr Haynes did not accept the denial of the applicant and he could
recall if he apologised for his conduct.
During his cross examination
he was asked to comment on the letter he received from the applicant, he
“He was not concerned with breakdown between staff and
supervisors as it was a matter for the supervisor to deal with”
his view the Company frowns on excessive use of alcohol, but he agreed there was
usually some alcohol at functions but Carlton
United expected everyone to be
disciplined. There was no alcohol served at the Carlton United conferences he
had held at the Kent
He conceded he knew the applicant to be a
good Disc Jockey and had congratulated him on his performance at the Karaoke.
not deny he had approached the Disc Jockey and asked him if the
applicant could perform. He could not tell if people were affected
by drink as
most were good natured and having a good time. During his evidence he often
retreated into the “don’t recall”
style of answer. His
evidence about the amount of alcohol he drank at the gala dinner was most
unsatisfactory and unreliable.
In response to the allegation that he had
said during his speech that the one thing that he wished to do before he retired
get rid of the applicant he maintained that although he could not
recollect making that statement, he would not deny it. He agreed,
that things
were said in jest in his speech.
Mr Haynes was asked about a luncheon at
the Governor Bourke Hotel at Parramatta, he readily admitted to being present on
the occasion
and to having consumed, in his words, “half a bottle of
wine”. He was then asked by counsel for the applicant, under
cross-examination, as to whether he had driven a company vehicle after the
event. At this stage, I intervened in the process and
asked that Mr Haynes
leave the room. I explained to counsel that if this line of questioning were to
continue, then Mr Haynes should
be given an explanation of his right under
Section 128,
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) not to answer any question which might
tend to incriminate himself.
On the return of Mr Haynes to the court
room, the provisions of
Section 128
Evidence Act, 1995
(Cth) were explained to
him and he was asked if he wished the opportunity of discussing the matter with
Mr Benson. He agreed to
that course of action and a short adjournment was
granted for this purpose. On his return to the court, counsel for the
again asked a similar question, Mr Haynes objected to answering the
question on the grounds that he may be incriminated. Given that
Mr Haynes has
now left the employ of the respondent, Counsel for the applicant in a very
proper way did not request that Mr Haynes
be directed to answer the question.
Had the question been pressed it is likely I would have found that there were
reasonable grounds
for the objection. It is also unlikely that I would have
found that the interests of justice required a direction be given to Mr
to answer the question.
EVIDENCE OF FORMER SECONDED EMPLOYEE OF
Mr Anthony Charles Nicholls a former employee of the
respondent, who at the time of the incident was also seconded to Guinness
gave his evidence in person in Brisbane. In order to conserve costs
for the parties this evidence was taken by video link. Mr Benson,
Counsel for
the Respondent, was also present in Brisbane while Ms Rudland, Counsel for the
Applicant, was located in Sydney. The
“Due to the poor quality of the video link sound we must apologise
for the amount of indistincts that we have had to include
through the
transcript.”
At times, Ms Rudland, counsel for the applicant
could neither see nor hear what was being said by the witness. On occasions she
not be heard by counsel for the respondent, the witness or
Early in his evidence I gained the impression that he was not
being frank with the court and suggested that as he was now in employment
no cause to be reluctant in giving his evidence. An application under
Evidence Act
which was made by counsel for the applicant
during his Examination-in-Chief was initially refused by me. Later on in his
I formed the view, after his use of the expression “unfair
dismissal jazz” that he was not making a genuine attempt to
give evidence.
A renewed application was subsequently granted.
His testimony included
the following allegations against the applicant:
(a). During the course of the dinner on the Thursday evening both urinated in
the wash basins in either the male or female toilets
he was unsure as to
(b) Both of them banging on the door of the Disco in turn whilst the other
keeled over in laughter.
(c) “Both laughing and holding the ends of our penises to stop
ourselves wetting ourselves.”
(d) He pretended to have sex with the statue of the lion by the
(e) He talked about his penis and the size of it and how he
knew how to use it.
Other evidence from him included admitting:
being “quite drunk”.
2. That whilst he was banging on the door the DJ came to the
3. He remembered the applicant saying:
given him enough – as he’s laughing: let’s get
4. That the applicant had lead him away with his arms around him.
5. That they fell down in the gutter and had a “deep and meaningful
conversation and then took their clothes off.”
6. Jumping on a sleeping Rob Phillis, who was sharing a room with the
7. Talking to a female staff member at reception while
8. Being told by Cadell Bass to go to bed.
9. That on Monday 5 February 1996 he was told by representatives of the
respondent through Guinness Australia that “he had to
go because the
applicant had to go.”
Mr Nicholls denies:
(i) taking towels with
them from the room of the applicant.
(ii) that Mr Frize spoke to them at the
He was cross examined about a telephone conversation he had with
the applicant after the proceedings had commenced:
“In relation to the telephone conversation that you spoke about
earlier, you in fact told Mr Shields at that time that you did
not want to go
against the company in court because you wanted to return to the liquor
industry, is that not correct? Yeah, I may
have said words to that effect and
you’d be right in saying the liquor industry.
Now, in the course of that conversation Mr Shields in fact said to you
that if you came to Sydney to give evidence on his behalf he
would cover your
expenses in doing so?---My recollection is that he encouraged me to write
something on paper to back him up in some
sort of way and if he was to have a
win of sorts he’d cut me in.
What exactly did he say?---I can only say words to the effect.
Yes?---I can’t say it exactly.
Say words to the effect?---Words to the effect so I’ll repeat
myself. He encouraged me to put my versions down on paper backing
some sort of way with the incentive being he’d give me a slice of whatever
he was to get. I wasn’t interested
in doing that cause I’ve taken
my medicine. I’ve done the wrong thing and I’ve been accountable
for what I’ve
I put it to you that in fact Mr Shields did not make that offer to you,
what he offered to do was pay your expenses to come to Sydney
evidence?---No, that’s not right.
Ms Rudland: Sorry, if you can go back, yes?---Yeah, he definitely offered
me a slice and to go along with that he probably did offer
the expenses also,
but most definitely offered me a slice and I imagine expenses would have come
along with that.
And I put it to you that in relation to offering you a slice, that is not
true?---Mrs Rudland, I swore on the Bible and I’m
being absolutely
During part of their drunken escapade there was
apparently some effort made at modesty by both the applicant and Mr Nicholls as
is evidence from other witnesses that the two of them had towels when they
were at the pool. The evidence of Mr Nicholls should
be given little weight.
After his resignation he had been assisted by officers of the respondent to
obtain other employment. He
displayed a large element of self interest and self
preservation while giving his testimony.
The amount of alcohol which he
consumed and its effect on his recollection of events must also be taken into
account. Given his age
it is unlikely that he has, not yet, developed the
tolerance towards the use of alcohol that some of the more longstanding
in the industry have demonstrated during their evidence.
DIRECTION UNDER
EVIDENCE ACT 1995
During the evidence of Mr Nicholls and after his objection I directed under
Evidence Act, 1995
, that he answer questions from Ms Rudland, Counsel for
the Applicant. It was important to the case for the applicant to obtain proper
testimony from Mr Nicholls. This direction was given as I was satisfied that it
was in the interests of justice that he be directed
to answer. Mr Nicholls is
entitled to the protection afforded by the section and he may apply to the
registry of the court for a
certificate to be issued. That part of his
testimony which may be covered by the certificate is contained in pages 24 to 45
of the transcript of the proceedings heard in November 1996.
Consideration has been given to the non-publication of his name in
reasons but there is no justification for that course to have been
EVIDENCE OF GENERAL MANAGER OF GUINNESS
Mr Geoffrey William Plews, the General Manager of Guinness
Australia Pty Ltd a subsidiary of Guinness PLC gave evidence in support
respondent.
He had worked for the Guinness group of companies for approximately 15 years and
had been in Australia since the end of 1984. He
provided more detail of the
relationship with Carlton United for the provision of specialist staff to his
company which had been
in effect for four years. It is a two-year rolling
agreement where selected staff in each State are seconded to Guinness Australia
to be directed by marketing and sales personnel of that company. The agreement
operates in New South Wales, Queensland, Western
Australia, South Australia and
He conceded he had first met Mr Shields at the conference in Coffs Harbour. He
testified he had received a phone call at the end
of 1994 from Mr Dallas Haynes
to say that he was proposing a restructuring of the sales force. One person was
to be replaced with
Mr Shields. There was not a close working relationship
between him and the applicant. He confirmed the evidence of Mr Haynes that
applicant was directly supervised by Mr Frize, who reported to Mr Plews for the
direction of the business. In terms of the personnel
arrangements, such as
salaries, cars, expenses, these were all handled by Carlton United. Mr Plews
provided a Guinness PLC document
on Alcohol and the Workplace.
He maintained that:
“Guinness is signatory to the Portman Group in the UK and the Amsterdam
Group in Holland. We take a very responsible attitude
to drinking and we take a
very responsible attitude to our employees. When our employees join the company
they are all given documents
alcohol, and in local countries I am encouraged to circulate all my employees
documents that are current or are in force in the market.”
He also produced other Australian documents of this nature which he originally
said the applicant would have seen at a conference
in 1986. He was obviously
mistaken as the documents were dated 1995. He corrected the error and said they
would have been available
at the Lindeman Island Conference. This claim was not
supported by any other witness.
He clarified the position saying:
“This information by our company is put on desks in front of people for
them to read and is distributed for people to look at.
Now, I have to preface
that by saying it is mandatory to be put in front of my employees, ie, those
people that work for Guinness.
It is optional whether the Carlton people read
He described the approach to alcohol at the
conference as:
“The agreement that we had with the hotel was as follows: one, that we
would supply Guinness, which is our product that we
produce, to the hotel, and
that the rest of the products consumed at the hotel would be at the expense of
those people attending.
So I had an agreement with my staff that a full packet
of Guinness was put into every person's room at the start of the conference.
The hotel then had a system whereby if you wanted to buy a drink from the hotel
because the hotel was open to the general public
you had a chit - book chit
system whereby you would buy a book of chits and then you would go to the bar
and exchange that for a
drink. That was at call for all the attendees. The
other thing that we agreed at the conference was that during the evening the
hotel, because it was part of the inclusive deal, would supply wine and on the
last night we actually selected some bottles of wine
ourselves.”
Having regard to the totality of the other evidence given about alcohol at the
conference this is a gross understatement of the amount
and variety of alcohol
available on the Thursday evening when the gala dinner was held. He gave
evidence of two contacts with the
applicant on that evening:
“I met Mr Shields at the top of the stairs at the conference where he
appeared in a very highly agitated state. I wasn't sure
what was wrong with him
but he seemed to be very nervous, he seemed to be very excitable, he was jumping
all over the place and he
was muttering funny expressions to me which I wasn't
quite sure what he was on about, to which I just said, "Look, I don't know what
the problem is but would you please (a) calm down and (b) would you just behave
yourself because we've had a great conference and
we now wish to go and have a
dinner and I don't know what your problem is. There was a lot of mutterings
like, "Dallas has got the
dirt on me. I've got the dirt on Dallas."
Mumbo-jumbo, not relevant to what we were doing.”
This suggested conduct of Mr Shields is not reflected in the evidence of Mr
Mr Plews admitted drinking Guinness before the dinner:
“I would have had, before the dinner, one, maybe two.
And what size?---They would be the cans because they were on there, so
they're 440 mil cans.
And from your observation what alcohol did you see being consumed at the
dinner?---On my table where I was I was drinking wine and
some of us did bring
in the glasses that we'd had from the drinks outside and finished
What did you consume during the dinner, do you
recall that?---Well, I'm sorry, I would have had a glass of red wine.
And did you address the dinner?---There were several speeches made during
the evening, mainly of a congratulatory nature, to make
various awards. Certain
people stood up. I stood up and I did a thank-you speech for everybody coming
and I said it had been a
very successful conference, which it had been, and I
congratulated everybody for their work efforts.”
During the dinner he did not observe any behaviour that caused him
After dinner he talked to the New Zealand Manager and
their two representatives from Western Australia. He then went down to the
and had another Guinness. As it became quite late in the evening. He was asked
to go up to the nightclub by his staff who said:
"Everybody's gone up to the nightclub. Would you please go up to the
nightclub? Just say hello to everybody and good-bye and, you
know, talk to
people." There was a very good atmosphere by that time. There had been a lot
of - I mean, we were working successfully
as a team. I went up there. I went
around. I talked to people. I then thanked them for all their efforts. I said
to everybody
personally, "Please behave. You're still here on company business.
This is a public place." I used the word "behave" a lot. "Be
responsible."
And then I said, which I had wanted to do about four hours earlier, "I'm going
He says he spoke very firmly to the applicant along these lines. At the
nightclub he stayed about 40-45 minutes having a glass of
mineral water and he
thought somebody bought him a rum and coke. Up until the time of his departure
from the nightclub he did not
observe any conduct that caused him any undue
On Saturday he caught an early morning flight out and
went to his office and then to his home. He confirmed the evidence of Mr
evidence suggests that he had provided a written report on “Eric
behaviour” to Mr Haynes by fax sent on 1 February 1996 it was not
dispatched until “
02.05.96 at 09.57”
hours, being 5 February
1996 at 9.57 am. That memorandum concluded with a recommendation that Mr
Shields be removed from the Guinness
Australia business immediately. In reality
the applicant had already been removed from the business on Saturday 3 February
On 6 February 1996 he wrote to Mr Gustav Ribeiro, Chief of Village,
Club Med, Lindeman Island apologising for the behaviour and saying
as far as we were concerned that the two people that had offended them
greatly had been removed from our business.”
There was no evidence
given that the apology was not accepted by Mr Ribeiro.
He gave further
evidence of his discussions with Mr Pelly about Mr Tony Nicholls:
Was disciplinary action taken in respect to him as well?---On the
night of Mr Chapman phoning me, Mr Nicholls actually phoned me at
personally, and it was difficult to describe the conversation I had with him
because he was very tearful and he said, "I just
want to tell you what's
happened at the resort. I have behaved abominably, I have made a complete fool
of myself, I cannot describe
to you what's happened. I am going in on Monday
morning to Carlton United Breweries in Queensland and expect to have my job
and if it does I can only say I'm sorry." He followed that up with a
Did he make any comment in respect to Mr Shields?---He said that
Mr Shields had tried to contact him, there were messages on his machine,
Shields was desperately trying to get hold of him, quote/unquote "So we can
concoct a story together."
Did Mr Shields ever apologise to you in relation to any of his conduct at
the conference?---Not once.”
He was told by Mr Pelly that Mr Nicholls had resigned. Under cross examination
he revealed that he had been informed by Mr Haynes:
was given a verbal conversation that Mr Shields had had, and I have to say it
was either one written warning or one verbal
warning whilst in his employment
with CUB, and that he had proved to be a difficult person to manage within the
large confines of
the CUB organisation and that Guinness would probably be a
good trial ground for him to come over and see if he could quote/unquote
it work", and I have a very liberal view to this and that maybe Mr Shields might
have been better in a smaller environment
and it could work for him, and I was
quite welcome to give him a go.
Were you told that notwithstanding his difficulty in being managed he in
terms of sales was a good performer?---Yes, I accepted he
was a good performer;
however, I referred to my notes at that interview and my meeting with Mr Shields
..................
I made three characteristics, assessments of Mr Shields at the time: one was
that he was very self-centred, two was that he was very
lacking in interpersonal
skills, particularly between himself and CUB and that there always seemed to be
non-stop criticism between
CUB, and the third note that I made of him was that
he is a very highly agitated person.”
He disclosed that there is 1.7 standard drinks in a can of Guinness. He
maintained the general company policy was:
drink in the work environment” and “Whilst we're working in our
offices there is no alcohol allowed.”
“And what about in relation to
sales reps and sales managers?---It is the same policy.”
When the sales representatives go out there is an entertainment element allowed
which is at the discretion of the employee. At Carlton
representatives get an entertainment allowance which they use at their
discretion. Guinness employees do not get such
an allowance. Mr Plews had to
concede that the sales representatives or managers do drink the product with a
client. He tried to
distinguish this as only in a social environment. After
some discussion about the use of words "sales manager" and “sales
representative” by the cross examiner this reply occurred:
“- - - the distinction, I was using them interchangeably
so I do apologise. So in relation to a sales representative when they
visit clients on site do they drink the product with that client?---At their
discretion, yes.
During his evidence it became obvious that there was a subtle cultural
difference between Carlton United and Guinness
“And what is the difference in the purpose of
dealing with them?---The sales rep will often be the man that will do the
promotional
work which is he will be in the bars promoting our products, running
- you know, looking after the taps, looking after the equipment,
looking after
the merchandise, giving out the bar towels, ashtrays or whatever. The
one-stepper bed is much more dealing with the
things like the pricing issues,
the objectives of getting the product on tap, the monetary side.
Now, in relation to sales representatives, they have a company car to go
Now, in relation to - if I understand this correctly sales managers also
entertain clients, like get them tickets to say the rugby
or whatever; is that
right?---Not with Guinness, I'm afraid, no. We don't have any rugby. It may be
Carlton, but unfortunately
Guinness doesn't have the budgets or the facilities
to do that. I think you're getting confused with what Carlton do.
Right. So in Guinness, leaving rugby aside, was there any sort of
entertainment of clients by sales managers at events?---Yes, there
have our own events and they tend to be on site and they tend to be highly
structured to what we're good at. A classic
one would be a folk festival in
Canberra, the Mullaney folk festival up in Queensland, which are all events
where people come in
and we will take people to those events to enjoy - because
Guinness has very much a cultural identity with things like music, so
take people along to the event and say, "Enjoy the concert and have a drink on
our behalf."
And is that different from CUB who seems to have more of a relationship with
sporting events?---Absolutely; totally different, yes.
And did Guinness not have any sporting events they took guests - clients
to?---I once took four people to see the Irish rugby team
He agreed that he was at the Coffs Harbour
Conference but did not recall seeing people being fairly intoxicated. He also
don’t recall
” style of answering
questions that may have tended to be embarassing or to not support the case for
the respondent. He conceded
that Guinness staff were to be reimbursed for other
expenditure on alcohol at the conference. This included gin, vodka and whisky
packaged by a sister company called United Distillers. Under further cross
examination he conceded that he went to the karaoke and
performed his version of
When Irish Eyes are Smiling
". While he was at the nightclub he
didn’t observe much
“because I was speaking most of the time to a
French barmaid. I speak French; it was an opportunity to speak to someone in
He did not observe the behaviour of Mr Shields or Mr
Nicholls in the nightclub. He made this observation:
“Generally, a nightclub is a place where people are sort of dancing,
talking, guys are playing music and it was that
atmosphere.”
He also conceded:
Yes. Now, in the course of the
period between you encountering Mr Shields on the stairs at say a quarter
to 7, or around a quarter
to 7 and when you retired at about a quarter to 12,
had you observed anything in his behaviour which gave you the feeling that you
saw as him continuing to be agitated?---No, only the performance on the stairs.
That was the only thing I saw him - - -
Mr Plews said he had not found the applicant to be dishonest in his business
activities. Mr Plews claims that he was concerned that
the applicant would
further misbehave is not supported by the failure to cut off the supply of
alcohol. He was also concerned by
the failure of the applicant to telephone
him. However when he was asked:
“Prior to removing Mr Shields or seeking to have Mr Shields removed you
did not think it was necessary to discuss with him the
incidents and to get his
side of the story?---I think at the time I was so horrified by the event in
itself and I was so disgusted
by what had happened - I was actually ashamed,
because if you think about the amount of effort and time I'd put into the whole
to have this one dropped on you right at the end, I wasn't really in the
mood to talk to anybody by Monday afternoon. Well, you
had talked to a large
number of people about it, but not Mr Shields, by the time Monday morning
came about?---Correct.”
Mr Plews had no doubt gone
to a lot of personal effort to make the conference a success and in strictly
business terms that objective
was achieved. His initial sense of outrage with
the activities of Mr Nicholls and the applicant was justified. His attitude and
demeanour in the witness box, and the way in which he responded to questions,
which did not have the offensive overtones which he
seemed to imply, is in sharp
contrast to his recorded image performing “When Irish Eyes are
Smiling”, if this is what
it was, at the 1991 Conference. This may have
been a diversion to distract attention from the possibility that the organisers
the conference bore some responsibility for the contribution made to the
state of inebriation of the applicant by the unlimited availability
of alcohol.
At the hearing his sense of outrage was disproportionate to the consequences on
the business of the respondent which
flowed from the activities of Mr Nicholls
and the applicant. Mr Plews expressed abhorrence at the fact that the applicant
telephoned to apologise for his conduct. No doubt he was not aware that
a member of his personal staff had advised the applicant
not to upset him
further by telephoning. He also very strongly and forcefully expressed the view
that had the applicant been a decent
business person then he would have
resigned. No matter what indignation was shown by Mr Plews he is unable to
escape the responsibility,
which is his, for the circumstances under which
alcohol was made freely and copiously available to all the participants,
the applicant, at the conference.
EVIDENCE OF FORMER
NATIONAL SALES MANAGER FOR GUINNESS AUSTRALIA
Mr Richard Darling a business consultant and formerly the National Sales Manager
of Guinness Australia gave evidence in support of
the applicant. Prior to
working at Guinness he had worked for six and a half years for a consumer
manufacturing company. His role
at Guinness was
“to work with the Guinness sales representaives - we called them
Guinness men - in the field, with their accounts. I was also
responsible for
some national accounts, Liquorland and Mac's in New South Wales and Theo's, and
I was also responsible for the hiring
and firing of Guinness men as well as -
part of that process meant that I was to be involved in all of the performance
appraisals.
These were specific activities that were written up in my contract
of appointment, as well as - there is actually a Guinness contract
stipulates between Guinness and CUB; what Guinness are responsible for and what
CUB are responsible for.”
He gave evidence of being concerned with the way the applicant was appointed to
his sales team. This confirmed a general feeling
of the people who came to work
for Guinness from Carlton United that they had been moved there because of poor
performance or because
they were not liked, internally. During an initial
discussion with the applicant, he said:
performance appraisal and I want you to be present if not to help me, but more
as a witness, because I really don't trust
the person that is doing my
This person was identified as David Hastie. He testified
that he had participated in the appraisal and that:
“Both Eric and David Hastie were raising their voices at each other
in a very - not at all in a constructive manner, which is
the process of the
performance appraisal
The material that was presented to Eric was
handwritten notes on different scraps of paper. There did not seem to be a
formal appraisal
document, which - I asked whether there was a CUB formal
appraisal document and I was told yes, there was, but he didn't have any
Eric then wanted to present - I don't know. He had a pile of documents at least
2 inches thick, that he wanted to present
to David. David was not interested in
seeing those documents. Two incidents were raised, one about a chair being
broken in the
box and one about Eric abusing, verbally abusing, another Guinness
rep in a particular outlet, to which Eric said that they were
lies, that they
did not happen. "A chair was not broken by myself, in a box, and I did not
verbally abuse the other Guinness rep."
He was just simply trying to give him
advice. He tried to explain that process. The whole situation became quite
unruly and I
felt that it was my position, as the independent third party, to
intervene and stop the process because it did not resemble a performance
development appraisal that I had been - - -“
......................
You say that you stopped it. How did you do that?---It was at that point
that I said to both Eric and David "This is not going anywhere.
This is not the
way the process should be conducted. David, if it's okay with you, Eric and I
will leave this meeting now. We
will spend time over the next two weeks and
compile what we believe is an accurate performance development appraisal, giving
positives and the negatives, so it is a balanced, constructive document. We
will write it up on your CUB documentation, at which
point we'll meet again and
then go through that document. We'll send you a copy beforehand so you have an
opportunity to put your
input into it. Alternatively, if you would like to do
the same and then we can come back and we can meld the two reports, I think
that's a better starting point." So that's basically the point of departure.
That's where we all basically left the room.”
He asked the applicant to produce a first draft of an appraisal and then
discussed it with him over a two hour period, putting it
into a more positive
form. The revised document was presented to Mr David Hastie and it was alleged
“David Hastie said he wasn't going to sign the document. He didn't
want anything to do with that document, and he wanted us
to sign the original
document that he presented which was, I must say, still handwritten and still
with - no. The other documents
that he had in the first meeting, the
handwritten notes from certain people saying that he'd broken a chair and done
other things,
they'd disappeared. They were nowhere to be found, because I
recall clearly Eric requesting those so that he could get copies for
records. They were not to be found. We basically left that meeting, Eric not
wanting to sign David Hastie's document and
David Hastie not wanting to sign our
document. Our document was a balanced document that included both strengths and
and areas of opportunity and things that Eric can do down the track
to improve his performance.”
There were further clashes between him and Mr Hastie about the
Mr Darling attended the Guinness conference at the
Radisson Hotel, Manly and went to have a meal at the award winning,Woolloomooloo
Hotel, which had been organised by John Frize as it was his account. He
described what happened afterwards:
“Afterwards, actually, we were all to be involved in a, for want of
a better word, pub crawl. Everyone had been assigned a
group of four people and
a number of hotels, and you were to catch cabs between hotels and everyone at
the end of the evening met
up at pub in Pyrmont, the Pyrmont Bridge
Did you attend the pub crawl?---Yes. I went along. Basically the idea
is, you go to a pub, order a round of Guinness and sample
it and assess it and
talk about the head height and talk about the colouring and talk about the taste
and have a look at how they
poured the product. So that was the idea behind the
whole issue.
After that night, did you participate in any discussion with more senior
management or staff about that event?---That night, after
the series of pubs
that we went to, we ended up meeting at the Pyrmont Hotel and drinking
everything from whiskey to you name it,
until 3 in the morning, and playing
pool. I remember that clearly, because I won every game that I played and I
held the table and
I was pretty proud of that. I think it went to 3 in the
morning. I got home at 3.30 and we had to get up early the next morning
play golf, and everyone was struggling through the nine holes of golf we played
at Palm Beach.
He was later told:
By Jodie Matthews, that Eric had not been at the final destination
or at either of the pubs that we were supposed to go to afterwards;
that he had
requested to leave and had just left, and that it was unacceptable, that it was
team building and so on.”
..........................
The subject of Eric leaving that evening was discussed and it was agreed that
I was to sit down with Eric and reprimand him for not
being part of that
.....................
MS RUDLAND: Yes. Who agreed that you were to reprimand Mr Shields?---We
all did, basically.
When you say "we all", can you - - -?---Geoffrey Plews, Rick
Chapman, Jodie Matthews. I don't know if Kate was there at the time.
she was. I basically then took Eric aside and said "Eric, I know you felt you
had had enough to drink that night and you
felt you wanted to go home, but
perhaps what you should have done is drink water and just do the pub crawl and
then you could have
gone home after that, because you caused a bit of an issue.
Just before you do that sort of thing in the future, come and talk to
it's my role to try and help you through those things, and it's better if I'm
knowledgable about - I could have said you
weren't feeling well, if you weren't,
or whatever." It actually just reminded me of another point. When we were
going from the
Manly Hotel on the first night to a restaurant around the corner
from the Manly Hotel, it was a fair walk around up past the life-saving
forget the name of the restaurant. I was walking alongside Rob Phyllis and Eric
Shields. I recall the conversation because
Eric was, not getting into Rob but
questioning him fairly energetically about Rob's supposed statement to David
Hastie about a particular
occasion when Eric abused Rob in a hotel. Rob Phyllis
at that point denied ever writing a note about it or ever speaking to David
Hastie about it, and he recalled the occasion as, I
think - - -
Can you recall the words, or words to the effect, that he used?---He said
"I never wrote anything of the kind. I never said to David
Hastie. The only
thing I said was to Mr Dun and it was more along the lines of, 'I know Eric was
trying to help me in the account,
but he came across a little bit heavy.'"
Basically, the two shook hands and Rob said "I'd never ever do anything to
incriminate
you or anything", you know. "I never would have said
Under cross examination by Mr Benson, Counsel for the
Respondent, he acknowledged that he was not aware that the applicant was given
warning that unless his performance improved, he would be dismissed. Questioned
the meeting:
“Everything was personal. It was a personal attack and David Hastie
was making personal attacks on Eric Shields and Eric Shields
was retaliating
with, you know, "You effing liar...".
By "effing liar" do you mean - - - ?---
a very heated meeting. It was not constructive. It was not professional. I
intervened and put a stop to the meeting because
it was not getting
That was the first meeting?---That was the first
He was cross examined about the
Woolloomooloo Hotel visit:
“That what you described as a pub crawl had a specific purpose to
it, in a marketing and sales sense?---It was a bit of fun.
Yes, but it also had a purpose to it, to observe comparative ways of Guinness
products being - - -?---No, not really. We had done
morning at another hotel. We'd already gone through the perfect pike training
and had a few beers at lunch-time. This
was more - we wanted to end up at one
pub, but we wanted to just send a few people around, have a few drinks, break up
and then all meet back at another hotel. It was a bit of
Yes, but you were there also to observe in practice
what you had been talking about during the day?---No, because we'd done that.
We'd actually had a turn of doing that during the day.
At the different pubs?---Yes - no, at the one pub back in Manly.
This was the first time for you to go out to different pubs and look at those
ideas being put into practice in the field?---No, not
really. It was more - the
purpose behind doing the various pubs was to show Guinness men - show off a few
key pubs in Sydney, and
that was basically the objective. We were told - in
fact some of us bumped into other groups at certain pubs because the timings
were out. We actually bumped into Geoffrey Plews' group and there were a couple
of people actually drinking whiskey and a few other
drinks, so - it was just a
bit of fun, just to move people around.
I put it to you
that it had a work purpose and that that was to be able to see, in the field,
the things you had been talking about
during the day?---Well, I mean, I was part
of the planning of the conference, and I have to disagree with that point. The
of that night was to bond.”
...............
You also indicated that if he found himself where he was having too much
drink, he could slow it down and have a drink of water?---I
personally said
Yes, and that was just giving him some guidance as to how he could manage
himself in a similar situation in the future?---No, not
necessarily; just if he
wanted to stick around, and if he didn't want to drink.
The thing is, you go
away on these conferences and the expectation is there that you
drink - - - “
(Note underlining is my
In his re-examination he confirmed that at no time was he asked to discuss with
the applicant his drinking habits. Mr Darling volunteered
the following
observations:
“When I was at Proctor and Gamble, the expectation from the national
sales manager to the state managers was that you counsel
your team before
leaving your offices to go to the destination for the national conference, and
the sort of counselling you are to
provide them is, "Keep your drinking to a
level that's acceptable. Make sure that you're always on your best behaviour.
We're representing
the company on this venture. I don't care what you do behind
your own bedroom door, but that's not what you do on conference."
Now, that's
the Proctor and Gamble scenario. At Guinness, even at Proctor and Gamble, there
was always drinking and people, after
the dinner, would go to the bar and you
would drink and you would be frivolous and people would do things that are
embarrassing to
them. There would be midnight romps around the pool, and swims.
If we were at the surf, there would be a group of three or four
people who would
go off and take their clothes off on the beach and go swimming and come back do
whatever else you do on beaches
in the middle of summer, you know, when you're
young. That is the conference lifestyle. Some people participate. Some don't.
just sit in their rooms after the dinner and they leave it at that.
Typically at P and G, the national sales manager or the managing
director would
disappear very shortly after the dinner to allow the troops to bond. The only
Guinness conference that I went on
- so that's my only reference point - all the
alcohol was provided for, as it normally is, through the dinner. Then the bars
basically open to us till whenever, as they normally are. There were
bottles of whiskey on the table, whiskey that is produced by
someone - it's an
Irish whiskey, one of the very good Irish whiskies and there may be four or five
bottles of those along the table.
There was Guinness flowing all night and then
there was the odd bottle of red wine and white wine for the ladies, if they
choose to drink - - -“
EVIDENCE OF REGIONAL SALES MANAGER OF
Mr David John Hastie the Regional Sales Manager for Carlton and United Breweries
(NSW) Pty Ltd was to give evidence by way of a prepared
statement which
canvassed work performance issues of the applicant between 1992 and 1995. It
was clear that Mr Hastie and the applicant
were incompatible as supervisor and
subordinate. This was one of the reasons Mr Haynes arranged the transfer of the
applicant to
Guinness Australia. After some discussion as to the relevance of
such a statement to the events leading up to this termination the
document was
not pressed into evidence. Whilst it may be conceded that these issues may be
relevant to the question as to whether
it was impracticable to reinstate the
applicant. The applicant had been told by Mr Haynes to put these issues behind
him as they
would not be further investigated.
evidence Mr Hastie confirmed he was the direct manager of the applicant from
1992 to early 1995, and he was one of eight such
persons who reported to him.
He testified:
“The company was very strict in the policies of their responsibility
for an area which means that they had a strict call cycle
and a neat company
He added that the sales representative must
be of neat appearance preferably wearing a suit and a tie and be of good
character. His
cross examination revealed he had been at Carlton United for 17
years. He was asked about the 1991 Conference:
“Yes, and it would be true to say that at that conference there was
a lot of drinking after hours in the social times?---Not
to excess. The company
had a very successful year and this was out end of review conference. So
everyone obviously from top management
down were very happy and we had organised
- or management had organised a karaoke evening. A team based evening where we
together in teams and, as karaoke's do, we sing songs.
Yes, and people were getting pretty intoxicated on that occasion, is that
not right?---I don't know believe that's the case, no.
People were not intoxicated at the karaoke night?---It depends on how you are
determining
intoxicated.”
...............................
MS RUDLAND: Now, on that occasion there were some female reps there, at
the karaoke night?---I believe so. It's '91.
You were at the karaoke?---It's 1991. Yes, I was there.
Do you recall witnessing the two female representatives performing a song
on the karaoke and one of them simulating the sexual act
with a male?---No. I
Do you recall a conference at Wyong 9 years ago?---Yes, I do.
Do you recall a female representative having her underpants taken off and
put on the horns of a stag on the wall of a games room at
that conference, in
the social activities?---Her underpants?
Yes?---No, I don't.
At that conference in the social time, people were drinking
alcohol?---Yes, they were. After the conference, yes.
Yes, in the social times of the conference?---Yes, pre-dinner.
Some people would have drunk enough alcohol not to have safely driven a
car?---I'd suggest that would be the case.
Now, do you recall the launch of Fosters Light Ice at the Brewery
bar?---Fosters Light Ice?
Yes?---I do, yes.
That was at around about 10 o'clock in the morning?---We had invited
guests, clients in about 10.00 for the launch at around about
11 o'clock, yes,
People were drinking the product on that occasion at that launch?---People
were invited to sample the product, being our new light
How long did the function go on for?---The presentation took approximately
half an hour and then obviously we had finger food and
light refreshments so
they could sample the products; so no longer than two hours.
During that two hours, the product was available?---The Light Ice was
available, yes.
Was there any other product available?---Not to my recollection, because
we were promoting and launching Light Ice.
Can you recall the last Christmas that Mr Shields was under your
supervision, which would have been Christmas '94? Do you recall
that?---No, I
You do not recall it? Can you recall taking Mr Shields to a restaurant
called St Elmo's, as part of a sales team?---Yes, I can now.
What is St Elmo's?---It's a restaurant in the heart
of the city.
It was a lunch. Is that correct?---That's correct.
Elmo's is a nude or topless restaurant?---No. It's just a bar, a very suitable,
well established bar.
The staff of that establishment are less than fully attired. Is that
correct?---I do recall, yes, that's the way it went.”
He was asked
not recall saying:
“I’m sorry there are so many conferences that
we have conducted over 17 years it is a matter of working out which one
He confirmed that the applicant had won a staff incentive program in relation to
sales, which was a trip for his family to Hayman
Island. He advised:
“Each area manager is given an expense account per week to entertain or
to buy beverage if required for a customer, and that
money is approximately
EVIDENCE OF FORMER HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGER OF THE
Mr Alvan James Freeman, testified that in February
1996, he was the State Manager, Human Resources, for Carlton and United
(NSW) Pty Ltd which position he had held since 1989. He had first
joined the company in 1974 and was now on a part time basis.
In February 1996,
it was part of his function, to deal with disciplinary matters.
involvement commenced with a request from Mr Ryan the regional director to
attend at a meeting with sales manager, Mr Dallas Haynes.
At that meeting he
was informed that there were a number of allegations being made about the
applicant which had arisen at a Guinness
Conference in Lindeman
He confirmed the evidence of Mr Haynes in relation to the
allegations which were being made. In the discussion with Mr Ryan and Mr
he was advised, “
it was considered that those matters were quite
serious and if those allegations were demonstrated to be correct, then Mr
should no longer be employed by the company
description of the allegations fell broadly in line with the admissions made by
the applicant. He also acknowledged that he had
a number of documents in his
possession at the time of the interview with the applicant. His report of the
response made by the
applicant is again not dissimilar to the admissions made to
the court. If there is any difference it is not considered to be
substantial.
Asked to further respond he replied:
“Having dealt with those allegations, do you recall if Mr Shields
said anything else to you and Mr Haynes?---Yes, he did. He
said that all of the
other allegations were lies and those things that he denied were in fact the
truth of the matter. Those things
that he agreed to, those things were also the
truth of the matter.
In regard to what might arise out of the meeting, did Mr Shields make any
comment?---Mr Shields said words like "I know what's going
down here. You're
going to sack me." I said at that stage that the purpose of the meeting was to
investigate the allegations;
that might be a final outcome in terms of
termination, but the purpose was investigation. He said "If you sack me, it
won't be the
last you hear of it."
How did the conversation then proceed?---I said to Eric Shields that the
substantive part of the allegations of his conduct and in
particular the
nakedness was conduct that was not acceptable to the company and that it was
rather a serious matter. In terms of
the disagreement between his recollection
of the events and those events that had been detailed to Dallas Haynes and
myself by other
people, I put to Eric Shields that it seemed to me that their
recollection of the events were more likely the way things happened
than the way
Eric explained them. I said then that it was proposed that his services be
terminated. He said again "If you sack
me, it won't be the last you hear of
it." I then said to Eric "Your services are now
terminated."
He explained the payment of four weeks pay
“To avoid any arguments as to whether or not a termination related to
serious and wilful misconduct or not that would warrant
immediate termination,
it has been the company's practice to pay a payment in lieu of notice to avoid
that issue.”
MS RUDLAND: You say that the company practice is to pay four weeks in
lieu to avoid any argument as to termination for wilful misconduct.
correct?---Serious and wilful misconduct, yes.
Are you saying that was not what Mr Shields was terminated for?---I'm not saying
that at all.
What do you say he was terminated for?---Mr Shields was terminated for his
misconduct on Lindeman Island. It was unnecessary for
us to categorise
Whose decision was it to terminate his employment?---It was a collective
decision between John Ryan, Dallas Haynes and myself.
When was that decision made?---The decision to terminate Eric Shields was
made after he had given his response to the allegations.
So he left the room and you met again with Mr Haynes and Mr Ryan?---No. I
had previously been authorised, if I needed to, to take
As the applicant was under 45 years of age and had
been in the employ of the respondent for more than five years a payment of four
weeks salary is the amount required to avoid a contravention of section
Under cross examination he agreed that it was his decision to
terminate the employment of the applicant. The meeting lasted about
according to Mr Freeman. He agreed he had attended staff conferences away from
the work premises and witnessed people consume
alcohol in social time at staff
conferences. He conceded on infrequent occasions he consumed an amount of
alcohol where it would
probably be unsafe for him to drive a motor
He agreed he had witnessed others doing the same thing as well
as behaving in a pretty boisterous way. He agreed it would be normal
drinking alcohol on these occasions, to become louder as more alcohol is
consumed. They also get into a party mood at
these staff conferences in social
At the staff conference at Pelican Shores he was the after dinner
speaker and his subject was the company's policy on AIDS. He did
not recall a
representative from Newcastle being quite abusive towards him on that occasion.
The Company had an Employee Assistance
Program that is not specific in terms of
drugs and alcohol. He conceded that:
“The company has previously supported a program with the Langton
Clinic. That is a detox unit, is it not, where the person
is required to
undergo a period of supervised stays there? Is that the case?---Yes, that is
correct. There are other issues in
respect of supporting people's attendance at
Alcoholics Anonymous. There is also now, within the context of the employee
program, a greater latitude for the employee to be able to select
their own particular program.”
EVIDENCE OF STATE MANAGER (CUSTOMER SERVICE) OF
Mr Reginald George Turner the State Manager,
(Customer Service) of the respondent testified in support of the case for the
respondent.
His responsibilities included marketing and customer support and he
had been employed in the brewing industry for 17 years. The last
10 years being
with the respondent. Prior to taking up his current position in January 1995 he
was the sales manager, north and
west for the respondent with Mr Hastie as a
regional sales manager. The applicant came under his control for about two and
The witness was shown an appraisal form whilst acknowledging it was his
signature and comment at the bottom right-hand corner he was
unable to confirm
that he had communicated those comments to the applicant. He was shown another
staff appraisal (Exhibit “O”)
of the applicant which he had signed
and commented upon. Asked to explain he replied:
Returning to the front sheet, and your comments at the foot of the
second page, can you comment what prompted you to make those comments?---Yes.
What I believe was a generally unsatisfactory performance by Mr Shields in his
duties as an area manager, and that I was conferring
with Mr Hastie in his
assessment and in effect a confirmation with Mr Hastie that he needed to
continue much closer supervision of
Mr Shields.
You came to your assessment, based on what factors?---The factors that led
me to my remarks about Mr Shields were certainly Mr Hastie's
discussion with me
on Mr Shields' performance throughout that assessment period, complaints from
customers who had phoned me directly
and complained about Mr Shields' behaviour
and performance in the field, and my general observations of Mr Shields with
staff, with
supervision and in the performance of his duties.
If you will go to that second sheet? You have written certain comments on
the back, bottom right-hand corner?---Yes.
Can you inform us what made you make those particular comments?---It had
become clearly apparent to me by the middle of 1994 that
certainly my
endeavours, and I believe the endeavours of Mr Hastie, to alert Mr Shields of
issues we had with his performance were
certainly not being heeded; that there
were complaints continuing to come in from customers reflecting this. There
were concerns
by our own sales staff about his general behaviour and that I was
really instructing Mr Hastie to ensure that his field supervision
of Mr Shields
was at its highest level.”
In addition he reported he:
“received a phone call from Mr Lees, our professional sales training
manager who, amongst other issues, had discussed with
me the poor behaviour by
Mr Shields.” He amplified this saying:
“Mr Lees had expressed a concern that Mr Shields, one of our area
managers, had behaved in a disruptive fashion during one of
the sessions that he
had conducted for all our area managers in a previous sales training session.
Having taken tha on board, I'd
also received information or a concern from Mr
Hastie who had said that he had been in attendance at the session and that Mr
had behaved in a disruptive fashion in that sales training session.
Following that, I then concluded that Mr Haynes was in fact
making reference to
Mr Shields in that communication. I hence directed this to Mr Shields and
indicated to him that this communication
applied directly to him and that I
would need to discuss with him not only that incident, but other incidents that
had been reported
to me about his performance.”
Did you have such a discussion?---With Mr Shields? Yes, I did.
Do you recall when that was?---That was in - I'm just trying to get clear
on the dates - I think early October 1994.
Can you tell the court your recollection of that conversation?---In that
conversation, I had been through a number of issues with
Mr Shields on his
performance. I clarified with him that that communication from Mr Haynes
directly related to his behaviour in
the sales training conference.
.............................
I had also gone through a number of complaints that I'd received from
customers about Mr Shields' presentation in the trade, his apparently
behaviour and his lack of support of a number of customers who had phoned me
personally. Having received those concerns
and some concerns from Mr Hastie,
who had outlined to me Mr Shields' unco-operative approach when it came to the
administrative part
of his duties, I had suggested to Mr Shields that he was on
a review period from October, November and December and that we would
performance after the end of that quarter and that he was in fact being viewed
as somebody that we would seek to dismiss
if his behaviour did not improve and
his performance did not improve.”
Might the witness be shown exhibit 5? I ask you to turn to page 2. Is
that your signature with the date 1 February '95 next to it?---Yes,
Do you know who wrote that memo?---The memo was written by me.
That relates to a discussion. Do you see that?---Yes, it does.
is that a discussion you were part of?---Yes. I was in that discussion
with Mr Shields, Mr Hastie and myself on 23 December '94.
Were the matters outlined in that memo discussed with Mr Shields?---Yes.
They were all discussed in some detail.
Approximately how long did the meeting take, to your recollection?---It
was at least an hour, perhaps longer.
What was Mr Shields' response to the matters raised as to his perceived
poor work performance?---At the conclusion of the meeting,
Mr Shields concluded
that he was shocked, that such a weight of opinion had come from both customers,
staff and myself in terms of
our view of his performance and behaviour and that
he had committed to make the necessary adjustments to his work practice in the
What was the purpose of you preparing this memo?---The - if I could
perhaps be permitted to take a step back, if that would be helpful?
actually prepared some of the detail of this a couple of weeks earlier because
it was my view at the time that Mr Shields
had reached a point where I would be
required to dismiss him. Having put the detail that was necessary for
presentation to Mr Shields
to our industrial relations manager, I was advised
that the detail had to have some adjustments made to it in terms of the way it
was presented, which really took us virtually up to Christmas Eve. At the point
of Christmas Eve, I had made a personal decision
that it would be inappropriate
to dismiss Mr Shields on Christmas Eve, with his family visiting him, or his
children visiting him
in January, and I decided not to dismiss him but to
present the details as it was and then to confer with him again the holidays,
which I was taking and Mr Shields was taking - that was annual leave - at the
end of January and reconfirm with him the need for
him to improve his
After the January holidays, did that in fact occur?---Yes, it did.
What occurred at that meeting?---At that meeting this document was
presented to Mr Shields. It was agreed by Mr Shields and ourselves
was a fair record of what we had discussed. Mr Shields had accepted the content
of it and again reconfirmed that he would
be using his best endeavours to
So far as your management responsibilities were concerned, you indicated,
I think, that you were transferred about this time?---That
was the conclusion of
my management and supervisory responsibilities for Mr Shields and Mr
Did Mr Shields ever ask you for a transfer?---The matter of a transfer was
raised by Mr Hastie in late 1994 - - -
...................
MR BENSON: Yes?---The issue of Mr Shields' transfer was raised by Mr
Hastie in late 1994, after discussions with Mr Shields who
had suggested to him
that he would like to move to another sales team. When Mr Hastie raised these
matters with me, I felt obliged
to seek an opportunity or if there was an
opportunity for Mr Shields to move into another sales team. The sales managers
I conferred
with found Mr Shields' transfer into their team unacceptable and as
a result of that I conveyed that to Mr Shields in that February
meeting in 1995;
that his request for a transfer to another team could not be met, would not be
met, and for the grounds that I've
MR BENSON: Would it be practical in your view, given the role of area
sales manager as you know it, to have a person such as Mr
Shields put back into
that role?---I don't believe it's practical.
Why do you say that?---Because I believe the people who are currently
there, supervising and managing sales staff, have had a difficult
time managing
Mr Shields and I don't foresee they would have any easier time in the
Under cross examination Mr Turner admitted that during the course of employment
of the applicant with Carlton United, he had a very
good relationship with him
and had visited him at his home. He denied that he had a falling out with Mr
Shields when he went over
his head to Mr Haynes to complain about another sales
manager, Mr Ross Stewart. Although he did not recall the incident he confirmed
that Mr Stewart was dismissed because of his territory performance. He was
“You say that in 1993, there were issues raised. What processes were
put in place to assist Mr Shields improve the perceived
shortfalls in his
performance at that time?---We had in practice a staff training process where a
manager would go into the field
with the various area managers and make an
assessment of his performance and attitude. We would have our sales supervisors
the appropriate time, both with customers and with the area manager, to
improve their performance and as a rule, where I had the
opportunity, it was
either an in-field visit with the appropriate area manager or attendance at
their sales meetings and discussion
with them on various issues that might arise
with their business.”
He was unable to relate any specific issues on which Mr Hastie or himself had
provided any assistance to Mr Shields. He agreed that
in 1994, Mr Shields was
nominated by the Liquor Stores Association as representative of the year. He
conceded there were customers
within the liquor stores with whom the applicant
did get on well. He maintained the applicant had a far higher frequency of
with his clients than any other Area Manager he was
supervising.
He agreed the applicant had received a number of
awards, some of which he had communciated to the applicant. He added that he
also written the same standard letter to every other area manager in the
territory. He confirmed that it was only in the last 6
months that he was aware
there was a relationship problem between the appplicant and Mr Hastie. He
amplified this:
“You understood there were relationship problems between the
two?---I understood from Mr Shields' point of view there was a
relationship
Not from Mr Hastie's point of view?---No. Mr Hastie was indicating to me
that he was pursuing the supervision requirements I had
asked of him and I had
asked him to ensure he recorded any difficulties he had. He had not conveyed to
me a personality problem
or a personal issue problem with Mr Shields.
Mr Shields had worked for Carlton United Brewery for some time prior to
his transfer to Guinness?---That's correct.
You had known him for some period of time up until then?---Yes. I
He raised those issues with you, the issues about Mr Hastie and his
problems in his relationship with Mr Hastie?---I can't recall
him having raised
the issues of a relationship problem with Mr Hastie until perhaps December '94
and the issue of a transfer was
raised by Mr Hastie in early October '94 which
indicated to me that Mr Shields had a desire to exit himself from the sales team
was currently in.
You did not think it was necessary to investigate the problems Mr Shields
was experiencing?---Yes, I did. In December 194 I had advised
Mr Shields, in
conjunction with Mr Hastie, that the company had a counselling service available
and that if Mr Shields felt uncomfortable
that he had, whether they related to internal work issues or personal problems,
that we had
a confidential counselling service available through the personnel
department.
If Mr Shields has told you, or you have become aware that there are
problems between Mr Hastie and Mr Shields, why would you suggest
counselling of
Mr Shields in a private counselling service? Why would you not look at the
whole relationship between the two men?---Well,
I was not aware that there was a
problem between Mr Hastie and Mr Shields. As I said, Mr Hastie had advised me
in about October
1994 that Mr Shields had discussed with him movement to another
sales team. At that time I had no belief that the issues with Mr
related to personal problems with Mr Hastie. All the issues I was confronted
with were issues of professional performance
and service by Mr Shields, not by
Why did you not give any credence to the issues Mr Shields raised in
December '94?---Because the issues we had raised with Mr Shields
in December
1994 related, as the document there indicates, to his performance and
professional performance in the work place.
However, you have indicated that he told you and that you were aware in
December '94 that he had relationship problems with Mr Hastie?---No.
say that. What I said was that in December 1994, Mr Shields raised the issue of
a desire to transfer from the current
sales team.”
........................
Tell me those things that you observed, not what Mr Hastie said or did not
say?---Okay. I would observe Mr Shields arrive at meetings,
often late. I
would observe him sit either at the rear of the room, detached from the sales
team, or I would see him sit at a distant
end of the table, removed from the
sales team, and not participate in general discussions on business or customers
until I'd made
a note of the fact that he hadn't participated and had invited
him to join in.
MS RUDLAND: You say there were complaints from a number of customers.
In fact, you have identified three customers. Are they the
only three customers
that you received complaints from?---Those were the three that I can recall now,
at short notice. There are
several others that, given time to recollect, I can
probably have the names of those people who phoned. I certainly remember the
outlets and sometimes not the names. For instance, Theo's group, which was a
very large and important customer to us, a manager
from one of those stores had
phoned me and complained about Mr Shields' service to him. He had also
indicated that he had spoken
to both Mr Brazell and Mr Dun on a previous visit,
both of whom - - -
Who is Mr Brazell?---Mr Brazell was the sales manager for southern New
South Wales, and Mr Dun was the sales training manager at the
time. Both those
gentlemen had visited a Theo's liquor store and the liquor store manager had
complained to both those gentlemen
that he was dissatisfied with Mr Shields'
service and that other store managers from the Theo's group in Mr Shields' area
complained about that.
How many customers did in fact Mr Shields have in the course of 1994?---He
would have approximately 130, 140 customers.
How many in 1995?---It would be a similar number.
In 1993?---It would be a similar number.
You say that in relation to his work performance, if his work performance
was so bad that, in your words, he would be someone you
would seek to dismiss,
why was he still receiving rewards and awards?---I would not believe that in the
period of 1993 through to
1995 the rewards or awards were necessarily reflective
of a high level of performance. In specific and sometimes small categories,
yes, he would achieve a competition win. That represented only a very minor
part of what is required of a professional area manager
In a letter dated 6 October 1992 which he had sent to
the applicant, he had congratulated him on a great sales effort. Further cross
examination of Mr Turner revealed:
(a) it is likely that the ‘Hayman Island’ competition commenced
on 1 February and concluded on 30 June 1993.
(b) During November the applicant had achieved sales figures of "Net average
76.9" with the next highest being Mr Phyllis at 64.5.
(c) He wrote a letter
dated “9 December 1993”which states:
"Dear Eric, congratulations on a marvellous November sales result and on
your sales results for 1993."
"Your professional approach in a difficult and competitive selling
environment is established. The metropolitan north sales team
is one of the
nation's best. Your family and friends have good reason to be proud of you. I
certainly am.”
He conceded this was in effect congratulating the applicant on his
professional approach.
(d) At about the same time as a poor performance issue was being raised on 25
August 1994 he had written a letter dated 17 August
"Once again, your commitment and our enthusiasm during our 1994 financial
year has contributed to Carlton's most outstanding sales
result since entering
into the New South Wales market. The New South Wales north-west metropolitan
team is without doubt Carlton's
most accomplished sales team. I feel very proud
to have worked with you over the past year and look forward to sharing the
ahead in F95. Your family and partner play a vital part in our
personal and professional success. In appreciation of this support,
please take
the opportunity to enjoy a quiet dinner with Suzanne on behalf of Carlton and
(e) He did not call for personnel files on
(f) A certificate of completion of sales training program by the
applicant (Exhibit 13)
(g) A Certificate of Sales recognition award for distribution of one of the
brands of the respondent signed by Mr Haynes and presented
by him (Exhibit
(h) After January 1995 his only contact with Mr Hastie was in the course of
sales promotional activity requirements where communication
is needed to be made
to the sales staff.
(i) He was not aware of staff appraisals of the applicant undertaken by Mr
Hastie in 1995.
He recalled attending a luncheon at a restaurant called
St Elmo's in August ’94 and confirmed that it was a lingerie hotel,
he believed to be owned by one of the major customers of the respondent. It is
a hotel with a restaurant attachment as part
of the facilities. In
re-examination he explained to Mr Benson Counsel for the respondent:
“ Just dealing with that restaurant, what was the purpose of the
luncheon being there?---That was a luncheon held by the metropolitan
and if I recall we may have handed out either incentives in an envelop or end of
financial year congratulatory - I can't
exactly recall what the motivation or
incentive was at the time.
Are you aware why that venue was selected?---Yes. I understand in
discussions with Mr Hastie that the venue was offered to us by
a gentleman, Mr
Theo Feros, who was owner of that establishment, as well as seven other major
hotels and liquor outlets in New South
Was that a customer in relation to each of those outlets?---Yes. We have a
practice of endeavouring to support customers by holding
our functions and sales
meeting at their venues around the metropolitan
He concluded his evidence on what was the
criteria for an effective salesperson:
“Alcohol sales?---The criteria relate to a range of things like
distribution, volume against last year's sales, budget, the
quality of display
that is available in the customer's stores, the relationship that is built with
customers to continue to provide
better selling opportunities, etcetera.
Yes. Well, different sales industries have different criteria.
Generally, do you say that at all - you gave me some statistic that
was in the bottom third of the team, or was that only in one particular
year?---No. In 1992/93 he was in the bottom third.
In 1993/94 - - -
Sorry, 1992 to '93?---No. In 1993 until 1994, that is our fiscal year,
and in 1994 through to March '95 he was virtually at the bottom
of the sales
teams results.
Wait a minute. 1992 to '93 you say he was - - -?---No. From July '94 -
sorry, July '93 through until June '94, that is our fiscal
year, his results
were perhaps in the bottom third - - -
I see?--- - - - in terms of his volumes against last year's sales for those
customers. In 1994, from July through until March 1995
his sales were perhaps
in the bottom two or three of the 20 metropolitan supervisors that you might
compare him with. I again repeat,
that is one criteria for
measurement.”
The advice given to Mr Turner by the
Industrial Relations Manager that he did not have the necessary detail to effect
a termination
of the applicant on performance issues in December 1994 was sound.
This was compounded by the conflicting messages being given to
the applicant and
by the failure to investigate his complaints about the method of supervision
used by Mr Hastie.
EVIDENCE OF DIRECTOR AND VICE PRESIDENT (SALES) OF
Mr John Thomas Ryan a Director and Vice
President, Sales (Australia) for Carlton United Limited and of its subsidiary,
Carlton United
Breweries (NSW) Pty Limited testified that he had been in the
brewing industry for 44 years, of which he was with Tooheys Limited
approximately 38 years with the last five years as the chief executive of the
latter company.
On 1 July 1996 he was appointed to his present position and he maintained
that it would be fair to say he had an extensive knowledge
of both the sales and
marketing of beer products in Australia. He had been responsible for New South
Wales since he joined the company
answered to him nationally with about 200 in New South Wales. He had known the
only since he had joined the company except that he
“Eric had had to be spoken to a couple of times about his
behaviour.”
Asked to describe his involvement on 5 February
1996 he replied:
“Well, that was a Monday morning and the then state sales manager,
Dallas Haynes - who retired a few weeks ago, he reached 65
and retired - came to
my office and said there had been a problem at Lindeman Island involving one of
our people. I asked him what
it was about. He said that there had been a
disturbance a couple of nights prior to this Monday morning, two or three nights
perhaps a Thursday night, a Friday night or something like that, and
that Eric Shields was involved. He inferred that Eric had been
naked moving
through the resort. He was knocking on doors trying to wake someone. The
management of the resort of complained.
A disc jockey had complained and
Guinness personnel had complained. I asked him if we were able to substantiate
these statements.
He said he would do that. I asked him to get Alvin Freeman,
who was the personnel manager, involved. They came back to my office.
a letter, as I recall it, from the resort, perhaps the disc jockey. They had
more information from Guinness. I read the
letter and it became obvious to me
that someone else was involved.
The other person was identified as a representative from our Queensland
branch. I then rang the Queensland manager and asked him
if he was aware of
this. This had been brought to his attention and he was also looking at it and
would call me back. Some little
while later, Dallas Haynes and Alvin briefed me
on the basis that they were satisfied that these allegations were accurate and I
spoke again to our Queensland manager who said that - I can't remember -
Nicholls, had confirmed that and that Nicholls was in fact
very ashamed of his
behaviour and had tendered his resignation. I spoke again with Dallas and
Alvin, asked them to go through the
appropriate procedure and if substantially
the allegations were found to be correct, then we had no alternative but to
He strongly maintained that it would be totally impractical to reinstate the
“Firstly Mr Shields at the time was working with Guinness Australia and
the Managing Director of Guinness Australia has told
me that under no
circumstances will he have Eric Shields back. Apart from that, one has to have
confidence in our sales representatives,
our area managers. To a large extent,
our team is working alone. They have supervision, but it is not constant. They
days without supervision. One has to have absolute confidence in
their behaviour. In this circumstance, this occurred on the premises
our customers. So we have a situation where one of our area managers, in the
premises of one of our customers, has behaved
in a most unacceptable manner.
Under those circumstances, our company could not possibly consider
reinstatement.”
Asked to comment about the video he testified:
“Yes, I saw the video about a week ago and my understanding is, and
I've asked, that function took place in a private room within
the - I mean, it
was a private party. There weren't any outsiders there. It seemed to me, as I
understand it, that these people
were having a fairly good time. They had been
divided into teams during the day for a team-building exercise, a fairly long
as I understand it, and then were invited to dinner. As part of the
evening, those teams were then asked to perform a karaoke.
That's - do you know
what that is?
Well, please tell us in your words?---It's reading - well, it's performing
a song reading from a video screen, as I understand it.
I haven't done it
actually. I've seen it. They were doing this in teams. I wasn't there, but I
understand that to be the case.
Some did it better than others. None of them
should apply for jobs in the entertainment world, because they weren't real
Under cross examination by Ms Rudland Counsel for the
Applicant he was asked:
“Now, you say nothing there overly concerned you. Did you see that
part of the video where a member of the organisation had
his trousers
off?---Yes, I did.”
He agreed that there were male and
female staff present. Subsequently he was asked about an award to the
Yes?---He and 15 others were nominated on that particular - I was
there at the function when the nominations of a lot of sales reps
in New South
Wales were read out and I wrote to all of my company's sales reps, there were 16
in all, to congratulate them because
I take the very strong view that if people
deserve a pat on the back they get it. That always gives me the opportunity
I have to discipline anyone, to do it because I'm seen as being
fair-handed.
When you say he was one of 16 - but that was not every sales rep in New South
Wales, was it, that was nominated?---No, no. There
were - the Liquor Stores
Association nominated quite a few from all sorts of companies, not only our own,
but 16 of our own people
received nominations.
Asked about
the company policy on drinking alcohol at these events, he replied:
“Well, staff generally are expected to behaviour responsibly when
drinking alcohol. I mean, that's - there's an example to
be set and under no
circumstances does our company encourage drinking in excess at any time by
What do you do to stop people drinking from excess in that
situation?---Well, I would expect that someone would have a word to them,
repeat they are adults and there are not too many instances of it. I cannot
recall very many, in all my career.
Now, can I ask you this: if somebody is given a - no, I will withdraw
that. Is it your understanding that people at these staff
conventions have free
access to company products?---Well, at those sort of functions, yes. I mean, if
you are saying to me "do they
have to pay," the answer is "no."
They have unlimited access really, do they not?---Look, the answer to that
question is probably "yes," but they are expected to act
responsibly. I mean,
if you say "unlimited access," they are not expected to sit down and drink to
excess all night and - no, they
are just not expected to do that.
People do do that, do they not, at these events?---Obviously someone
Are you saying that Mr Shields in your knowledge, in 44 years in the
industry, is the only person that you are aware of that drank
to excess on one
night?---No, I couldn't say that. The industry is very large. It encompasses
consumers, retailers and employees.
Is Mr Shields the only staff member who has been under your control in the
industry who has consumed a large amount of alcohol -
While he agreed that the applicant was not
the only staff member who has consumed a large amount of alcohol. He maintained
he was the only one that has stripped naked and walked through
the premises.”
As he was not with the respondent at the time he
was not aware:
“if any disciplinary action was taken against the
person who danced in his underpants at Coffs Harbour.”
noticed in the video the two gentlemen that took off their shirts and were
dancing bare-chested. He was asked about the
policy of the company towards:
a lingerie restaurant is one in which the persons, usually women,
waiting the tables are dressed in see-through lingerie and basically
and whether this was an acceptable means of staff motivation. He
I haven’t been to one.
”He conceded that if
it was a customer of the respondent then they would have to be called on. He
did not see it as being unacceptable
behaviour at the Coffs Harbour conference
to have one of the only two female representatives at the conference sitting on
of a man who was obviously inebriated. These responses and the general
attitude of Mr Ryan appears to exhibit on his part: an appproval
harassment as an implied condition of work for women. See discussion of the
issue of sexual harassment at work by Associate
Professor Kim Lane Scheppele in
her article “Just the Facts, Ma’am: Sexualized Violence,
Evidentiary Habits, and The
Revision of Truth” 37NYLSLR 125, 140-141 and
He agreed that he had directed Mr Freeman and Mr Haynes to
dismiss the applicant if they found the circumstances to be as alleged
reports which they had received. He also conceded that the law in NSW was
“There are indeed; very recent applications of the law on the basis
of not serving anyone who is intoxicated.
Yes. The penalty is what, $2000 fine?---I don't know, but it's a
A substantial penalty, yes?---Yes.
Who does that apply to? It applies not only to the publican. It applies
to the bar person?---Yes. Yes, it does.”
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS
At the conclusion of the hearings a programme of written submissions was
agreed between Counsel. The initial submission of the Respondent
was filed on
21 April 1997. This was responded to by the applicant on 14
with the final reply by the Respondent being filed on 26 May 1997. I do not
propose to analyse the submissions in detail
as each approach was effective in
putting the case in support of the respective and differing interests of the
parties. For example:-
1. The initial submission on behalf of the respondent
“It is relevant to note that Mr Turner by late 1994, had come
to the point where he believed he would be required to dismiss
the applicant.
However the intervention of Christmas persuaded Mr Turner to not do so
(TP36-3.3.97).”
This submission overlooks the advice given by the
Industrial Relations Department to the effect that there were insufficient
available to achieve that result. This is supported by the fact that no
reliable details of his sales results were produced in a
reliable statistical
form or otherwise during the hearing.
2. This can also be contrasted with
the reply on behalf of the applicant at:-
“39. The two men left the
applicant’s room to go Mr Nicholls room. It would appear Mr Nicholls did
not have a key and
they commenced banging on the door to awake his room-mate.
This attracted the attention of a woman guest in an adjoining room who
see what was going on and, on seeing the two men who were semi-naked, shut her
This submission overlooks the evidence of the applicant
which was: “
she opened the door and saw us standing there naked smiled
and closed the door.”
Despite these differences I found the
submissions to be quite helpful and acknowledged the contribution made by
counsel in this
ALCOHOL, INDUSTRY & OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH &
McGeehan v Hazleton Airlines
(McILwaine JR decision number 118/97)
Garside v Hazleton Airlines
(McILWaine JR decision number 119/97) I
discussed a number of issues arising out of the admitted consumption of alcohol
by two pilots
more than eight hours before a scheduled commuter flight. These
issues are summarised under the following headings: The Shout,
Expert Report,
Consumption of Alchohol and Public Safety, Alcohol and Aircrew and Alcohol and
Civil Aviation. Those observations
record the change in the attitude of the
community towards drink driving and the responsible use of alcohol and need not
be repeated
The introduction of random breath testing throughout
Australia was justified on the basis that at certain levels of alcohol in the
blood the driver could not perform the usually simple task of driving a motor
vehicle without the likelihood being increased of driving
it improperly or
having an accident. Easy to read guides have been published specifying the
number of standards drinks a person
may consume during a period of time which
will keep them to a level at which it is not an offence to drive. These
guidelines have
been adopted by the community and are used as a means of self
discipline when consuming alcohol. It is also an objective standard
be used by the Court to assess the degree of “drunkeness”. To some
extent it lessens the need for the court
to rely on subjective factors. This
case is notable for the removal of these safeguards. There was no likelihood
during the evening
that anyone might have to drive in this location. There was
an unlimited supply of alcohol provided by Guinness Australia for which
was not required.
It is an objective standard which can be simply calculated if related to a
standard drink. The evidence from Mr Plews is that a
can of Guinness is 1.74
times the standard drink. If a male drinks three Guinness cans in an hour it is
likely that the level of
blood alcohol in the blood will be such that it is a
criminal offence if a car is driven in NSW. Given the general bonding and
in self-discipline experienced by all at the gala dinner and its
aftermath, this objective standard was exceeded.
It is arguable that the way in which alcohol was supplied in this instance would
be in breach of the general duty of the employer
to take action to prevent
injury to his employee (See
McLean v Tedman & Anor
[1984] HCA 60
It is relevant to note that the supply of alcohol was
maintained even when the bar service ceased. Moreover had these events occurred
in New South Wales then they may be subject to the provisions of the
Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1983:
(a) Section 15 (Employers to ensure the health, safety and welfare of their
employees).
(b) Section 18 (Manufacturer, suppliers etc to ensure health and safety as
regards plant and substances for use at work.)
(c) Section 19 (Employees at work to take care of others and to co-operate with
Such provisions do have an effect on the everyday operations of the people (both
employer and employee) working in this industry.
This issue was not raised
directly in these proceedings. Therefore it is not necessary to examine the
matter further, except to
note that it is possible that there may have been
similar or more stringent provisions in the applicable state jurisdiction where
the conference was held.
The evidence in this case makes it clear that in the past there has not been
sufficient attention paid to the risks associated with
the so called
“need” for employees to sample the product, which they are selling,
in the company of their “consumers,
retailers and employees.”
However there is sufficient written material available to the respondent warning
of the dangers
of supplying alcohol at office or work related social events or
company sponsored functions. See for example articles such as:
liability in Canada and Australia Tort Law Review 4(3) November 1996: 188-241;
Holiday Cheer you can be held liable if your
employee drives in a drunken state
after the company party. Entrepreneur 24 p.80-2 December 1996; Liquor
Liability: Last Call!
Sales and Marketing Management V145 p62-7 December
1993.” I hesitate to say it was completely irresponsible conduct as there
is confirmation in the evidence of the applicant that he was given, even if
reluctantly, a cabcharge docket to enable him to return
to the Radisson Hotel at
Manly by taxi rather than carrying on having “a bit of fun.”
In a hypocritical way the senior management and a number of witnesses sought to
avoid any responsibility for the contribution they
made by their own indulgence
on that night together, with the unrestricted provision of alcohol to those
persons (including the applicant),
who were present on that
CREDIT OF MAIN WITNESSES
Between the
applicant and Mr Nicholls I prefer the evidence of the applicant. It must be
said that their recollections would have
been severely affected by their
consumption of alcohol. Both of them were prepared to fudge the truth when
their own self interest
was at stake. An accurate assessment of their conduct
on the night can only be made when there is evidence from a Third Party who
not involved. There is the evidence of Mr Chapman that the applicant calmed
down when his own skills were discussed. It is
for this reason that I have
accepted the evidence of the Disc Jockey that Mr Nicholls became more aggressive
as the night wore on.
I accept that it was the applicant who removed Mr
Nicholls from the door to the disco area. In view of his eight or nine years
actual participation in the industry the applicant is likely to have developed a
higher degree of tolerance to alcohol. There
is no previous complaint made
Conferences where similar
amounts of alcohol were available. It would seem that
the age of Mr Nicholls is relevant and tells against him in terms of likely
aggressiveness. This is demonstrated by his lapses into the vernacular when
giving his evidence.
In considering the evidence of all the witnesses who
were present on the evening with the exception of Mr Clingan and possibly Mr
Frize I am convinced that their evidence was not frank in many instances. This
was particularly noticeable by the attempt to minimise
their own contribution to
the bonding which was taking place. In response to the remarks about the credit
of the applicant made
on behalf of the respondent, counsel for the applicant
further when the respondents own witnesses have been shown to
be less than frank, when it suited their interests he can hardly be
held out as
less than credible than they are on such a basis.”
Whilst these
remarks are understandable, I have carefully considered the discussion on lack
of truthfulness by Wilcox J in
Allied Express Transport Pty Ltd v Michelle
1997 FED 796
, in particular his observation that:
the application of that passage to this case means I should choose
that version of any disputed primary facts that is least favourable
to the party
that bears the onus of proof; in this case Allied.”
In determining
the issues in this case I have applied this principle.
WAS THERE A VALID REASON FOR TERMINATION
There was no issue between the parties that the Respondent had not
terminated the employment of the applicant at its initiative.
provisions of the Act, the respondent carries the burden of showing that at
termination it had a valid reason or reasons
for bringing the employment to an
end summarily. In his decision in
Selvachandran v Peteron Plastics Pty Ltd
(1996) 62 IR 371
, Northrop J describes the meaning of this phrase in the
following way:
“Section 170DE(1) refers to “a valid reason, or valid
reasons”, but the Act does not give a meaning to those phrases
adjective “valid”. A reference to dictionaries shows that the word
“valid” has a number of different
meanings depending on the context
in which it is used. In the Shorter Oxford Dictionary, the relevant meaning
given is: “2.
Of an argument, assertion, objection, etc; well founded and
applicable, sound, defensible: Effective, having some force, pertinency,
value.” In the Macquarie Dictionary the relevant meaning is “sound,
just, or well founded; a valid reason.”
In its context in s170DE(1), the adjective “valid” should be
given the meaning of sound, defensible or well founded.
A reason which is
capricious, fanciful, spiteful or prejudiced could never be a valid reason for
the purposes of s170DE(1). At the
same time the reason must be valid in the
context of the employee’s capacity or conduct or based upon the
operational requirements
of the employer’s business. Further, in
considering whether a reason is valid, it must be remembered that the
requirement
applies in the practical sphere of the relationship between an
employer and an employee where each has rights and privileges and
obligations conferred and imposed on them. The provisions must “be
applied in a practical, commonsense way to ensure
that” the employer and
employee are each treated fairly, see what was said by Wilcox CJ in Gibson v
Bostik Pty Ltd
(1995) 60 IR 1
, when considering the construction and application
of s170DC.”
In considering whether there was a valid reason for termination connected with
the employees capacity or conduct of the applicant
I have taken into account the
following factors:-
1. There was no evidence of any long term disruption to the arrangement between
Carlton United and Guinness Australia about the secondment
of employees. There
is some evidence that there was concern expressed about the inappropriateness of
the conduct of the applicant
and his initial appointment.
2. The conduct of the applicant, inappropriate as it was, occurred after the
business section of the conference had been successfully
completed consequently
there was no disruption to the purpose or objectives of the conference.
3. The contribution made by Guinness Australia to the intoxication of the
applicant by the continued supply of its product and other
alcoholic beverages
in copious amounts.
4. The failure of management at any level to exercise any appropriate
supervision by removing access to further alcohol at any stage
conference.
5. There was no evidence of any financial damage or harm done to the reputation
of Guinness Australia.
6. It is probable that there was annoyance disturbance and embarrassment caused
to at least one female guest of the island resort
who was not part of the
Guinness’ Australia group. There was no evidence from the management of
Lindeman Island that the resort
suffered any other damage, apart from
embarassment by the actions of the applicant. On the contrary the resort
management appears
to have accepted the apologies given individually and by the
management of Guinness Australia.
7. A similar situation as in paragraph 6 prevails with the Disc Jockey and it
appears he has accepted the apology of the applicant.
8. The fact that the applicant was a person singled out for receipt of one of
the “humorous” awards presented at the
function. It is likely that
similar hurtful remarks may have been made, albeit in jest, by some of the other
9. The long period of employment with the respondent by the applicant where
conduct of a similar nature had not occurred despite
the attendance by him at a
number of functions, where alcohol was freely available.
10. The failure of the company to consider as an alternative placing him in a
suitable drug and alcohol program.
11. The applicant had already been appropriately disciplined by having his
secondment with Guinness Australia terminated and his
transfer back to Carlton
12. The discrepancy in treatment between Mr Nicholls who was allowed to resign
and that of the applicant.
Generally the respondent is required to prove that at 5 February 1996 it had a
valid reason for the termination of the applicant
on the basis of his conduct.
Having regard to those circumstances the decision of the respondent to terminate
his services was not
“sound, defensible or well-founded”. There
appears to me to be an element of “spite” or capriciousness in
decision. The evidence in this case leads me to the conclusion that there was
not well founded or just grounds for the decision
to terminate the employment of
the applicant. There was not a valid reason to terminate the employment of the
REINSTATEMENT IMPRACTICABLE
satisfied that I have only a limited discretion not to reinstate the applicant
where it has been found that there is no valid
reason for termination of his
employment. (See decision of
Liddell v Lemke t/a Cheryls Unisex Salon ( Full
Court decision by Wilcox CJ, Keely & Gray JJ dated 15 December
1994, IR 56
Nevertheless I am obliged by Section 170EE (1) to take into
account all the circumstances of the case.
In view of the findings
which I have made earlier in these reasons reinstatement appears to be required.
There is no evidence that
there is any previous incident of a similar nature in
the case of the applicant. I have taken into account the evidence of Messrs
Hastie and Turner about their attempts to discipline the applicant. However
both of these men are no longer in their former positions.
The applicant will
start under fresh supervision.
During his evidence the applicant agreed
that he would undertake a suitable educational and rehabilitation program
regarding the use
of Drugs and Alcohol. It seems to me that the applicant may
need to have a better understanding of the rate of metabolism of alcohol
In my view, Section 170EE (1) allows me to take account of the
legitimate concerns of the respondent and the public interest in the
responsible use of alcohol by the applicant against the possibility, however
remote, that there might be a repeat performance
There is a need
on behalf of the respondent and the public interest, that I impose a condition
precedent to a finding that it is not
impracticable to reinstate the applicant.
Such a condition will ensure that the company is able to take practical steps
achieving greater certainty about the alcohol intake of the applicant.
It will also restore the confidence of the respondent in the
capacity of the
applicant to conduct himself more appropriately in the future.
McGeehan and Garside (referred to previously),
it was made a
precondition of a finding that it is not impracticable to reinstate the
Applicant that they agree to the monitoring
of their usage of alcohol over a
period of twelve months. It was expected that such monitoring be to the level
and of the same standard
and nature as that required of a “Special
Category Driver” or by the
Rail Safety Act 1993
(NSW). In addition, they
were to sign a written consent addressed to the respondent that if required by
their Chief Pilot they consented
to the random monitoring of their drug and
alcohol intake upon reporting for any period of duty or during such duty. Their
was to include consent to breath analysis and to the supply of blood
or urine samples if required. The monitoring program was to
last for 12 months
from the date of signing of the consent. The position of the applicant in this
industry is different. Each day
he is obliged to travel the roads of his
territory and is subject to the possibility of regular random Breath Tests.
is not the same need to subject his employer to the expense and
inconvenience of such a monitoring program unless it forms part of
counselling program.
I will arrange to list the matter before me in the event that either
counsel wish to put forward any practical difficulties about
this issue. For
example, if there can be an agreement between the parties as to the
rehabilitation program and the form of monitoring,
then that can be incorporated
into my orders. In the absence of agreement, the applicant may sign a general
consent to undertake
the programme specified by the respondent and serve it on
the respondent and file it in court. The applicant is not obliged to agree
this condition. If for any reason he does not accept the condition then there
will be a finding that it is impracticable to reinstate
SECTION 170DC: EMPLOYEE OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND
exception of the interview at which Mr Darling was present there was no
opportunity given to the applicant to be assisted
by another person when
defending himself.(See Schedule 11 of the Act – Paragraph 9 of
Recommendation No. 166) It appears to
me that the procedural aspects of the
various interviews conducted by the respondent were deficient.
instruction to Mr Freeman is clearly set out in his evidence, and that of Mr
Haynes. It is confirmed by Mr Ryan that he instructed
substantially the allegations were found to be correct, then we had no
alternative but to separate
“.In this matter Mr Freeman followed the
instruction of Mr Ryan to the letter. These instructions were such as to not
him to comply fully with the provisions of Section
Experience has shown that the dismissal of an employee from his
employment is not an easy or welcome task. The angry response of
the applicant
to being told that he would be terminated was to be expected given that he had
no earlier warning of this prospect.
Had Mr Freeman gone on to ask him if he
wished him to make any representations to Mr Ryan on his behalf about his
decision or adjourned
the meeting to enable the applicant to obtain assistance
then it is likely that there would have been no contravention of the
legislation.
Perrin v Des Taylor Pty Limited
(1994) 58 IR 254
at 256-7, Moore J said the following about the purpose of section 170DC:
“Its purpose is at least twofold. It is to give the employee the
opportunity to demonstrate that the allegations have no foundation
they should not be viewed as reflecting on the employee’s capacity. In
the present case, the applicant may have
been able to show that the complaints
explanation for their
slow delivery that did not relate to any want of effort on
his behalf.
A second purpose of s170DC is that an employee with whom an allegation has
been raised may be able to persuade the employer that,
while the allegation is
of substance, there are factors that should persuade the employer not to
terminate the employment. They
may be extenuating personal circumstances or
they may involve undertakings about future conduct.”
no evidence that there was an opportunity given to the Applicant to respond in
line with the second purpose of the legislation
as outlined by Moore J. I am
satisfied that there is a contravention of section 170DC. Despite the fact that
there was an interview
between the applicant, Mr Haynes and Mr Freeman the
evidence is clear that the applicant was simply told that he was to be
terminated.
The company has breached section 170DC of the Act, in that it
should have given the applicant the opportunity of making representations
on a number of factors including those which I have set out earlier in these
reasons. In addition he may have wished to give
undertakings about
future conduct
” to “Carlton United”. After considering
the report of Mr Freeman and any representations the applicant wished
the company would then have been in a position to dismiss him without
contravening the section.
In those circumstances I propose to make a
finding against the respondent that there was a contravention of Section
COMPENSATION
Ordinarily an order for the payment of remuneration lost by the employee
commences from the date of termination however in this case
it should take into
account the four weeks payment in lieu. The applicant is to disclose to the
respondent all income earned (excluding
social security payments) from 5
February 1996 to date. Carlton United is to pay only the difference between the
remuneration which
he lost, less any paid employment during the
Should the applicant decide that he does not wish to sign the
agreement, to attend the counselling programme, then the matter will
be relisted
on a date convenient to the parties to provide assistance to the Court on the
question of compensation, if any, payable
in such circumstances. For the
assistance of the parties in this case I set out a preliminary view on this
Nicholson v Heaven & Earth Galleries Pty Ltd
(1994) 1 IRCR
, Wilcox CJ, suggested it may be appropriate to make an assessment of the
period of time in which the applicant might continue in
his employment, before
his termination was able to be properly completed. In that case Wilcox CJ found
that the particular applicant
was not suited to the type of work he had done.
This is not the case here. This applicant had demonstrated, even with all his
that he could promote the interests of his employer against its
competitors in the hard, tough and sometimes physically demanding
industry by
selling its brand to the detriment of its industrial rivals.
Caroline Lethern v Beresfield Pty Ltd trading as Titan Ford Brookvale
(unreported IRCA decision dated 3 October, 1995 No.542/95 McILwaine JR), a
similar situation arose where there was some dispute as
to the number of the
sales to be completed. In that case I said:
“It is essential for sales managers to put clearly to the sales
persons under their control the results which they want the
representatives to
achieve and that failure to achieve those results will mean dismissal.
Preferably, but not essentially, this
should be done in writing. I am not
satisfied on the evidence before me that either was properly done in this
I think that a period of a further three month to four
months may have been sufficient to enable him to demonstrate his capabilities
achieving the desired level of sales and rectifying the other performance
issues. An alternative would be shortly after the figures
for the then current
financial year were available.
The following interim orders are
1. The applicant was an employee of the respondent
from 1 August 1988 to 5 February 1996.
2. The applicant was seconded by
the respondent to work for Guinness Australia Pty Ltd from May 1995 to 2
February 1996.
3. The Respondent has contravened Section 170 DC of the
4. The respondent has contravened Section 170 DE(1) of the Act in
that it did not have a valid reason for the termination of the employment
Applicant on 5 February 1996.
5. Subject to a written agreement being
given to the respondent and a copy being filed in the court, within 7 days of
today, by the
applicant, undertaking to satisfactorily attend a recognised
educational and counselling program on Alcohol and Drug addiction over
of one year nominated by his Employer (including the monitoring of his Alcohol
and Drug Usage if required by the program),
it is not impractical to reinstate
the applicant to the position he formerly held with the
Respondent.
6. The period between the date of termination and the date of
his reinstatement be treated as continuous employment of the applicant
respondent for all purposes.
7. The respondent pay to the applicant the
remuneration lost by the employee because of the termination from 5 February
1996 to the
date of signing of the agreement within twenty-one days of the date
of receiving the signed agreement referred to in paragraph 5
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
8. The respondent
re-appoint the applicant to the position he formerly held with the respondent
prior to his secondment on terms and
conditions no less favourable than those on
which he was employed on 1 February 1996.
9. The respondent pay to the
applicant the remuneration lost by him because of his termination within
twenty-one days of the date
of receiving the signed agreement referred to in
paragraph 5 from the applicant.
THE COURT DIRECTS THAT:
10. The applicant is to provide the respondent with details of
his income from paid employment including the amounts earnt as a part
Jockey within 7 days to enable the calculation of “lost
remuneration”. The respondent is to have the benefit
of the 4 weeks
salary paid to the applicant in lieu of Notice.
11. Upon application being made to the District Registrar of the NSW Registry Mr
Nicholls is to have the benefit of a certificate
issued pursuant to
Evidence Act, 1995
. That part of his testimony which may be covered by the
certificate is contained in pages 24 to 55 inclusive of the transcript of
proceedings conducted by videolink on 1 November
12. Liberty to Mr Nicholls or either of the parties to
apply as to the extent of coverage of the certificate ordered in paragraph
13. In the circumstances, I am directing counsel for the applicant to
bring forward for consideration by the court, draft orders in
accordance with
these minutes. Those orders should be filed with the court by 4.00 pm 19 August
1998. It will preferable if they
can be agreed with counsel for the respondent,
if they cannot be agreed then I shall provide a time commencing in the week
24 August 1998 to hear and finalise the orders in this
14. In the event that the parties are unable to agree on the
amount to be paid or other proposed orders by 4 pm on 19 August 1998,
liberty to apply to the court to relist the matter at an earlier
There will be judgment and orders
accordingly.
certify that this and the preceding 62 pages
Is a true copy of the reasons
for the decision of
Judicial Registrar
Associate: Kate Benson
Dated: 21 August
APPEARANCES
Counsel for the Applicant: Ms Rudland
Solicitors for the
Applicant: Mr L N Riches
Taylor and Scott
Counsel for the Respondent Mr S.B.
Solicitors for the Respondent: Mr Michael
Tillyard & Callanan Solicitors
Dates of hearing: 13 & 14 August 1996
&19 February and
RTF format (329 KB)
Signed PDF/A format