URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/cth/AUEPI/2019/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:25:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Greenhouse and Energy Minimum Standards (Air Conditioners up to 65kW) Determination 2019 [2019] AUEPI 5 (1 April 2019)
Greenhouse and Energy Minimum Standards (Air Conditioners up to 65kW)
Determination 2019
I, Angus Taylor, Minister for Energy, make the following determination.
Dated 25 March 2019
Angus Taylor
Minister for Energy
© 2019 Commonwealth of Australia
This Determination includes material from Australian Standards and/or
Australian/New Zealand Standards, which are copyright Standards
Australia Ltd.
Apart from uses permitted under the
Australia Ltd material may not be reproduced without permission or licence.
With the exception of the Commonwealth Coat of Arms, any trade marks owned by
the Commonwealth (including the energy rating labels
and the energy rating
icons) and any material the subject of third party intellectual property rights,
this Determination is licensed
under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Non-Commercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International Licence. To view a copy
of this licence, visit
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
You are free to copy and communicate this Determination (apart from the
excluded material indicated above) so long as you do so for
non-commercial
purposes, attribute the Commonwealth of Australia, and license any derivative
works under the same licence as the
original (indicating any modifications), in
accordance with CC BY-NC-SA. For clarity, you are permitted to use this
Determination
in the above manner to comply with your obligations under it.
Complete Australian/New Zealand Standards are available for purchase from
Standards Australia Ltd. Requests and inquiries concerning
other reproduction
and rights pertaining to standards should be directed to Standards Australia Ltd
via the contact details set out
at https://www.standards.org.au/contact.
—Preliminary
This instrument is the
Greenhouse and Energy
Minimum Standards (Air Conditioners up to 65kW) Determination 2019
2 Commencement, revocation and
replacement
This Determination:
(a) commences and comes into force on 1 April 2020; and
(b) revokes the
Greenhouse and Energy Minimum Standards (Air Conditioners
and Heat Pumps) Determination 2013
(c) replaces that Determination.
Note: The form of this section reflects the requirements of
sections 34
Greenhouse and Energy Minimum Standards Act 2012
, which deal
with how a GEMS determination enters into force and how it replaces an earlier
Subsection 35(2)
Greenhouse and Energy Minimum Standards Act
provides that, when a GEMS determination is revoked and replaced, the
revoked determination ceases to be in force immediately before
the replacement
determination comes into force.
3 Authority
This Determination is made under
sections 23
and Energy Minimum Standards Act 2012
4 Definitions—standards referred to in
this Determination
Subsection 11(2)
provides that the applicable version of each
standard referred to in this section is the version that existed at the date
this Determination
In this Determination:
AHRI 1230:2010
Air-Conditioning, Heating, &
Refrigeration Institute Standard 1230 Performance Rating of Variable Refrigerant
Flow (VRF) Multi-Split
Air-Conditioning and Heat Pump Equipment
Note 1: AHRI 1230:2010 is available from www.ahrinet.org.
Note 2: AHRI 1230:2010 includes all amendments and changes through Addendum
2, June 2014.
AS/NZS 3823.1.1:2012
Australian/New Zealand Standard
3823.1.1:2012 Performance of electrical appliances – air conditioners and
heat pumps –
Non-ducted air conditioners and heat pumps –
Testing and rating for performance (ISO 5151:2010, MOD)
Note: AS/NZS 3823.1.1:2012 is available from Standards Australia Limited.
AS/NZS 3823.1.2:2012
Australian/New Zealand Standard
3823.1.2:2012 Performance of electrical appliances – air conditioners and
heat pumps –
Ducted air conditioners and air-to-air heat
pumps—Testing and rating for performance (ISO 13253:2011, MOD)
Note: AS/NZS 3823.1.2:2012 is available from Standards Australia Limited.
AS/NZS 3823.1.3:2005
Australian/New Zealand Standard
3823.1.3:2005 Performance of electrical appliances – air conditioners and
heat pumps.
Water-source heat pumps—Water-to-air and
brine-to-air heat pumps—Testing and rating of performance (ISO 13256-1,
01 (1998) MOD)
Note 1: AS/NZS 3823.1.3:2005 is available from Standards Australia
Note 2: AS/NZS 3823.1.3:2005 includes all amendments up to and including
AS/NZS 3823.1.3:2005/Amdt 1 made on 22 September 2011.
AS/NZS 3823.1.4:2012
Australian/New Zealand Standard
3823.1.4:2012 Performance of electrical appliances – Air conditioners and
heat pumps.
Multiple split-system air conditioners and air-to-air heat
pumps–Testing and rating for performance (ISO 15042:2011, MOD)
Note: AS/NZS 3823.1.4:2012 is available from Standards Australia Limited.
AS/NZS 3823.1.5:2015
Australian/New Zealand Standard
3823.1.5:2015 Performance of electrical appliances – Air conditioners and
heat pumps.
Non-ducted portable air-cooled air conditioners and
air-to-air heat pumps having a single exhaust duct – Testing and rating
for performance
Note: AS/NZS 3823.1.5:2015 is available from Standards Australia Limited.
AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014
Australian/New Zealand Standard
3823.4.1:2014 Performance of electrical appliances – Air conditioners and
heat pumps.
Air-cooled air conditioners and air-to-air heat
pumps–Testing and calculating methods for seasonal performance factors
Cooling seasonal performance factor (ISO 16358-1:2013,
Note 1: AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014 is available from Standards Australia
Note 2: AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014 includes all amendments up to and including
AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014/Amdt 1 made on 8 May 2017.
AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014
Australian/New Zealand Standard
3823.4.2:2014 Performance of electrical appliances – Air conditioners and
heat pumps.
Air-cooled air conditioners and air-to-air heat
pumps–Testing and calculating methods for seasonal performance factors
Heating seasonal performance factor (ISO 16358-2:2013,
Note 1: AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014 is available from Standards Australia
Note 2: AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014 includes all amendments up to and including
AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014/Amdt 1 made on 8 May 2017.
EN 12102:2013
European Standard 12102:2013 Air
conditioners, liquid chilling packages, heat pumps and dehumidifiers with
electrically driven compressors
for space heating and cooling. Measurement of
airborne noise. Determination of the sound power level
Note: EN 12102:2013 is available from the European Committee for
Standardization.
EN 12102-1:2017
European Standard 12102-1:2017 Air
conditioners, liquid chilling packages, heat pumps, process chillers and
dehumidifiers with electrically
driven compressors - Determination of the sound
power level -
Air conditioners, liquid chilling packages, heat pumps for
space heating and cooling, dehumidifiers and process chillers
Note: EN 12102-1:2017 is available from the European Committee for
Standardization.
EN 14511:2018
European Standard 14511:2018 Air
conditioners, liquid chilling packages and heat pumps for space heating and
cooling and process chillers,
with electrically driven compressors
Note: EN 14511:2018 is available from the European Committee for
Standardization.
ISO 5151:2017
International Organization for
Standardization Standard 5151:2017 Non-ducted air conditioners and heat pumps -
Testing and rating
for performance
Note: ISO 5151:2017 is available from the International Organization for
Standardization.
ISO 13253:2017
International Organization for
Standardization Standard 13253:2017 Ducted air conditioners and air-to-air heat
pumps - Testing and
rating for performance
Note: ISO 13253:2017 is available from the International Organization for
Standardization.
ISO 15042:2017
International Organization for
Standardization Standard 15042:2017 Multiple split-system air-conditioners and
air-to-air heat pumps
- Testing and rating for performance
Note: ISO 15042:2017 is available from the International Organization for
Standardization.
5 Definitions—other expressions used in
this Determination
In this Determination:
Greenhouse and Energy Minimum Standards Act
air conditioner
means a device that:
(a) is capable of cooling, heating, or both cooling and heating, a
conditioned space using a vapour compression cycle driven by an
compressor; and
(b) contains one or more condensers, one or more evaporators, and one or
more fans; and
(c) is designed for cooling, heating, or both cooling and heating, of a
conditioned space primarily for human comfort;
whether or not it has additional functions such as dehumidification, air
purification, ventilation, heat recovery, sanitary water
heating, and
supplementary air heating by means of electric resistance heating.
Note: An air conditioner in heating mode is also referred to as a heat
: an air conditioner is
(a) when in cooling mode—air as the heat sink; and
(b) when in heating mode—air as the heat source.
Annual Coefficient of Performance
subsection 20(1).
Annual Energy Efficiency Ratio
subsection 20(1).
Australian Standard
means a standard that is published by
Standards Australia Limited denoted by the letters “AS” and
identifying numbers
and letters.
Australian/New Zealand Standard
means a standard that is
jointly published by Standards Australia Limited and Standards New Zealand, is
applicable in both countries
and denoted by the letters “AS/NZS” and
identifying numbers and letters.
average true power factor
subsection 40(3).
(a) total cooling capacity; or
(b) heating capacity.
ceiling cassette
means a type of indoor unit for a non-ducted
single-split system whose chassis is installed within the ceiling space. The
fascia/panel/grille
assembly includes an air inlet and multiple outlets and is
the only component visible from within the conditioned space.
circumvention device
subsection 2(5)
of Schedule
close control air conditioner
subsection 17(2).
Coefficient of Performance
subsection 20(1).
commercial SEER rating
section 33.
conditioned space
means an enclosed space, room or zone to
which conditioned air is provided.
Cooling Season Total Energy Consumption
means the amount of
energy a product will use over a cooling season for a particular climate zone,
as calculated in accordance with
subsection 30(1)
subsection 30(4).
Note: A particular product, other than one in product class 3 or 4, will have
6 values for the Cooling Season Total Energy Consumption,
a value for each
temperature zone (hot, average and cold) relating to residential use of the
product, and a value for each temperature
zone relating to commercial use of the
A product in product class 3 or 4 will have only 3 values for the Cooling
Season Total Energy Consumption, one for each temperature
zone relating to
residential use of the product.
Cooling Seasonal Energy Consumption
subsection 30(1).
dehumidifier
subsection 17(2).
an air conditioner is
if it is designed primarily to provide ducted delivery of conditioned
air to a conditioned space.
Note: An air conditioner will not necessarily be “ducted”
solely because it has ducts connected to it. For example, an air
conditioner will not be “ducted”
conditioner only has ducts drawing outside air into the air conditioner or
expelling air to the outside, such as in the
case of a unitary double duct air
conditioner (that is, a portable unitary double duct air conditioner or a wall
mounted unitary
double duct air conditioner) or a unitary single duct air
conditioner (that is, a portable unitary single duct air conditioner or
mounted unitary single duct air conditioner).
of a supplementary water tank means the period the
tank can provide water before needing to be refilled.
Note: For a portable unitary double duct air conditioner (product class 2),
the duration of the tank is worked out in accordance with
subsection 12(5)
of Schedule 2. For a portable unitary single duct air conditioner (product class
4), the duration of the tank is worked out in accordance
with Appendix B of
AS/NZS 3823.1.5:2015.
Energy Efficiency Ratio
subsection 20(1).
energy label
section 26.
energy rating label
section 26.
evaporatively-cooled condenser
means a heat exchanger that
condenses refrigerant vapour by rejecting heat to a water and air mixture
causing the water to evaporate
and increase the enthalpy of air.
Note 1: For the purposes of this Determination, evaporatively-cooled
condensers may be found in portable unitary single duct air conditioners
portable unitary double duct air conditioners.
Note 2: Such condensers are fed by a supplementary water tank.
Note 3: This is the same meaning as clause 3.8 of AS/NZS 3823.1.5:2015.
extra-low temperature heating capacity test—
subsection 9(2).
fixed capacity
: a multi-split system is of
(a) it has a single outdoor unit that has a dedicated set of refrigeration
ports for each individual indoor unit; and
(b) the maximum number of indoor units that can be connected is limited by
the number of dedicated ports on the outdoor unit.
GEMS retail premises
section 26.
ground-loop air conditioner
subsection 17(2).
ground-water air conditioner
subsection 17(2).
heating capacity—
subsection 9(1).
heating extended-load operation
has the same meaning as in
clause 3.13 of AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014.
Heating Season Total Energy Consumption
means the amount of
energy a product will use over a heating season for a particular climate zone,
as calculated in accordance with
subsection 30(2)
subsection 30(4).
Note: A particular product, other than one in product class 3 or 4, will have
6 values for the Heating Season Total Energy Consumption,
a value for each
temperature zone (hot, average and cold) relating to residential use of the
product, and a value for each temperature
zone relating to commercial use of the
A product in product class 3 or 4 will have only 3 values for the Heating
Season Total Energy Consumption, one for each temperature
zone, relating to
residential use of the product.
Heating Seasonal Energy Consumption
subsection 30(2).
Heating Seasonal Performance Factor
the ratio of the total annual amount of heat, including make-up heat, that the
equipment can add to the conditioned space when
operated for heating in active
mode to the total annual amount of energy consumed by the equipment during the
same period, as calculated
by the method set out in clause 6.1 of AS/NZS
3823.4.2:2014.
Note: Each product, other than a product in product class 3 or 4, will have 6
values for the HSPF, a value for each temperature zone
(hot, average and cold)
relating to residential use of the product, and a value for each temperature
zone relating to commercial
use of the product.
An HSPF is not calculated for products in product classes 3 and 4 (wall
mounted unitary single duct air conditioners and portable
unitary single duct
air conditioners).
liquid-chilling package
subsection 17(2).
low temperature cooling capacity test
subsection 8(2).
low temperature heating capacity test—
subsection 9(2).
low temperature heating extended-load capacity—
subsection 9(1).
low temperature heating full capacity—
subsection 9(1).
means Minimum Energy Performance Standards.
multi-split outdoor unit
means the outdoor unit of a
multi-split system, that:
(a) contains the compressor, outdoor heat exchanger, fans, and refrigeration
(b) does not contain the indoor heat exchanger; and
(c) is designed to be connected to two or more individually controlled
indoor units.
multi-split system
: an air-to-air air conditioner is a
multi-split system
(a) it has separate indoor and outdoor units that are connected with
refrigerant piping; and
(b) it has two or more indoor units, each of which can be individually
controlled.
Note: A multi-split system can be of fixed head type or variable refrigerant
flow (VRF) type.
multi-stage capacity
means the sound power level (dB(A)) of a product as
determined under EN 12102:2013 or EN 12102-1:2017.
of Schedule 2 for an associated testing
requirement.
an air conditioner is
if it is designed primarily to provide free delivery of
conditioned air to a conditioned space.
Note 1: Spot coolers, dehumidifiers, unitary single duct air conditioners and
unitary double duct air conditioners are defined separately.
Note 2: An air conditioner might still be “non-ducted”
even if has one or more ducts drawing outside air into the air
conditioner or expelling air to the outside, so long as it provides
(that is, non-ducted) delivery of air to the conditioned space. For example, the
following are “non-ducted”:
unitary double duct air conditioners
(that is, portable unitary double duct air conditioners and wall mounted unitary
double duct
air conditioners) and unitary single duct air conditioners (that is,
portable unitary single duct air conditioners and wall mounted
unitary single
duct air conditioners).
: an air conditioner is
(a) is designed to be portable; and
(b) is supplied and offered for supply for portable applications only;
(c) has the following features:
(i) a casing that encloses the entire air conditioner, including the
(ii) castors, wheels or feet;
(iii) flexible ductwork that is:
(A) either supplied with the air conditioner or available as additional
accessories, for adapting to various portable installation
situations; and
(B) designed to temporarily fit, via specialised attachments, to a partially
opened window or door;
(iv) a length of power cord with a mains plug; and
(d) does not have any of the following:
(i) permanent wall or window mounting brackets, either on the air
conditioner, in the packaging, or as a separately supplied accessory;
(ii) available instructions that demonstrate how to fix the air conditioner
(other than the ductwork) to a wall or window;
(iii) other accessories, such as pipes and flanges, designed to allow
permanent wall or window mounting.
portable unitary double duct air conditioner
means a unitary
double duct air conditioner that is portable.
Note 1: As a portable unitary double duct air conditioner provides for the
free delivery of conditioned air to the conditioned space,
“non-ducted air conditioner”.
Note 2: A product that is a portable unitary double duct air conditioner will
be treated as such for the purposes of this Determination,
whether or not it can
also operate as a spot cooler or a portable unitary single duct product.
portable unitary single duct air conditioner
means a unitary
single duct air conditioner that is portable.
Note 1: As a portable unitary single duct air conditioner provides for the
free delivery of conditioned air to the conditioned space,
“non-ducted air conditioner”.
Note 2: A product that is a portable unitary single duct air conditioner will
be treated as such for the purposes of this Determination,
whether or not it can
also operate as a spot cooler.
product class
section 16.
section 10.
relevant MEPS level
section 19.
Note: MEPS is short for minimum energy performance standards.
residential SEER rating
section 33.
SEER rating
section 33.
single-phase
: a product is
single-phase
components that require an external power supply require only single-phase
single-split outdoor unit
means the outdoor unit of a
single-split system, that:
(a) contains the compressor, outdoor heat exchanger, fans, and refrigeration
(b) does not contain the indoor heat exchanger; and
(c) is not designed to be connected to two or more individually controlled
indoor units; and
(d) is supplied or offered for supply as a separate outdoor unit of a
single-split system, rather than as part of a complete single-split
single-split system
: an air-to-air air conditioner is a
single-split system
(a) it has separate indoor and outdoor units that are connected with
refrigerant piping; and
(b) if it has two or more indoor units—the units cannot be
individually controlled.
Note 1: The indoor unit of a single-split system usually lies within the
conditioned space, and may be installed or portable. The
indoor unit in some
configurations feeds into a duct system. The indoor units of some single-split
ducted systems might not have
a fan and instead be designed to operate with an
existing system (for example, with a gas heater).
Note 2: A single-split system might have two or three indoor units that are
controlled by a single controller, in which case it is
known as a twin or triple
split system. Twin or triple split systems are tested to AS/NZS
3823.1.1:2012.
solar-boosted air conditioner
subsection 2(5)
Schedule 2.
split system
(a) a multi-split system; or
(b) a single-split system.
spot cooler
subsection 17(2).
means an Australian Standard, an Australian/New
Zealand Standard, a CIE Standard, an IEC Standard or any other equivalent
standard cooling capacity test
subsection 8(2).
standard cooling full capacity
subsection 8(1).
standard cooling part-load capacity
subsection 8(1).
standard heating capacity test
subsection 9(2).
standard heating full capacity
subsection 9(1).
standard heating part-load capacity
subsection 9(1).
supplementary water tank
means a tank designed as an integral
part of the unit to contain external supplementary water which is fed to the
evaporatively-cooled
Note 1: For the purposes of this Determination, supplementary water tanks
may be found in portable unitary single duct air conditioners
or portable
unitary double duct air conditioners.
Note 2: This is the same meaning as clause 3.31 of AS/NZS 3823.1.5:2015.
section 10.
test simulation software
subsection 3(7)
Schedule 2.
three-phase
: a product is
three-phase
if at least
one component requires an external three-phase power supply.
Note: Where a system has more than one power supply (e.g., a split system),
the whole system is considered to be three-phase where
at least one of the
external power supply systems is three-phase.
total cooling capacity
subsection 8(1).
Total Cooling Seasonal Performance Factor
means the ratio of the total annual amount of heat that the equipment
can remove from the conditioned space to the total annual amount
consumed by the equipment, including the active and inactive energy consumption
as calculated by the method set out in
Annex B of AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014.
Note: Each product, other than a product in product class 3 or 4, will have 6
values for the TCSPF, a value for each temperature zone
(hot, average and cold)
relating to residential use of the product, and a value for each temperature
zone relating to commercial
use of the product.
A TCSPF is not calculated for products in product classes 3 and 4 (wall
mounted unitary single duct air conditioners and portable
unitary single duct
air conditioners).
two-stage capacity
: an air conditioner is
evaporator, condenser and associated refrigeration components (for example, the
compressor) are contained within a single housing.
Note: Unitary air conditioners may be non-ducted (for example, window/wall
units) or ducted (for example, packaged rooftop units).
unitary double duct air conditioner
means a unitary, air-to-air
air conditioner that:
(a) is designed to:
(i) be located wholly within the conditioned space; and
(ii) provide free delivery of conditioned air to the conditioned space; and
(b) draws air into the air conditioner from outside the conditioned space
using one duct; and
(c) uses another duct to discharge that air back outside the conditioned
Note 1: As a unitary double duct air conditioner provides for the free
delivery of conditioned air to the conditioned space, it is
a “non-ducted
air conditioner”.
Note 2: A unitary double duct air conditioner will, depending on its design
features, either be a “portable unitary double duct
air conditioner”
or a “wall mounted unitary double duct air conditioner”.
Note 3: A product that is a unitary double duct air conditioner will be
treated as such for the purposes of this Determination, whether
or not it can
also operate as a unitary single duct air conditioner.
unitary single duct air conditioner
(a) means a unitary, air-to-air air conditioner that:
(i) is designed to:
(A) be located wholly within the conditioned space; and
(B) provide free delivery of air to the conditioned space; and
(ii) draws air into the air conditioner from the conditioned space; and
(iii) uses a duct to discharge that air outside the conditioned space,
whether or not the duct is supplied with the air conditioner;
(b) does not include such a product that is designed so that it can be
configured as a unitary double duct air conditioner.
Note 1: As a unitary single duct air conditioner provides for the free
delivery of conditioned air to the conditioned space, it is
a “non-ducted
air conditioner”.
Note 2: A unitary single duct air conditioner will, depending on its design
features, either be a “portable unitary single duct
air conditioner”
or a “wall mounted unitary single duct air conditioner”.
variable capacity
variable refrigerant flow
: a multi-split
system is of
variable refrigerant flow
if it has one or more outdoor units comprising a single
refrigerant circuit, each of which has a set of refrigeration ports that
the network of indoor units through branch piping or distribution
devices or both.
wall mounted unitary double duct air conditioner
unitary double duct air conditioner that is not portable.
Note 1: As a wall mounted unitary double duct air conditioner is a unitary
double duct air conditioner, it provides for the free delivery
of conditioned
air to the conditioned space, and so is a “non-ducted” air
conditioner.
Note 2: A product that is able to be wall mounted as well as portable is
considered to be wall mounted for the purposes of this Determination.
wall mounted unitary single duct air conditioner
unitary single duct air conditioner that is not portable.
Note 1: As a wall mounted unitary single duct air conditioner is a unitary
single duct air conditioner, it provides for the free delivery
of conditioned
air to the conditioned space, and so is a “non-ducted” air
conditioner.
Note 2: A product that is able to be wall mounted as well as portable is
considered to be wall mounted for the purposes of this Determination.
water-loop air conditioner
water-to-air air
conditioner that uses liquid circulating in a common piping loop functioning as
a heat source or a heat sink.
Note 1: The temperature of the liquid loop is usually mechanically controlled
within a temperature range of 15 °C to 40 °C.
Note 2: This is the same meaning as the term “water-loop heat pump
application” in clause 3.1.1 of AS/NZS 3823.1.3:2005.
water-to-air
: an air conditioner is
water-to-air
if it uses:
(a) when in cooling mode—water or brine as the heat sink; and
(b) when in heating mode—water or brine as the heat source.
Note 1: Water-to-air air conditioners include the following three
(a) water-loop air conditioners (covered by this Determination);
(b) ground-water air conditioners (not covered by this Determination);
(c) ground-loop air conditioners (not covered by this Determination).
Note 2: Several other
words and expressions used in this Determination have the meaning given by
of the Act. For example:
● category A product;
● covered by;
● family of models;
● GEMS business premises;
● GEMS labelling requirements;
● GEMS level requirements;
● premises;
● product classes.
6 Meaning of
multi-stage
In this Determination, the following apply:
(a) a product is of
fixed capacity
if it is unable to change
its capacity;
(b) a product is of
two-stage capacity
if it can vary its
capacity by two steps;
(c) a product is of
multi-stage capacity
if it can vary its
capacity by three or four steps;
(d) a product is of
variable capacity
if it can vary its
capacity by five or more steps.
Note: For paragraphs (c) and (d), these are the same meanings as in
clauses 3.9 and 3.10 respectively of AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014.
7 Temperature conditions—H1, H2, H3 and
In this Determination:
means the following temperature conditions:
(a) 20 ˚C dry-bulb and 15 ˚C wet-bulb inside;
(b) 7 ˚C dry-bulb and 6 ˚C wet-bulb outside.
means the following temperature conditions:
(a) 20 ˚C dry-bulb and 15 ˚C wet-bulb inside;
(b) 2 ˚C dry-bulb and 1 ˚C wet-bulb outside.
means the following temperature conditions:
(a) 20 ˚C dry-bulb and 15 ˚C wet-bulb inside;
(b) -7 ˚C dry-bulb and -8 ˚C wet-bulb outside.
means the following temperature conditions:
(a) 27 C dry-bulb and 19 C wet-bulb inside;
(b) 35 C dry-bulb and 24 C wet-bulb outside.
8 Total cooling capacity and related
total cooling capacity
and related definitions
(1) In this Determination:
standard cooling full capacity
, in relation to an air
conditioner,
(a) the air conditioner’s total cooling capacity when tested in
accordance with the standard cooling capacity test at full
(b) a rated value based on that amount.
standard cooling part-load capacity
, in relation to an air
conditioner,
(a) the air conditioner’s total cooling capacity when tested in
accordance with the standard cooling capacity test at a particular
(b) a rated value based on that amount.
total cooling capacity
of an air conditioner means the amount
of sensible and latent heat that the air conditioner can remove from the
conditioned space
at particular temperature conditions and at a particular load
in a defined interval of time.
Note: This value may be tested or rated.
Tests for total cooling capacity
(2) In this Determination:
low temperature cooling capacity test
, in relation to an air
conditioner, means the test for the air conditioner’s total cooling
capacity in accordance with the
relevant test standard at:
(a) the outdoor dry bulb temperature of 29˚C, as defined in Table 1 of
AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014; and
(b) a particular load.
standard cooling capacity test
, in relation to a product, means
the test for the product’s total cooling capacity in accordance with the
relevant test standard
(a) T1 temperature conditions; and
(b) a particular load.
relevant test standard
(3) For this section, the following are
relevant test
(a) for a water-to-air air conditioner—clause 6.1 of AS/NZS
3823.1.3:2005;
(b) for a unitary single duct air conditioner—clause 5.1 of
AS/NZS 3823.1.5:2015;
(c) for a non-ducted air-to-air air conditioner (other than one covered by
paragraph (b))—clause 5.1 of AS/NZS 3823.1.1:2012;
(d) for a ducted air-to-air air conditioner—clause 6.1 of AS/NZS
3823.1.2:2012;
(e) for a multi-split system—clause 6.1 of AS/NZS
3823.1.4:2012;
(f) if applicable—a standard referred to in
Schedule 2.
9 Heating capacity and related terms
heating capacity
and related definitions
(1) In this Determination:
heating capacity
of an air conditioner means the amount of heat
that the air conditioner can deliver to the conditioned space at particular
temperature
conditions and at a particular load in a defined interval of
Note: The value may be tested or rated.
low temperature heating extended-load capacity
, in relation to
an air conditioner, means:
(a) the air conditioner’s heating capacity when tested using the low
temperature heating capacity test at heating extended-load
operation; or
(b) a rated value based on that amount.
low temperature heating full capacity
, in relation to an air
conditioner, means:
(a) the air conditioner’s heating capacity when tested in accordance
with the low temperature heating capacity test at full
(b) a rated value based on that amount.
standard heating full capacity
, in relation to an air
conditioner, means:
(a) the air conditioner’s heating capacity when tested using the
standard heating capacity test at full load; or
(b) a rated value based on that amount.
standard heating part-load capacity
, in relation to an air
conditioner, means:
(a) the air conditioner’s heating capacity when tested using the
standard heating capacity test at a specified part-load point;
(b) a rated value based on that amount.
Other definitions
(2) In this Determination:
extra-low temperature heating capacity test
, in relation to a
means the test for the product’s heating capacity
in accordance with the relevant test standard at:
(a) H3 temperature conditions; and
(b) a particular load.
low temperature heating capacity test
, in relation to a
means the test for the product’s heating capacity
in accordance with the relevant test standard at:
(a) H2 temperature conditions; and
(b) a particular load.
standard heating capacity test
, in relation to a product, means
the test for the product’s heating capacity in accordance with the
relevant test standard
(a) H1 temperature conditions; and
(b) a particular load.
relevant test standard
(3) For this section, the following are
relevant test
(a) for a water-to-air air conditioner—clause 6.1 of AS/NZS
3823.1.3:2005;
(b) for a unitary single duct air conditioner—clause 6.1 of
AS/NZS 3823.1.5:2015;
(c) for a non-ducted air-to-air air conditioner (other than one covered by
paragraph (b))—clause 6.1 of AS/NZS 3823.1.1:2012;
(d) for a ducted air-to-air air conditioner—clause 7.1 of AS/NZS
3823.1.2:2012;
(e) for a multi-split system—clause 7.1 of AS/NZS
3823.1.4:2012;
(f) if applicable—a standard referred to in
Schedule 2.
10 Meaning of
In this Determination:
value or amount is one that is
claimed by the manufacturer and that:
(a) is based on a tested value or amount; and
(b) in the case of a product’s capacity—satisfies the
(c) in the case of a product’s power input—satisfies the
(d) in the case of any other parameter—is calculated on the basis of
rated capacities or power inputs that satisfy paragraph
(b) or (c), as
appropriate.
value or amount is one that
(a) determined in accordance with a physical or simulation test conducted in
accordance with this Determination; or
(b) calculated on the basis of values or amounts that have been determined
in accordance with paragraph (a).
Note: Under this Determination, the following values are tested and may be
• the total cooling capacity or the heating capacity;
• the product’s power input.
The following values are tested, but are not rated:
• the amount
referred to in
subsection 20(2)
• noise (sound) levels;
• average true power factor;
• the duration of a supplementary water tank of a portable unitary
double duct air conditioner or a portable unitary single
conditioner.
11 Applicable definitions and applicable
versions of standards and documents incorporated into standards
Applicable definitions of terms or phrases
(1) If there is inconsistency in the definitions of words or expressions,
words or expressions will be interpreted in the following
order of priority to
the extent of any inconsistency:
(a) the Act;
(b) this Determination;
(c) a standard referred to in this Determination, or another standard
referred to in such a standard.
Applicable version of documents incorporated into standards
(2) For the purposes of this Determination the applicable version of
(a) standard; or
(b) other document that:
(i) is referred to in a standard under the heading “Referenced
Documents” or under an equivalent heading; and
(ii) must be applied to give effect to this Determination or a standard
referred to in this Determination;
is the version of the standard or other document that existed at the date
this Determination was made.
Note: For example clause 5.1 of AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014 requires that the
accuracy of all test instrumentation used for tests are those
defined in AS/NZS
3823.1.1:2012, AS/NZS 3823.1.2:2012 and AS/NZS 3823.1.4:2012. The
applicable versions of AS/NZS 3823.1.1:2012,
AS/NZS 3823.1.2:2012 and
AS/NZS 3823.1.4:2012 are the versions that existed at the date this
Determination was made.
12 Families of models
of the Act, for a particular product class covered
by this Determination, two or more models are in the same family of models
(a) they are members of a family that has been declared to the GEMS
Regulator; and
(b) the requirements of this section are satisfied in relation to the models
and the family.
(2) For subsection (1), the models must:
(a) be in the same product class; and
(b) have the same energy performance characteristics relevant to complying
, including, but not limited to:
(i) electrical phase; and
(ii) average true power factor; and
(iii) rated power inputs; and
(iv) rated capacities; and
(c) have the same physical characteristics that are relevant to
complying with
(d) be included on a single test report which was prepared prior to the
application for registration for the model being made under
(3) For subsection (1), a family must not contain more than 10
13 Product category
of the Act, the products covered by this Determination are
category A products.
Registrations affected by this Determination
of the Act, this Determination does not affect the
registration of any model registered against the
Greenhouse and Energy
Minimum Standards (Air Conditioners and Heat Pumps) Determination 2013
Note: If a model’s registration is not affected, the model is taken to
be registered against this Determination. See
of the Act.
—Products covered by
Determination
15 Purpose of Part
subsections 23(1)
and (2) of the Act, this Part specifies:
(a) one or more classes of products that are covered by this Determination;
(b) one or more classes of products that are not covered by this
Determination.
16 Classes of products that are covered by this
Determination
product class
set out in Schedule 1 is a class of
products covered by this Determination.
Note 1: The product classes are numbered 1 to 23.
Note 2: The products covered by this Determination are single-phase and
three-phase:
• air conditioners; and
• multi-split outdoor units (whether or not supplied or offered for
supply as part of a multi-split system); and
• single-split outdoor units;
that have a rated standard cooling full capacity, or for heating only
products, a rated standard heating full capacity, of 65kW or
Air conditioners that have a rated standard cooling full capacity, or for
heating only products, a rated standard heating full capacity,
of greater than
65kW are expected to be covered by another GEMS determination.
Note 3: The products covered by this Determination are ones that are designed
primarily for human comfort. However, this Determination
covers such products
irrespective of the context in which they are used. For example, this
Determination applies to such products
designed primarily for human comfort even
if they are used in a close control context.
17 Classes of products that are not covered by
this Determination
(1) This Determination does not cover the following:
(a) close control air conditioners;
(b) liquid-chilling packages;
(c) evaporative coolers or any other cooling systems that are not of the
vapour compression type;
(d) ground-water air conditioners or ground-loop air conditioners;
(e) spot coolers;
(f) dehumidifiers;
(g) air conditioners powered by mains electricity specifically designed and
sold only for installation in end-use mobile applications,
such as caravans,
mobile homes, camper vans, boats and rail cars;
(h) air conditioners powered by mains electricity specifically designed and
sold only for installation in specialised high temperature
applications, such as crane cabins used over blast furnaces;
(i) air conditioners that do not condition air sourced from within the
conditioned space, but instead condition air sourced from
outside the
conditioned space, and deliver that air to the conditioned space.
Note 1: Regarding paragraphs (a) and (b), some products excluded from
the application of this Determination are subject to the application
GEMS determinations.
Note 2: Regarding paragraph (c), air conditioners of the vapour
compression type that have an enhancement or option to assist the
energy efficiency (for example, solar-boosted air conditioners) are not excluded
from this Determination.
Note 3: Regarding paragraph (d), water-loop air conditioners are
included in the application of this Determination.
Note 4: Regarding paragraph (g), units for end-use mobile applications
listed at paragraph (g) are air conditioners that have been
designed to cater
for the expected vibrations, repetitive bumping and shock and other rough use
conditions of the intended mobile
application, and have design specifications
and test evidence of complying with Australian/New Zealand Standard or IEC
Standard requirements
under such conditions.
Note 5: Regarding paragraph (g), units installed in portable
buildings are included in the application of this Determination.
(2) In this section:
close control air conditioner
means an air conditioner designed
for high sensible heat ratio applications that is capable of maintaining close
control of both temperature
and humidity.
dehumidifier
means an encased assembly designed to remove
moisture from its surrounding atmosphere using either an electrically operated
refrigeration
system or a desiccant type of material. It also includes a means
to circulate air and a drain arrangement for any or all of collecting,
and disposing of the condensate.
Note: This is the same meaning as in clause 3.4 of AS/NZS 3823.1.5:2015.
ground-loop air conditioner
means a brine-to-air air
conditioner that uses a brine solution circulating through a subsurface piping
loop as a heat source or a
Note 1: The heat exchange loop may be placed in horizontal trenches or
vertical bores, or be submerged in a body of surface water.
Note 2: The temperature of the brine is related to climatic conditions and
may vary from -5 C to 40 C.
Note 3: This is the same meaning as the term “ground-loop heat pump
application” in clause 3.1.3 of AS/NZS 3823.1.3:2005.
ground-water air conditioner
means a water-to-air air
conditioner that uses water pumped from a well, lake or stream as a heat source
or a heat sink.
Note: This is the same meaning as the term “ground-water heat pump
application” in clause 3.1.2 of AS/NZS 3823.1.3:2005.
liquid-chilling package
a factory-made and
prefabricated assembly (not necessarily shipped as one package) of one or more
compressors, condensers and evaporators,
with interconnections and accessories,
designed for the purpose of cooling water, and is a machine specifically
designed to make
use of a vapour compression refrigeration cycle to remove heat
from water and reject the heat to a cooling medium, usually air or
spot cooler
(a) means a unitary air conditioner, which is usually portable, that lies
wholly within a conditioned space, draws air for both the
evaporator and
condenser from the conditioned space, and expels both of these back into the
conditioned space; but
(b) does not include a product that can be configured as:
(i) a portable unitary double duct air conditioner; or
(ii) a portable unitary single duct air conditioner.
Note: This is the same meaning as in clause 3.29 of AS/NZS 3823.1.5:2015.
—GEMS level requirements
Division 1—Preliminary
18 Purpose of Part
For paragraph 24(1)(a) of the Act, this Part specifies GEMS level
requirements in accordance with
of the Act for the product classes
covered by this Determination.
19 Meaning of
relevant MEPS
In this Part:
relevant MEPS level
, for a product in a particular product
class, means the amount specified for the product class in Schedule 1.
Note: MEPS is short for minimum energy performance standards.
20 Meaning of
(1) In this Determination:
Annual Coefficient of Performance
the measure of the energy efficiency of the heating function of air conditioners
and incorporates Weighted Average Inactive
Power Consumption
Annual Energy Efficiency Ratio
measure of the energy efficiency of the cooling function of air conditioners and
incorporates Weighted Average Inactive
Power Consumption
Coefficient of Performance
means a ratio
of the standard heating full capacity to the power input to the product
(watts/watts).
Energy Efficiency Ratio
means the ratio of
the standard cooling full capacity to the power input to the product
(watts/watts).
Calculation of ACOP and AEER
(2) For this Determination, a product’s ACOP and AEER are calculated
in accordance with the following formula:
(a) in relation to the product’s ACOP—the product’s
standard heating full capacity or standard heating part-load
capacity, as
appropriate, in kW; and
(b) in relation to the product’s AEER—the product’s
standard cooling full capacity or standard cooling part-load
capacity, as
appropriate, in kW.
power input
is the product’s power input, in kW, when
determining the relevant capacity.
is the Weighted Average Inactive Power
Consumption, in watts, as defined in Annex B of AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014 and
AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014.
represents a single, weighted, average,
inactive power consumption figure that applies equally to both cooling and
heating cycles.
It can be measured/calculated once using Annex B of either
AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014 or AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014. The product of the amount
and the number of hours of inactive mode,
, as given by AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014 or
AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014, is equal to the annual inactive energy consumption
, as used in
subsections 30(1)
Note 2: The number 2000 represents the assumed hours of operation per year in
cooling or heating mode.
Note 3: The number 6.76 is a factor that converts power (watts) to energy
(kWh) for 6760 (that is, 8760 – 2000) hours per year.
Division 2—GEMS level requirements (MEPS
21 GEMS level requirements (MEPS levels) for
product classes 2, 3 and 4
Note: For a reverse cycle air conditioner, the product must meet the
requirements of this section for both heating and cooling.
Application of section
(1) This section applies to a product in product class 2, 3 or 4.
Cooling requirement
(2) If the product is capable of cooling, the product’s rated and
tested EER must be greater than or equal to the relevant
MEPS level.
Heating requirement
(3) If the product is capable of heating, the product’s rated and
tested COP must be greater than or equal to the relevant
MEPS level.
Note: For products in product classes 2 and 4 with a supplementary water tank
designed to provide additional water to an evaporatively-cooled
condenser, the
EER and COP may be tested using this feature, provided that the duration of the
tank is 4 hours or more. See
sections 12
of Schedule 2.
22 GEMS level requirements (MEPS levels) for
other product classes—products without variable capacity
Note: For a reverse cycle air conditioner, the product must meet the
requirements of this section for both heating and cooling.
Application of section
(1) This section applies to a product that:
(a) is in product class 1 or 5 to 23; and
(b) is not of variable capacity.
Cooling requirement
(2) If the product is capable of cooling, the product’s rated and
tested AEER at full load must be greater than or equal to
the relevant MEPS
Heating requirement
(3) If the product is capable of heating, the product’s rated and
tested ACOP at full load must be greater than or equal to
the relevant MEPS
23 GEMS level requirements (MEPS levels) for
other product classes—products with variable capacity
Note: For a reverse cycle air conditioner, the product must meet the
requirements of this section for both heating and cooling.
Application of section
(1) This section applies to a product that:
(a) is in product class 1 or 5 to 23; and
(b) is of variable capacity.
Cooling requirement
(2) If the product is capable of cooling, then either:
(a) the product’s rated and tested AEER at full load must be greater
than or equal to the relevant MEPS level; or
(b) both of the following must be satisfied:
(i) the product’s rated and tested AEER at full load must be greater
than or equal to 95 per cent of the relevant MEPS level;
(ii) when operating at a part-load point nominated by the
manufacturer—either:
(A) for a part-load point between 83.3 per cent and 100 per cent of full
load—the tested AEER at that part-load point must
be greater than or equal
to the relevant MEPS level; or
(B) for a part-load point between 50 per cent and 83.3 per cent of full
load—the tested AEER at that part-load point must be
greater than or equal
to the amount
as calculated in accordance with
subsection (4).
Heating requirement
(3) If the product is capable of heating, then either:
(a) the product’s rated and tested ACOP at full load must be greater
than or equal to the relevant MEPS level; or
(b) both of the following must be satisfied:
(i) the product’s rated and tested ACOP at full load must be greater
than or equal to 95 per cent of the relevant MEPS level;
(ii) when operating at a part-load point nominated by the
manufacturer—either:
(A) for a part-load point between 83.3 per cent and 100 per cent of full
load—the tested ACOP at that part-load point must
be greater than or equal
to the relevant MEPS level; or
(B) for a part-load point between 50 per cent and 83.3 per cent of full
load—the tested ACOP at that part-load point must be
greater than or equal
to the amount
as calculated in accordance with
subsection (4).
(4) For this section, the amounts
, at a particular part-load point, are calculated
in accordance with the following formula:
(a) in relation to the product’s
—the product’s standard cooling
part-load capacity, in kW, at that part-load point; and
(b) in relation to the product’s
—the product’s standard heating
part-load capacity, in kW, at that part-load point.
(a) in relation to the product’s
—the product’s standard cooling full
capacity, in kW; and
(b) in relation to the product’s
—the product’s standard heating full
capacity, in kW.
is the relevant MEPS level.
24 Testing requirements
For paragraph 25(b) of the Act, testing requirements for the purposes
of this Part are set out in Schedule 2.
—GEMS labelling requirements
Division 1—Preliminary
25 Purpose of Part
For paragraph 24(1)(b) of the Act, this Part specifies GEMS labelling
requirements in accordance with
of the Act for the product
classes covered by this Determination.
26 Interpretation
In this Determination:
energy label
, in relation to a product,
label that is, or purports to be, designed to assist consumers to compare the
energy efficiency and energy consumption of
products covered by this
Determination.
energy rating icon
means an energy label whose content and
format complies with the requirements of Schedule 4.
energy rating label
means an energy label whose content and
format complies with the requirements of Schedule 3.
GEMS retail premises
means any premises:
(a) that are open to the public on a regular basis; and
(b) that are used for, or in connection with, the supply of one or more GEMS
products; and
(c) at which products that are covered by this Determination are displayed
for the purposes of retail supply or offers of retail
Note: Such a premises will be a
GEMS business premises
the meaning of
of the Act, and in particular, will satisfy
paragraph (a) of the definition of that term.
non-residential product
means a product in any of product
classes 1 to 12, that:
(a) is designed for non-residential applications; and
(b) is not on display for sale through retail outlets; and
(c) is not promoted in any catalogue or advertising material that could be
interpreted as implying that it is suitable for some residential
applications.
Division 2—Requirements relating to energy
Note: This Division applies only in relation to retail supplies and offers of
retail supply, and does not regulate wholesale supplies
or offers of wholesale
Subdivision 1—When energy labels are and
are not required or permitted
27 Prohibition on energy labels
and Division 3, an energy label must not be
provided with, displayed with, or otherwise communicated in connection with, a
covered by this Determination in the course of the retail supply, or
offer of retail supply, of the product.
28 When energy labels are required or
Products covered by this section
(1) This section covers a product:
(a) that is in any of product classes 1 to 12; and
(b) that has a rated standard cooling full capacity or, for a heating-only
product, a rated standard heating full capacity, of 
(2) However, this section does not cover such a product if test simulation
software was used in place of any physical test.
When energy rating labels are required
(3) An energy rating label must be communicated in connection with the
retail supply, or offer of retail supply, of a product that:
(a) is covered by this section; and
(i) single-phase; and
(ii) non-ducted; and
(iii) supplied, or offered for supply, at a GEMS retail premises; and
(c) is not a single-split system that has a ceiling cassette as the indoor
section 29.
When energy rating labels are permitted
(4) An energy rating label may, but need not, be communicated in connection
with the retail supply, or offer of retail supply, of
any other product that is
covered by this section.
section 29.
When energy rating icons are permitted
(5) An energy rating icon may, but need not, be used in an online or print
advertisement for a product covered by this section.
29 Manner of communication of energy rating
(1) If an energy rating label is communicated under
(a) adhere to, be printed on, or be part of; or
(b) be included in;
the packaging of each unit of the product.
Example: A single-split system for which the indoor and outdoor units are in
separate packages could have:
• an energy rating label that is printed on the package of the outdoor
• no energy rating label that adheres to, is printed on, is part of, or
is included in, the package of the indoor units.
(2) If an energy rating label is communicated under
or more units or packages of the product, or one or more units of another
product that looks like or is otherwise represented
as being the product, are
displayed at a GEMS retail premises:
(a) at least one energy rating label must be clearly visible in relation to
the display; and
(b) if all units on display are packaged—an energy rating label must
adhere to, be printed on, or be part of, the outside of
each package; and
(c) if one or more units are not packaged:
(i) for each unpackaged unit—an energy rating label must:
(A) adhere to, be printed on, or be part of, the unit; or
(B) be attached, in the form of a double-sided swing tag or a non-rotating
single-sided swing tag, to the unit; and
(ii) for each packaged unit (if any)—the energy rating label may, but
need not, adhere to, be printed on, be part of, the unit’s
(3) For subsection (2), if a display relating to the product includes a
model of the product, a non-functioning display unit, or
another item that
represents a unit of the product, paragraph (2)(c) applies as if it were an
unpackaged unit.
Subdivision 2—Calculation of amounts for
energy rating label and energy rating icon
30 Calculating Cooling Season Total Energy
Consumption and Heating Season Total Energy Consumption
Products other than unitary single duct air conditioners
(1) For this Determination, for a product other than a unitary single duct
air conditioner, the Cooling Season Total Energy Consumption
is the amount
as calculated in accordance with the following
is the Cooling Seasonal Energy
Consumption (CSEC), as calculated in accordance with clause 6 of AS/NZS
3823.4.1:2014 and based on
rated inputs.
Note: The Cooling Seasonal Energy Consumption or CSEC
total annual amount of energy consumed by the equipment when it is operated for
cooling in active mode.
is the Annual Inactive Energy
Consumption, as calculated in accordance with Annex B of
AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014 and based on rated inputs.
Note 1: The annual inactive energy consumption
equal to the product of the weighted average inactive power consumption
subsection 20(2))
and the number of hours of
inactive mode,
, as given by AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014.
Note 2: The factor 0.6 represents 60 per cent of the
which is attributed to the cooling cycle.
(2) For this Determination, for a product other than a unitary single duct
air conditioner, the Heating Season Total Energy Consumption
is the amount
as calculated in accordance with the following
is the Heating Seasonal Energy
Consumption (HSEC), as calculated in accordance with clause 6 of
AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014 and based on
rated inputs.
Note: The Heating Seasonal Energy Consumption or HSEC
total annual amount of energy consumed by the equipment, including make-up heat,
when it is operated for heating in active
is the Annual Inactive Energy
Consumption, as calculated in accordance with Annex B of
AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014 and based on rated inputs.
Note 1: The annual inactive energy consumption
equal to the product of the weighted average inactive power consumption
subsection 20(2))
and the number of hours of
inactive mode,
, as given by AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014.
Note 2: The factor 0.4 represents 40 per cent of the
which is attributed to the heating cycle.
Temperature bins for energy rating label calculations
(3) For calculating the Cooling Season Total Energy Consumption and Heating
Season Total Energy Consumption using subsections (1)
and (2) for the
purposes of
of Schedule 3, calculations must be based on the
residential temperature bins of clause 6.3 of AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014 and
AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014.
Note: AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014 has 3 cooling temperature bins, for the hot,
average and cold zones. AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014 has 3 heating
temperature
bins, for the hot, average and cold zones.
Unitary single duct air conditioners
of Schedule 3, for a unitary single duct air conditioner
within product classes 3 or 4, the Cooling Season Total Energy Consumption
and (if applicable) Heating Season Total Energy Consumption must be calculated
for each climate zone by multiplying the rated power
input specified by
subsection (5) or subsection (6) by the hours of operation set out in
the following table:
Cooling hours
Heating hours
(5) A wall mounted unitary single duct air conditioner in product class 3
must use the rated power input derived from the standard
cooling capacity test
at full load.
(6) A portable unitary single duct air conditioner in product class 4 must
use the rated power input derived from:
(a) if the duration of the supplementary water tank is 4 hours or
longer—the standard cooling full capacity test using the
supplementary
water tank in accordance with the additional requirements of Appendix B of
AS/NZS 3823.1.5:2015; and
(b) otherwise—the standard cooling capacity test at full load.
31 Calculating the star rating
Products other than unitary single duct air conditioners
of Schedule 3 and
of Schedule 4, for a
product other than a unitary single duct air conditioner:
(a) the cooling star rating is based on the Total Cooling Seasonal
Performance Factor (TCSPF or
) calculated in accordance
with Annex B of AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014 and derived from the use of rated
values; and
(b) the heating star rating is based on the Heating Seasonal Performance
Factor (HSPF, or
) calculated in accordance with clause
6.1 of AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014 and derived from the use of rated values.
(2) For subsection (1), calculations must be based on the residential
temperature bins of clause 6.3 of AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014 and
3823.4.2:2014.
Note: AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014 has 3 cooling temperature bins, for the hot,
average and cold zones. AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014 has 3 heating
temperature
bins, for the hot, average and cold zones.
(3) The TCSPF and HSPF correspond to a star rating as per Schedule 5.
Unitary single duct air conditioners
of Schedule 3 and
of Schedule 4,
unitary single duct air conditioners within product class 3 or 4 must always
display a star rating of zero for cooling
and heating (if applicable) in all
climate zones on the energy rating label or the energy rating icon, as
appropriate.
Division 3—Other GEMS labelling
requirements
32 Application of Division
This Division does not apply to:
(a) unitary single duct air conditioners (product classes 3 and 4);
(b) water-to-air air conditioners (product classes 22 and 23).
33 Meaning of
SEER rating
In this Determination:
commercial SEER rating
means a SEER rating calculated:
(a) using the commercial-based temperature bins set out in
Schedule 6; and
(b) according to subclause 6.2 of AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014 and
AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014, using the
values set out in
of Schedule 6 for the
purposes of Formula 2.
residential SEER rating
means a SEER rating calculated in
accordance with Division 2 of this Part.
SEER rating
(short for Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio rating)
means any of the following:
(a) the Total Cooling Seasonal Performance Factor (TCSPF);
(b) the Heating Seasonal Performance Factor (HSPF);
(c) the Cooling Season Total Energy Consumption;
(d) the Heating Season Total Energy Consumption.
Note: For each SEER rating, there will be 6 values, one for each temperature
zone (hot, average and cold) relating to residential
use of the product, and one
value for each temperature zone relating to commercial use of the product.
34 Advertising material—references to
SEER ratings
(1) Sales literature that is provided at the time a product is supplied, or
offered for supply, may include either or both of the
(a) a commercial SEER rating;
(b) a residential SEER rating.
(2) If a SEER rating is included, the sales literature must indicate:
(a) whether the SEER rating is a commercial SEER rating or a residential
SEER rating; and
(b) the temperature zone or zones (hot, average or cold) to which the SEER
rating applies.
(3) If a star rating is included, the sales literature must indicate the
temperature zone or zones (hot, average or cold) to which
the star rating
Division 4—Testing requirements
35 Testing requirements
For paragraph 26(1)(c) of the Act, testing requirements for the
purposes of this Part are set out in Schedule 2.
Division 5—Labelling requirements if this
Determination is revoked
36 Impact of replacement determination
A GEMS labelling requirement of this Determination (the
requirement
) is taken to be complied with if:
(a) this Determination is revoked in accordance with paragraph 35(1)(a)
of the Act; and
(b) another GEMS determination (the
replacement determination
is made in accordance with paragraph 35(1)(b) of the Act; and
(c) a transitional GEMS labelling requirement (the
replacement
requirement
) of the replacement determination
that, if the replacement requirement is complied with, the revoked requirement
is taken to be complied with.
Division 6—Transitional GEMS labelling
requirements
37 Purpose of Division
The requirements of this Division are made for the purpose mentioned in
paragraph 26(2)(c) of the Act.
Note: The purpose mentioned in paragraph 26(2)(c) of the Act is
providing a transition to regulation of products in the product class
GEMS determination (including because the products were not previously covered
by a GEMS determination or because the GEMS
determination is a replacement
determination). Under the Act, a requirement of a GEMS determination that is
expressed to be made
for this purpose is a “transitional GEMS labelling
requirement”.
38 Transitional GEMS labelling
requirements—product classes other than product classes 3 or 4
Note: This section does not apply to unitary single duct air conditioners
(product classes 3 or 4).
(1) This section applies to a product other than one in product classes 3 or
(a) the model of the product was registered (whether under this
Determination or the revoked Determination) before 1 April 2020;
(b) the product is supplied or offered for supply while the registration is
Note 1: 1 April 2020 is the date this Determination came into force. See
Note 2: For paragraph (b), see Division 5 of
for when a registration is in force.
(2) This section applies irrespective of whether:
(a) the supply or offer for supply is before or after 1 April 2020; or
(b) the product was imported into, or the product’s last process of
manufacture is performed in, Australia before or after
1 April 2020.
(3) The product must comply with the GEMS labelling requirements of
(a) this Determination; or
(b) the revoked Determination.
(4) In this section:
revoked Determination
Greenhouse and Energy
Minimum Standards (Air Conditioners and Heat Pumps) Determination 2013
—Other requirements
39 Purpose of Part
subsection 24(2)
of the Act, this Part specifies other
requirements in accordance with
of the Act for product classes
covered by this Determination.
40 Product performance—average true power
(1) The specified product performance requirements in relation to tested
average true power factor are as follows:
(a) air conditioners with a rated power input of less than or equal to 850W
(i) a tested input that does not exceed 1000VA; and
(ii) a tested average true power factor greater than or equal to 0.5;
(b) air conditioners with a rated power input of greater than 850W and a
rated capacity of less than or equal to 15kW must have a
tested average true
power factor greater than or equal to 0.85;
(c) air conditioners with a rated capacity of greater than 15kW and less
than or equal to 20kW must have a tested average true power
factor greater than
or equal to:
(d) air conditioners with a rated capacity of greater than 20kW must have a
tested average true power factor greater than or equal
(2) In this section:
rated capacity
(a) rated standard cooling full capacity; or
(b) for a heating-only product—rated standard heating full
(3) In this section:
average true power factor
means the average ratio over a given
time of the tested kilowatt hours (kWh) divided by the tested kilo volt ampere
hours (kVAh).
Note: It is not the average of regular instantaneous power factor
measurements.
41 Amounts to be determined before applying for
registration
(a) Total Cooling Seasonal Performance Factor; and
(b) Heating Seasonal Performance Factor; and
(c) noise (sound power);
must be determined before an application to register a model of a product
is made under the Act.
Note: For products that have an energy rating label, these amounts appear on
the label. For products that do not have an energy rating
label, these amounts
would be provided at the time of applying for registration, and would appear on
the GEMS Register.
42 Testing requirements
For paragraph 27(1)(e) of the Act, testing requirements for the
purposes of this Part are set out in Schedule 2.
1—Product classes and minimum energy performance standards
sections 21
of this Determination, a numbered
identified in the following table consists of products that:
(a) are the kind of product indicated; and
(b) have the characteristics indicated; and
(c) have a value of
in the indicated range; and
(d) are not excluded by
of this Determination.
(2) For this Schedule,
(a) the rated standard cooling full capacity; or
(b) for heating-only products—the rated standard heating full
(3) For the purposes of determining the relevant product class, the amount
must be rounded to the nearest 0.1kW.
Note: In the case of reverse cycle products, the relevant Minimum Energy
Performance Standards (MEPS) for heating and cooling are
both based on the
product’s rated standard cooling full capacity (even if the
product’s rated standard heating full capacity
is different from its
standard cooling full capacity).
Kind of product
Product class
Characteristics
Air-to-air unitary air conditioners
Wall mounted unitary double duct air conditioners
Portable unitary double duct air conditioners
Wall mounted unitary single duct air conditioners
Portable unitary single duct air conditioners
Ducted or non-ducted, excluding product classes 1 to 4
Ducted or non-ducted, excluding product classes 1 to 4
Ducted or non-ducted, excluding product classes 1 to 4
Air-to-air single-split systems
Ducted or non-ducted
Ducted or non-ducted
Air-to-air single-split outdoor units
(not supplied or offered for supply as part of a single-split system)
Supplied or offered for supply to create a non-ducted system
Supplied or offered for supply to create a non-ducted system
Supplied or offered for supply to create a ducted system
Whether supplied or offered for supply to create a ducted or a non-ducted
Whether supplied or offered for supply to create a ducted or a non-ducted
Air-to-air multi-split outdoor units
(whether or not supplied or offered for supply as part of a multi-split
Water-to-air air conditioners
Schedule 2—Testing requirements
sections 24
1 Conducting
This Schedule sets out requirements for conducting tests in relation to
of this Determination.
Application of section
(1) This section applies to all tests conducted for the purposes of
of this Determination.
Rounding and significant figures
(2) Unless otherwise stated, numbers must be rounded and recorded to five
significant figures.
Use of circumvention devices
(3) Circumvention devices must not be used.
Solar-boosted air conditioners
(4) Solar-boosted air conditioners must be tested with any solar input
minimised or disconnected, as far as possible.
Definitions
(5) In this section:
circumvention device
means any control, control device,
software, component or part that alters the operating characteristics during any
test procedure,
resulting in measurements that are unrepresentative of the
appliance’s true characteristics that may occur during normal use
comparable conditions.
Note 1: Generally, circumvention devices save energy during an energy test,
but not during normal use.
Note 2: An example of a circumvention device would be a mechanism that
de-activates a crankcase heater or other energy-consuming devices
Note 3: Locking instructions, or software or hardware that sets the
compressor output, fan speeds and other settings for a rated test,
considered circumvention devices.
solar-boosted air conditioner
means an air conditioner that has
provision for the input of energy from a solar source and can be configured to
operate with little
or no solar input.
3 Test simulation
Application of section
(1) This section applies to all tests conducted for the purposes of
of this Determination.
Restriction on use of test simulation software
(2) Test simulation software must not be used other than in accordance with
this section.
(3) Test simulation software must not be used for a product in product class
3, 4, 22 or 23.
(4) Test simulation software must not be used:
(a) to test noise (sound power); or
(b) to test average true power factor; or
(c) to conduct the tests referred to in
subsections 8(3)
this Schedule at H2 or H3 temperature conditions.
Note 1: For noise (sound power), see
of this Schedule.
Note 2: For average true power factor, see
Determination and
of this Schedule.
Note 3: The tests referred to in
subsections 8(3)
and (4) of this
Schedule are used when determining SEER ratings, and in particular, when
determining:
• the Heating Seasonal Performance Factor (HSPF), and hence the star
rating (see
of, and Schedule 5 to, this Determination); and
• the Heating Season Total Energy Consumption (see
of Schedule 3 to, this Determination).
As a result, simulation software cannot be used on its own in order to
determine these SEER ratings.
Use of test simulation software—product classes other than 3, 4, 22
(5) The GEMS Regulator may authorise, in writing, a particular test
simulation software package for a product or products that:
(a) are in product classes other than 3, 4, 22 or 23; and
(b) are of a particular type;
if satisfied that the software package has an accuracy equivalent to the
relevant physical test standard for products that are in
those product classes
and of that type.
Note 1: Evidence of accuracy to this level may include (but is not limited
to) a full physical test report and a full simulation test
report on the same
Note 2: The GEMS Regulator may require separate evidence of the accuracy of
the software package for each product class/type combination
for which the
supplier wishes to use it.
(6) Test simulation software that has been so authorised may be used
(a) products:
(i) that have a rated standard cooling full capacity or, for heating-only
products, a rated standard heating full capacity, of 
(ii) that are of the same type as the product for which the software has
been authorised; and
(iii) that are in the product classes specified in the authorisation; or
(b) products:
(i) that have a rated standard cooling full capacity or, for heating-only
products, a rated standard heating full capacity, of 
(ii) that are of the same type as the product for which the software has
been authorised; and
(iii) that are in the product classes specified in the authorisation, but
that are not in product class 1 or 2; and
(iv) for which the sales of the model of the products have been or will be
less than 10 units in the financial year in which registration
occurred, and
each subsequent financial year.
Note: The GEMS Regulator may request evidence of sales volumes to demonstrate
compliance with subparagraph (6)(b)(iv), under
of the Act.
Definitions
(7) In this section
relevant physical test standard
(a) for non-ducted air conditioners—AS/NZS 3823.1.1:2012; and
(b) for ducted air conditioners—AS/NZS 3823.1.2:2012; and
(c) for multi-split systems—AS/NZS 3823.1.4:2012.
test simulation software
means a computer-based software
package that uses simplified measurements and other data to estimate relevant
product performance
without the need for a full, physical test.
: the following are the
(a) ducted split systems;
(b) non-ducted split systems;
(c) multi-split systems;
(d) ducted unitary systems;
(e) non-ducted unitary systems.
calorimeter and air enthalpy test methods
(1) This section applies in relation to all tests undertaken for the
purposes of
(other than sound testing) of this
Determination.
(2) This section does not apply in relation to a simulation test that was
conducted in accordance with
of this Schedule.
(3) For a test of a kind indicated in the following table that is conducted
in relation to a product indicated in the corresponding
row of the table, the
test method, or any of the test methods, indicated in the corresponding row of
the table must be used.
Note: These tests are outlined in AS/NZS 3823.1.1:2012,
AS/NZS 3823.1.2:2012 and AS/NZS 3823.1.4:2012.
Indoor enthalpy test method
Calorimeter room test method
Shortened calorimeter room test spanning 3 complete defrost
the following tests for the purposes of
(a) low temperature heating capacity test (H2); and
(b) extra-low temperature heating capacity test (H3)
all products (whether single-phase or three-phase) other than products in
product class 3 or 4
any test not covered by item 1
(a) products in product class 3 or 4 (whether single-phase or
three-phase);
(b) single-phase, non-ducted products in product class 1, 2, 5, 6 or 7,
other than such products that are registered on the basis
that a label will not
be displayed at the time of supply or offer of supply;
(c) single-phase, non-ducted products in product class 8, 9, 11 or 12,
other than such products:
(i) with a ceiling cassette as the indoor unit; or
(ii) that are registered on the basis that a label will not be displayed at
the time of supply or offer of supply
(d) any product not covered by paragraph (a), (b) or (c)
5 Use of default test values in AS/NZS
3823.4.1:2014
of this Determination, fixed capacity products may elect to use
the default values of Table 1 of AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014 for the low
temperature cooling capacity test, rather than perform a physical test at these
conditions.
Note: These defaults are based on tested values from the standard cooling
full capacity test. The standard cooling full capacity is
multiplied by 1.077
and the power input is multiplied by 0.914.
Rating variable capacity
products as fixed capacity products
of this Determination, variable capacity, two-stage capacity,
and multi-stage capacity units may elect to be tested and rated as
capacity product for the purposes of testing to Table 1 of AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014
and/or AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014.
Note 1: A low temperature cooling capacity test may be performed using the
locking instructions for the standard cooling full capacity
test. Alternatively,
the default values may be used as per
of this Schedule.
Note 2: A low temperature heating capacity test at full capacity may be
performed using the locking instructions for the standard
heating full capacity
7 Degradation coefficient of AS/NZS
of this Determination, the value for the Degradation Coefficient
) of Table 1 in both AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014 and
AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014 may not be changed from the default value of 0.25.
8 Seasonal rating tests
(1) This section applies:
(a) to a product in a product class other than 3, 4, 22 and 23; and
(b) in relation to tests relating to a SEER rating that are conducted for
of this Determination.
Note: This section applies to product classes other than those covering
water-to-air air conditioners and unitary single duct air
conditioners.
(2) Subject to
of this Schedule, an air conditioner
that has a cooling capability must be tested to the required cooling test points
in Table 1 in AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014, as per its product type.
(3) Subject to
of this Schedule, an air conditioner that
(a) a heating capability; and
(b) for an air conditioner that also has a cooling capability—a rated
standard cooling full capacity of < 30kW; and
(c) for a heating-only product—a rated standard heating full capacity
must be tested to the required heating test points identified in Table 1 in
AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014, as per its product type.
Note 1: The heating test points correspond to temperature conditions H1, H2
Note 2: See paragraph 3(4)(c) of this Schedule for when tests referred
to in subsection (3) cannot be done using test simulation software.
(4) Subject to
of this Schedule, an air conditioner that
(a) a heating capability; and
(b) for an air conditioner that also has a cooling capability—a rated
standard cooling full capacity of  30kW; and
(c) for a heating-only product—a rated standard heating full capacity
must either:
(d) be tested to the required heating test points identified in Table 1 in
AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014, as per its product type; or
(e) be tested and rated as per the standard heating full capacity test.
Note 1: The heating test points correspond to temperature conditions H1, H2
Note 2: See paragraph 3(4)(c) of this Schedule for when tests referred
to in subsection (4) cannot be done using test simulation software.
(5) In the case of subsection (2), subsection (3) or
paragraph (4)(d), any of the optional tests may also be performed.
Note: Testing at H3 is optional under AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014.
(6) In this section:
product type
means fixed capacity, two-stage capacity, variable
or variable capacity.
9 Noise (sound power) testing
of Schedule 3 to this Determination, sound power
tests must be conducted according to either EN 12102:2013 or
EN 12102-1:2017.
(2) Tests must be conducted using the installation and operating conditions
(a) the standard cooling full capacity test; or
(b) for heating only products—the standard heating full capacity
10 Specific
requirements for multi-split outdoor units
Note: For multi-split outdoor units, the relevant product classes are 18 to
21, “Air to air multi-split outdoor units (whether
or not supplied or
offered for supply as part of a multi-split system)”.
Each of these product classes covers only the multi-split outdoor unit
itself; the unit may be supplied or offered for supply in
relation to any
appropriate system of outdoor and indoor units (including a system with a single
indoor unit).
(1) This section applies in relation to all tests undertaken for the
purposes of
of this Determination.
(2) The test results for a multi-split outdoor unit are based on a
multi-split system. The outdoor unit model is to be tested using
representative combination of indoor units. The representative combination of
indoor units must:
(a) consist of units that are readily available for possible check-testing
purposes; and
(b) for a VRF type unit—not be less than the manufacturer’s
specified minimum number of indoor units; and
(c) for a fixed head product—consist of a dedicated indoor unit for
each refrigeration port on the outdoor unit; and
(d) be one for which the ratio of:
(i) the sum of the manufacturer’s nominated rated capacities for the
indoor units; and
(ii) the manufacturer’s nominated rated capacity for the outdoor
is equal to 1, or is as close as possible to 1 within the range of the
manufacturer’s specified connectable indoor units;
(e) be the same for all heating and cooling tests; and
(f) be configured with a remote control for each indoor unit (unless the
controls are integral to the indoor unit).
(3) The documentation of the test must also specify:
(a) the make and model number of each indoor unit; and
(b) the rated capacity for each indoor unit when used in the representative
combination; and
(c) the configuration and test setup. Complete setup instructions, including
but not limited to piping lengths and layouts, capacity
fixing methods,
refrigerant charge and system specifications must be included. This may take the
form of a printout from the manufacturer’s
sales selection software.
Note: A representative indoor unit that is used for the purposes of this
section might be the indoor unit of a single-split system
which has an energy
rating label pursuant to
of this Determination. In such a case,
the rated capacity for the purposes of subparagraph (2)(d)(i) and
paragraph (3)(b) of this
section might differ from the rated capacity as
indicated on the single-split system’s energy rating label. This is
the rated capacity of an indoor unit can vary depending on the outdoor
unit with which it is combined.
11 Alternative test
methods for VRF type multi-split outdoor units and products
(1) This section applies in relation to all tests undertaken for the
purposes of
of this Determination.
(2) This section applies to:
(a) variable refrigerant flow (VRF) type multi-split outdoor units; and
(b) products that:
(i) are in a product class other than 3, 4, 22 or 23; and
(ii) have a rated standard cooling full capacity or, for heating-only
products, a rated standard heating full capacity, of more than
(3) Subject to this section and
of this Schedule, tests for
the purposes of
of this Determination may be undertaken
according to the methods set out in the following:
(a) EN 14511:2018;
(b) a standard based on ISO 5151:2017 (non-ducted air conditioners, any VRF
multi-split and fixed head multi-split outdoor unit greater
than 30kW rated
standard cooling full capacity or, for heating-only products, rated standard
heating full capacity);
(c) a standard based on ISO 13253:2017 (ducted air conditioners);
(d) a standard based on ISO 15042:2017 (multi-split outdoor units);
(e) AHRI 1230:2010.
(4) Subject to this section, information set out in any of the following
certificates may be relied on for the purposes of
Determination without further testing being conducted:
(a) an AHRI certificate, being a certified test certificate from the
Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute;
Note: Further information on AHRI certification could, in 2019, be found at
www.ahrinet.org.
(b) a Eurovent certificate, being a certified test certificate from the
European Association of Air Handling and Refrigerating Equipment
Manufacturers.
Note: Further information on Eurovent certification could, in 2019, be found
at www.eurovent-certification.com.
(5) A standard or certificate mentioned in this section may be relied on
only in relation to testing at:
(a) an electrical supply voltage of 230V single-phase or 400V three-phase;
(b) a frequency of 50Hz; and
(c) the H1, H2, H3 or T1 temperature conditions.
12 Specific
requirements for unitary double duct air conditioners
(1) This section applies in relation to all tests undertaken for the
purposes of
of this Determination.
Specific requirements for wall mounted unitary double duct air
conditioners
(2) Wall mounted unitary double duct air conditioners must use the test
procedures of AS/NZS 3823.1.1:2012. They must be installed
on the wall of
the test chamber as per the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
Specific requirements for portable unitary double duct air
conditioners
(3) Portable unitary double duct air conditioners must use the general test
procedures of AS/NZS 3823.1.1:2012. However, both the
exhaust and inlet ducts
must be installed as per Appendices A2.1 to A2.5 of
AS/NZS 3823.1.5:2015.
(4) Portable unitary double duct air conditioners that contain a condensate
container must not have a test interrupted by a full
condensate container
triggering a cut-off switch. If necessary, condensate containers must be
modified to drain away excess condensate
into a larger container in the test
chamber before the volume that activates the cut-off switch is reached.
Note 1: Some portable unitary double duct air conditioners may have an
in-built hose to facilitate the draining of condensate.
Note 2: Some portable unitary double duct air conditioners are designed to
collect condensate and evaporate it on the condenser. This
process should be
allowed to occur during testing.
Note 3: The testing requirements of this subsection mirror the
requirements for unitary single duct air conditioners as detailed in
3823.1.5:2015.
(5) For a portable unitary double duct air conditioner that contains a
supplementary water tank:
(a) the duration
of the tank must be determined during the
standard cooling full capacity test; and
(b) in determining this period:
(i) the test setup and test conditions must be as per AS/NZS 3823.1.1:2012;
(ii) the duration must be determined as per Appendix B of
AS/NZS 3823.1.5:2015; and
(c) if the duration of the tank is  4 hours:
(i) all tests may be performed using this feature as per the
manufacturer’s instructions; and
(ii) if tests are performed using the tank—any water added to the tank
must be 27°C ± 1°C; and
(iii) if the product can operate both with and without the tank—the
standard cooling full capacity must be determined both
with and without the tank
being used; and
(d) if the duration of the tank is  4 hours—the tank must not
be used when determining whether the product meets the
GEMS level requirement of
of this Determination.
Note 1: If the duration of the tank is less than 4 hours, and the portable
unitary double duct air conditioner cannot operate without
the tank, the product
will not comply with the requirements of this Determination.
Note 2: Some portable unitary double duct air conditioners are fitted with a
supplementary water evaporation feature designed to provide
additional water for
the evaporatively-cooled condenser and/or compressor. They generally require the
user to fill the water tank
and manually select an operational mode via the
unit’s control panel or remote control that turns this function on. This
operational
mode may override other thermostat and fan settings and is designed
to achieve higher cooling capacities and greater energy efficiency
feature is active. When these units deactivate their supplementary water
evaporation feature (for instance, when insufficient
water is detected in the
supplementary water tank), they may automatically revert to cooling without the
aid of the supplementary
water evaporation feature, or they may automatically
switch off.
Note 3: This provision is not applicable to wall mounted unitary double duct
air conditioners within product class 1.
Note 4: The testing requirements of this subsection mirror the requirements
for unitary single duct air conditioners as detailed in
3823.1.5:2015.
Note 5: AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014 and AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014 use the test procedures
of AS/NZS 3823.1.1:2012 for unitary double duct air
conditioners.
13 Specific
requirements for portable unitary single duct unit air conditioners
(1) This section applies in relation to all tests undertaken for the
purposes of
of this Determination.
(2) For a portable unitary single duct air conditioner (product
class 4) that contains a supplementary water tank:
(a) if the duration of the tank is  4 hours:
(i) all tests may be performed using this feature as per the
manufacturer’s instructions; and
(ii) if the product can operate both with and without the tank—the
standard cooling full capacity must be determined both with
and without the tank
being used; and
(b) if the duration of the tank is  4 hours—the tank must not
be used when determining whether the product meets the
GEMS level requirement of
of this Determination.
Note: For a portable unitary single duct air conditioner, the duration of the
tank is worked out in accordance with Appendix B of
AS/NZS 3823.1.5:2015.
14 Specific
requirements for water-to-air air conditioners
(1) This section applies for the purposes of
Determination.
(2) Water-to-air air conditioners (product classes 22 and 23) must be tested
to the cooling and (if applicable) heating capacity
AS/NZS 3823.1.3:2005.
Note: While the determination of seasonal performance to AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014
and AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014 are prohibited for water-to-air
air conditioners,
variable capacity products may be tested for part load performance as per the
provisions of
subsections 23(2)
and (3) of this Determination. Part load
testing is defined in AS/NZS 3823.1.3:2005.
15 Specific
requirements for single-split outdoor units
(1) This section applies in relation to all tests undertaken for the
purposes of
of this Determination.
(2) A single-split outdoor unit must be tested using a representative indoor
unit. The representative indoor unit must:
(a) be of the same type of indoor air distribution as the outdoor unit is
being supplied or offered to be supplied for (i.e. ducted
or non-ducted);
(b) be specified by make and model number and be readily available for
possible check-testing purposes; and
(c) be the same for all cooling and heating tests; and
(d) be configured with a remote control, unless the controls are integral to
the indoor unit.
16 Specific requirements for testing for
average true power factor
(1) This section applies in relation to tests undertaken for the purposes of
of this Determination.
(2) The average true power factor must be determined over a period of not
less than 5 minutes of operation.
(3) The calculation of the average true power factor value must be based on
the results of the standard cooling capacity test, the
standard heating capacity
test, or both, as applicable, at full load. The values must not be calculated
through simulation testing.
Schedule 3—
Format of energy rating
Interpretation
In this Schedule:
subsection 3(3)
of this Schedule.
subsection 4(7)
of this Schedule.
subsection 4(8)
of this Schedule.
subsection 4(9)
of this Schedule.
subsection 4(10)
of this Schedule.
subsection 7(7)
of this Schedule.
subsection 8(8)
of this Schedule.
subsection 8(8)
of this Schedule.
subsection 8(8)
of this Schedule.
subsection 8(8)
of this Schedule.
subsection 8(8)
of this Schedule.
subsection 10(4)
of this Schedule.
subsection 10(5)
of this Schedule.
subsection 10(6)
of this Schedule.
subsection 10(7)
of this Schedule.
subsection 11(2)
of this Schedule.
subsection 12(2)
of this Schedule.
subsection 12(3)
of this Schedule.
subsection 12(4)
of this Schedule.
subsection 12(5)
of this Schedule.
subsection 3(2)
of this Schedule.
2 Meaning of certain details in the diagrams
In a diagram in this Schedule, numbers, model details and star ratings are
illustrative only; the actual numbers, model details
and star ratings for the
energy rating label for a particular product must be those specified in this
3 Default elements of the energy
(1) Unless this Schedule provides otherwise:
(a) the energy rating label for a product must include each element
mentioned in subsection (2); and
(b) the elements must contain the objects and text shown in diagram 1;
(c) the elements, and the objects and text within them, must be arranged as
shown in diagram 1.
(2) For this Schedule, the
of an energy rating label
for a product are the following, as identified by letter in diagram 1:
(a) the heading strip (
(b) the cooling capacity strip (
(c) the heating capacity strip (
(d) the star rating statement (
(e) the hot, average and cold area Cooling Season Total Energy Consumption
and Heating Season Total Energy Consumption figures (
(f) the hot, average and cold area star ratings (
(g) the noise statement (
(h) the climate zone map (
(i) the model details (
4 Content of elements b and c (cooling capacity
strip and heating capacity strip)
Heating only and cooling only products
(1) Despite any other provision in this Schedule:
(a) for a cooling only product, the heating capacity strip must be left
blank, as shown in diagram 2; and
(b) for a heating only product, the cooling capacity strip must be left
blank, as shown in diagram 3.
Products that are capable of cooling
(2) Subject to subsections (3) and (4), for a product that is capable
of cooling, the cooling capacity strip must:
(a) state the product’s rated standard cooling full capacity; and
(b) have the wording, and be in the arrangement, shown in element b of
(3) For a product in product class 2 or 4 that:
(a) has a supplementary tank with a duration of 4 hours or more; and
(b) can operate with or without it;
the cooling capacity strip must instead:
(c) state the rated standard cooling full capacity both with and without the
supplementary water tank in use; and
(d) have the wording, and be in the arrangement, shown in:
(i) for a product in product class 2—element b of diagram 2;
(ii) for a product in product class 4—element b of diagram 5.
(4) For a product in product class 4 that:
(a) has no supplementary water tank; or
(b) has a supplementary tank with a duration of 4 hours or more and cannot
operate without it;
the cooling capacity strip must instead:
(c) state the product’s rated standard cooling full capacity; and
(d) have the wording, and be in the arrangement, shown in element b of
Products that are capable of heating
(5) For a product that is capable of heating, the heating capacity strip
must state:
(a) the product’s rated standard heating full capacity; and
(b) for a product other than one in product class 3 or 4—either:
(i) if the product is capable of heating extended-load operation—the
product’s rated low temperature heating extended-load
capacity; or
(ii) otherwise—the product’s rated low temperature heating full
(6) The heating capacity strip must have the wording, and be in the
arrangement, shown in:
(a) for a product in product class 3 or 4—element c of diagram 4;
(b) otherwise—element c of diagram 1.
5 Content of element d (star rating
The text of the star rating statement must be set out as shown in element d
of diagram 1.
6 Content of elements e, f and g (hot, average
and cold area Cooling Season Total Energy Consumption and Heating Season Total
Consumption figures)
Elements e, f and g must set out the product’s:
(a) Cooling Season Total Energy Consumption; and
(b) Heating Season Total Energy Consumption;
for each temperature zone, calculated on the basis of the residential
temperature bins.
Note: For a product other than one in product class 3 or 4, the Cooling
Season Total Energy Consumption and Heating Season Total Energy
Consumption
figures are calculated in accordance with
subsection 30(1)
and (2) of this
Determination respectively.
For a product in product class 3 or 4, these figures are calculated in
accordance with
subsection 30(4)
of this Determination.
7 Content of elements h, i and j (hot, average
and cold area star ratings)
(1) The hot, average and cold area star ratings for the product in
accordance with
of this Determination must be set out as shown in
elements h, i and j of diagram 1, with any modifications or variations
by this section.
(2) For each relevant heating and cooling function, a star rating must be
shown in numerals in a star, positioned as detailed below.
There must be a set
of such ratings for each geographical region. A product that does not provide
either a cooling or heating service
must not place a rating star on the star
band for that service.
(3) The cooling function star rating (the
rating star
must be shown in a blue star within a square box with black outline. A
rating of 0 must be shown in a grey star (see for example diagrams
4). A rating of 0.5 must be shown in a star whose left half is blue and right
(4) The heating function rating star must be shown as a red star within a
square box with black outline. A rating of 0 must be shown
in a grey star (see
for example diagram 4). A rating of 0.5 must be shown in a star whose left half
is red and right half grey (see
for example diagrams 7 and 15).
(5) The rating star must be vertically centred on the centre of the relevant
star in the star band. For example, if the rating is
then the rating star aligns with the fourth star in the band; this obscures the
fourth star, and some of the
third. Rating stars from 0 to 1 are placed in
the same location; the centre of the rating star must sit on the centre of the
star in the star band. For a rating involving a half star, the rating star
must bisect the gap between the stars that bracket the
(6) The coloured band for the star rating must extend to the edge of the
rating star box.
(7) The following diagrams (
) show the appropriate star bands for different types
of products, and their dimensions:
8 Content of element k (noise
(1) The tested noise level in decibels in accordance with
Schedule 2 to this Determination must be set out as shown in element k of
diagram 1, and diagram 9, with any modifications or
variations required by this
(2) For the following product types, the relevant noise (sound power) types
are as follows:
Product type
Non-ducted single-split systems
Non-ducted unitary air conditioners (other than those of a kind mentioned
indoor and outdoor noise levels
Ducted units (including ducted split systems and ducted unitary air
conditioners)
outdoor noise level only
Unitary double duct air conditioners
Unitary single duct air conditioners
indoor noise level only
(3) For non-ducted, single-split systems with two or three indoor units,
indoor sound power is required for a single indoor unit
(4) For a product in product classes 5, 6, 8, 9 or 11, excluding ducted
products, the indoor decibel rating must be shown inside
the house symbol and
the outdoor decibel rating must be shown outside the house symbol, as shown in
diagram 10.
(5) For a product in product class 5, 6, 10 or 11, excluding non-ducted
products, only the outdoor decibel rating must be shown outside
the house symbol
together with the fixed ducted air conditioner symbol, as shown in diagram
(6) For a product in product class 1 or 2, only the indoor decibel rating
must be shown together with the double duct symbol, as
shown in diagram 12.
(7) For a product in product class 3 or 4, only the indoor decibel rating
must be shown together with the single duct symbol, as
shown in diagram 13.
(8) The following diagrams show the appropriate decibel rating icons for
different types of products, and their dimensions:
9 Content of element m (model details)
(1) The brand and model of the product must be set out as shown in element m
of diagram 1. The text must:
(a) be complete and concise; and
(b) not exceed a width of 58 mm; and
(c) not exceed a height of 17 mm (or 4 lines of text); and
(d) be left aligned in the area allowed.
(2) For a single-split system, the model details must consist of:
(a) if there is a model number for the system as a whole—that number;
(b) otherwise—the model numbers of the individual units, using the
format “outdoor unit model number/indoor unit model
(3) A family name may be used in place of an individual model name/number
for a family registration. Wildcard characters may be used
in the family name,
but may not represent more than one character.
10 Colours and fonts for the energy rating
(1) The energy rating label must be printed on a white background using the
following colours in the elements as shown in diagram
For a printed label
Pantone 116
Pantone 300
Pantone Warm red
Pantone Black 5%
Pantone Black 40%
Pantone Black
(2) The entire label must be in only one font, which may be any one of the
(a) Gill Sans (preferred);
(b) Humanist 521;
(c) Hammersmith.
(3) The text in an energy rating label must be of the font size and colour
shown in diagrams 14 to 17. All type weights regular unless
(default requirements):
(requirements for cooling capacity strip given
by diagram 2):
(requirements for heating and cooling capacity
strips given by diagram 4):
(requirements for cooling capacity strip given
by diagram 5):
requirements for the energy rating label—diagram
(1) The objects in an energy rating label must be as shown in diagram 18.
(default requirements):
12 Physical layout
requirements for the label
(1) The objects and elements in an energy rating label must be laid out as
shown in diagrams 19 to 22.
(default requirements):
(requirements for cooling capacity strip given
by diagram 2):
(requirements for
heating and cooling capacity strips given by diagram 4):
(requirements for cooling capacity strip given
by diagram 5):
Schedule 4—
Format of energy rating
1 Interpretation
In this Schedule:
subsection 3(2)
of this Schedule.
subsection 7(4)
of this Schedule.
subsection 7(5)
of this Schedule.
2 Meaning of certain details in the
In a diagram in this Schedule, numbers are illustrative only; the actual
numbers for the energy rating icon for a particular product
must be those
specified in this Schedule.
Elements of the energy rating
(1) Subject to
, an energy rating icon must be in
substantially the format shown in diagram 1.
4 Colours for the energy rating icon
The energy rating icon must use the colours in the elements in accordance
with the following table:
For a printed label—the following Pantone colours
For a label that appears in digital media—the following RGB
colours, or equivalent colours
Pantone 116
252 - 217 - 11
Pantone 300
0 - 122 - 195
Pantone Warm red
238 - 59 - 36
Pantone Black 5%
242 - 242 - 242
Pantone Black 40%
177 - 179 - 179
Pantone Black
Note: The Pantone colours are illustrated in the energy rating labels that
are reproduced in Schedule 3. The RGB colours are illustrated
in the energy
rating icons that are reproduced in this Schedule.
5 Fonts for the energy rating icon
(1) The entire icon must be in only one font, which may be any one of the
(a) Gill Sans (preferred);
(b) Humanist 521;
(c) Hammersmith.
(2) The text in an energy rating icon must have the following weights and
“ENERGY RATING”
Star ratings
“HOT”, “AVERAGE” and “COLD”
6 Size of the energy rating icon
(1) Subject to this section, an energy rating icon may be of any size.
(2) The dimensions of the icon, and of the text in the icon, must be
proportional to the dimensions of the icon as illustrated in
7 Content of energy rating icon
(1) Subject to this section, an energy rating icon must list the cooling
star ratings and heating star ratings for each of the climate
illustrated in
(2) If the product is heating-only, a dash must be included in the area
where the cooling star rating would otherwise go (see diagram
(3) If the product is cooling-only, a dash must be included in the area
where the heating star rating would otherwise go (see diagram
Schedule 5—
Star ratings
1 Star ratings
subsection 31(3)
of this Determination, the correspondence between
the TCSPF and HSPF and the star ratings is given by the following table:
TCSPF or HSPF value
Star rating
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
TCSPF / HSPF
Schedule 6—
Commercial-based
temperature bins
1 Commercial-based temperature bins
For paragraph (a) of the definition of “commercial SEER
of this Determination, the commercial-based
temperature bins are set out in the following tables:
Commercial cooling outdoor temperature distribution
Outdoor temperature tj °C
Hot/humid zone hrs
Mixed zone hrs
Cold zone hrs
Commercial heating outdoor temperature distribution
Outdoor temperature tj °C
Hot/humid zone hrs
Mixed zone hrs
Cold zone hrs
2 Values of
For paragraph (b) of the definition of “commercial SEER
of this determination, the values of
are given by the following
AS/NZS 3823.4 zone
AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014
AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014
AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014
AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014
AS/NZS 3823.4.1:2014
AS/NZS 3823.4.2:2014
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (7.87 MB)
PDF format (4.55 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter