Lobb & Galanis [2025] FedCFamC2F 1097 (8 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Lobb & Galanis
[2025] FedCFamC2F
File number(s):
BRC 12832 of 2024
Judgment of:
JUDGE STREET
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Review application
– de facto maintenance – alleged failure to seek employment –
no proper basis for maintenance
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Ms M Karaman
Solicitor for the Applicant:
McLaughlins Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr C Bolovan
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Omb Solicitors
BRC 12832 of 2024
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
JUDGE STREET
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
8 made by the Registrar on 13 June 2025 is set aside.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
EX TEMPORE REASONS FOR
JUDGE STREET
is an application for review of, relevantly, order 8 that was made by a
Registrar on 13 June 2025 for the payment of spousal
maintenance under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”) in relation to a de
facto relationship. Order 8 is as follows:
8. That commencing 18 June 2025, the Respondent pay to the Applicant the sum of
$760 per week by way of periodic spousal maintenance
by way of bank transfer to
her nominated account.
applicant de facto wife (“the de facto wife”) is still in occupation
of the matrimonial home that was acquired by
the respondent de facto husband
(“the de facto husband”) well before the brief four-year
relationship. It is not apparent
to the Court as to why there has been no
application brought forward for the immediate sale of the matrimonial home and
for the removal
from occupation of the de facto wife. On the evidence currently
before the Court, it is not apparent that either party has a capacity
the other, given the mortgage on the property.
the matter was first identified before the Court, the Court raised the
possibility that what should happen is the property should
forthwith be sold and
there should be orders for vacation of the premises. The Court was informed
that the de facto husband wants
an opportunity to be able to pay out the amount.
The de facto wife contends that the four-year relationship would justify a
allocation, the 45% in favour of the de facto wife. It is not
immediately apparent to the Court how that percentage would necessarily
appropriate, just and equitable for such a short period of relationship.
that as it may, there is no application that is properly before the Court today
for the immediate sale of the property and for
immediate vacation. All that is
before the Court today is a review application in respect of a maintenance
order. This is a
hearing. There is no dispute as to the de facto
wife’s contention that the proceedings were commenced within time under
of the Act or as to the requirements under
and s 90DSB of the
de facto wife, notwithstanding the most recent financial statement of the de
facto husband and his affidavit, wished to contend
that he had a capacity to
work and pointed out that there had been a drawdown of funds on the matrimonial
Those matters in this case where the de facto
husband’s apparent income, property and financial resources as disclosed
his most recent financial statement, are matters that may have an impact in
final hearing, as may an argument about disclosure. On
the evidence before the
Court, taking into account
of the Act, the Court is not satisfied that
the de facto husband is reasonably able to do so within the statutory
requirement for
the payment of maintenance.
de facto wife wished to contend that there was a deliberate failure by the de
facto husband to go and seek work. That is inconsistent
with the de facto
husband's affidavit. The de facto wife wished to contend that he had no
physical ailments that prevented him
from going out and working. At the current
time, his income is in the order of $350 a week. The de facto husband is living
It is surprising that there has been no application made
of the kind that the
Court has already identified in respect of the vacation and sale of that
matrimonial home.
the extent that it was contended that the Court should make some finding of a
capacity to derive income and a deliberate decision
not to do so, the Court is
not prepared to make such finding. The fact that the de facto husband was in a
successful film a little
while ago does not change his current financial
circumstances. The Court is not satisfied the current financial circumstances
the de facto husband identify a proper basis upon which this Court could find
that the threshold issue in the principal informed
by the matters in
of the Act that the relevant party is reasonably able to do so is made out. The
Court finds no order for maintenance of the de fact
wife is proper in this
is for these reasons; the Court makes to above orders.
I certify that the preceding eight (8) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Ex Tempore Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 14 August 2025
RTF format (295 KB)
Signed PDF/A format