Samaras & Allen [2021] FamCA 626; (26 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Samaras & Allen
[2021] FamCA 626
File number(s):
SYC 5524 of 2017
Judgment of:
HENDERSON J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
FAMILY LAW –
PARENTING –
Interim parenting – Application for a review of a Senior Registrar’s
decision by the mother –
Where the father seeks to increase time spent
with the child – Where the mother opposes an increase in time –
father has an extensive historical criminal record – Where the
father’s time with the child has never been supervised
– Assessment
of risk – Orders made for the child to spend time with the father
gradually up to four nights a fortnight
and for significant and substantial time
in the school holidays.
Legislation:
Family Law Act (1975)
(Cth) ss 60B,
60CC(2), 60CC(3), 65DAA
Cases cited:
Goode & Goode
(2006) FLC 93-286
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr Cummings SC
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Lander & Rogers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms Christie SC
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Vizzone Ruggero Twigg Lawyers
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Mr Greenaway
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
John Spence & Associates
SYC 5524 of 2017
HENDERSON J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS PENDING FURTHER ORDER THAT:
1. The child X (“the child”) live with the mother.
2. The child spend time with the father during the school term as
(a) From the date of these Orders until the commencement
of Term 1 2022:
(i) Each alternate weekend from the
cessation of school Friday until 5pm Sunday; and
(ii) Each Wednesday from the cessation of school until 7pm.
(b) From the commencement of Term 1 2022, commencing the
first weekend after school resumes:
(i) Each alternate weekend from the
cessation of school Friday until the commencement of school Monday; and
(ii) Each alternate Wednesday from the cessation of school to the commencement
of school Thursday, being the Wednesday following
the father’s alternate
weekend as per Order 2(b)(i) herein.
3. The child spend time with the father during school holidays as
(a) During the term school holidays in 2021 with the
father’s time as per Order 2(a) herein to recommence the first weekend
after school resumes:
(i) The first Friday after school ceases
until 5pm Sunday; and
(ii) Each Wednesday from 9am to 6pm on
(b) During the Christmas school holidays commencing in
(i) From 3pm Christmas Eve to 3pm Christmas
(ii) Each alternate weekend from 9am Friday to 9am Tuesday commencing the second
Friday of January 2022 unless otherwise agreed.
(c) During the term school holidays in
(i) From 5pm Friday to 5pm Tuesday in the
first week of the school holidays; and
(ii) From 9am Friday to 5pm Sunday the weekend before school resumes.
(d) During the Christmas school holidays commencing in
(i) From 3pm Christmas Day to 5pm 29
December and each alternate year thereafter;
(ii) For a further period of four nights as agreed and, failing agreement, from
the third Friday in January 2023 for a period of
four nights on the first
occasion with such time to extend to five nights each alternate year
thereafter.
(e) Commencing 2023:
(i) In the holidays following Terms 1, 2 and
3 from the cessation of school at 5pm for five nights or as otherwise
(ii) From 3pm Christmas Eve to 3pm Christmas Day and each alternate year
thereafter;
(iii) For two further periods of five nights in January 2024 as agreed and
failing agreement in the first and third weeks of January
and each alternate
year thereafter.
4. Otherwise the orders made by Senior Registrar Hayward on 12 March 2021
being orders 2, 3, 4, 6.4.2 - 6.4.7, 6.5 - 6.11, 7, 8, 9,
Note: The form of the order is subject to
the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Samaras & Allen
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
1 This was a review of a senior registrar’s decision made on 12 March
2021 filed by the mother, Ms Allen (“the mother”),
in relation to
interim orders regarding the parties’ child X born in 2016. The orders
provided for X to spend increasing time
with her father, Mr Samaras (“the
father”), from the current one night per fortnight and various times
during the day
each week to ultimately, commencing in Term 3 2021, the child
spending from after school Friday to before school Monday with her
each Wednesday from after school to 6pm.
2 The learned senior registrar also made orders in relation to special
occasions such as birthdays, Christmas, Easter, holiday time
and the like.
3 The regime of time proposed by the senior registrar was an increase in time
from the short and frequent periods of time ordered
by Senior Registrar Campbell
on 27 November 2019. At that time the child was three years of age. She is now
five and in 2022 will
be six. It is common ground the child is progressing
extremely well in her mother’s care and has flourished under the current
4 The mother sought that the Court make orders that the child spend time with
her father each Wednesday from after school to 5.30pm,
each alternate Friday
from after school to Saturday 5:30pm, daytime during the school holidays on each
of Monday and Wednesday with
the alternative Friday night time to continue, time
on the child’s birthday, the mother’s birthday, the father’s
birthday, Easter, Christmas and the like. This is virtually maintaining the
current orders however with less actual time with her
father and grandparents as
she now attends school. Additionally, the mother sought this regular time be
maintained during the school
holidays however the father have whole days on
Mondays and Wednesdays with the child.
5 At the outset the time proposed by the mother is limited, short and
frequent and involves these parents meeting on multiple occasions
to exchange
their child during the school term and even more during school holidays. This is
a matter that the Court is mindful should
be minimised in X’s best
interests. The father’s proposed orders minimise changeover to one evening
per week on a Wednesday
night during school term and twice in holidays.
6 X now attends school and is progressing well and her maturity will have
also progressed since 2019 when the initial interim orders
7 The amount of material read was voluminous for what the Court regards as an
important but narrow issue.
8 For the mother:
(1) Amended Application in a Case of the mother filed 29
(2) Response of the mother filed 2 March 2021;
(3) Affidavit of the mother filed 2 March 2021;
(4) Affidavit of the mother filed 8 March 2021;
(5) Mother’s updating affidavit filed 29 July 2021 together with
voluminous annexures being documents produced under subpoena
in relation to the
father’s extensive criminal history in New South Wales, police records
from Queensland and the AFP and results
of drug testing of the father together
with emails, newspaper articles and correspondence;
(6) Report of Dr D dated 13 October 2020;
(7) Case outline together with a Minute of Order sought prepared by Mr Cummings
of senior counsel who acted on her behalf.
9 For the father:
(1) Response to Amended Application in a Case of the
father filed 30 July 2021;
(2) Supporting affidavit of the father filed 30 July 2021 together with
voluminous and extensive annexures;
(3) The father, too, relied on the report of Dr D;
(4) Case outline of the father prepared by Ms Christie of senior counsel who
acted on his behalf.
10 The Independent Children’s Lawyer (“ICL”) made
submissions at the conclusion of this lengthy interim hearing
that in December
2017 the parties entered into orders by consent which provided for equal shared
parental responsibility and for
the child to spend day-time time with her father
and in 2019, by consent, an overnight period of time to commence in March 2020.
That the child has progressed well and it is now 2021.
11 As Ms Christie SC for the father submitted, the father was required to
bring the matter back to Court when his daughter commenced
school for the
majority of time he was spending with her was day-time and that was impossible
when she was at school. It is disingenuous
of the mother to complain that the
father has brought the matter back to the Court on multiple occasions.
12 Mr Cummings SC acted for the mother, Ms Christie SC for the father and Mr
Greenaway of counsel for the ICL.
13 The father was born in 1981.
14 The mother was born in 1988.
15 The father says the parties commenced a relationship in 2009.
16 In August 2009 the father was charged and convicted of possession of
firearms. The father became subject to a Firearm Prohibition
(“FPO”) which will remain in effect until 2024. The father was
subject to bail conditions including drug testing
between August 2009 and
November 2011.
17 In 2010 the father was committed to sentence to the New South Wales
District Court for firearms and drug offences. The father was
convicted for
driving with a suspended license and placed on a six-month bond. The father was
fined for driving with a low range
PCA. The father came to the attention of the
Australian Federal Police (“AFP”) in relation to access to firearms
due to being a suspended driver. The AFP case note states that the father is
recorded in over 80 Information Reports due to his links
to a criminal group and
organised crime.
18 In 2011 the father and his father were arrested and charged with criminal
offences relating to methamphetamine oil which charges
were dismissed at
committal. The father says this was a turning point and he realised if he
continued his association with criminals,
he may end up in jail and lose
everything. The father was dismissive of Dr D’s questions in relation to
these serious offences,
asserting he was involved but not responsible. That
attitude to involvement in criminal activity is somewhat immature.
19 In November 2011 the father’s bail was varied to provide that he
reside at an address known to the New South Wales Commission
which was with the
20 The mother alleges the parties’ commenced cohabitation in early
January 2012.
21 On 12 February 2012 the father was charged with the supply of
methamphetamine oil and this charge was in Queensland dismissed at
The maternal grandmother paid the father’s $100,000 bail in respect of
this charge.
22 In 2016 X was born.
23 The father says he ceased using cocaine after X was born.
24 The mother asserts the parties separated in 2016 when X was ten days
25 The father asserts the parties separated in 2016 when X was three months
26 On 26 September 2016 the father was served with a Firearms Prohibition
27 The father commenced a relationship with Ms B in 2017.
28 In 2017 the father arranged to meet the maternal grandmother, the mother
and X in Queensland for a family holiday. The father stayed
at the same hotel as
the mother and X and would meet them in the hotel foyer to spend time together
throughout the day.
29 In 2017 the mother located in the former matrimonial home a fake
driver’s licence, which was exhibited in the proceedings,
husband’s photograph but a different name and date of birth. This caused
her concern as to the father’s continued
activities.
30 On 7 February 2017 the parties entered into a parenting plan.
31 On 24 August 2017 the father filed an Initiating Application in the Family
32 On 13 December 2017 consent orders were made.
33 Between early 2018 and 2019 the father was stopped by the police due to
either his manner of driving or places he had parked his
car being known meeting
places for drug exchanges such as G Street, Suburb J. No criminal charges were
34 The mother formed a relationship with Mr C in 2018 whom she subsequently
35 In June 2018 the police records suggest that the father was observed
entering and leaving a hotel over a short period of time and
that he drove off
at high speed. He was later stopped and searched by police. The police found a
large amount of cash and several
remote controls which they noted were
“consistent with [a] concealed compartment”.
36 In a separate incident, Dr D records the father was found by police parked
in an area known to police as a meeting point for conducting
criminal activity.
37 In 2018 the father’s brother Mr F Samaras was killed in Country
38 From 31 October 2018 to January 2019 the father asserts the parties were
extremely close and would communicate daily in relation
39 In 2018 a divorce order was granted.
40 In December 2018, as Dr D notes, the police records indicate that the
father was driving at high speed at 1.15am and was stopped
and searched by the
police. The police file indicated that the passengers in the car “had
recent intelligence relating to organised
crime” as did the father. It is
asserted the father was found with a large amount of cash.
41 On 3 December 2018 a Child Responsive Memorandum was completed.
42 In 2019 X commenced attending preschool. The father alleges the mother did
not provide information to facilitate the father’s
attendance.
43 In early 2019 the parties’ relationship deteriorated and the father
asserts he felt blocked from X’s life by the mother.
44 In early 2019 the father invited the mother, her partner and X to
Queensland with him and his partner so that X could have a holiday
with both her
parents however the mother declined.
45 On 26 March 2019 the mother filed a Response to Initiating
Application.
46 On 4 April 2019 consent orders were made providing for the father to spend
time with X:
(1) In Week 1:
(a) On Monday from 11.30am to 5pm;
(b) On Wednesday from 9am to 5pm;
(c) On Friday from 3.30pm to 7.30pm.
(2) In Week 2:
(a) On Monday from 11.30am to 5pm;
(b) On Wednesday from 9am to 5pm;
(c) On Saturday from 9am-5pm.
(3) On special occasions such as Christmas, Easter and
Father’s Day.
47 On 11 April 2019 the father could not complete his hair follicle test
because his hair measured 1.3cm.
48 The father returned a negative result on a completed drug test following
request on the following dates:
(1) 24 April 2019;
(2) 16 May 2019;
(3) 6 June 2019;
(4) 26 June 2019;
(5) 28 August 2019;
(6) 1 October 2019;
(7) 18 October 2019;
(8) 25 October 2019;
(9) 1 November 2019;
(10) 8 November 2019;
(11) 15 November 2019;
(12) 22 November 2019.
49 On 27 November 2019 consent orders were made for X to spend time with the
father in a two-week cycle as follows:
(1) In Week 1:
(a) Monday from 12pm to 5.30pm;
(b) Wednesday from 9am to 5pm;
(c) Friday from 3.30pm to 3.30pm
(2) In Week 2:
(a) Monday from 12pm to 5.30pm; and
(b) Wednesday from 9am to 5pm.
(3) In addition, X to spend time with the father on
various special occasions including Christmas, Easter, Good Friday, Easter
and Father’s Day.
50 On 7 and 8 September 2020 Dr D conducted interviews.
51 On 13 October 2020 Dr D’s report became available to the
52 In 2021 X commenced Kindergarten at L School.
53 On 12 March 2021 orders were made by Senior Registrar Hayward providing
for X to spend time with the father as follows:
(1) In Term 1 2021:
(a) In Week
(i) Wednesday after school until
(ii) Friday after school until Saturday
(b) In Week
(i) Wednesday after school to
Thursday before school.
(2) In Term 2 2021:
(a) In Week
(i) Wednesday after school until
(ii) Friday after school until Sunday
(b) In Week
(i) Wednesday after school until
Thursday before school.
(3) From Term 3 2021:
(a) In Week
(i) Wednesday after school until
(b) In Week
(i) Friday after school until
Monday before school or 5pm if a public holiday.
(4) School holiday time on Mondays and Wednesdays from
9am to 5pm and each alternate Friday from 12pm to Saturday
54 In early February 2021 the father says X reported to him that the mother
request requested she call her partner “dad”.
55 In 2021 the mother married her partner.
56 On 22, 23 and 25 March 2021 X did not attend school.
57 On 24 March 2021 the mother’s stay application was heard. The term
time orders were stayed.
58 On 21 April 2021 the father asserts he requested time with X for Sunday
Church and the mother declined on the basis that she had
a play date.
59 On 24 April 2021 X did not attend school. Upon inquiry, the mother told
the father X had been hospitalised.
60 On 22 April 2021 and 4 June 2021 the father returned a negative drug test
61 The mother is highly resistant to the father
having any more than one overnight period with the child each fortnight despite
child progressing well in her care, being healthy and happy. Mr Cummings
SC’s submission was “if it ain't broke don't
fix it”. If I
adopted that approach, however, no child would spend additional time with their
other parent until they expressed
a wish so to do and were of an age that such a
wish had weight and it was not otherwise a risk to the child to increase
62 Further, Mr Cummings SC submitted that there was no remit or reason why I
would increase the child's time with the father given
she is progressing well.
The social science is clear: a child's relationship with a parent becomes
deeper, more meaningful and is
optimised when they spend good quality, frequent
and settled time with the other parent. This includes time with the other parent
increasing as the child matures and overnight time is an important aspect of a
developing relationship. Time must progress appropriately
and have regard to the
child's needs and capacity as the most important consideration in any increase
in time. Children's lives are
not static and neither are their parents.
63 Further, such a position fails to recognise my obligation under the
Family Law Act
section 60B
, that children have a right to
have both parents involved in their life and
section 60CC(2)
, that a child has a
right to a meaningful relationship with each of their parents.
Section 65DAA
requires when, as here, parental responsibility is shared I must consider equal
or significant and substantial time for the child
with the other parent.
Provided, and this is the gravamen of the mother’s resistance to extending
the father's time, a child
is not at risk of harm or an unacceptable risk of
harm in the other parent's care. That proviso is uppermost at all times in
concerning children.
64 There has clearly been, on the material, a risk to the child in spending
time with her father given his concerning, serious and
lengthy criminal history
commencing in 2002.
65 Going to that history which is in “Bundle 3” of the mother's
tender bundle.
66 The father's criminal history commenced on 15 November 2002 when he was 21
years of age. The offence was affray, destroy or damage
67 In 2002 he knowingly drove a motor vehicle in a dangerous manner and
menaced another. Driving dangerously, recklessly and furiously
is a theme in
the father's criminal history.
68 In 2005 the father lost his license at that time yet, not complying with
the law, he drove whilst disqualified and in 2006 was
convicted of driving
whilst having his license suspended.
69 In 2009 he was charged with possessing a prohibited drug, possessing a
firearm with an altered or defaced barrel, supplying a prohibited
cannabis, possessing ammunition, possessing an unregistered and unlicensed
pistol, not keeping the pistol safely, possessing
an anabolic steroid and
dealing with property suspected to be the proceeds of crime.
70 In relation to possessing an unauthorised pistol, the father was
imprisoned for 21 months suspended on entering into a bond in
April 2009 and
fined in relation to the remainder of the charges he had been charged with. The
charge of dealing with property suspected
to be the proceeds of crime was
71 In relation to the charge of possessing a firearm or barrel with an
altered or defaced ID, the father was sentenced to eight months
imprisonment
suspended upon entering a bond.
72 In 2010 the father was charged with driving whilst his license was
73 In 2010 he was charged with driving with low range PCA and was given a
Section 10 bond.
74 The father has a FPO against him. He has been pulled over by police on no
less than 120 occasions up to 2019 due to his manner
of driving bringing him to
the attention of the police, or in parking in places where known drug exchanges
take place, for example
G Street in Suburb J, leaving licensed premises shortly
after arriving and being found in the possession of large amounts of cash.
clearly known to the NSW Police and AFP and has been since 2010.
75 Despite having being pulled over by police on multiple occasions, the last
occasion being 24 February 2019, he has not been charged
with any criminal
offence and his last charge of any criminal offence at all was in 2010 of
driving with a low range PCA and driving
whilst unlicensed.
76 The wife relied upon documents from the AFP by way of subpoena which were
supplied and heavily redacted, for example Case Notes
dating back to 2010 that
he associates with known drug suppliers and criminal group. That he has a FPO
against him and his prior
charges include dealing with property suspected to be
proceeds of crime and driving offences. I note the charge relating to dealing
with proceeds of crime was dismissed. The father is recorded in over 80
information reports with links to a criminal group and organised
77 On 18 August 2015 the AFP notes an associate of his brother Mr F Samaras
allegedly imports pseudoephedrine oil from Country H and
directly manufactures
it into a saleable product.
78 The husband's brother was shot dead in Country H in 2018 and the mother
believes this was due to his involvement in the illegal
drug trade and this has
heightened the mother's concerns of a risk to the child in the father's care.
She asserts this is supported
by the AFP's suspicions, which is the highest
their reports amount to.
79 On 30 April 2017 the AFP notes that the father is “extensively
monitored by New South Wales police, seems to be actively
involved in possible
importation”. There is nothing but suspicion to support that report. Even
in the NSW COPS entries there
are only innuendos and suspicions of known
associates, not named places frequented where illegal activity associated with
trade occurs.
80 The facts are the father has not been charged with any offence despite
being pulled over by the police at random times monthly
and multiple times
81 The father's drug tests have all returned negative. There is no doubt X's
father was on a very slippery slope and on a very poor
trajectory in 2012 at the
time the mother met him and then married him in 2013. Despite almost constant
police surveillance since
then, he has not been charged with any criminal
offence and he now drives motor vehicles for a living.
82 Turning to the mother's affidavit.
83 The parties were married in 2013. They must have had a relationship prior
to that date and I note in one of the AFP documents the
mother's name is
mentioned. I do not accept that the mother was unaware of the father’s
serious criminal history or unaware
post the relationship that he was subject to
a FPO permitting the police to search his home, vehicles and person as they
deemed appropriate
given part of his bail conditions required that he resided
her home in late 2012/2013. His behaviour since their marriage has improved
markedly given he has had no criminal convictions. I accept, however, a risk of
harm to a child from a parent is not reliant on a
criminal conviction rather
their behaviour, conduct, attitudes and those with whom they may bring the child
onto contact with.
84 With this knowledge, and in light of these circumstances, the parents
entered into consent orders in 2017 when X was 18 months
of age for equal shared
responsibility and for the father to have unsupervised time weekly with the
knowledge of his serious criminal
85 On these facts I question the veracity of the mother's concerns now some
four years later when:
(1) There is no evidence that the father has been
charged with any criminal offence or even questioned in relation to criminal
by the State or Federal police despite being monitored by the State
(2) The child has not been exposed to being stopped by police while she is in
the car being driven by her father;
(3) The child is flourishing in her mother's care and she has a strong and
bonded relationship with her father and paternal grandparents;
(4) X has been spending time with her father from a very young age and has not
come to any harm whatsoever. The mother can make
no serious complaint about the
care of the child by the father;
(5) The father has been in a stable relationship for three years;
(6) The father has stable employment driving motor vehicles and his license is
important to him to maintain his income.
86 These were not the facts when the mother and father entered into consent
orders in 2017 for equal shared parental responsibility
and for the child to
spend unsupervised day time weekly in her father's care.
87 If the mother is as concerned as she asserts, and as Mr Cummings SC
submitted to me she is, it would not be a surprise if the mother
had insisted
that time with the father and the child be supervised. For the police can pull
the father and child over in the car
on any day or night of the week while she
is in his care. He can meet with alleged criminal group members at those times
and clearly
he has not done so.
88 Why then is the mother so resistant to any increase in overnight time? Mr
Cummings SC said, in answer, that there is a risk to
the child in her father's
care and the more time she spends with him in a continuum the greater her
exposure to those risks becomes.
Minimising lengthy periods of time with her
father minimises the potential risk to the child.
89 Dr D was also concerned about the father's past criminal history, that he
is still within the radar of the police, that he had
not been forthcoming about
his prior criminal history to her and that these are risk factors for X.
90 Both the father and the Independent Children's Lawyer relied upon
paragraph 191 of Dr D's report as a sound basis to increase the
overnight time with the child wherein she says:
I think that by the time that X has completed Term 1 of
Kindergarten [April 2021] then she will be able to cope with spending two
consecutive nights in her father’s care; for example, from Friday after
school until Sunday evening. I also think that X should
spend time with her
father in the alternate week, for example one weeknight from after school until
before school the following morning.
91 This was the position adopted by the senior registrar and she ordered that
by Term 3 X would spend three nights a fortnight in
her father's care, every
Wednesday after school and time in the school holidays and for special
92 Mr Cummings SC correctly says Dr D also said paragraph 190:
I have considered each of the parties’ respective
parenting proposals and their impact on X. As mentioned previously, if the
is satisfied that the father does not pose an unacceptable risk to X then I
think that she could manage a gradual schedule
of increased time with
93 Thus it is not X's capacity to be away from her mother that is in issue,
it is the risk to her in her father's care that is at
issue. This is an interim
hearing and I am unable to make findings on contested matters. X is a young
child and I must act cautiously.
94 There is no doubt that the father's prior criminal history would, if
continuing or even possibly continuing, pose an unacceptable
risk of harm to
this child. However these are not the facts. The mother relies upon heavily
redacted AFP documents, which have no
supporting details at all, including any
details of charges or convictions other than those that the New South Wales
police launched
against the father in 2010 to 2012 for which he was found
guilty. The reports are, at best, innuendo of known criminal associates
95 There is no doubt Dr D was correct to criticise the father for his
immature attitude to his serious prior history and involvement
with criminals,
that this has led him to be pulled over by police on random occasions and that
he continues to blame the mother in
some fashion for the situation he finds
himself in rather than taking full responsibility. As Dr D says at paragraph
At the interview with me, the father oscillated between
expressing respect for [the mother] and then critiquing almost every aspect
her parenting and personhood. He spoke in highly critical ways about [the
mother], often implicitly demeaning her. For example,
he implied that she was
“spoiled”, that she had an overly enmeshed relationship with her own
mother, that she outsourced
X’s care to others, that she did not properly
care for X and that she had failed to give him proper information about
routine and care. These sentiments and attitudes bode poorly in terms
of the father’s insight into X’s needs to observe
relationships between her parents, to have her parents understand her loyalty
towards each of them and the importance
of removing her from any conflict
between her parents.
96 At paragraph 181 Dr D opined:
...[The father] may lack insight into the central
importance to X of preserving her mother’s positive standing, in
respect for her role in X’s life and in supporting the mother
in front of X.
97 At paragraph 169:
With respect to [the father], I have mixed views about
his parenting capacity. On the one hand, I think that he is doting, loving
kind towards X. I think he organises fun and exciting activities for X which she
enjoys and which are child focused and positive.
The father spoke about
establishing an appropriate routine with X when she was in his care. However, on
interview with me the father
had less awareness of X’s developmental needs
or intimate knowledge of her daily life, such as her friends at preschool or
upcoming events in her life. The father asserts that this is because the mother
has sought to exclude him from X’s life and
has not provided him with
sufficient information.
98 This is a vexed issue between the parents and will be determined at a
final hearing once the evidence is tested.
99 Of concern was Dr D’s opinion at paragraph 170 that the father has
allowed X to become aware of his negative views of the
100 In relation to the father's concerning past criminal history Dr D says
the following commencing at paragraph 154:
The father presented as being aggrieved by being
unfairly judged by his historical criminal activities...he was highly critical
the mother for what he regarded as her preoccupation with his criminal
history and potential drug taking.
155. My review of the matter indicates that the father’s criminal history
is relevant and of significant concern with respect
to the issue of the safety
of a very young child. The police records...indicate that the father is being
closely monitored...is subject
to a Firearm Prohibition order...[which] allows
the police to enter the father’s premises without a warrant to conduct any
is frequently stopped and searched by police when
156. ...[T]he police records indicate that [the father] is frequently stopped
and that on occasions his manner of driving has caused
the police to pull his
car over...
157. I was also concerned that the father was dismissive about questions
regarding the risk posed to X in terms of things such as
the Firearms
Prohibition order and police involvement. The father displayed no insight into
the impact of such potential episodes
on a young child...[t]he father does not
seem to accept that the serious nature of his criminal history, together with
murder of his brother have reasonably escalated the mother’s
anxieties and that her fears are proportionate and protective
101 The father said the reason he was pulled over is because he drives motor
vehicles and that is part of his job. I agree with Mr
Cummings SC that this was
disingenuous of him. He is subject to a FPO and that is one of the reasons, as
is his manner of driving
and places he is found in.
102 The father told Dr D at paragraph 83 that when his father was arrested
for drug trafficking this was a turning point for him.
That he is subject to the
FPO for another four years. It is somewhat evident from his clear drug tests
that he no longer uses illegal
103 The father’s brother was shot in Country H in 2018 and he denied
that this had anything to do with drug importation.
104 Dr D raised at paragraph 158 her concern of an inconsistency between the
father's sworn affidavits and assertions of from 2012
having “effectively
changed his ways”, having had no criminal association or involvement from
that time and that he and
his partner have a “quiet life”.
105 Dr D notes he was pulled over by police in December 2018 driving at a
high speed and was stopped and searched by police but not
charged. The police
noted in June 2018 he was observed entering and leaving a hotel, drove off
“at high speed” and was
later stopped and searched. He was in
possession of a large amount of cash and remote controls. In 2018 he was found
known to police as a meeting point for conducting criminal activity,
G Street, Suburb J.
106 That the AFP have him under “ongoing surveillance” in
relation to possible involvement with criminal groups and organised
However the father is correct, he has not been charged with any criminal
offences since 2012, and in that sense has most certainly
changed his ways, and
there is no indication he has been using illicit substances. It is clear he is
on the radar of NSW Police as
he has been since 2009 when he was charged with
firearms offences.
107 It will be a matter for trial whether the father being pulled over as he
has been, having large amounts of cash on him and the
AFP and State police
innuendo of his involvement with known criminals is correct or not.
108 This is a parenting matter and I must follow the pathway set out in
Goode & Goode
(2006) FLC 93-286 and have regard to the factors under
section 60CC(2)
and (3) of the
Family Law Act
(Cth) (“the
Act”) to determine the orders that are in the child's best interests.
109 Dr D's report attests that the child benefits from a meaningful
relationship with each of her parents. That her mother is an
exemplary parent
and parents the child to a high standard.
110 That the father has a somewhat immature attitude to the mother and is
critical of her at times and that this has been made known
to his daughter. That
as a parent he lacks insight into the possible consequences for the mother of
their daughter's safety in his
care having regard to his criminal history and
the impact of his brother’s shooting in 2018 and other matters. The father
it difficult to accept that these events have impacted upon the mother and
form the basis of the concerns she now raises.
111 However he is also a doting and devoted father and gave evidence that he
and X enjoy activities together, return home for “date
night”, they
eat dinner together with the father’s partner. The father then bathes X,
reads a book to her and puts her
to bed. The father says he observed that the
overnight time has been going “exceptionally well”, that X has slept
the night without disruption. The father says he ensures he spends time
with X one on one to ensure she knows it is their special
time together. On
Wednesday’s, the father says he previously took X to visit the paternal
grandparents with whom she has a
loving and close relationship. Now she is at
school this can only occur on a Saturday.
112 Dr D was confident that X can cope with three nights away from her mother
but that confidence was clearly overshadowed by her
concern as to the potential
risks of harm to the child in her father's care.
113 Assessing the risk is the most important factor in this matter.
114 Mr Cummings SC said that if there is a risk to the child in father's care
of one night that risk must be amplified if it is two
or three nights. I do not
share that concern.
115 The evidence is that whilst the child has been in her father's care he
has not come to the attention of police. The times he has
been found driving at
an alleged high-speed or in places that known drug dealers frequent the child
was not with him and importantly,
given no charges were laid, the police cannot
have been overly concerned about any of his activities despite his concerning
116 At the time of marriage the mother was well aware of the father's
criminal history and continued so to be aware when she entered
into consent
orders in 2017 for equal shared parental responsibility and unsupervised day
time and, by consent, agreed to overnight
time in November 2019. When the
consent orders were made in 2019 for equal shared parental responsibility and
one occasion of overnight
time, the mother knew her former brother-in-law had
been shot in Country H and if this issue posed an additional risk to their
there is no doubt the mother would not have agreed.
117 The evidence is that there are no fresh incidents of the father's
behaviour that would raise the risk of harm to the child to
a higher level or
even the same level that was not already evident in 2017 and 2019 and therefore
to a level of an unacceptable risk.
In fact the evidence is that the father has
not been charged with any criminal or other offence, is monitored by the police,
stable employment and is in a stable relationship. His lifestyle and
behaviour has taken a positive trajectory since 2017 albeit
from a low base.
118 Having so determined, I accept there is still some risk to X in her
father's care for extended periods given his immature attitude
to the mother,
his difficulty in accepting his responsibility for the consequences of his past
behaviour and that X is still young
and that an increase in time must be slow to
ensure X is able to spend time away from her mother and her mother can support
an increase
in time. This also provides the father with time to continue his
positive lifestyle choices.
119 I have formed the view that the orders that are in X's best interests are
that she forthwith commence to spend alternate weekends
with her father from
Friday after school until 5pm Sunday and each Wednesday night from the cessation
of school to 7pm.
120 In relation to term school holidays for 2021, the child shall spend time
with her father the first Friday after school breaks
up until 5pm Sunday and
each Wednesday from 9am to 6pm Thursday.
121 The father's time in the school term is to commence the first weekend
after school resumes.
122 For Christmas 2021 the child is to spend with her father from 3pm
Christmas Eve to 3pm Christmas Day.
123 The father's time in the 2021/2022 school holiday period is to continue
each alternate weekend from 9am Friday to 9am Tuesday
commencing the second
Friday of January 2022 unless otherwise agreed.
124 Commencing the first weekend after the child returns to school in 2022
the father's time to commence from after school each alternate
Friday to the
commencement of school Monday and each alternate Wednesday from after school to
the commencement of school Thursday,
being the Wednesday after the father's
alternate weekend.
125 For the term school holidays in 2022 the father's time with the child
shall commence the first week from the breakup of school
being 5pm Friday to 5pm
Tuesday and the weekend before school resumes from 9am Friday to 5pm Sunday.
126 For the Christmas school holidays in 2022/2023 the child to spend time
with the father from 3pm Christmas Day to 5pm on 29 December
and each alternate
year thereafter.
127 Then, for a further period of four nights as agreed and, failing
agreement, from the third Friday in January 2023 for a period
of four nights
with time in January to extend to five nights each alternate year
thereafter.
128 Commencing 2023 the child is to spend five nights in her father's care in
each school term holiday from the cessation of school
being Friday 5pm for five
nights, or as agreed.
129 From 3pm Christmas Eve to 3pm Christmas Day in 2023/2024 and each
alternate year thereafter.
130 For two further periods of five nights in January 2024 as agreed and,
failing agreement, in the first and third weeks of January
and each alternate
year thereafter.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
thirty (130) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
the Honourable
Dated: 26 August 2021
RTF format (519 KB)
Signed PDF/A format