Tenants' Union of Queensland Inc, Tenants' Union of NSW Co-op Ltd and complainants C, D, E, F and G v TICA Default Tenancy Control Pty Ltd [2004] PrivCmrACD 2 (16 April 2004)
Complaint Determination No. 2 of 2004
Federal Privacy
Commissioner
Table of Contents
Complaint Determination No. 2 2004
section 52.
Parties to the
Complainants
The Tenants’ Union of
Queensland Inc, Tenants’ Union of NSW Co-op Ltd and complainants C, D, E,
TICA Default Tenancy Control
This determination relates to
a complaint lodged by the Tenants’ Union of Queensland Inc (TU QLD)
in February 2003 under
The respondent to the complaint is TICA
Default Tenancy Control Pty Ltd (TICA). As set out below (see [
]) TICA’s business activities
involve the collection, use and disclosure of personal information. It is
complained that certain
acts and/or practices of TICA may be an interference
with the privacy of individuals.
complaint is a representative complaint, lodged pursuant to
. TU QLD has identified the class of members to the
representative complaint as ‘tenants or former tenants whose listing
the TICA database is either inaccurate, incomplete or not up to
I also received complaints made
by the Tenants’ Union of NSW Co-op Ltd (TU NSW), and complainants C, D, E,
F and G. The individuals
the subject of those complaints fell within the class
of members identified by TU QLD and, accordingly, those complaints were dealt
with as a part of the representative complaint brought by TU
I decided to investigate the relevant acts
and practices of TICA pursuant to
, being satisfied
that there was an act or practice which may have been an interference with the
the complaints received were validly made
am also satisfied that the requirements for the making of a representative
complaint, set out in
, have been
Background,
allegations and remedies sought
is one of a number of organisations that operates what is known as a tenancy
information about many
thousands of Australians relating to alleged defaults on tenancy agreements,
including failures to pay rent
or damage to property. It also holds personal
information about applicants for tenancies in what is known as the Enquiries
TICA collects personal information about tenants and applicants for
tenancies from property managers that are ‘members’
of TICA and
makes the personal information it holds on its database available to its members
The complainants allege that
the notices that TICA provides tenants and others about whom it collects
personal information under National
]) are not sufficient to make
individuals aware that they have been listed on the database and thus allow them
to challenge the accuracy,
completeness and currency of the listing. They also
allege that the information held in the TICA database is not ‘accurate,
complete or up-to-date’ to the extent required by NPP 3 (set out below at
The complainants argue that there are a
number of related problems that contribute to the allegation that the personal
information
on the database is not sufficiently accurate, complete or
up-to-date.
The issues that the
complainants raise, in the original complaint or in submissions and oral
comments to me at the hearing I conducted
on 3 March 2004, are that
allows listings that have not
been verified by an independent third party such as a tenancy tribunal –
in the complainants’
view this means that listings can be made vexatiously
and inaccurately;
uses non-specific
listing categories such as ‘Tenancy History Only’ that bring into
question the accuracy of the database;
allows landlords to list incidents
that are not a breach of residential tenancy agreements, thereby undermining
tenancy legislation;
does not advise
individuals that a listing has been made;
uses a dispute resolution system that
is inadequate and does not resolve accuracy disputes effectively;
holds entries on its database that
are incomplete or which are not accurate, for example because all fields are not
complete or because
there are entries that duplicate, in most but not all
respects, another
6.5 (set out below at [
]) and 6.6 (set
out below at [
]) are also relevant to
this complaint in that they require organisations to take reasonable steps to
correct personal information
that is not accurate, complete and up-to-date or to
allow an individual who does not agree that personal information about them is
accurate, complete and up-to-date to attach a statement to this effect to the
record. As the complaint I am considering is about
the accuracy of personal
information, I consider I also need to decide if TICA’s acts and practices
mply with these NPPs.
Section 38(2)
amongst other things that a complainant identify the remedy sought. The remedy
sought by the complainants is a declaration
by the Privacy Commissioner that
only list a person if the person
has breached an order of a state tenancy tribunal, or similar body;
advise a person in writing if they
have been listed on the TICA database;
require that its members keep records
of these orders in order to support the listing and will provide these to TICA
within seven
days in the case of a
immediately remove listings
which are incomplete such as ‘refer to agent’ or ‘tenancy
history only’;
remove listings
where an agent is no longer in business or no longer a member of TICA and
therefore the listing cannot be substantiated;
amend and publish, on its website
and in all material provided to tenants (such as documentation provided under
) categories under which individuals may be listed on the
categories.
The NPPs in Schedule 3 of
outline standards for handling personal information that legally
bind organisations, as defined by
section 6C(1)
Section 13A
that an act or practice of an organisation is an interference with the privacy
of an individual if the act or practice
breaches an NPP in relation to personal
information that relates to that individual.
issue in this complaint is whether TICA takes reasonable steps to make sure that
the personal information it handles is accurate,
complete and up-to-date as
required by NPP 3. NPP 3 sets out organisations obligations’ to maintain
data quality.
NPP 3 states
An organisation must take reasonable steps to
make sure that the personal information it collects, uses or discloses is
complete and up-to-date
The complainants also
alleged that TICA does not meet its obligations under NPP 1.5 to take reasonable
steps to provide individuals
with specified information.
NPP 1.3 states
At or before the time (or, if that is not
practicable, as soon as practicable after) an organisation collects personal
information
reasonable steps to ensure that the individual is aware of:
the identity of the
organisation and how to contact it; and
fact that he or she is able to gain access to the information;
the purposes for which the information
is collected; and
the organisations (or the
of that kind; and
any law that requires the
particular information to be collected;
the main consequences (if any) for the
individual if all or part of the information is not
1.5 states that:
If an organisation collects
personal information about an individual from someone else, it must take
reasonable steps to ensure that
the individual is or has been made aware of the
matters listed in subclause 1.3 except to the extent that making the individual
of the matters would pose a serious threat to the life or health of any
individual.
NPPs 6.5 and 6.6 are also
relevant to the question of the accuracy, completeness and currency of personal
information. These principles
are part of the range of measures set out in NPP
6 dealing with aspects of the right to access personal information. They
organisations’ data quality obligations under NPP 3 by
requiring them, where the individual independently establishes that
information is not accurate, complete and up-to-date, to take reasonable steps
to correct that information and by allowing
individuals to have their view noted
where there is disagreement.
NPP 6.5 states
If an organisation holds personal information
not accurate, complete and up-to-date, the organisation must take reasonable
steps to correct the information so that it is accurate,
complete and
up-to-date.
6.6 states that:
If the individual and the
organisation disagree about whether the information is accurate, complete and
up-to-date, and the individual
asks the organisation to associate with the
information a statement claiming that the information is not accurate, complete
or up-to-date,
the organisation must take reasonable steps to do so.
Section 6D(1)
defines a small business as one with an annual turnover of ‘$3,000,000
Section 6D(3)
provide for a small
business to be classed as ‘a small business operator’ and therefore
not subject to the
except in specified circumstances, including
where an organisation trades in personal information.
also provides that small
businesses which are subject to the
would not be subject to the
provisions of the NPPs until 21 December 2002. Consequently, when investigating
this complaint I have
been restricted to examining evidence relating to the acts
and practices of TICA which occurred after 21 December 2002
provides otherwise.
In this regard with respect to small
businesses:
section 16D(2)
provides that NPP 3, as far as it relates to collection of personal
information, only applies to personal information collected after
21 December 2002;
section 16D(3)
provides that NPP 3, as far as it relates to use and
disclosure, applies to personal information regardless of when it was collected;
Section 16D(4)
provides that NPPs 2 and 6 apply to personal information collected after
21 December 2002.
provides that after I have investigated a complaint I may make a
determination:
dismissing the
complaint; or
finding the complaint
substantiated and making a declaration
the respondent has engaged in conduct constituting an interference with the
such conduct;
the respondent should perform any reasonable act or course of conduct to redress
any loss or damage suffered by the complainant;
the complainant is entitled to compensation for any loss or damage –
including injury to the complainant’s feelings or
humiliation suffered by
the complainant.
is also within my powers under
to make recommendations
which will promote compliance with the NPPs.
Investigation
Section 40(1A)
provides that I must not investigate a complaint where the
complainant has not first complained to the respondent, unless I consider
it was not appropriate for the complainant to have done so. In the present
case, I am aware that TU QLD has had ongoing contact
with TICA in relation to a
number of privacy issues arising out of its activities and that this contact may
be considered to be by
way of ‘complaint’. To the extent that the
present complaint falls beyond those ‘complaints’ made to the
respondent, which I note have not resulted in the resolution of these matters, I
am satisfied that the complex nature of the issues
raised and their significance
for the rights of the people concerned makes it inappropriate for them to be the
subject of direct
complaint to the respondent.
My Office’s investigation of this
complaint involved the following:
• formally advising the parties that I was opening an investigation into
the complaint under
section 40(1)
and inviting the parties to
• gathering evidence and considering information provided by TU QLD, TU
NSW, the individual complainants and TICA in submissions
or in response to
matters raised by my staff or the complainants;
• providing the respondent and the complainants with opportunities to
comment on an initial preliminary view on the complaint
in September 2003;
• visiting TICA’s premises to discuss the issues raised in the
complaint, to observe its database in practice and gather
additional information
• providing the parties with the current Office position on the complaint
in February 2004 following changes in some aspects
of the views expressed by the
Office since September 2003 and extending an invitation to make oral and/or
written submissions;
• holding a hearing on 3 March 2004 affording the parties the opportunity
to appear before me – TU QLD and TU NSW accepted
the invitation to appear
at the hearing;
• considering written and oral submissions and gathering information to
clarify claims made by the parties;
• providing the primary representative complainant (TU QLD) and TICA with
the opportunity to see information and submissions
provided by the other party;
• checking TICA listings relating to 50 individuals to assess if the
personal information in the listings was accurate, complete
and up-to-date;
• pursuant to
section 43(5)
and the principles of
procedural fairness, providing the parties with a revised preliminary view in
March 2004 (the March preliminary
view) and a final opportunity to comment
before I finalised the determination;
• holding a further hearing on 8 April 2004 affording the parties the
opportunity to appear before me – TICA accepted
the invitation appeared at
the hearing; and
• providing TICA and TU QLD with copies of the submissions, excluding some
material that involved personal information of third
parties, made by the other
party in response to my March preliminary
considerations
Before setting out my
findings and reasons in relation to this complaint I will make some general
comments about the context in which
this complaint is made.
Housing is essential for all people and is
one of the basic human rights set out in the Universal Declaration of Human
The operation of tenancy
individuals listed on the
tenancy databases, such as TICA, can be seen as a legitimate risk minimisation
for property managers.
A number of
the NPPs relevant to this complaint require an assessment of
‘reasonableness’ (for example, the ‘reasonable
required of an organisation under NPP 1.3). I take the view that in making an
assessment of ‘reasonableness’,
it is appropriate to take into
account the purposes for which personal information is collected and the
consequences for the individuals
concerned. In this case I am satisfied that
tenancy databases, such as the one operated by TICA, do have an impact on an
individual’s
ability to obtain housing; my understanding is that this is
part of the intention when establishing such databases.
However, this is only one factor I have
taken into account. I have also considered the overall intention of the
including that business needs to be able to operate efficiently and
effectively and that the NPPs are general high level principles
and are not
prescriptive in how they apply.
set out below issues that this complaint raises together with information and
evidence and discussion about the application
of the law that I consider
relevant to the question of whether TICA complies with its obligations under
NPPs 3, 6.5 and 6.6.
It is relevant to
note that this complaint is against TICA, not its members. Accordingly, I will
not consider how the NPPs apply to
the acts and practices of its members. That
would be the subject of separate investigation should such a complaint be made
a member I acknowledge TICA's request in its submission in response to
my March preliminary view that it be advised about practices
of its members that
may be breaches of the
so that it can assist to address these
Small business
I find that TICA is an
‘organisation’ as defined by
section 6C(1)
is accordingly bound by the NPPs.
that TICA does not fall within the exemption to the
which applies to
‘small business
operators’.
‘small business’ in terms of the
, in that its annual
turnover is ‘$3,000,000 or less’. However, as TICA trades in
personal information, it does not fall
within the definition of ‘small
business operator’ by virtue of
section 6D(4)(c)
steps taken to make sure personal information is accurate, complete and
TICA argues that the
information it holds is accurate, complete and up-to-date. TICA has put forward
the following points to support
The ‘essential information is
true and correct. Essential information is that a tenancy existed, the agent
was the agent or
had the agency transferred to it. The contact number for the
agent is recorded’.
not a person is currently renting the property, the information on the database
reflects the conduct of the tenant.
is TICA’s policy that its members must provide TICA with information that
is ‘true and correct’ and ‘all
members guarantee the accuracy
of the information at all times’.
It carries out 50 random checks on
lodgements every week where members are required to give a copy of the tenancy
agreement, the tenancy
application, the tenancy history ledger, any notices
issued to the tenant, any tribunal orders and any accounts for cleaning or
Its collection process uses
specified fields and pick lists, rather than free text fields, to ensure
consistency and accuracy of listings
and it publishes information about the
meaning of listings.
It refers disputes
acknowledge that TICA does take some steps to ensure that its information is
accurate, complete, and up-to-date, it is my
view, for the reasons that follow,
that the steps taken are not, in all of the circumstances, sufficiently adequate
to be considered
‘reasonable’.
As noted above, I consider the potential
significance of the listing for an individual – namely, difficulty in
obtaining access
to housing – as being relevant. In my view, this impacts
upon what steps are ‘reasonable’ in ensuring that information
accurate, complete and up-to-date.
Agreement with
responsibility on organisations with respect to data quality that cannot be
passed onto others by contractual arrangements
(although others may assist in
meeting the obligations). I consider that the fact that TICA’s agreement
with members places
obligations on the members to make ‘true and
correct’ listings is a positive step in meeting the obligations in NPP 3.
However, I note that the agreement only
requires that the listing be ‘true and correct’ and it does not
specify what is
meant by ‘true and correct’. The obligations in NPP
3 go beyond requiring organisations to take reasonable steps to
personal information is correct. They must also take reasonable steps to make
sure personal information is complete and
up-to-date. In my view, a listing
might be ‘true and correct’ but be incomplete, for example because
it notes that a
debt of X amount was owed but does not note that it has since
been paid, or be out-of-date because it relates to very old events.
I also note that the agreement with
members does not currently specify what will happen if members fail to provide
listings that are
‘true and correct’. Although the NPPs do not
require a specific course of action, it would not be reasonable in my view
TICA to take no action in such circumstances; the listings would need to made
accurate, complete and up-to-date or be removed.
It is also my view that it
would be unreasonable not to take some steps to prevent incorrect listings in
the future. TICA notes
in its submission of April 2004 (responding to the March
2004 preliminary view) that its web site states that members will be suspended
for making vexatious listings and that it would amend listing found to be false
or misleading. I acknowledge these measures and
consider they are helpful. I
would also expect similar action where a member has a pattern of inaccurate,
incomplete or out of date
listings for reasons other than a vexatious intent.
Random checking of
In my view, the 50 random
checks that TICA states it undertakes weekly to test the accuracy, completeness
and currency of member listings
would be a positive step in meeting the
obligations in NPP 3. TICA advises that its process is to seek copies of
the documents
above from its member and to check these against the
listing. However, TICA has advised that it does not keep records
and that it shreds the documents it receives from its members once the
check is complete.
The Office asked TICA
to provide it with the first 50 alphabetical listings from the Tenancy History
the accuracy of these listings. To confirm the
accuracy of each listing staff of the Office undertook the
examined the face of each
listing to ensure that the record was complete and that there were no obvious
inaccuracies; and
telephoned the
listing member using the telephone number provided in the record
ask if the individual was/is a
tenant who had a tenancy relationship with the member; and
ask if the tenant’s name and
suburb in which they rented was correct;
ask if the member had a copy of the
lease that applied to the tenancy;
ask if the member, on TICA’s
behalf, had obtained the individual’s consent for TICA to collect the
individual’s
personal information and how this consent was obtained;
ask the member if the remark in the
field titled ‘comment’ (that is the listing category) was correct;
ask the member what evidence it had
to support the listing, including what specific evidence was held to
substantiate that money was
owed or that a tribunal/court order existed and for
a copy of that evidence to be provided to my
In relation to the records that the
Office checked it was found that:
records did not contain adequate identifying information, for example no
driver’s licence number was
There were obvious inaccuracies
on the face of some records. For example, some records contained the listing
‘Tenancy History
Only’ but also listed an amount of rent owed and a
date the rent debt was cleared.
listing category was incorrect in some
The record showed that one
real estate franchisee had listed a debt when in fact the listing was made by
another franchisee.
The amount of rent
owing was incorrect in some
Rent had been
‘cleared’ but the record had not been updated to reflect this in
some instances.
The listing member had
no knowledge of the tenant in some
The member who initially
listed the tenant had sold the real estate agency and the current owner had no
records relating to the tenancy
In its April 2004 submission
TICA accepted some of the error types listed above but argued that others were
based on the Office’s
misunderstanding of its processes. In particular,
TICA noted that it did in fact have minimum listing requirements in place and
had done so since 1998-99 when over 100,000 entries were removed from the
]). TICA also queried the Office’s
conclusion that some listing categories were incorrect. This conclusion was
corrections made by listing members when the Office contacted them to
discuss their listing and I am satisfied that it is correct.
TICA did acknowledge that it is aware of
cases where the listing agent may have been incorrect, for example where a staff
member moved
to a new agency and made a listing with the previous agent’s
logon and password; it has taken steps to prevent this occurring
in the future
including changing members' logon and password more frequently.
TICA also accepted that there may be
instances where a listing in relation to an amount owing was incorrect because
of an ‘oversight’
by a member, or where the listing member had no
knowledge of the tenant or had ceased to trade. It considered that these
would be dealt with under TICA’s policy of deleting listings that
cannot be validated or would be subject to correction under
NPP 6.5. However,
these mechanisms rely on TICA or an individual being aware that a listing is not
accurate, complete or up-to-date
and in my view this is inadequate.
In the context of ensuring that personal
information is accurate, complete and up-to-date in the present circumstances, I
view that the following elements in any system of quality control are
implementation of a system
for routine random checking of
deletion or amendment of
records that are found to be
inaccurate;
advice of deletion or
amendment to the individual concerned and to any other members that have
accessed the record since it was
provision of feedback to the
member concerned; and
detailed records
of the checking process including the member’s name, date of the check,
results of the check and action taken.
March preliminary view indicated that TICA’s system of checking does not
meet these criteria. TICA states in its April
2004 submission that it takes all
the steps other than the record keeping element. TICA also advised that it
would consider establishing
a system to keep records of its random check of
members; the system would probably involve making file notes rather than keeping
copies of documents. However, on the basis of the evidence before me,
including the investigation conducted by the Office detailed
above, I am
satisfied that TICA has not taken sufficient steps to comply with NPP 3.
Listing process and
requirements
TICA’s method of
collection is to receive listings from its members, either by the member
entering data directly into the database
or by the member providing information
to TICA for entry. TICA advises that its system is designed to promote accuracy
of the listings
in that it uses a standard format for data entry it provides a
number of standard fields and it does not allow the member to make
The March preliminary view was
based on the understanding that TICA did not require its members to provide a
minimum set of information
before accepting a listing. TICA advised in its
April 2004 submission that it does require, in addition to name, at least one
form or identification (date of birth, driver’s licence number or
passport number) before accepting a listing. It provided
a copy of a listing
screen, dated 25 March 2004, that stated this requirement. I also note
that the 50 records the Office examined
all contained at least two
identifiers.
The March 2004 preliminary
view was that, in the context of ensuring that personal information is accurate,
complete and up-to-date
in the present situation, the following elements are
important for a method of collection:
mandatory completion of fields that
are significant in terms of ensuring the personal information is accurate,
complete and up-to-date;
a minimum set of identifying information, for example name, date of birth, and
address or driver’s licence number.
As noted above,
TICA advises that it does require one piece of identifying information in
addition to name. It argued strongly against
any requirement to include
tenants’ addresses on its database on the grounds of relevance to its
members and privacy risks
for the individuals concerned. It also argued that
the information currently submitted by members was limited to what tenants
or had available; it noted that there were many people who would have
neither a driver’s licence nor a passport. The complainants
submission to me in response to the March 2004 preliminary view agreed, with
qualifications, with the proposal that a listing
should only be accepted with a
minimum set of personal information. It considered that the minimum set should
be name, date of birth
and an official identification number of some sort. It
did not seek to include address as an identifier.
I am aware of a wide range of anecdotal
evidence to the effect that a listing with TICA can have a negative impact on an
individual’s
ability to gain housing and that a property manager may
decide not to proceed with a tenancy application if it finds a listing it
relates to an applicant. While I accept that not all or even most property
managers will rely only on the fact that a person
has a listing with
TICA[cedilla] I consider that it would not be reasonable for TICA to accept
listings that are ambiguous as to
the person to whom they relate.
In my view, name and one other identifying
factor will not always be sufficient to establish identity to this level. My
is that, in general, database entries commonly contain a range of
errors introduced, for example because of operator error, the use
by individuals
(for whatever reason) of different names or variations on their names, or the
existence of a number of people with
the same or similar names. Increasing the
number of identity-related data items to be collected may improve the strength
of evidence
of identity. In the case of tenancy databases, I take the view that
the minimum requirement is three pieces of such information,
including name and
date of birth.
TICA needs to be mindful
that there are many government-issued (Commonwealth, State and Territory), and
other, numbers that could
be used as the third data element in determining
evidence of an individual's identity. Use of Commonwealth government
identifier-numbers
(such as passport numbers) by private sector organisations,
however, can occur only in compliance with NPP 7; this will require further
consideration by TICA. TICA also needs to be mindful that the collection of
additional data elements such as date of birth or government-issued
identifiers
for the primary purpose of establishing evidence of identity would mean, in
accordance with NPP 2, that these particular
data items may only be used or
disclosed for the purpose of establishing evidence of identity (or in accordance
with the exceptions
accordance with NPP 1.5 as reasonable step under NPP 3
In my view, in the context
of this complaint, proper notification of the collection of personal information
(required by NPP 1.5)
can play an important role in ensuring accuracy as it
allows an individual to challenge a listing that they believe is (and may be)
inaccurate.
The complainants argue that
TICA’s current forms of notice are not sufficient to make people aware
that they have been listed
on the database and as a consequence TICA is failing
to allow individuals the opportunity to check and challenge the accuracy,
completeness
and currency of listings about them.
TICA advises that it informs individuals
that it has collected their personal information from a third party (the
property manager)
via the ‘Privacy Acknowledgement that tenants are
required to sign when they apply for a property’. TICA believes that
acknowledgment form makes ‘the database membership and activities
transparent and fully advises individuals what will
occur with their personal
information’. It also advised in its April 2004 submission that the
not the only source of information available to
tenants about TICA and its operations or about the fact that they may or will be
listed in certain circumstances. Other advice includes arrears letter from
members and various other TICA policy statements that
it has prepared for use by
members or which describe its operations. On this basis, TICA believes that it
satisfies the requirements
of NPP 1.5.
I note here that TICA collects personal
information at two stages and holds that information in two separate databases
as follows:
information may be
collected, about potential tenants and other people who will live in the
dwelling but not be included on the tenancy
agreement as tenants (known as
approved occupants), when they apply for a tenancy and regardless of whether the
tenancy proceeds
– this set of personal information is held on the
Enquires Database;
information may be
collected when a member considers there has been a problem with the tenancy, or
the tenancy ends, and it makes
a listing about a tenant (but not about approved
occupants) – this set of information is held on the Tenancy History
The application of the
to the Enquiries Database and to the steps TICA takes to meet its
obligations under NPP 1.5 is considered in relation to my Determination
2004. That determination finds that in some respects the steps that TICA is
currently taking are not reasonable for the
purposes of NPP 1.5 given the
circumstances of the complaint.
relation to this complaint I consider that the fact that TICA takes some steps
to advise individuals, in accordance with its obligations
under NPP 1.5, is a
positive step towards the reasonable steps it needs to take under NPP 3.
However, I consider it is relevant here to
TICA has only been obliged
to comply with NPP 1.5 since 21 December 2002, and I consider it is
probable that there are many
individuals
who are currently listed in the
it would appear that individuals
are not necessarily informed that an adverse listing has been made with TICA and
may only become
aware that they have been listed, and therefore have an
opportunity to challenge the accuracy, completeness and currency of the listing,
if they are denied a tenancy and are told that this is on the basis of an
adverse TICA listing.
In regard to this
last point, TICA in its April 2004 submission noted that tenants would be
advised in arrears letters of the possibility
of listing if payments are not
brought up to date. However, I also understand from supporting material
provided by TICA that a property
manager may or may not proceed with a listing
in these circumstances. I also understand that listings may occur without an
letter – for example because the listing was for a non- arrears
matter. Although an arrears letter may make some individuals
aware of a listing
or potential listing, I am not satisfied that the practices of property managers
are consistent. I also reiterate
that arrangements that TICA might make to get
others to help meet its obligations does not relieve TICA itself of these
obligations,
in this instance in regards to NPPs 1 and 3.
Findings in relation
to TICA’s current data quality processes
I note that TICA in its
April 2004 submission argues that is up to it, not the Privacy Commissioner, to
decide what steps are reasonable
in the circumstances. I agree with this view
but only up to a point. The
clearly puts an obligation on an
organisation to make such judgements. The Act also, however, provides that I
can make those judgements
should they be the subject of a complaint and that I
am then in a position in a determination such as this to reach a different view
on what is reasonable.
On balance, for
the reasons I have set out above, I find that although TICA is taking some steps
to make sure the personal information
it collects, uses and discloses is
accurate, complete and up-to-date these steps fall short of the
‘reasonable steps’
required by NPP 3. Consequently, I find that
TICA is in breach of NPP 3.
TICA’s use of
generic listing categories
The information before me
indicates that the listing categories used during May 2003
Arrears of rent
Broke tenancy agreement
Dishonoured Cheques
Tribunal orders (Against the Tenant in
favour of the Agent or Lessor)
orders (Against the Tenant in favour of the Agent or Lessor)
Failed to comply with Residential
Tenancy Act
Rental bond claims
Failing to provide adequate notice
Sublet without consent
Entered into Payment Arrangement
Damage to property
Taking possession without consent
Past tenant history no default
Satisfactory payment
Recommended
Breaches of body corporate
Poor periodic inspections
Unauthorised
arrangement
TICA stated that members are only
allowed to use existing categories and there is no free text field that allows
members ‘to
members are able to list amounts in relation to certain fields. When
makes an enquiry about an individual the information returned is listings
against any category, any associated monetary
details, details about the listing
agent and the date of listing.
In my view,
given that members may only look at the category name when checking for listings
categories should allow the tenant and
listing member to understand the meaning attached to the listing, and they
should convey accurate
information about the tenant’s history to other
persons using the TICA database. The March preliminary view stated that the
current categories do not meet this test, in part because a number of broad,
‘catch-all’ categories are in use.
TICA responded in its April 2004
submission that is was considering changing its business model to being a
history only database;
that is that the database would only contain individual
details including the property managers with whom they had rented. While
this proposal, it does not alter the situation in relation to the complaints
currently before me. However I note that in
general the
prevent this form of database provided its operation complied with the NPPs.
Without well-defined listing criteria,
tenants and users of the database are not able to determine the meaning attached
to listings.
If there are multiple definitions for listing categories the
precise nature of the comment being made cannot be plain on the face
categories. My view is that this would render the database incomplete and
inaccurate.
The categories noted in the
March preliminary view as being currently too broad included ‘Breaking a
tenancy agreement’
and ‘Failed to comply with Residential Tenancy
Act’. It was noted that the use of these terms may result in information
being recorded that is incomplete in terms of NPP 3, for example because it is
possible that a term of the tenancy agreement or legislation
is broken by mutual
agreement between the parties. These generic terms are applicable when a tenant
is in rental arrears, has absconded
or failed to provide adequate notice, has
sublet without consent and taken possession without consent. Neither of the
generic terms
‘Breaking a tenancy agreement’ and ‘Failed to
comply with Residential Tenancy Act’ reveals the precise nature
comments being made and accordingly, appear to be incomplete.
TICA’s April 2004 submission advises
that it ascribes a particular meaning to the term ‘broke tenancy
namely the situation where the tenant advises the property
manager of their decision to vacate the premises while an agreement is
the term is therefore not a catchall for other listings such as
‘absconded’ or ‘sublet without consent’.
I accept this
clarification. However, I continue to hold the view that the category
‘Failed to comply with Residential Tenancy
Act’ is a broad, catch
all category and results in information being recorded which is incomplete.
TICA does provide definitions of the
categories on its website and in information to members. While TICA has
published its listing
criteria on its website, the listings are preceded by the
sentence ‘The following list provides a selection of the most common
breaches for which tenants can be listed on the database. It should be noted
that members may list other breaches which may not
be listed below.’ From
the material before me, I have concluded that the listing categories are used
intermittently and not
adequately understood or followed by members. I find
this is likely to result in an incomplete and inaccurate
It would also appear that the
listing definitions on the TICA website are not identical to the definitions
TICA provided to my Office.
For example, the website defines ‘Arrears of
rent’ as ‘a tenant can be reported to TICA from the time of
The advice provided to my Office by TICA defines ‘Arrears
of rent’ to be ‘when a tenant is more than four days
in arrears and
not in advance as required under the Residential Tenancy Agreement and the
Residential Tenancy Act’. This suggests
that the listing criteria are not
well defined. TICA has acknowledged that there have been ambiguities in
definitions. Its April
2004 submission argues that the examples referred to
above refer to different scenarios and are therefore technically accurate.
Nevertheless, it remains my view that it is critical that the categories are
consistently described in all the circumstances in which
they are made
I find that TICA’s use
of a ‘pick list’ method of reporting tenancy history, which relies
on one category that is
broadly defined and on descriptions that are brief, not
consistently defined and are not mutually exclusive, means that in this regard
it is not taking reasonable steps to make sure that the personal information it
holds is accurate, complete and up-to-date.
The complainants argue that, given the
nature of the database and its impact upon an individual’s ability to gain
housing, listings
should be supported by a high standard of proof and refer to
the objective decision of a third party. They also argue that as a
general rule
listings should only be allowed when a tenant breaches an order of a relevant
tenancy tribunal. They claim that without
this the accuracy of the listing
cannot be determined and that without introducing any external process, such as
verification through
tribunal orders, incorrect and subjective listings will
does not, in my
view, give me the power to determine what listing categories should be used by
requires that all listings must be accurate, complete and
up-to-date and I may therefore be able to form a view that certain listing
categories are not acceptable. However, it does not follow that I can or should
prescribe what categories must be used.
Having said this, in my view listings
which are restricted to categories defined by legislation, or listings which
relate to tribunal
and court orders, will be clearly defined and are appropriate
for use in a database such as that maintained by TICA. While I acknowledge
tenancy regulation is a state responsibility and the legislation differs in each
state, which may limit the ability to define
national criteria for listing
categories, where appropriate such an approach is to be encouraged in the
interests of accuracy and
completeness.
consider that it would be reasonable for the definition of each mutually
exclusive listing to be clearly communicated to database
members and
individuals, including the type of evidence the agent will require before making
a listing. I note that the use of mutually
exclusive categories does not
prevent an agent from making multiple listings of multiple breaches of the
tenancy agreement. However,
each breach of the agreement should be clearly
defined by one category. I suggest that TICA provide tenants and members with
information
advising exactly when one listing would be used to the exclusion of
In my view it would also be
beneficial for TICA to ask members to provide tenants with a copy of the listing
categories at the time
the tenancy agreement is signed and the criterion that
will lead to listing in the database. The criteria should make clear exactly
the circumstances under which a person would be listed. Individuals would then
understand that if they committed a particular act
that they would be listed on
the TICA database. TICA advises, in its April 2004 submission, which its
members provide individuals
with the definitions of the categories. I encourage
TICA and its members to continue this practice.
Findings in relation
to TICA’s use of generic listing categories
I find that TICA’s use
of a ‘pick list’ method of reporting tenancy history, which relies
on one category that is
broadly defined and categories which are not
consistently defined and are not mutually exclusive, means that in this regard
not taking reasonable steps to make sure that the personal information it
holds is accurate, complete and up-to-date. I therefore
find that TICA is in
breach of NPP
TICA’s use of
the term ‘Tenancy History Only’ for multiple purposes
My findings in relation to
TICA’s listing categories apply also to the use of the listing
‘Tenancy History Only’.
However, this listing category raises
particular issues that warrant separate consideration.
TICA states that ‘Tenancy History
Only’ is used when ‘a member may not need to report a default but
cannot justify
recording a satisfactory tenancy history or recommended
tenant’. TICA also states that this listing is used when ‘a
rented a property and the member wishes not to record ‘Past history no
default recorded’ or ‘Satisfactory
payment history’. In
addition the TICA website states that defaults which have been listed for either
3 or 5 years are amended
to ‘Tenancy History Only’. Its April 2004
submission also states that it is possible for a rental arrears listing to
made in conjunction with a Tenancy History Only listing.
TICA’s view is that this listing is
accurate, complete and up-to-date: ‘a Tenancy history listing provides no
more information
than would be provided by an honestly and accurately completed
tenancy application form. It acts as a verifier of an application
Tenancy history only is what it says, a tenancy history’.
From my investigation I understand that
this listing may indicate that a tenant has had a default in the past. However,
it may also
be chosen by agents to be used for tenants who did not have any
defaults or where the tenant did not conduct the tenancy in a satisfactory
manner (although the tenant did not have a default recorded against their name).
As the ‘Tenancy History Only’ listing
may indicate that a default
once existed, it appears inconsistent to allow this listing to be applied to
tenants who have had no
default recorded.
The history of use of the ‘Tenancy
History Only’ is such that it will continue to carry with it a negative
connotation
and therefore the category appears to be, in effect, a continuing
adverse listing. The practical implication is that the individual
is branded a
bad risk even though the specific default listing has been purged. I do not
believe that this problem can be resolved
by TICA making efforts to clarify the
nature of the listing with members. In my view, the listing may be misleading
and for this
reason is inaccurate and incomplete because it does not explain the
nature of the rental problems, if any.
TICA’s April 2004 submission
disputes this view on the grounds that the full meaning of the listing will be
apparent when a
member contacts the property manager that made the listing.
However, I am not satisfied that this is the consistent practice of
members and in the absence of evidence as to this practice, I am of the view
that in at least some circumstances members
will impute a negative meaning from
the term ‘Tenancy History Only’ and will decide on this basis not to
proceed with
the application.
Further, if
the tenant is advised that their application did not proceed because of a
tenancy history listing and wishes to establish
the reason for the listing he or
she can only do so by going back to the member that made the listing.
Findings in relation
to the use of the ‘Tenancy History Only’ listing
I find that the use of the
term ‘Tenancy History Only’ results in the information being held by
TICA being inaccurate,
incomplete and out-of-date. I therefore find that, in
continuing to use this listing category, TICA is not taking reasonable steps
make sure that the personal information it holds is accurate, complete and
up-to-date, in breach of NPP 3.
Determination No. 3 of 2004 also deals with use of the ‘Tenancy History
Only’ listing with respect to the timeframes
for retaining listings.
Dispute resolution
processes and NPP 3
When describing the steps it
takes when a tenant alleges that their personal information is inaccurate,
incomplete or out-of-date,
TICA advises that the member is contacted and
informed of the dispute. The member must provide copies of the same evidence
is sought in random checks. If the tenant continues to dispute the
listing, the record is marked as ‘disputed by tenant’
for a period
of 30 days whilst the tenant can have the matter heard by a court or tribunal.
On receipt of a tribunal or court order
which proves that a listing is incorrect
TICA will immediately amend or delete a listing and advise the member of the
inaccuracy.
To comply with its obligations
to ensure information is accurate, TICA must, in conjunction with its members,
take responsibility
for any dispute that arises about the accuracy of personal
information in its database and ensure that such disputes are resolved.
it does so, it cannot be confident that the information it holds is accurate.
TICA’s April 2004 submission states
that it does take appropriate
responsibility for disputed listings.
relevant to consider the potential significance of a listing for an individual,
particularly if it may be inaccurate, incomplete
or out-of-date. In this
instance, as noted earlier, this could include inability to gain any housing on
the residential rental
market. This will impact upon what is reasonable for
ensuring accuracy. In the present case I am of the view that for the steps
relation to disputes about accuracy to be reasonable they would need to include
some of the following elements:
details of the individuals dispute and putting the concerns to the
requiring members to respond to
the dispute within a reasonable timeframe, in most cases this would be not more
than seven days;
seeking sufficient
evidence to establish if the criteria set in relation to a particular listing
has been met – for example
if rental arrears can only be listed after a
specified number of days what evidence does the member have that this was the
removing listings where the
member cannot provide the necessary evidence, including because it is no longer
in business;
providing detailed
information to the individual concerned about the members’ response and
advising them of other avenues of
redress including to this Office; and
keeping records of disputes and the
resolution process, including what evidence was provided by the member and how
TICA was satisfied
sight the documentary evidence.
states that if a member cannot provide the necessary evidence to validate a
listing the listing is removed. Its April 2004 submission
states its dispute
resolution practices do include the elements listed above. In support of this
view TICA provided the Office with
documentary evidence in relation to a number
of disputed listings it had investigated. I acknowledge that the documents
do show that in these instances many of the steps above were included.
The documents provided do not include specified response
times or evidence that
notes are kept on a tenant’s file. I also note that these documents
relate to dispute investigations
commenced after I commenced my
investigation.
TICA’s April 2004
submission confirmed that where relevant TICA will advise tenants that it will
mark files as disputed for
30 days to allow the tenant to apply to the relevant
tenancy tribunal. The submission puts the view that this is appropriate as
fact that a tenant disputes an amount owing does not necessarily have
implications for whether the listing is accurate, complete
and up-to-date but
rather is a matter to be negotiated between the parties or arbitrated by a
tenancy tribunal.
However, in the
circumstances of this complaint, TICA’s obligation is to take reasonable
steps to make sure the personal information
it holds is accurate, complete and
up-to-date. I do not expect TICA to take on an arbitration role in relation to
disputed amounts;
however, I do not consider it is reasonable for TICA to limit
its action to marking the listing disputed for 30 days subject to a
ruling. There may be reasons why a person is unable to seek arbitration of
their matter by a tribunal – for example,
because the subject of the
dispute falls beyond the jurisdiction of the tribunal, or because a person
becomes aware of a listing
after the time limit for making an application to the
relevant tribunal has passed.
discussed below (see [
]) as a minimum, I consider TICA should
advise tenants of the option of seeking to have a statement to the effect that
the listing
is disputed associated with the listing.
Findings in relation
to Dispute Resolution and NPP 3
I find that with respect
to amounts disputed TICA’s current practice of only marking listings
disputed for 30 days means that
in this respect it is failing to take reasonable
steps to make sure that the personal information it holds is accurate, complete
and up-to-date. I therefore conclude that in this regard TICA has breached NPP
NPPs 6.5 and 6.6
TICA is only obliged to
comply with NPPs 6.5 and 6.6 in respect of personal information it collected
after 21 December 2002.
NPP 6.5 states
that, if an individual can establish that personal information is not accurate,
complete and up-to-date, the organisation
must take reasonable steps to correct
the information. TICA has advised that if an individual establishes that a
listing is inaccurate
it will remove the listing regardless of when it was made.
I accept this and find that TICA takes reasonable steps to correct information
where an individual establishes that it is inaccurate.
NPP 6.6 says
that if an individual and an organisation are unable to agree about whether
information is accurate, up-to-date and complete,
the organisation must, at the
request of the individual, take reasonable steps to associate with the
information the individual’s
claim to this effect. I am satisfied that at
present TICA does not take any steps in this regard other than, as noted above,
mark disputed listing as ‘disputed by tenant’ for a period of 30
consequence of this approach is that in cases where the individual does not
proceed to take the matter to a court or tribunal
or is unable to do so (for
example because the matter falls beyond jurisdiction or arises out of time for
the commencement of proceedings),
TICA will still remove the disputed marker
‘disputed by tenant’ after 30 days, thereby leaving in place the
information without any indication to future users of the dispute.
I therefore find that TICA is not taking
‘reasonable steps’ to associate with an individual’s personal
information
an individual’s claim as to the accuracy, completeness or
currency of that information. Consequently, I find that TICA is in
breach of NPP
TICA has advised the Office that it
is willing to investigate options to enable individuals to note they believe
their personal information
to be inaccurate, incomplete or out-of-date. I would
commend such an approach and suggest that in the case that a statement provided
by a tenant is unduly long, it would be reasonable for TICA to suggest a
shortened version.
of findings on NPP 3 and NPP 6.5 and 6.6
Whilst I am satisfied that
TICA employs some steps to ensure that the information it holds is accurate,
complete and up-to-date, my
preliminary view is that I do not consider its
present practices satisfy the obligation imposed by NPPs 3, 6.5 and 6.6. For
reason I find that TICA has failed to take reasonable steps to make sure
that the information it collects, uses and discloses is
accurate, complete and
up-to-date and it has therefore breached NPPs 3, 6.5 and 6.6.
Determination
I find that TICA has
breached NPPs 3, 6.5 and 6.6 by:
using an agreement with its members
that does not sufficiently specify the data quality standards
failing to take sufficient
steps to check listings by property managers and not requiring minimum
identification requirement before
failing to advise tenants
contemporaneously that they have been
using a ‘pick list’
method of reporting tenancy history, which relies on one category that is
broadly defined and on descriptions
that are brief, not consistently defined and
are not mutually exclusive;
an inadequate dispute resolution process; and
failing to provide mechanisms to
correct records where the individual concerned has established they are not
accurate, complete and
up-to-date or to associate a statement to this effect
when there is a dispute about accuracy, completeness or
I therefore find this element of
the complaint substantiated and declare that TICA has engaged in conduct
constituting an interference
with the privacy of individuals who are members of
the class identified in the complaint. I declare that TICA should not repeat or
continue such conduct.
The complainants
have asked me to make a declaration requiring TICA to develop new forms to meet
its obligations under NPP 1.5. I
am not satisfied that I should do so. While I
have declared that TICA should not repeat or continue conduct which constitutes
interference with the privacy of an individual, I do not, in my view, have
the power under
section 52(1)(b)(i)(B)
to otherwise generally prescribe how
TICA should act.
I am also of the opinion
section 52(1)(b)(ii)
does not provide the basis for making a declaration of
the type sought by the complainants as to the future conduct of TICA. I am
on the information presently before me, satisfied that there has been any
identifiable loss or damage suffered by the complainants
that would be redressed
by a course of conduct required by such a declaration.
However, I do consider the suggestion
made by TU QLD to be helpful in assisting TICA to meet its obligations under
NPPs 3, 6.5 and
6.6, in promoting ‘best practice’ under the
and allowing the members of the class upon whose behalf this complaint has
been brought to be better assured that personal information
that TICA holds
In my view the following steps, that
include many of the suggestions made by TU QLD and also that TICA has indicated
it is willing
to consider, would be a reasonable set of measures to ensure that
the personal information it currently holds on the database is
complete and up-to-date when used or disclosed; and that the personal
information it collects in the future is accurate,
complete and up-to-date. I
note that the set of measures below are reasonable steps in the context of this
complaint and at this
time and taking account of TICA’s operational
circumstances. It is open to me to find that in another set of circumstances
that these steps would not be all that was
recommend to TICA that it undertake the following action and that to the extent
possible these actions are completed by mid July
2004 unless I suggest otherwise
Develop, in consultation with
my Office, a detailed description of all listing categories that are mutually
exclusive, include objective
criteria for listing, are consistent with state and
territory tenancy legislation and do not include the terms ‘breaking
agreement’ or ‘tenancy history only’. Provide the
finalised listing categories to my Office, make them available
website and provide a copy to all of TICA’s members.
Specify to its members that the
listing categories are to be made available to all individuals at no charge when
a tenancy agreement
is signed and make the listing categories available on
TICA’s website and on request to individuals at no charge to the
individual.
Develop in consultation
with my Office, detailed guidelines for the categories, for example, TICA will
include the number of days
overdue before a ‘late payment’ can be
listed. Provide the finalised guidelines to my Office and make the guidelines
available with listing categories wherever published or made
Allow members to only use
the terms ‘objectionable behaviour’ and ‘repeated
breaches’ if there is a relevant
Provide tenants with the ability
to add a statement to any listings which they dispute.
Develop, in consultation with my
Office, criteria by which members may validate listing. Remove listings that
cannot be validated
by members either in the course of TICA’s random
checks or where the individual concerned has disputed the
Continue to conduct at least
50 random checks a week to validate listings and regular data cleansing. In
particular, delete or amend
records that are found to be inaccurate, provide
advice of deletion or amendment to the individual concerned and to any other
that have accessed the record since it was listed, provide feedback to
the member concerned and keep detailed records of the checking
process including
the member name, date of the check, results of the check and action
Ensure that individuals are
advised, either by TICA or its members that a listing has been made and that
this will occur when individuals
complete a tenancy application and when the
individual is listed.
Commission an
independent audit of the Tenancy History and Enquiries database that will test
the accuracy, completeness and currency
of 500 listings on the databases in
terms of NPP 3 and TICA’s stated operating procedures. Provide a
de-identified copy of
the audit report to my Office within twelve months of the
date of this Determination.
months from the date of this Determination, delete all records that do not
contain adequate information to uniquely identify
an individual. As a minimum
requirement I would expect this to be a name, date of birth and another official
document number (subject
to the requirements of NPP 7).
Develop an audit trail for both the
Tenancy History Database and Enquiries Database to enable TICA to monitor
modification of the
to provide members with training and information on the appropriate use of the
TICA system.
Alter the agreement with
members to ensure that it reflects TICA’s obligations under the
Federal Privacy Commissioner
Dated 16 April 2004
I note that
section 38C
gives me the power to amend a complaint so that it can be dealt with
as a representative complaint. In the event that it is necessary
to amend the
complaints received from TU NSW and the individuals concerned so as to make them
a part of the wider representative
complaint, I would do so pursuant to
of the Act.
I note here
does not require complainants to specify which NPPs may be
relevant to the complaint they are
TICA is not bound by an
approved privacy code in terms of
section 13A(b)(ii)
Article 25 Universal
Declaration of Human Rights available at
http://www.un.org/Overview/rights.html
I note that TICA was offered the opportunity to make any submissions or provide
any material to me in relation to this exemption.
I did not receive any
submissions or material in relation to this
I note that
does not prevent a body corporate from being a
‘small business operator’ only because it discloses personal
information
with the consent of the individual, or as required or authorised
under legislation. I find that TICA does not have the consent of
individuals whose personal information appears on their database (in particular,
those individuals whose personal information
was collected before 21 December
2002) and is disclosed to TICA’s members. I note that TICA has not claimed
that it does have
such consent, although it was given the opportunity to do
I note, for example, that
NSW tenancy legislation has time limits, which usually begin when individuals
become aware of an alleged
tenancy agreement breach, after which the dispute can
be brought to the Consumer Trader and Tenancy Tribunal (CTTT). This could
that if a TICA listing is about a disputed event that occurred, for instance 60
days before the listing, the tribunal may not
have the jurisdiction to hear the
matter. In addition, the CTTT has no specific jurisdiction to hear matters
involving disputed
TICA listings.
No downloadable files available