Stubbs & Stubbs (No 3) [2025] FedCFamC1F 534 (11 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Stubbs (No 3)
[2025] FedCFamC1F 534
File number:
MLC 7164 of 2023
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PARENTING AND PROPERTY
– Defended hearing – Final orders – Parenting – Where
the children live with
the mother and have spent limited daytime with the father
– Where the parents live in different States – Where since
orders were made in April 2024 neither party has applied for interim orders
requiring the children to spend time with the
father – Where the mother
told the court child expert she considers the children are responsible for the
time they spend with
the father – Where the father’s deep mistrust
of the mother’s willingness to support the children’s relationships
with him is not objectively explicable by the evidence – Where the
children all express the desire to spend more time with
the father – Where
the father’s insistence the children live with him implies the
prioritisation of his desire over the
children’s needs – Orders made
– Children to remain living with the mother and that she have sole
decision-making
authority – Children to spend three weekends of each
school term and half school holidays with the father – Property
Where it is just and equitable to make orders adjusting the parties’
property interests – Where the mother and
her sibling are registered legal
owners of a property purchased by the maternal grandparents – Where the
mother asserts the
property is the subject of a resulting trust – Where
the mother was impelled to admit the presumption of advancement ousted
presumption of a resulting trust – Where loans entered into by the parties
to pay for legal fees are ignored as liabilities
– Contribution-based
entitlement assessed as 65/35 with a 12 per cent adjustment in favour of the
mother – Orders made
– Where the parties’ agree for the mother
to retain the former matrimonial home and other real properties, provided she
pay the father a cash sum – Where the parties otherwise agree to retain
their personal property and superannuation entitlements.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Amendment Act 2024
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) rr 7.01, 7.10, 7.11
Property Law Act 1958
Cases cited:
Allen v Snyder
(1979) FLC 90-656
Atco Controls Pty Ltd (in liq.) v Newtronics Pty Ltd (recs and mgrs
(2009) 25 VR 411
[2009] VSCA 238
Balfour v Balfour
[1919] 2 KB 571
Bosanac v Commissioner for Taxation
(2022) 275 CLR 37
Calverly v Green
(1984) 155 CLR 242
[1984] HCA 81
Chorn v Hopkins
(2004) FLC 93-204
[2004] FamCA 633
Cohen v Cohen
(1929) 42 CLR 91
[1929] HCA 15
Ermogenous v Greek Orthodox Community of SA Inc
(2002) 209 CLR 95
[2022] HCA 8
Henderson v Miles
[2005] NSWSC 710
Jones v Padavatton
[1968] EWCA Civ 4
[1969] 2 All ER 616
Lainhart & Ellinson
(2023) FLC 94-166
[2023] FedCFamC1A
Magill v Magill
(2006) 226 CLR 551
[2006] HCA 51
Marriage of Ravasini
(1983) FLC 91-312
[1982] FamCA 62
Martin v Martin
(1959) 110 CLR 297
[1959] HCA 62
Muschinski v Dodds
(1985) 160 CLR 583
[1985] HCA 78
Pera v Pera
(2008) FLC 93-372
[2008] FamCAFC 87
Shinohara & Shinohara
[2025] FedCFamC1A 126
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
28, 29, 30 & 31 July 2025
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Bentleys Barristers & Solicitors
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms McCreadie
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Lander & Rogers
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Bentleigh Family Lawyers
Table of Corrections
In paragraph 80, the words “Property 2 at C Street” have been
replaced by “Property 1 at C Street”
MLC 7164 of 2023
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
former orders relating to the following children are discharged:
(a) X, born 2014;
(b) Y, born 2015; and
(c) Z, born 2018.
parties shall each retain parental responsibility for the children as conferred
by law, but in respect of whom the mother has
sole decision-making authority for
all “major long-term issues” as defined in
Law Act 1975
children shall live with the mother.
parties shall take all reasonable steps to ensure the children spend time with
the father:
(a) on the third, sixth and ninth weekends of each school term, from 5.00 pm
Friday until 6.00 pm on Sunday, confined to within a
radial distance of 150
kilometres from the Melbourne GPO;
(b) for the first week of the Victorian Spring, Autumn and Winter school
holidays, commencing at 9.30 am on the first Saturday of
the holidays and
concluding at 6.00 pm on the second Saturday of the holidays;
(c) in the Victorian Summer school holidays, commencing in December 2025 and in
odd years thereafter, for the first half of the holidays;
(d) in the Victorian Summer school holidays, commencing in December 2026 and in
even years thereafter, for the second half of the
the purpose of Orders 4(c) and 4(d), the Victorian Summer school holidays are
deemed to start at 9.30 am on the first day after
the last day of term, end at
9.30 am on the last day before the day on which school resumes in the new term,
and the mid-point is
9.30 am on the day between those days.
parties shall ensure the children’s exchange:
(a) for the purpose of implementing Order 4(a), at the mother’s home;
(b) for the purpose of implementing Orders 4(b), 4(c) and 4(d), at the Melbourne
domestic airport terminal.
parties shall take all reasonable steps to ensure the children communicate with
the father by telephone at 6.00 pm each Sunday
when they are not spending time
with him pursuant to Order 4.
parties shall take all reasonable steps to ensure the children communicate with
the mother by telephone at 6.00 pm each Sunday
when they are not living with her
pursuant to Order 3.
party is restrained from denigrating the other in the presence or hearing of the
children and from permitting the children to
remain in the presence or hearing
of another person denigrating the other.
party shall forthwith inform the other if any of the children require medical
treatment for illness or injury while in their
respective care and shall notify
the other of the name of the treating doctor, clinic or hospital.
party shall forthwith inform the other, and keep the other informed, in writing
of their respective current residential address,
mobile telephone number, and
email address.
the purpose of
s 65Y(1)(c)(ii)
Family Law Act 1975
parties are authorised to remove the children from Australia upon the following
conditions:
(a) the children’s removal from Australia is temporary;
(b) the trip away is confined to the periods when the children are living or
spending time in school holiday periods under these
orders with the parent
accompanying them; and
(c) the children are not taken to a country which is not a signatory to either
the 1980 Hague Convention or the 1996 Hague Convention.
to s 65DA(2) and
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), particulars of
the obligations that these orders create, particulars of the consequences that
may follow contravention of these
orders, and details of assistance to comply
with these orders are set out in the attached Fact Sheet, which forms part of
these orders.
Independent Children’s Lawyer is discharged upon the latter of the
determination of any appeal or the expiration of the
applicable appeal
and all other outstanding applications for orders under
Law Act 1975
(Cth) are dismissed.
parties shall forthwith do all acts and things necessary to sell their shares in
O Company and, upon their sale, to divide the
net sale proceeds in
proportions of 77 per cent to the mother and 23 per cent to the father.
mother is declared the sole legal and beneficial owner (as between the parties)
of Motor vehicle 1 presently in her possession
and the father shall forthwith
transfer to her all his right, title and interest in the vehicle.
mother shall pay to the father the sum of $482,765 within three months of the
date of these orders.
costs orders made in favour of the mother against the father are preserved, but
merge in these orders upon the mother’s
compliance with Order 18.
to compliance with Order 18, the mother is declared the sole legal and
beneficial owner (as between the parties) of:
(a) the real property at
Street, Suburb D, Victoria;
(b) the real property at E Street, Suburb D, Victoria;
(c) her one-half interest in the real property at F Street, Town B,
Queensland;
(d) her shares in H Ltd; and
(e) her bank accounts;
(f) all other personal property in her possession; and
(g) her superannuation interests.
father is declared the sole legal and beneficial owner (as between the parties)
(a) his shareholdings in J Pty Ltd, K Pty Ltd, and L Pty Ltd;
(b) his sailboat; and
(c) his bank accounts;
(d) all other personal property in his possession; and
(e) his superannuation interests.
parties shall each indemnify, and keep indemnified, the other against liability
for debts secured over property retained by them
individually, debts in their
respective sole names, and any debt they individually incur for capital gains
tax by reason of compliance
with these orders.
the event of either party refusing or neglecting to sign within seven days of a
written request to do so any document necessary
to implement the terms of these
orders, a Registrar of the Court is empowered to execute such documents on
behalf of the parties
pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
and all other outstanding applications for orders under
Law Act 1975
(Cth) are dismissed.
are reserved for 28 days.
implement Orders 3 and 4, the father volunteers to bear the costs of all
airfares for the children.
children are habitually resident in Australia, in the State of
parties have “rights of custody” in respect of the children within
the meaning of the 1980 Hague Convention by virtue
of the provisions of
Family Law Act 1975
of the children away from Australia by one party without the written consent of
the other will constitute a wrongful retention
of the children within the
meaning of the 1980 Hague Convention.
orders constitute “measures of protection directed to the protection of
the person of the children” within the meaning
of the 1996 Hague
Convention.
These orders have been amended pursuant to
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Stubbs & Stubbs
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Amended pursuant to r 10.14(b) of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court
of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) on 30 October 2025
proceedings concern the grant of relief between the parties in causes of action
brought in respect of their children under
Family Law Act
(Cth) (“the Act”) and their property under
parties began cohabitation and married in 2013.
three children were born in 2014, 2015 and 2018 and are now aged between 11 and
seven years respectively.
parties separated in either late 2021 or early 2022, which factual dispute need
not be determined. The children remained in the
mother’s residential care
in the former family home in Melbourne, while the father moved to Sydney. The
parties still maintain
their homes in Melbourne and Sydney.
the next 18 months or so, the parties voluntarily arranged the children’s
interaction with the father,
the negotiation of such arrangements became fractious and the children
temporarily ceased spending time with him in
for which historical
events the parties each advance different
explanations.
It is quite
unnecessary to now determine whose perception most closely resembles objective
facts because their respective proposals
for how much time the children will
spend with the non-residential parent are not all that much different.
father commenced these proceedings seeking both parenting and financial relief
in June 2023. Numerous substantive interim parenting
and financial orders have
since been made.
April 2024, interim consent orders were made providing for the children to live
with the mother and requiring her to facilitate
any telephone communication
which the children wanted to have with the father. No interim orders were made
compelling the children
to spend time with the father, as that issue was
expressly “reserved” (Order 1), whatever that may mean. This
was made to the interim parenting orders made in April
[father] is not pursuing time with the children on this day and is focusing on
engaging in therapy as recommended by [the single
Thereafter,
neither party ever applied for interim orders requiring the children to spend
time with the father. Notwithstanding the
absence of any such orders, the
children have spent some limited time with him over the past few months, but
only on three occasions
and only for brief daytime visits. They have not spent
any overnight time with him for some
2023, the parties each took $15,000 from the net proceeds realised by them on
the sale of a property.
Thereafter,
several interim property settlement orders were made consensually, progressively
exhausting the funds. In August 2023,
orders were made for both parties to
receive $100,000 from the funds. In February 2024, more orders were made for the
each receive another $50,000. In April 2024, more orders were made
for the father to receive $80,000 and for the wife to receive
the residue
balance of the account, estimated to be $28,000.
proceedings were transferred to the Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia (Division 1) in July 2024 and listed for trial
in July 2025.
father relied upon:
(a) his affidavit filed on 11 July 2025 (with annexures);
(b) his financial statement filed on 11 July 2025;
(c) his undertaking as to disclosure filed on 19 June 2025;
(d) the affidavit of his partner, Ms N, filed on 11 July 2025;
(e) the affidavit of the paternal aunt, Ms M, filed on 11 July 2025 (with
annexures); and
(f) the affidavit of the paternal grandmother filed on 11 July 2025 (with
annexures).
father sought and was granted permission to rely upon evidence given by the
maternal grandmother,
but did not
file any affidavit sworn by her.
father sought and was granted permission to rely upon evidence given by his
treating psychologist,
but did not
file any affidavit sworn by him or her.
father was earlier refused permission to rely upon opinion evidence given by two
proposed adversarial experts,
failed to demonstrate entitlement in accordance with r 7.10(1) and r 7.11 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) (“the Rules”). He did not renew his application at any
point prior to or during the trial.
mother relied upon:
(a) her affidavit filed on 11 July 2025 (with annexures);
(b) her financial statement filed on 11 July 2025;
(c) her undertaking as to disclosure filed on 23 June 2025;
(d) the affidavit of the maternal grandfather filed on 11 July 2025 (with
annexures);
(e) the affidavit of her treating medical practitioner filed on 11 July 2025
(with annexures); and
(f) the affidavit of her treating psychologist filed on 21 July 2025 (with
annexures), which was filed late,
but no objection was taken.
mother’s affidavit was the subject of some minor evidentiary objections to
two paragraphs and an annexure, which were sustained.
evidence given by the mother’s treating medical practitioner and treating
psychologist went further than permitted by r
7.01(1)(a) of the Rules by
offering opinions about the mother’s parenting capacity, as the
mother’s lawyers impermissibly
invited such opinion evidence despite
express limitation by procedural
The offending parts of
their evidence was ruled to be inadmissible.
parties and the Independent Children’s Lawyer (“the ICL”)
relied upon the family report prepared by the court
child expert, dated 15 May
earlier family report was prepared by a single expert in April 2024 (pursuant to
orders made in August 2023), which report the
parties and the ICL formerly told
the Court would be read in evidence at the
but that did not
eventuate. In November 2024, the father sought leave to call an adversarial
expert to challenge the opinion evidence
of the single expert, but the dispute
was resolved by orders made by another judge requiring the court child expert to
fresh family report without recourse to either the single
expert’s report or the adversarial expert’s
with which direction the
court child expert
PARENTING CAUSE
Legal Principles
in respect of children are made under Part VII of the Act, where the meaning of
a “parenting order” is defined
(s 64B). The Court may make such
parenting orders as it thinks proper (s 65D), within the context of the objects
of the legislation
making parenting orders, the Court is mandated to regard the child’s best
interests as the paramount consideration (s 60CA
and s 65AA) and the Act
specifies the criteria which must be considered when determining the form of
orders which meets and promotes
the child’s best interests (s 60CC).
responsibility for children is vested in their parents (s 61C(1)), regardless of
whether they live together or are separated
(s 61C(2)), but that situation only
applies whilst ever no order is made to change it (s 61C(3) and s 61D). Parental
responsibility
is defined to encompass all duties, powers, responsibilities and
authority conferred by law upon parents (s 61B).
parental responsibility for a child or children in relation to “major
long-term issues” rests with more than one
person, the order may prescribe
whether those persons have joint or sole decision-making authority in relation
to all or only specified
issues (s 61D(3)). The Act defines “major
long-term issues” to include those such as the child’s education,
cultural upbringing, health, name, and changed living arrangements (s
4(1)) and specifies what “joint decision-making”
requires of the
parties in respect of decisions about such issues (s 61DAA). One person who is
allocated with parental responsibility
for a child need not be consulted by
another person allocated with parental responsibility in respect of minor
decisions made for
the child which fall outside “major long-term
issues” (s 61DAB).
responsibility orders no longer have any bearing upon determinations made about
with whom a child should live or spend time.
father proposed the orders set out within a Minute of Proposed Orders he
tendered as the trial began,
which proposal differed slightly from his Further Amended Initiating Application
filed on 29 July 2024. He seeks sole decision-making
authority for the children,
orders that they live with him (even though they have hardly seen him over the
past two years), and orders
that they spend time with the mother on three
weekends of each school term in Sydney and for four consecutive nights in school
periods. The father’s proposal for the children’s residence
is motivated by his belief the mother will not facilitate
their relationships
even to the point of
disobeying court orders,
she has never done.
father’s fall-back position was for the children to spend time with him on
one weekend per month during school terms (without
them being confined to
Melbourne) and for half of school holiday periods, which is much like the
proposal he originally advanced
and discussed with the court child expert in
April 2025.
The corollary of
this original primary proposal is the father’s recognition that the
children’s best interests are served
by remaining in the mother’s
residential care – unless he can make out his assertion their
relationships with him will
be destroyed or damaged if they continue to live
mother eventually joined in the proposal advanced by the
which differed slightly
from the proposed orders set out within her Second Further Amended Response
filed on 10 June 2025. She seeks
sole decision-making authority for the
children, orders that they live with her, and orders that they spend time with
on two weekends each school term (confined to Melbourne) and for half
of school holiday periods.
mother abandoned her former proposal for the children not to spend any time at
all with the father until he engages in “family
therapy”, and only
then subject to the therapist recommending they do
which proposal was plainly
incompetent because it purported to vest judicial power in the therapist
Lainhart & Ellinson
[2023] FedCFamC1A 200
(2023) FLC 94-166
[58]–[59]).
the mother’s current proposal implicitly recognises, there is scant reason
to be found in the evidence for why the children’s
interaction with the
father should be truncated, aside from the distance between the parties’
ICL proposed the orders within the Minute of Proposed Orders tendered during
final submissions.
Children’s Best Interests
children are not indigenous, so s 60CC(1)(b) and s 60CC(3) of the Act do not
mother made allegations of the children being unsafe in the father’s
but the allegations were
not put to him in cross-examination for admission or rebuttal. Nor was it
contended by the parties or the
ICL that orders were required to ensure the
children’s safety and protection from either their subjection or exposure
violence, abuse, or neglect perpetrated by either party. Nor could it
have been because the parties and the ICL all advocated for
orders which would
require the children to spend substantial amounts of unsupervised time with the
non-residential parent. The mother
knows children sometimes suffer illness and
injury through misadventure because it has happened to them while in her
Accordingly, the
provisions of s 60CC(2)(a) of the Act are not relevant to the disposition of
children all express the desire to see much more of the father (s
60CC(2)(b)),
but none expressed
the desire to live with him in preference to the mother. She knows the children
want to see more of him.
children do not have any special developmental, psychological, emotional or
cultural needs (s 60CC(2)(d)). Save for some debate
capacity to provide adequately for the children’s emotional needs, both
parties can easily meet all
the children’s needs, including physical and
intellectual needs (s 60CC(2)(d)). The father expressly acknowledged as
two pivotal influential issues were the mother’s capacity to adequately
provide for the children’s emotional need
to enjoy close and loving
relationships with the father (s 60CC(2)(d)) and the benefit the children would
derive from having relationships
of that type with the father and members of the
extended paternal family (s 60CC(2)(e)).
children already enjoy close and loving relationships with the mother and, on
the evidence, there is no reason why they ought
not have similarly close and
loving relationships with the father. Their safety would not be thereby
compromised. The children have
not seen much of the father since separation,
with the consequence they are starved of his emotional nourishment. The court
expert witnessed the children’s eagerness to see and interact with
the father.
mother told the court child expert she considers the children are responsible
for the time they spend with the
but she must be
disabused of that mistaken notion. As their parent, it was her responsibility to
make those decisions. In cross-examination,
the court child expert described the
mother’s attitude towards the children’s relationships with the
father as “ambivalent”,
which prevented her from actively promoting
such relationships. Correctly, the court child expert considered her views about
children’s developmental needs were “somewhat
children’s safety is not genuinely in issue, as is the situation here, an
intuitive residential parent will actively encourage
the children’s
regular interaction with the non-residential parent as it is important for their
emotional development. Children
will baulk at asking to see more of the
non-residential parent if they perceive, either rightly or wrongly, that such
requests will
be unfavourably or ambivalently received by the residential
parent. Seeing more of the father may well be one of the “topics”
the children do not feel “safe” being able to discuss with the
mother, as the court child expert
The weight of
responsibility to make such requests should not burden the children. They must
be removed from the centre of the parental
conflict. If the parties cannot reach
agreement, they cannot expect the impasse to be brokered by the children and
must instead be
bound by prescriptive and enforceable court orders.
the mother lacks such insight, that shortcoming must be distinguished from
conduct which damages the children’s relationships
with the father, which
distinction he erroneously conflates. His deep distrust of the mother’s
willingness to support the children’s
relationships with him is not
objectively explicable by the evidence.
a while after their separation, the parties co-operatively arranged for the
children to spend time with the father, though their
personal acrimony sometimes
obstructed their co-operation. Once the interim orders were made in April 2024,
intentionally omitting
any regulation of how and when the children would spend
time with the father, the mother did not breach any orders by not positively
agitating for them to see him, but the silence of the orders likely suited her.
mother said in cross-examination she did not use her initiative to arrange for
the children to spend time with the father after
April 2024 due to her concern
which the father contended
was unfairly critical of him. Regardless of any
doubts entertained by the father, things have changed for the better anyway. The
original single expert report was overtaken by the family report prepared by the
court child expert in April 2025. The mother permitted
the children to spend
time with the father after the interviews with the court child expert in April
2025 and again when he travelled
to Melbourne in June
She then conducted the
trial in July 2025 on the premise that orders should be made for the children to
spend as much time with the
father as the distance between their two households
reasonably allows. She sensibly admitted in cross-examination the father should
be more involved in the children’s lives.
father failed to plausibly explain how his negative view of the mother could be
reconciled with her recent positive conduct. The
children’s uncontained
joy at seeing the father, as was observed by the court child expert, is wholly
inconsistent with his
theory that the mother has damaged their relationships
with him and will not support their relationships with him in future.
father acknowledges the children would probably have felt abandoned by him when
he moved to Sydney and refused to return and live
in Melbourne, once it became
apparent to him they would remain in
He also knows it
would be disruptive for the children if they move to live with him in
Yet despite his
recognition of those facts, he refuses to move back to Melbourne and insists on
the children living with him in Sydney,
which implies his prioritisation of his
desire over the children’s needs. That is his prerogative, but he must
live with the
consequences of his decision.
parties evidently have different personalities and parenting
which differences most
probably underpin their mutual distrust and conflict. The court child expert
considered the parties were “adult
polite way of saying they fail to recognise the paramountcy of the
children’s best interests and tend to dwell on
their personal differences.
During cross-examination, the court child expert said neither party was putting
the children first. Such
expert opinions are accepted as being correct. The
parties’ reciprocal recriminations about historical events, as deposed in
their affidavits and posed by questions in cross-examination, which were
immaterial to the decision at hand was testament to that.
further consideration should not be overlooked (s 60CC(2)(f)). The father now
lives with Ms N and her two children in a four-bedroom
house, owned jointly by
her and her former husband. Were the father’s proposal granted, the house
would have to accommodate
two adults and five children, when only one bedroom is
currently vacant. The father confidently deposed the house has “room
the children”,
existing bedroom allocations would need to be re-organised and space would be at
a premium which would inevitably add pressure
to the new residential
arrangements when the children do not know either Ms N or her two children
“particularly well”,
as she conceded in cross-examination. If the
father found the house was not big enough, the children would then have to
endure another
move and probably another change of schools. The prospect of such
disruption should be avoided.
Conclusions
children should remain living with the mother. She is soundly meeting all their
physical and educational needs. True enough, she
could have done better by
actively promoting the children’s relationships with the father over the
past few years in the absence
of any prescriptive order, but her laxness in that
regard should not be treated as a wilful sabotage of their relationships with
him. The father’s belief the mother will not comply with orders made after
this trial which will compel her to ensure the children
spend time with him is
mere imagination, as there is no evidence to objectively support it. In any
event, if his suspicions are realised,
she can be sanctioned for any
contravention of orders. Her proven contraventions of orders could well enliven
the litigation under Pt VII of the Act (s 65D(2) and s
proposed orders altering the allocation of “parental
responsibility”. Save in one respect, the parties and the
ICL agreed the
residential parent should have sole “decision-making authority” for
the children in respect of “major
long-term issues” for the children
(as that term is defined in s 4(1) of the Act). It follows then that, as the
residential
parent, the mother shall have sole decision-making authority. The
parties otherwise retain the parental responsibility which is conferred
them by law (s 61C). The father wanted to have sole decision-making authority
for decisions related to the children’s
education, but it would be absurd
to carve out such exclusive responsibility for him when he lives in Sydney and
the children live
with the mother in Melbourne.
court child expert observed the children to be bonded as a sibling
so the orders providing
for them to spend time with the father should cater to them collectively rather
than individually.
parties and the ICL uniformly proposed the children should spend time with the
non-residential parent several times on weekends
spread over each school term,
for substantial portions of all school holiday periods, and on other special
occasions. There were
minor variations in the proposals with respect to the
precise times of visits and whether the visits must occur in Sydney or
but such variations were hardly the subject of any evidence or
meaningful submission, which suggests they were not so important,
avoid disruption to the routine, no provision is made especially for
Father’s Day and Mother’s Day. The children will
have telephone
communication with the father on the Sunday of Father’s Day, if they are
then living with the mother, and with
the mother on the Sunday of Mother’s
Day, if spending time with the father.
orders provide for the children to spend time with the father on weekends during
school terms, but that should occur in Melbourne.
That will enable the
father’s participation in the children’s extra-curricular
activities, which he was keen to do, and
avoid the inconvenience for the
children of return inter-state flights and connections on weekends. It is likely
no more expensive
for the father, rather than all children, to do the
inter-state travel on weekends. The orders permit the father to take the
to Sydney or to other destinations when they spend time with him during
school holiday periods. The father agreed to bear the cost
children’s airfares. The changeover venues were not ultimately
controversial.
orders require the parties to ensure the children communicate with the parent
they are not then living or spending time with on
each Sunday evening, in line
with the proposal of the mother and the
The father conceded such a
prescriptive order was preferable to the aspirational and unenforceable
communication order he
order is made restraining the father from contacting the children’s
doctors, as the mother and ICL
They conceded such an
injunction was inconsistent with other information orders they
and also inconsistent
with the father’s retention of parental responsibility for the
order is made dictating the way in which the parties must
communicate.
They each retain
parental responsibility and can decide for themselves, particularly when they
each sought orders compelling them
to notify each other of their contact
orders described are in the children’s best interests.
FINANCIAL CAUSE
Legal Principles
trial of the financial cause began after 10 June 2025, in which event the
amendments to the Act wrought by the
Family Law Amendment Act 2024
accordance with the new provisions of
of the Act, it is first necessary
to establish the existing property interests and liabilities of the parties (s
79(3)(a)), which
then illuminates whether it is just and equitable to make any
property adjustment order at all (s 79(2)).
a property adjustment order is warranted, when deciding what order to make, the
Court must consider the parties’ respective
contributions (s 79(3)(b)(i)
and s 79(4)) and their current and future circumstances (s 79(3)(b)(ii) and s
animals are considered separately (ss 79(1), 79(6) and 79(7)), but there are no
companion animals to consider in this case.
parties agreed that a car, owned by the father but possessed by the mother,
should be transferred to the mother and form part
of her proportional share of
the property.
father abandoned the orders set out within both his Further Amended Initiating
Application filed on 29 July 2024 and his Proposed
In final submissions, he
accepted the mother could retain the former family home and other real
properties, provided she was able
to raise the cash sum necessary to satisfy his
proportional share of the property, allowing for the personal property and
superannuation
entitlements he would retain.
mother proposed the orders set out within her Further Amended Response filed on
25 July 2024. She proposed paying a cash sum to
the father within three months,
subject to which she would retain her real properties, personal property and
superannuation entitlements.
Section 79(3)(a)
the litigation, the parties received interim property settlements. The father
received $245,000.
received $193,659.
are not notionally added back to the parties’ existing assets, as the
practice is now deprecated following recent
amendments to
Shinohara & Shinohara
[2025] FedCFamC1A 126
[117]–[128] and [135(d)]). Instead, the premature distributions of funds
are taken into account under the rubric
of s 79(5) of the Act.
parties tendered a joint balance
They advanced arguments
and made concessions during final submissions about the few contested items.
Neither sought superannuation
splitting orders and they agreed their
superannuation interests should be treated as assets.
Item 3 – Town B property
title to the Town B property is registered in the names of the mother and her
sister, who are the equal owners as tenants in
common. The mother asserts they
hold title on trust beneficially for the maternal
grandparents.
final submissions, she conceded she was not contending for an express trust
because there is no deed creating the maternal
grandparents’ proprietary
interest, as would be necessary
Property Law Act 1958
(Vic)). Nor was she contending for a constructive trust. Rather, she
asserted it is a resulting trust, since the property was purchased
maternal grandparents using their money, though she was subsequently impelled to
the admission that the presumption of advancement
ousted the presumption of a
resulting trust.
property was bought by the maternal grandparents in their children’s
names, in which event the presumption of advancement
applies and was not
displaced by the evidence adduced by the mother and maternal grandfather
Bosanac v Commissioner for Taxation
[2022] HCA 34
(2022) 275 CLR 37
[12]–[22], [44], [51]–[53], [63]–[67], [95] and
[104]–[116];
Muschinski v Dodds
[1985] HCA 78
(1985) 160 CLR 583
Calverly v Green
[1984] HCA 81
(1984) 155 CLR 242
at 268-269;
Allen v Snyder
(1979) FLC 90-656
Martin v Martin
[1959] HCA 62
(1959) 110 CLR 297
303–305). In fact, the evidence was consistent with the mother’s
beneficial ownership of one-half of the property
because, since the property
began returning a rental profit from about 2014, she has disclosed her share of
the rent as income in
her tax returns, as was admitted by her and the maternal
grandfather. She would not have declared income and incurred tax on income
derived from a property in which she has no beneficial interest.
mother has a one-half legal and beneficial interest in the Town B property, the
corollary of which is that such proprietary interest
features on the balance
sheet and she receives credit for her contribution of the asset at the
commencement of cohabitation.
Item 11 – O Company shares
parties jointly acquired shares in O Company during the marriage, but they
disagreed whether the shares were purchased for $50,000
or $75,000. The parties
failed to bring any expert opinion evidence about the current value of the
shares. The mother tendered documents
on the issue, but they only revealed
negotiations over the price and failed to actually prove the original purchase
mother insisted on their current value being found to be $75,000, but she was
not prepared to have the shares transferred to her
at that nominal value because
she feared they might be worthless.
cure the impasse, the father proposed the sale of the shares and the
proportional division of the sale proceeds, which proposal
is accepted.
Item 19 – loans
mother professed her liability to the maternal grandfather for $437,885, loaned
to her to meet “legal fees and living expenses”,
but ultimately
argued for the loans to be valued at $385,885, for which revised calculation she
gave no explanation.
mother and the maternal grandfather entered four formal loan agreements between
2022 and 2023 covering total advances of $250,000.
The first loan of $50,000 was
for the mother’s “living costs”. The second loan of $100,000
was for the mother’s
“legal fees”. The third loan of $25,000
was for the mother’s “Christmas related expenses”. The fourth
loan of $75,000 was for the mother’s “living costs”.
second loan to pay legal fees should be ignored as a liability (
[2004] FamCA 633
(2004) FLC 93-204
other three loans, totalling $150,000 were for purposes other than the payment
of legal fees and are counted as liabilities because
the formal loan agreements
do imply an intention to create an enforceable debt between family members. The
maternal grandfather refused
to concede in cross-examination he would not
enforce repayment of the loans.
remainder of the money advanced by the maternal grandfather to the mother in
2023 was not covered by any formal loan agreement,
in which event they
ostensibly treated those advances differently. The maternal grandfather’s
self-serving evidence that the
residual funds are to be treated like the funds
advanced under the formal loan agreements is
Hence, absent
probative evidence of an intention to create a legal relationship of creditor
and debtor in respect of those residual
funds, they are not taken into account
as a liability (
Ermogenous v Greek Orthodox Community of SA Inc
[2002] HCA 8
Balfour v Balfour
[1919] 2 KB 571
Cohen v Cohen
[1929] HCA 15
(1929) 42 CLR 91
Jones v Padavatton
[1968] EWCA Civ 4
[1969] 2 All ER 616
Henderson v Miles
[2005] NSWSC 710
[2006] HCA 51
(2006) 226 CLR 551
Atco Controls Pty Ltd (in liq.) v
Newtronics Pty Ltd (recs and mgrs appt)
[2009] VSCA 238
(2009) 25 VR 411
Ultimately,
both parties were prepared to accede to the mother’s liability to the
maternal grandfather being taken into account
at the value of
Items 24 and 25 – loans
father agreed to the deletion of these liabilities, as he conceded they related
to the payment of his legal fees (
Chorn v Hopkins
at [55]–[60]).
That ensured equality between the parties.
Conclusions
father’s existing assets, liabilities and superannuation interests are as
follows (excluding his shares in O
Bank accounts
Motor vehicle 1
Shareholdings in:
Liabilities
Credit card debt
Superannuation
Superannuation Fund 1
Net surplus
mother’s existing assets, liabilities and superannuation interests are as
follows (excluding her shares in O
Property 1 at C Street, Suburb D (100%)
E Street, Suburb D (100%)
F Street, Town B (50%)
Bank accounts
H Ltd shares (100%)
Liabilities
Mortgage (C Street)
Mortgage (E Street)
Credit card debt
Debt to the maternal grandfather
Land tax debt
Superannuation
Superannuation Fund 1
Superannuation Fund 2
Net surplus
combined net value of the parties’ property is $2,964,040.
Section 79(2)
parties seek property adjustment orders, so they both accept it would be just
and equitable to adjust their property interests,
though they disagree upon the
nature of such orders. Indeed, it is just and equitable to make adjustment
Sections 79(3)(b)(i)
evidence about the parties’ respective contributions at the commencement
of their relationship in 2013 was not clarified
by cross-examination.
father alleged he had cash and personal property worth
whereas the mother
alleged it was only worth
By comparison, the
mother alleges she had real property, shares and savings with a collective net
value of about $935,000, but excluding
her proprietary interest in the Town B
whereas the father
admits it to be $969,000, but including the Town B property at its original
purchase price.
Town B property was purchased in 2003 for $400,000 and is now valued at
$1,300,000. There is no evidence of its value in 2013,
when the parties began
cohabitation. Inferentially, the mother’s one-half interest in the
property in 2013 must have approximated
$300,000 to $400,000 and, when added to
her other assets at that time, her initial capital contribution can be loosely
approximated
at $1,200,000. The parties agreed with that estimate.
inescapable inference is that, accepting the mother’s legal and beneficial
one-half interest in the Town B property as the
father asserts, her capital
contribution at the commencement of the relationship vastly exceeded his own.
Measuring the mother’s
initial contribution in another way, it amounts to
possesses about 94 per cent of their current net wealth.
the relationship, despite dividing their duties differently, the parties worked
equally hard at caring for the children and
improving the family’s
financial position.
party gains credit for other financial contributions during the relationship,
sourced to their families. The father’s family
gave them $150,000 in
while the mother received
two inheritances of $300,000 and $10,000 from her family in 2017 and
mother asserted another gift of $150,000 by her parents in
which the father did not
admit, despite conceding such a gift was
contemplated.
The mother bore
the burden of proving the fact, which she failed to discharge by reliance on the
uncorroborated evidence of the parties.
The maternal grandfather was called as a
witness, but did not give any corroborative evidence of the subject gift when
all the other financial accommodation he has provided the
During final
submissions, when addressing this factual issue, the mother considered seeking
leave to re-open the evidence to tender
a document she considered might be
probative but, following a short adjournment granted for her to consider her
position, did not
seek such leave.
the father moved to Sydney in 2021, the mother bore almost exclusive
responsibility for the care and supervision of the children.
The father paid
child support.
contributed to the maintenance and retirement of loans after their
separation.
mother’s contributions of that sort after separation may have arguably
been greater, she had the benefit of occupation
of the former family home and
sole ownership and possession of the other real properties.
in an effort to engage the provisions of
s 79(4)(ca)
of the Act, the mother
adduced evidence of abusive and controlling behaviour by the
though it was not
pursued as an issue at the trial. In any event, such evidence does not attract
any probative weight for three reasons.
the mother conceded to the court child expert in April 2025 how the father had
never physically harmed her, had never threatened
to harm her or the children,
did not yell at her, and did not call her
Such admissions are
exceedingly difficult to reconcile with her evidence-in-chief of being berated,
verbally abused, and called names
the father “den[ied] absolutely” all allegations of “family
and was not
meaningfully challenged in cross-examination over his denial of the
mother’s evidence. To the slight extent that
he was, he staunchly adhered
to his denial.
the provisions of
s 79(4)(ca)
of the Act require a causal connection between the
alleged family violence and the “ability” of the alleged victim to
make financial and non-financial contributions. Even if the mother’s
evidence of family violence by the father was accepted,
there is no evidence it
affected her “ability” to render valuable contributions. On the
contrary. She was at pains to
emphasise, in both her evidence and submissions,
the extent to which her overall contributions were far greater than the
She deposed she made “significant” contributions
“despite” being the subject of such family
mother contended her contribution-based entitlement should be assessed at 65 per
cent, while the father conceded her entitlement
should be assessed at 60 per
cent, so their dispute over the issue was very narrow.
a holistic approach to the parties’ contributions, as recognised under
of the Act, the mother’s contribution-based entitlement is assessed
at 65 per cent and the father’s share at 35 per cent,
which conclusion
properly reflects how her overall contributions were nearly twice as valuable as
Sections 79(3)(b)(ii)
father conceded an adjustment of five per cent in the mother’s favour was
warranted on account of her remaining the primary
carer for the children. He
contended all other factors prescribed by
of the Act were neutral in
mother contended an adjustment of 20 per cent in her favour was justified by
multiple factors, including: their disparate potential
to accumulate wealth in
the future; the father’s receipt of more money by way of interim
distributions; and her potential liability
for capital gains tax by reason of a
unilateral decision made by the father.
mother will retain her role as the children’s primary carer, which will
continue for another decade in relation to the youngest
child. The father
conceded her income-earning capacity will therefore be restricted over that
period, as she will only be able to
The father had little
option but to concede he has a superior income-earning capacity. Even now, his
income outstrips the mother’s,
even though he elected to work only four
days per week.
The father will
likely amass significantly greater superannuation interests in the future while
the mother performs the role of primary
carer for the children.
father received about $50,000 more than the mother by way of interim property
distribution during the litigation. That disparity
should be recognised at this
interim property distributions were paid to the parties from the proceeds
realised on the sale of a real property in early 2023.
The property was
purchased in early 2016. The parties lived in the property for about 15 months
but, from late 2017, the property
Without consulting the
mother, the father claimed the sale of the property was exempt from capital
gains tax on account of the property
being the family’s principal place of
residence, even though they had not lived in the property since 2017.
Consequently, if
and when the mother ever sells the former family home (of which
she is the sole owner), she will incur capital gains tax on the sale
precluded from claiming an
mother’s submissions as to such relevant factors are accepted, though they
are tempered by other factors. The father is
willing to bear the cost of his
airfares and attendant expenses to spend time with the children in Melbourne,
together with the cost
of the children’s airfares for them to spend time
with him in Sydney. Over the years to come, those expenses will not be
insignificant.
He will continue to pay child support, as he always has
adjustment in the mother’s favour is assessed at 12 per cent.
Conclusions
ultimate proportional division of property is 77/23 in the mother’s
the father transfers Motor vehicle 1 to the mother, he will retain assets, debts
and superannuation with a reduced combined net
value of $172,464, whereas she
will retain assets, debts and superannuation with an increased net combined
value of $2,791,576.
derive property worth 23 per cent of the matrimonial pool, the father needs to
hold assets, debts and superannuation with a net
value of $681,729. Allowing for
his retention of assets, debts and superannuation of $172,464, the mother would
need to pay him a
cash sum of $509,265. However, that gross sum should be
reduced by deducting the outstanding costs orders made in the mother’s
favour against the father during the proceedings, totalling $26,500. The net sum
payable is therefore $482,765.
parties agreed default orders need not yet be made, in expectation the mother
will raise the capital necessary to pay the cash
adjustment. In the event of her
default, she will need to sell one of her real properties, but the father agreed
she need not presently
be forced to sell the former family home which she wants
to retain. Consequential orders can be made later, if that becomes necessary
Pera v Pera
(2008) FLC 93-372
at [58]–[62];
Marriage of
[1982] FamCA 62
(1983) FLC 91-312).
orders will also require the parties to sell the O Company shares and divide the
net sale proceeds in shares of 77/23 favouring
the mother.
orders are just and equitable.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
ten (110) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Dated: 11 August 2025
Family Report at
Family Report at [11],
Mother’s affidavit
at [68(c)]–[74]; Father’s affidavit at
affidavit at [17]–[19]; Family Report at
Father’s affidavit
Order 7(e) made on
Order 7(f) made on
Notation A made on
Orders 6 and 8(b) made
Orders 8(b) and
8(c) made on 23/5/25
Notation D made on 16/4/24
Orders 9–18 made on
Family Report at
Father’s affidavit
at [109], [126]–[127]; Family Report at [14]–[15], [19], [24],
Family Report at
Family Report at
[14]–[15], [70]
Exhibit ICL3
Further Amended
Response filed on 25/7/24; Family Report at
Family Report at [18];
Mother’s affidavit at
Mother’s affidavit at
Report at [39]–[50]
Family Report at [18]
Father’s affidavit at
Family Report at
Report at [21], [37]
Report at [21]
Family Report
affidavit at [19(b)]
Father’s affidavit at
affidavit at [124]; Family Report at [14],
Family Report at
Family Report at [31],
[36], [38], [75]
Father’s affidavit at
Family Report at
Exhibit ICL3, Order
Exhibit F1, Order
Exhibit ICL3, Order
Exhibit ICL3, Orders 8
Exhibit ICL3, Order
Exhibit ICL3, Order
Father’s affidavit
at [128]; Mother’s affidavit at
affidavit at [128]; Mother’s affidavit at [141]; Mother’s financial
Mother’s affidavit
grandfather’s affidavit at
affidavit at [188]
Mother’s affidavit at
affidavit at [160], [180]
Father’s affidavit at
affidavit at [40], [152], [195]–[205]; Mother’s affidavit at
affidavit at [206]; Moter’s affidavit at [173], [174(a)], [180(d)(i)],
[180(d)(iii)]
affidavit at [170(c)],
[180(d)(ii)]
affidavit at [40], [151]–[152],
Affidavit of maternal
grandfather at [8]–[13],
Mother’s affidavit at [221]–[227]; Father’s affidavit at
[211]–[212]
Father’s affidavit at [178]–[187], [208]–[210]; Mother’s
affidavit at
[181]–[184]
Mother’s affidavit at
[185]–[205]
Report at [26]
Mother’s affidavit at [194],
[200]–[205]
Father’s affidavit at
affidavit at [185]
Father’s affidavit at
affidavit at [215]
Father’s affidavit at
[151]–[159]
Mother’s affidavit at [154]–[159]
RTF format (669 KB)
Signed PDF/A format