Rice v Nolan [2000] HREOCA 51 (15 December 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
No. H97/105
Complainant
KEVIN NOLAN
First Respondent
DR. THOMAS GODFREY OETTLE
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR DECISION OF INQUIRY COMMISSIONER, ANTHONY
CAVANOUGH Q.C.
Place of Hearing: Adelaide, South Australia
Date of hearing: 12
Date of receipt of final written
submissions:
Complainant: 11 June 1999
Second Respondent: 6 July
Date of determination: 15 December 2000
Appearances: Complainant: Ms. Margaret Kelly, instructed by
Stanley and Partners, Solicitors
Respondents: No appearance for either Respondent at the hearing.
First Respondent represented at directions hearings at times by Mr. Guy
Harley, solicitor.
Second Respondent represented from time to time at directions hearings and in
correspondence received before and after the hearing
by Ms. Chris Ronalds (NSW
Bar) and Mr. Peter La Fontaine, solicitor.
1. Introduction
This is an inquiry under s.59
Sex Discrimination Act
(Cth) (“the SDA”).
Section 59 and other related provisions of the SDA were repealed as of 13 April
2000. However,
they continue in operation for the purposes of this inquiry by
Human Rights Legislation Amendment
(No.1) 1999 (Act no. 133 of 1999).
The complainant claims that she was the victim of sex discrimination and
sexual harassment whilst employed as a receptionist/computer
operator at an
engineering establishment in Adelaide conducted by Aero Engineering Australia
Pty. Ltd. (“the company”)
between about 4 September 1995 and 14
November 1995.
2. Identification of the respondents
Initially the named respondents in this matter were
the company and two of its officers, namely Mr. Kevin Nolan and Dr. Thomas
Oettle. It later appeared that the company had become insolvent and was
in liquidation with no prospect of paying any compensation
which might be
awarded. In 1998 the complainant withdrew the complaint as against the company
accordingly.
As to the other named respondents, Mr. Nolan was the managing director of the
company at all relevant times and Dr. Oettle was at
all relevant times Chairman
of Directors of the company and the beneficial owner of 97.5% of the share
capital of the company.
Mr. Nolan lived in Adelaide and was in charge of the
day to day operations of the company. Dr. Oettle lived in Sydney. He rarely
visited the engineering establishment in Adelaide. It was Mr. Nolan who,
according to the complainant, had been the physical source
of the alleged sexual
harassment and associated sex discrimination of which she complained. Dr.
Oettle was said to be liable only
under s.105 of the SDA (as a person who
“aided” or “permitted” Mr. Nolan to engage in the
conduct) and/or
under s.106 of the SDA (which relates to vicarious
liability).
In late 1998, a preliminary application was made on behalf of Dr. Oettle for
a ruling that he should not be regarded as a respondent
and that the complaint
should be dismissed as against him. The grounds of his application were that he
had not been named personally
in the original complaint form lodged with the
South Australian Commissioner of Equal Opportunity in 1995 and that there was a
of evidentiary material against him. On 7 December 1998 I refused the
preliminary application and published detailed written reasons.
I concluded
that, in the events which had happened, Dr. Oettle had been at all relevant
times correctly regarded as a respondent,
based on my understanding of the law
in the light of the cases referred to at pp.19-20 of my ruling. However, doubt
was thrown on
my conclusion by the subsequent decisions of Branson J in
Commonwealth v Sex Discrimination Commissioner
(Federal Court of
Australia, unreported, 17 December 1998) and of the Full Federal Court in
Abbott Australasia Pty. Ltd. v HREOC
[1999] FCA 427
(1999) 88 FCR 132
. In particular, the Full Court’s
decision indicated (at para 25) that a person should not be regarded as a
respondent unless
a relevant allegation is made against them
. There was uncertainty about what constituted “the
complaint” in the present case. It may have been limited to the
which had been completed by Ms. Nolan on 20 November 1995 together with her
statement attached thereto. Dr. Oettle was
not actually named in either of those
documents. But, in any event, in
the Full Court further
said, albeit, perhaps, obiter (see para [25]), that it is open to an Inquiry
Commissioner to permit the amendment
of a complaint so as to make allegations
against one or more additional persons and that if that were done, each of those
would become a respondent. These cases were brought to the attention
of the parties. As a result, the complainant applied for
leave to amend the
complaint so as to include express allegations (under ss.105 and 106) against
Dr. Oettle. The application for
leave to amend was opposed, but for the reasons
set out in a written decision given on 10 May 1999, I granted leave.
Accordingly, the remaining respondents are Mr. Nolan (now, the first
respondent) and Dr. Oettle (now, the second respondent).
3. Non-appearance of the respondents/Procedural fairness
Between April 1998 (when this matter was referred to
me for inquiry) and May 1999 there were numerous telephone directions hearings
to deal with matters such as the preliminary applications mentioned above,
adjournment applications, directions for the exchange
of evidentiary material
and other matters. Notice of the referral for inquiry was received by each
respondent. Mr. Nolan personally
took part in a telephone directions hearing on
14 May 1998. He was legally represented by Mr. Harley, a solicitor, at
telephone directions hearings on 19 June 1998, 21 August 1998, 9
October 1998, 29 October 1998 and 23 November 1998. During the
hearing on 9 October 1998, Mr. Harley said that he had been unable to contact
Mr. Nolan for some six weeks. At the directions
hearings on 29 October 1998 and
23 November 1998 Mr. Harley reported that he had still not heard from Mr. Nolan.
Mr. Harley took
no further part in the proceedings nor did Mr. Nolan. By letter
dated 8 December 1998 Mr. La Fontaine, as solicitor for Dr. Oettle,
adjournment of the hearing which (after a previous adjournment) had been fixed
for 14 December 1998. One purpose of the
proposed adjournment was to
“ascertain progress in locating Kevin Nolan” with a view to his
being cross-examined on behalf
of Dr. Oettle at the hearing. I granted the
adjournment. The hearing was re-fixed for 15 March 1999. However, by letter
11 March 1999 Dr. Oettle’s solicitor applied for a further
adjournment on the ground that Mr. Nolan personally had not been
made aware of
the date and place of the hearing. This was said to be a breach of s.63 of the
SDA as against Mr. Nolan. I expressed
doubt about this argument, but, as it
happened, the complainant ultimately consented to the further adjournment. I
was not prepared
at that stage to accede to Dr. Oettle’s submission that
the matter should be adjourned indefinitely until Mr. Nolan was found.
specifically stated that I would be prepared to issue a subpoena for the
attendance of Mr. Nolan should either the complainant
or Dr. Oettle wish to have
it to assist in securing Mr. Nolan’s attendance at the hearing. I noted
that Dr. Oettle’s
counsel then indicated that, as then advised, Dr. Oettle
did not propose to seek the issue of a subpoena to Mr. Nolan. I refixed
hearing for a time which was otherwise said to be convenient to the parties and
their legal representatives, namely 12, 13 and
14 May 1999. A summary record of
this telephone directions hearing was provided to the parties.
By letter dated 10 May 1999, Dr. Oettle sought a further adjournment of the
hearing. The request was based on what was said to be
the belated receipt from
the complainant of about 40 pages of proposed evidentiary material. A telephone
directions hearing was
arranged for the next day, 11 May 1999. Ms. Ronalds of
counsel appeared for Dr. Oettle. After hearing the parties’ submissions,
I was not satisfied that it would have been unfair or unreasonable to at least
commence the hearing the next day as scheduled. I
indicated that steps could be
taken to ensure that Dr. Oettle had an adequate opportunity to deal with any
matters of genuine surprise.
Ms. Ronalds then announced that Dr. Oettle would
not be attending the hearing and that he would not be represented at the hearing
either. She foreshadowed sending a written submission and asked that it,
together with a signed witness statement of Dr. Oettle
dated 9 May 1999, be
taken into account.
A written submission from Ms. Ronalds dated 11 May 1999 duly arrived later
that day. It included a claim that the absence of Mr.
Nolan would disadvantage
Dr. Oettle in the conduct of his case and that the hearing should be adjourned
until the attendance of Mr.
Nolan could be secured. It was put that to
proceed otherwise would involve a denial of procedural fairness to Dr. Oettle.
In addition, Ms. Ronalds asserted that my previous interlocutory decisions
had “protected and promoted the interests of the
complainant only”
and that “no due or proper regard appears to have been paid to the
interests of Dr. Oettle and the
position in which he now finds
These written submissions did not persuade me that the hearing should be
further deferred. Mr. Nolan had been missing for about 9
months. Efforts made
by the complainant and Mr. Nolan’s own solicitor to find him had been
unsuccessful. There was no indication
that Mr. Nolan was likely to be found soon
or at all. Dr. Oettle had declined to seek the issue of a subpoena to Mr.
Nolan. There
was no clear evidence as to what steps, if any, had been taken on
behalf of Dr. Oettle to find Mr. Nolan. Moreover, the likelihood
Nolan’s evidence would have assisted Dr. Oettle greatly did not appear to
be high. The evidentiary material which
had been filed by the complainant, if
it were to be accepted, tended to indicate a strong case against Mr. Nolan, with
a substantial
measure of independent corroboration. Mr. Nolan had apparently
deliberately disappeared. There were also indications in the filed
that, contrary to Dr. Oettle’s protestations in his original witness
statement of 19 January 1999, he had indeed been
aware of prior sexual
harassment claims against Mr. Nolan and the company. Dr. Oettle would have had
ample opportunity to rebut
these indications himself, without needing Mr. Nolan,
had he chosen to defend himself at the hearing. It was not suggested that
Oettle’s representatives had in their possession any favourable proof of
evidence or statement of Mr. Nolan. I took into
account also the
complainant’s interest in obtaining a hearing of her complaint within a
reasonable time, as well as the provisions
of s.77(1) of the SDA.
So far as fairness to Mr. Nolan was concerned, I was satisfied, in terms of
s.63, that Mr. Nolan had been given sufficient notice
of the time and place at
which the Commission intended to hold the inquiry. He had been involved in
directions hearings, both personally
and by his solicitor, at which dates and
places for the proposed hearing proper were being discussed and fixed. He had
at all times to know what was proposed in this regard. He could not
be heard to say that by ceasing all contact with the Commission,
or by failing
to furnish his solicitor with instructions, or by simply disappearing, after the
directions hearings had begun, he
could obtain an indefinite deferral of the
inquiry. He was the author of his own position. In any event, out of an
abundance of
caution, the Commission caused the publication in advance in
several newspapers, including a national newspaper, of advertisements
notices of the time and place of the proposed hearing as finally fixed,
addressed to Mr. Nolan. In these circumstances, I took
the view that the
hearing could proceed without breach of s.63 of the SDA.
I saw no merit, and no point, in Ms. Ronalds’ vague assertions of
unfairness constituted or evidenced by my previous interlocutory
rulings. There
was no explicit claim that I should disqualify myself. Accordingly, I decided
that the hearing should proceed in
Adelaide on 12 May 1999, and it did. As
foreshadowed, there was no appearance on behalf of either of the (remaining)
respondents
at the hearing.
4. The evidence
The case for the complainant was comprised of her own
oral evidence, together with that of Ms. Peta-Shayli De Koenig (nee Thomas),
Chris Kennedy, Mr. Patrick Bale, Ms. Suzanne Graham, and also various
documentary exhibits, including a video of a segment of
the television program
“A Current Affair’ relating to Mr. Nolan in his role as a director
of the company. As indicated
above, neither respondent appeared at the hearing,
but Dr. Oettle’s representatives had forwarded statements by him dated 19
January 1999 and 9 May 1999. These were both put into evidence by the
complainant and I have taken them into account. I have also
taken into account
all written submissions put to me, including those of Ms. Kelly (for the
complainant) dated 8 June 1999 as well
as those of Ms. Ronalds (for Dr. Oettle)
dated 11 May 1999 (which in part incorporated by reference previous submissions
behalf of Dr. Oettle that I have also taken into account). In addition
I have taken into account the statement by Dr. Oettle dated
forwarded on his behalf by Mr. La Fontaine and the final submission of Mr. La
Fontaine contained in his letter dated
6 July 1999, together with the previous
submissions referred to in that letter.
5. The relevant provisions of the SDA
Sub-section 14(2) of the SDA provides, in effect,
that it is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against a person on the
of the person’s sex, in relation to, broadly speaking, the
employment relationship. Section 5 of the SDA defines sex discrimination.
Division 3 of Part II of the SDA deals with “sexual harassment”
(which is defined in s.28A). Sub-section 28B(2) provides
that it is unlawful
for an employee to sexually harass a fellow employee. Sub-section 28B(6)
provides that it is unlawful for a
“workplace participant” (as
defined) to sexually harass another workplace participant at a place that is a
of both of those persons.
Sexual harassment in an employment context can amount to sex discrimination
and thus involve a breach of s.14(2) of the SDA:
Aldridge v Booth
(1988) EOC 92-922 at 77,094;
Hall v A and A Sheiban Pty. Ltd
[1989] FCA 72
(1989) EOC 92-250
at 77,392, 77, 427. Section 105 of the SDA reads:
105 A person who causes, instructs, induces, aids or permits another
person to do an act that is unlawful under Division 1 or 2
of Part II shall, for
the purposes of this Act, be taken also to have done the act.
Section 106 is as follows:
106(1) Subject to sub-section (2), where an employee or agent of a person
does, in connection with the employment of the employee
or with the duties of
the agent as an agent –
(a) an act that would, if it were done by the person, be unlawful under
Division 1 or 2 of Part II (whether or not the act done by
the employee or agent
is unlawful under Division 1 or 2 of Part II); or
(b) an act that is unlawful under Division 3 of Part II,
this Act applies in relation to that person as if that person had also done
106(2) Sub-section (1) does not apply in relation to an act of a kind
referred to in paragraph (1)(a) or (b) done by an employee
or agent of a person
if it is established that the person took all reasonable steps to prevent the
employee or agent from doing acts
of the kind referred to in that
6. Findings on the claim against Kevin Nolan
Kevin Nolan was an employee of the company, receiving
a salary as managing director, as well as being the owner of 2.5% of the share
capital of the company.
On the evidence before me I find that Mr. Nolan
sexually harassed the complainant, contrary to the provisions of s.28B of the
on frequent occasions during the period of her employment with the company
between approximately 4 September 1995 and 14 November
1995. I accept that the
sexual harassment occurred as described in the following terms in the
complainant’s written submissions
dated 8 June 1999:
pats on the
buttocks and putting his arm around the complainant when she was at the desk,
filing, photocopying or sending a fax;
sexual innuendo
referring to the
complainant as “ugly” in front of others including clients;
suggesting that
promotion would be the “reward” for sexual favours;
referring to his
penis size;
suggesting that
he and the complainant should be “an item”;
pulling her
towards him and kissing her on the lips in a restaurant;
telling fellow
employees (falsely) that he and the complainant were having an affair and saying
upon returning from lunch with the
complainant that “that was the best $45
he had ever spent” implying that he had paid for her sexual favours;
asking if she
“would go so far as fucking the boss to get to the top”;
asking her to
“walk funny” so that other staff would think she was having an
affair with him;
persistent and
lengthy questioning about the complainant’s private life including the
assertion that she should leave her boyfriend
and find someone like him to
support her;
inappropriate
questions at the complainant’s job interview concerning her marital
status, relationships and dependents later
used in attempts to manipulate the
complainant;
telephone calls at home;
of November 1995, following her in the direction
of the female toilets, grabbing her and pushing her towards his office where he
insisted that she shut the door and remain whilst he berated her in relation to
her private life and again implied that there would
be promotion in exchange for
sexual favours.
I accept that each instance of harassment was unwelcome and that
the complainant clearly made this known to Nolan by requests to stop,
refusals of requests for sex and her obvious distress. I consider also that any
reasonable person would have found the behaviour
of Nolan to be offensive,
humiliating and intimidating to the complainant and that she herself found it
so. The sexual harassment
created for the complainant a sexually permeated
environment. Apart from the phone calls, the harassment took place during
hours at the workplace or at restaurants which the complainant attended
with Nolan at his insistence.
Other behaviour by Nolan directed to the complainant and other staff, whilst
not of itself amounting to sexual harassment of the complainant,
compounded the feelings of fear and insecurity which the complainant experienced
as a result of the sexual harassment.
By way of examples, I refer to an episode
when Nolan required other staff – in front of the complainant – to
the condition of the tyres of her car in order to test her excuse for
lateness on a particular occasion; to Nolan calling workers
fat, ugly, imbeciles
and serfs; to Nolan using a moulded plastic baton or “swagger stick”
to intimidate staff, sometimes
actually poking or hitting them with it; and to
Nolan swearing at staff and threatening their jobs. There was ample evidence to
satisfy me that Mr. Nolan behaved in these ways.
Nolan was generally under the influence of alcohol when harassing the
complainant but it appears that he was under the influence of
alcohol for most
of the working day in any event. It was well known in the workplace that he had
a drinking problem. For the purposes
of the SDA this in no way excuses his
behaviour. I find that the sexual harassment was of such a nature and extent
as to amount
to sex discrimination on the part of the employing company and thus
to a breach by it of sub-section 14(2) of the SDA: see
, supra and
Hall v A and A Sheiban Pty. Ltd
Documents obtained by the complainant from the South Australian Equal
Opportunity Commissioner and tendered in evidence indicate that
complaints about sexual harassment by Nolan from five women employed by the
company prior to the commencement of the complainant’s
employment, namely
Natasha Hawley, Maria Lazos, Lynne Mullen, Kay Cooper and Maria Francese. From
the evidence there may well have
been others who were sexually harassed by Nolan
but did not lodge a formal complaint. There was a common pattern to the abuse
those matters where the facts of the complaint are disclosed. Nolan directed
his attention to young women new to the workforce or
women who were otherwise
vulnerable as sole parents or financially very dependent upon the income from
their employment. Nolan embarked
on a campaign of physical harassment (grabbing
and kissing), prying into personal life, making reference to sexual activities
insisting that the woman lunch with him. When rebuffed he would resort to
sexual blackmail, making scarcely veiled threats about
job security and engaging
in verbal abuse. These complaints all bore a remarkable similarity to the
harassment alleged by the complainant
in the present matter.
At one stage in 1994 one of these five women (Maria Francese) and other staff
were so fed up with Nolan that they walked off the job
and told their tale of
abuse at the hands of Nolan to the news media – see the video of the
“A Current Affair”
The propensities of Nolan were amply corroborated by the evidence and/or
statements and/or correspondence of Mr. Bale, Mr. McMiles,
and Mr. Monaghan.
Some of the actual harassing behaviour to which the complainant was subjected
was able to be corroborated by her
co-worker Peta De Koening (Thomas), including
Nolan’s alcohol abuse, his prying into personal life, his verbal abuse to
generally, his name-calling, his bottom patting of the complainant and
herself, the lack of work to justify the two (female) staff
in reception, and
Nolan’s propensity to sit female staff in his office and berate them about
their private lives.
I note with particular concern the abovementioned incident on the afternoon
of 14 November 1995 whereby Nolan actually injured the
complainant’s right
shoulder in the course of grabbing her and pushing her towards his office. The
injury was quite serious
and gave rise to a successful workers compensation
claim by the complainant. Unsurprisingly, this was the “last straw”
for the complainant and she did not return to the company’s employment
after this incident.
In my view, Nolan plainly contravened s.28B of the SDA in his conduct towards
the complainant.
7. Findings on claim against Dr. Oettle
On behalf of the complainant, it has been submitted
that Dr. Oettle is liable under s.105 of the SDA as a person who causes,
induces, aids or permits another person to do an act which is
unlawful under Division 1 or 2 of Part II. The unlawful act is claimed
Nolan’s harassment of the complainant (amounting to sex discrimination) in
breach of s.14(2) which is within Division
1 of Part II of the SDA. In
particular, it is submitted on behalf of the complainant that Dr. Oettle
“aided” and/or
“permitted” the harassment in that,
knowing of Nolan’s behaviour and propensities, he did nothing to stop or
it, knowing full well the damage that it could cause.
I accept the submission on behalf of the complainant that the evidence
establishes that Dr. Oettle knew:
that Nolan had
been abusing the complainant – from her evidence of a telephone
conversation with him prior to the assault on
14 November 1995 (I prefer her
sworn evidence on this point to the unsworn denial by Dr. Oettle contained in
his witness statements
in relation to which he has chosen not to submit himself
to cross examination).
Nolan’s alcohol abuse – from numerous complaints including those of
Mr. Bale and of Dr. Pohl and from the fact that
Dr. Oettle brought Mr. Nolan to
Sydney briefly at one stage in 1993 with a view to bringing his drinking under
control and further,
from Dr. Oettle’s own (belated) admission (see
of claims for
Workers Compensation relating to stress caused by Nolan – from the
correspondence of Monaghan;
of the five
previous complaints of sexual harassment to the Equal Opportunity Commissioner
– from – in the case of Hawley,
correspondence to him by the
Commissioner detailing the complaint, correspondence advising of a conciliation
hearing, an apparent
response from Dr. Oettle in a letter of 20 August 1993
(referred to in a letter to Oettle of 8 October 1993), and the verbal complaints
of Bale, Pohl and McMiles and the written complaints of Monaghan; in the case
of Lazos – by written notice of complaint from
the Commissioner; in the
case of Mullen – by correspondence from the Commissioner and complaints of
Bale, Pohl, McMiles and
Monaghan; in the cases of Cooper and Francese –
correspondence from the Commissioner giving notice of the complaints, including
reference to s.105 of the SDA, so that it appeared that Dr. Oettle was a
personal respondent in those matters.
settlements in those matters – from the fact that there was a good deal of
communication between Nolan and Dr. Oettle
at the time of the
complainant’s employment, including legal documents, so that it is highly
likely that Dr. Oettle was aware
of , at least, the settlement in the Francese
matter which happened during the time of the complainant’s employment and
the terms of Dr. Oettle’s final statement of 6 June 1999 (see
Nolan’s mismanagement - from (at least) the complaints of Bale, Pohl and
Monaghan and the apparent financial deterioration
of the company which
eventually resulted in it going into liquidation. Dr. Oettle continued to back
Nolan in the face of the overwhelming
logic of these complaints.
In my view, it is highly likely that Dr. Oettle was made aware of
the “ A Current Affair” program of 23 September 1994
walkout by staff.
I accept the complainant’s submission that the documents from the State
Commissioner for Equal Opportunity indicate that Dr.
Oettle took pains not to
attend conciliation conferences arranged in respect of the other complaints;
that at every stage of this
present inquiry his tactics have been those of
delay; and that he has chosen to absent himself from this inquiry in order to
cross examination.
According to the ASIC company records, Dr. Oettle was the only director of
the company apart from Nolan, and was the majority shareholder
(97.5%). As
such, he had the voting rights to assert control over Nolan and remove him as
manager and he was the only person in
that position.
I agree with the submission made on behalf of the complainant that Dr.
Oettle’s statement of 19 January 1999 is clearly inaccurate
on a number of
points and is in part contradicted by his statement of 9 May 1999. In
paragraphs 1 and 7 of the earlier statement
he says that he cannot remember any
sexual harassment claims, but the second statement has detailed recollections of
the Francese
and Cooper claims. A document subpoena served on Dr. Oettle was
answered by some documents relating to these cases. Dr. Oettle
asserted that he
believed the claims to have been settled in the company’s favour. This
assertion makes no sense. In both
cases, settlement sums were agreed to be paid
by the respondents and in the case of Francese the debt on the company as a
of this settlement led to a petition to wind up and the appointment of an
administrator, matters of which Dr. Oettle must have known.
Although denying
executive input, he admits in paragraph 11 of the first statement to receiving
faxes and correspondence “in
the normal course of running AEA”. I
accept that it is likely that he received legal documents concerning the
Francese matter.
I note also the complainant’s evidence that Dr. Oettle
was regularly adding capital to company funds. I accept that any discrepancies
between the statements of Oettle and the evidence of the complainant should be
resolved in the complainant’s favour.
I note also, as submitted by the complainant, that in Dr. Oettle’s
statement of 9 May 1999 there is no mention of the claims
by Hawley, Lazos and
Mullen, whereas documents on those matters were sent to the same address as the
Cooper and Francese documents.
Nor is there any mention of the information
given by Bale, Pohl, McMiles and Monaghan. I agree with Counsel’s comment
Dr. Oettle’s recollection seems to be influenced by the amount of
information known to the complainant’s solicitors.
The validity of this
comment is reinforced by the final statement of Dr. Oettle dated 6 June 1999
which is not referred to in the
written submissions of the complainant’s
counsel (presumably because it did not reach her in time).
The complainant’s counsel submits that, given the length of the
friendship between Dr. Oettle and Nolan (para 1 of the second
statement) it
seems fair to assume that Dr. Oettle had knowledge of Nolan’s propensities
at least in relation to alcohol and
should have been alert to exactly the sort
of complaints that were raised by Bale, Pohl, McMiles, Monaghan and the
Commissioner.
The soundness of this submission is now confirmed by the terms of
Dr. Oettle’s statement of 6 June 1999. In particular, that
shows that Dr. Oettle was well aware of Nolan’s drinking problem. Dr.
Oettle now admits in substance the correctness
of the statements of Dr. Pohl,
Mr. McMiles and Mr. Bale. I note the stark contrast between the earlier
statement (19/1/99) of Dr.
Oettle to the effect that he could not remember any
prior compensation claims for sexual harassment and what is contained in
3 of his statement of 6 June 1999, as follows:
“The only knowledge that I had about allegations of sexual harassment
of staff by Nolan was the letters which I have produced
Commission’s summons. On each occasions I received these, I phoned him
great concern
. Invariably, he said the allegations were
untrue, they were in the hands of AEA’s solicitors who would handle the
and that the basis of the complaint was staff members trying to get
more money and trying to challenge Nolan’s authority.
There was nothing more I could do about these except to rely on what Nolan
told me and the limited contact I had with AEA’s
solicitors. I also
intervals, my
position about no drinking at work at all, and staff relations emphasizing the
necessity for absolute professionalism
and the principles laid down in the
EEO”. (my emphasis).
I accept the submission of the complainant that Dr. Oettle took no or no
adequate steps to ensure that there was no sexual harassment
continuing in the
workplace despite all of the complaints and warnings concerning events in 1993
and again in 1994 and 1995. He
simply took the word of the alleged perpetrator
without any investigation on his part, thereby putting the health, safety and
of more and more young women at risk, including the complainant. I
reject Dr. Oettle’s protestations that it was not possible
to do any more
because of his “total commitment” to his work as a forensic
pathologist in Sydney. This was a choice
he made. He must accept
responsibility for its consequences.
8. Section 105
The terms of section 105 are set out above.
Counsel for the complainant submits that a broad interpretation of
“permits” is appropriate and in keeping with the objects
of the Act.
She refers to s.3 of the SDA and
Cooper v HREOC and Coffs Harbour
(unreported, Federal Court, Madgwick J, NG 582/98, 4 March 1999)
para 41 (a case concerning a similar section in the
Disability Discrimination
(Cth)). In that case, reference was made to what was said by
Isaacs J in
Adelaide City Corporation v Australasian Performing Rights
Association Ltd
[1928] HCA 10
(1928) 40 CLR 481
at 490-491:
“the word ‘permits’ is of very extensive connotation...
the primary [dictionary] meaning of ‘permit’
is: ‘to allow,
, give leave;
not to prevent
illustration a person ‘permits’ his hall to be used for the public
performance of a play ... if he knows or
believe that the particular play ... will or may be performed, and, having the
legal power to prevent it, nevertheless
disregards that power and allows his
property to be used for the purpose.
For example
, ... McCardie J
held that [a claim that copyright in a musical work had been infringed by the
hall proprietors] was rightly abandoned.
But that was because the hall
proprietors ‘...
had no reasonable ground
for suspecting
that there would be an infringement of copyright by the band’” (at
490-491) (emphasis as added by Madgwick
Although Isaacs J was a dissentient in that case, Madgwick J considered that
the sort of approach outlined by Isaacs J was appropriate
in the context of the
Discrimination Act
. Likewise, I consider that the
same kind of approach is appropriate in relation to the SDA.
Ms. Kelly also referred to
Howard v Northern Territory &
(1995) (EOC 92-672 at 78,133) where the President, Sir Ronald Wilson
“In my opinion s.105 requires a degree of knowledge or at least
willful blindness or recklessness in the face of known circumstances
in order to
attract the operation of the section”.
Ms Kelly submitted that Dr. Oettle “did not prevent” the
harassment (cf
Adelaide City Corporation,
supra) and was at least
“reckless in the face of known circumstances” (cf
Northern Territory
In her written submissions of 11 May 1999 (which of course predate Dr.
Oettle’s statement of 6 June 1999). Ms. Ronalds referred
also to the
case and to
Howard v Northern Territory
supra. However, she proceeded to submit that the evidence “must
positively establish that Dr. Oettle honestly and reasonably
believed that there
was an act of sex discrimination or sexual harassment occurring in order to
establish any liability”.
I reject this submission. It finds no
foundation in the authorities referred to.
Ms. Ronalds then submits that the complainant was not employed by the company
in 1993 and that therefore “any material relating
to that period is not
proper to the factual matters to be considered”. Again, I reject this
submission. The conduct that
was occurring in the period between 1993 and the
commencement of the applicant’s employment was of obvious relevance to the
question of what Dr. Oettle knew or should have known about Mr. Nolan’s
propensities as at the time of the complainant’s
engagement.
Ms. Ronalds then submits that there is no other evidence to show that Dr.
Oettle was aware of any facts in relation to this complainant
nor that it was
not reasonable for Dr. Oettle to accept the views expressed by Mr. Nolan and the
information provided to him by Mr.
Nolan. However, there was evidence, which I
accept, that Dr. Oettle was told by the complainant herself about Mr.
harassment prior to the assault on 14 November. Further, in the
circumstances, it was entirely unreasonable of him to accept the
views expressed
by the alleged perpetrator, Mr. Nolan, and the information provided to him by
Ms. Ronalds next submits that Dr. Oettle did not play any active managerial
role in the company and had no capacity to direct the
operations on a daily
basis. As indicated above, I reject this view of the matter. The frequency and
similarity of the complaints
being made against Mr. Nolan by diverse persons
must have brought home to Dr. Oettle that for as long as he left Mr. Nolan in
of the premises in Adelaide there would be young or otherwise vulnerable
female employees subjected to completely unacceptable sexual
harassment from Mr.
Nolan. Though Dr. Oettle may have tried to shut his eyes and ears to
information about what was going on in
Adelaide, the information was so clear
and cogent and so often repeated that Dr. Oettle must have actually known at all
times that what happened to the complainant was very likely to happen.
The proved circumstances of this case, whilst unusual (one
hopes), clearly bring
Dr. Oettle within the reach of s.105 of the SDA in my opinion. By permitting
Mr. Nolan to do what he did,
Dr. Oettle permitted the company to discriminate
against the complainant on the ground of her sex. Such discrimination is
under Division 1 of Part II of the SDA. Accordingly, Dr. Oettle is
taken by s.105 to have discriminated against the complainant
on the ground of
her sex contrary
to the SDA.
9. Section 106
In view of my clear conclusion that s.105 applies in
this case, there is no need for me to consider whether s.106 would also
The complainant seeks a declaration that the
respondents should pay her damages by way of compensation pursuant to s.81(1)(b)
SDA. She asks that such damages include compensation for pain and
suffering, physical and emotional, and any economic loss. The
complainant
submits that awards of damages for injured feelings should not be too low, so as
to diminish the respect for the public
policy shown by the Act:
Press Clough Joint Venture & Anor
(1994) EOC 92-591
at 77, 179.
Mr. Kelly submits that, although the complainant here was not as young and
inexperienced as others complaining of the respondent’s
behaviour, she was
nonetheless economically vulnerable and thereby prey to Nolan’s continued
harassment. I accept that submission.
I accept also that the complainant suffered an injury to her right shoulder
and upper arm together with an anxiety disorder. The
physical injuries were due
directly to the assault of 14 November 1995. The anxiety disorder was no doubt
due to her experiences
of sexual harassment and associated bullying behaviour at
the hands of Mr. Nolan over the whole course of her employment including
last day. I note that these disabilities were accepted by WorkCover S.A. as
compensible disabilities caused by work. I accept
that the complainant received
physiotherapy and anti-depressant medication and, as set out in the medical
reports, that she experienced
sleep disturbance, irritability, relationship
difficulties and fits of crying as a result of the conduct complained of. I
that these consequences represent much more than just hurt feelings and
thus warrant significant compensation.
On the other hand, I note that WorkCover payments were made and continued
until March 1997, at first at the rate of notional weekly
earnings of $394.80
per week gross and after 12 months at the rate of $320.58 per week representing
80% of notional weekly earnings,
a total of $23,488. It was submitted by the
complainant that her problems incapacitated her for any work for a time, that
regained fitness for part-time work and later fulltime work but not
with the same employer. A claim is made that she be paid the
amount of the
WorkCover payment and in addition the 20% difference in the payments after 12
months, being approximately $1,187.52
(16 weeks at $74.22) with interest on this
20% make up component. It was then submitted that the economic loss represented
WorkCover payments should be paid in full because the WorkCover
Corporation had a right to recovery of damages pursuant to s.54(7)
Worker’s Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
1986 (S.A.).
It was said that the right to recovery is in respect of “damages”
per se, not damages for economic loss,
so that an award under s.81 of the SDA
for non economic loss is still subject to recovery. It was put that if the
WorkCover payments
were recovered there would be no “double-dipping”
by the complainant. It was said that although WorkCover should bring
recovery within 3 years from the date of the trauma (s.54(7)(g))and has not done
so nor yet given notice of a first charge
under s.54(7)(e), it may seek an
extension of time pursuant to s.48(1) of the
Limitation of Actions Act
in order to do so. In that regard, the complainant referred to
WorkCover v Mapstone
5 WCATR 544
Wheeler v Worker’s
Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation
(unreported, Supreme Court
of S.A., 1/11/96) and
Baulderstone v WorkCover and Male
However, I am not satisfied that the complainant has suffered any economic
loss for which she has not been adequately compensated
by the WorkCover
payments. Further, in my opinion, WorkCover would have no right to recover any
part of an award made pursuant to
s.81(1) of the SDA. In my view, any monies
which a complainant may receive from a respondent as a result of a declaration
s.81(1)(b)(ii) of the SDA would not be “damages” received
in pursuance of “rights” within the meaning of
s.54(7)(b) of the
Worker’s Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
1986 (S.A.).
Even where a complaint is substantiated, a complainant does not have a legal
right be paid damages by the respondent.
The Commission has a discretion as to
whether to make a declaration that the respondent “should” perform
any reasonable
act or course of conduct to redress any loss or damage suffered
by the complainant. Further, a determination of the Commission under
sub-section 81(1) is not binding or conclusive between any of the parties to the
determination: see s.81(2). Even if the matter
were taken to the Federal Court
by way of enforcement under s.83A, any relief that might be obtained by a
complainant would be discretionary
relief: see s.83A(2) of the SDA. Even if I
am wrong about that, I note that the WorkCover Corporation would now be well out
time to bring a proceeding under s.54(7) of the South Australian Act. Given
that I do not propose to make any award for economic
loss, I think it highly
unlikely that the relevant South Australian Court would grant the WorkCover
Corporation an extension of time
in which to bring a claim, even if all other
legal difficulties were overcome. The complainant’s loss of earnings have
compensated out of statutory funds to which, no doubt, premiums paid by
Aero Engineering Australia Pty. Ltd. contributed. In my
opinion, there is far
too much risk that any award by way of loss of earnings would, if met by Mr.
Nolan or Dr. Oettle, involve “double
dipping” on the part of the
complainant and an inappropriate burden on the respondents or one of them.
On the other hand, I am satisfied that a significant award should be made for
physical and emotional pain and suffering. The complainant
was subjected to
behaviour which can only be described as appalling on a repeated, if not
constant, basis. I have no doubt that
she was badly affected by it. In my
view, an appropriate amount to be paid by the respondents in this regard is
$20,000. Both respondents
would be responsible for the full amount of this
payment. It is unnecessary for me to make any order or declaration in relation
to contribution as between the respondents.
11. Determination
The Commission finds that the complaint has been
substantiated and determines and declares that the respondents should pay to the
complainant the sum of $20,000 to redress loss and damage suffered by the
complainant as a result of the unlawful conduct complained
I certify that this page and the
preceding 24 pages are the
reasons for decision of
Inquiry Commissioner,
Anthony Cavanough QC
Associate 15 December, 2000
RTF format (83.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format