Penrith v Monash University [2000] HREOCA 44 (31 October 2000)
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
No: H97/252
Karen Penrith
(also known as Karen
Complainant
First Respondent
Claire Graham
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR DECISION
PETER JOHNSTON
INQUIRY COMMISSIONER
Date of Hearing:
Location of
Date of Written Findings of Fact:
Date of Decision:
October 2000
Appearances:
Complainant: The complainant appeared in person.
Respondents: Mr Richard Naughton of
Arthur Robinson Hedderwicks, solicitors
appeared for the respondents.
INTRODUCTION
On 2 October, 1995 the complainant lodged with the Equal
Opportunity Commission, Victoria, as agent for the Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission (“the Commission”), a complaint against the
first and second respondents (Monash University and
Ms Claire Graham
respectively) alleging unlawful discrimination with respect to education on the
basis of race. She did so under
the name Karen Barry but since then she has
preferred to use the surname of Penrith. I shall refer where necessary to the
complainant
under the latter name in these findings.
The complaint was treated as falling under
of the Act. The
complaint arises from actions alleged to have occurred on the part of the
respondents after the complainant was
accepted in 1993 into the psychology
course at the Gippsland Campus of Monash University as a mature age student.
The allegations
of discrimination made by the complainant may be viewed on two
levels. The first is that, with respect to particular events that
occurred when
she attempted the first units in that course, the first respondent, the
University, through its officers and individual
staff members (including the
second respondent), acted in a way that constituted racial discrimination under
the Act. The second
level relates to a more general assertion that the attitude
of the University’s staff overall, consciously or otherwise, was
by perspectives of a racist kind. On both levels these are serious
allegations.
The principal specific allegation concerned the complainant’s inability
to complete successfully an assignment which she has
referred to as a lab report
as part of the course unit Introduction to Psychology. The assignment was
marked as a fail by the second
respondent, Ms Claire Graham, the Head of
Department at the Gippsland Campus. The complainant claims that she did not
pass mark because she chose to use Aboriginal interviewees. This
meant that the outcome would be different from the surveys of other
students who
had not. She therefore required assistance from Ms Graham to process that data
and this in her view was not provided.
The second incident mentioned in her complaint relates to a statement alleged
to have been made by Ms Graham when discussing the lab
report with the
complainant. According to the complainant, Ms Graham made a statement that
“up to two years ago we had always
believed that psychology was
white”. This reflects a difference maintained by the complainant that
Aboriginal psychology is
different to white psychology.
Other incidents raised in the complaint concerned the inability of the
University to resolve the problems that had arisen between
the complainant and
Ms Graham. Overall, she asserted that the University was not prepared to get to
the heart of the problem which
involved among other things the relationship
between Ms Graham and Aboriginal students.
The respondent University denied that generally it failed to provide support
and assistance to the complainant. It rejected in particular
the allegation
that it has engaged in racial discrimination in the area of education. It
contended that the complaint did not disclose
that the complainant, in breach of
section 9(1)
of the Act, has been treated less favourably than a person of a
different race and further, that the complainant was unable to demonstrate
if, as alleged, she had been treated less favourably than others, that treatment
was on the ground of her race. It also denied
that there was any basis for
finding that the complainant was the subject of any indirect discrimination
section 9(1A)
of the Act during her period of enrolment. It maintained
that the complainant received a fail grade for the particular lab report
it was a poor piece of work that did not satisfy the assessment criteria. Any
term, condition or requirement imposed upon
her such as the requirement relating
to the lab report was objectively fair and reasonable having regard to all the
circumstances
of the case and assessment was carried out by reference to the
relevant assessment criteria.
The University accepted that the complainant had a fundamental right not to
be discriminated against in the enjoyment or exercise
of her right or freedom to
receive an education
of the Act read together with article 5(e)(v) of
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination)
but maintained there was nothing in the matters alleged by
the complainant which demonstrated that the respondents engaged in conduct
involving a distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on race
which had the purpose of effect of nullifying or impairing
the recognition of
the complainant’s right to such education.
The Race Discrimination Commissioner, having formed the opinion that the
complaint could not be settled by conciliation, referred
it under s.24E of the
Racial Discrimination Act
(Cth) (“the Act”) for public
inquiry by the Commission.
2. BACKGROUND
As stated above, the complaint was treated as falling under
the Act. Those provisions relevantly provide:
9. (1) It is unlawful for a person to do any act involving a distinction,
exclusion, restriction or preference based on race, colour,
descent or national
or ethnic origin which has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the
recognition, enjoyment or exercise,
on an equal footing, of any human right or
fundamental freedom in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other
public life.
(1A) Where:
(a) a person requires another person to comply with a term, condition or
requirement which is not reasonable having regard to the
circumstances of the
(b) the other person does not or cannot comply with the term, condition or
requirement; and
(c) the requirement to comply has the purpose or effect of nullifying or
impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal
footing, by
persons of the same race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin as the
other person, of any human right or fundamental
freedom in the political,
economic, social, cultural or any other field or public life;
the act of requiring such compliance is to be treated, for the purposes of
this Part, as an act involving a distinction based on,
or an act done by reason
of, the other person’s race, colour, descent or national or ethnic
13. It is unlawful for a person who supplies goods or services to the public
or to any section of the public:
(a) to refuse or fail on demand to supply those goods or services to another
(b) to refuse or fail on demand to supply those goods or services to another
person except on less favourable terms or conditions
than those upon or subject
to which he would otherwise supply those goods or services;
by reason of the race, colour or national or ethnic origin of that other
person or of any relative or associate of that other person.
As also indicated above, when originally presented, the complaint alleged
racial discrimination had occurred on a number of wide-ranging
grounds. By
letter dated 12 March 1998 the first respondent applied for the complaint to be
dismissed under s.25X of the Act on
the ground that it was misconceived and
lacking in substance. On 19 June 1998 I decided, for reasons I provided on 26
to dismiss the complaint for the most part, but ruled that it could
continue to hearing in respect of one matter. I concluded that
there was a
possibility that the complainant might have been able to make out a case that
the respondents had breached the Act if
she could prove that personally she had
been treated differently by Ms Graham in being afforded assistance to overcome
difficulties
arising from the fact that she had as an Aboriginal person been
allowed to conduct the survey involving Aboriginal interviewees but
had not been
given sufficient guidance in how to reduce the responses into the required
format. This was indicated in my decision
in the following terms:
Except to the extent indicated below in respect of the assessment report
assignment, I dismiss the complaint pursuant to section 25X
Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) on the ground that it is lacking in substance.
The complaint may proceed to hearing to the extent that the complainant
claims that the respondents were in breach of
of the Act by treating
her differently from non-Aboriginal students enrolled in the Introduction to
Psychology course at the Gippsland
campus in so far as, having allowed her to
use Aboriginal interviewees for the purpose of a shopping survey assignment, the
University, through the course controller of that unit, failed to
provide sufficient guidance or assistance to allow her to complete
assignment in a way that would satisfy the assessment requirements of the
assignment.
In the reasons I published on 26 June 1998, I indicated that to succeed under
subsection 9(1)
, the complainant would need to show
how the actions or failures
on the part of the respondent University or its staff such as Ms
(a) involved a distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference;
(b) that was
(c) which had the purpose or effect;
(d) of nullifying or impairing;
(e) the enjoyment by her;
equal footing
(ie the same as others in her course);
(g) of her right to education.
Alternatively, to succeed under
subsection 9(1A)
, she needed to show
relevantly that in terms of completing the assignment she was
required to comply
with a term, condition or requirement
which was not reasonable in the
circumstances of the case. She also needed
to show that she could not comply
with the term, condition
or requirement and that the requirement to comply had
the purpose or effect
of nullifying or impairing the enjoyment, on an equal
footing, by an Aboriginal person in her situation of the right to education.
When the complaint as so restricted came on for hearing in Melbourne, the
complainant sought an adjournment to allow her to seek legal
assistance. Given
the belated nature of the request and the fact that the complainant could have
raised the matter before either
the Commission or the respondents had made
arrangements regarding the hearing, I declined the request. I gave a direction,
that subsequent to the hearing, I would provide written findings of
fact, as best I could, on the evidence. I further directed that
the complainant
could have an opportunity to approach a legal centre for assistance. This was
with a view, if the complainant could
arrange it, to the centre providing
written submissions within 21 days as to how any such findings could support a
determination
that the respondents were in breach of the Act. I then proceeded
to hear the evidence of the parties and on 18
August 1999, I published my
findings based on that evidence.
For completeness, I have repeated below (subject to some minor editing) my
summary of that evidence and the findings I made as a result.
The complainant,
however, has not taken advantage of the period of 21 days to seek legal advice,
nor has she in the considerable
time since I made my direction provided the
Commission with submissions in support of her claim. I therefore have decided
fairness to the respondents I should now determine the matter.
To that end I have had regard to the submissions of the respondents made in
their solicitors’ letter of 12 March 1998, as expanded
by Mr Naughton both
at the original dismissal hearing pursuant to s.25X of the Act and at the
further hearing on 10 July 1998. I
have not accepted those submissions
uncritically and have endeavoured to exercise an independent judgment concerning
their correctness.
At the same time, I have sought to relate the relevant
provisions of the Act to the evidence in as favourable a light to the
complainant’s
case as I may reasonably do.
3. EVIDENCE OF THE COMPLAINANT
Ms Penrith told the Commission that she enrolled in 1994 in the psychology
and sociology course at the University intending to achieve
a Bachelor of Arts
degree majoring in psychology. She enrolled in the distance education course
organised at the Gippsland Campus
of the University. This required her on
occasions during the academic term to travel down from Melbourne to attend
weekend classes
at Gippsland. Ms Claire Graham was the person in charge of the
Introduction to Psychology course which the complainant undertook.
As part of that course the complainant received an assignment by
correspondence that required her to chose from three or four topics.
not kept a copy of the materials forwarded to her but described them from
memory. She was also sent reading materials and
a list of other reference
materials for following up. Time and word limits were specified and the
assignment was to be completed
in a specific format. A guide to how to complete
the assignment was also provided. The assignment in question involved processing
statistical information resulting from a shopping survey.
When the complainant received the assignment notes and materials she gave the
shopping questionnaire to her mother who had it filled
out by persons her mother
knew. When the results came back the complainant had to mark various items in
the questionnaire from 1-10.
The questions were set out on a single sheet and
asked such questions as: ‘
When you go shopping do you purchase
a particular item
]?’ These items were everyday things.
When the complainant came to collate the information and put it into the form
of a statistical analysis she started to encounter difficulties.
She could tell
from the answers whether the respondent was male or female and whether
Aboriginal or white. The information was supposed
to be anonymous. A question
directed to an Aboriginal male such as: “Do you go out to buy
fruit?” would be meaningless
in the case of Aboriginal men as they would
not think of buying fruit.
These kind of answers caused problems for the complainant in that she could
see historical influences that affected the survey respondents’
It seemed to her that she would have to write a book to reduce the answers to
statistics. As she put it to the Commission,
mainstream psychology has no
provision for inclusion of information that comes from indigenous people in
Australia. This is because
Australian history continues to influence the
answers that are given by indigenous people today. It is impossible to
the present answers without looking at the pressures that have come
from the past. Thus in order to make sense of the questions
such as: “Why
did you buy (something)?” one would have to evaluate the answer in terms
of the circumstances of the person
responding in order to turn it into a
statistic. The complainant therefore had difficulty in turning the information
into statistics
because she was aware of things that she was not supposed to
This had led the complainant to seek assistance from the University through
Ms Graham. Before that she had first contacted a person
who had tutored her in
a welfare assistant course she had previously undertaken. She wanted to know
why the figures had turned out
the way they had and how to deal with the new
information she was seeing. Seeking further assistance she had then approached
Graham who, according to the complainant, was not prepared for the kind of
information that had turned up. The complainant told the
Commission that she had
gone to see Ms Graham in Gippsland during the first semester and had made
special arrangements to go down
there during the week to do so. The complainant
had indicated that she was struggling to turn the information into the
she was supposed to complete. It was in the course of their
conversation about the difficulties the complainant was having that Ms
had made the comment that “up to two years ago we had always believed
psychology was white”. During that meeting
the complainant said to Ms
Graham: “Are you aware of how much racism there is in this course.
I’m getting assaulted
As a result of this meeting, Ms Graham had allowed her to change the
assignment so as to deal with just male performance in the questionnaire.
for the complainant, exclusion of
some survey respondents did not change
the nature of the assignment. Taking out females did not change the final
outcome. The historic
influences on the survey respondents were still what they
were, as she saw it. The answers still came from a position of oppression,
a reacting to forces that had oppressed the survey respondents all their lives.
Therefore the answers were more “reactionary”
complainant’s term) than those of other survey respondents. According to
the complainant, Aboriginal respondents give
the answers that they think someone
wants to hear. For this reason, the statistics did not fit the hypothesis that
was to be tested
by the assignment. As the complainant saw it, the information
never would match up because mainstream psychology was not set up
to deal with
the influence of other cultures. It had no “framework” to take in
the complex system of Aboriginal behaviour.
It was only built on the way white
cultures think and did not allow for ethnicity.
In cross-examination, the complainant insisted that the only time she had had
a conversation with Ms Graham was at a midweek meeting
during the course of the
semester. She did not agree that the conversation with Ms Graham had been in
February and involved a broad-
ranging discussion about the problems she might
face and the assistance that was available to her. She also denied that her
with Ms Graham about her assignment took place during a midweek
telephone conversation.
She told the Commission that she had gone to the University’s Koori
Resource Centre (“the Centre”) but again disagreed
suggestion of counsel for the respondents that Ms Marlene Drysdale from the
Centre had come in to see Ms Penrith at Gippsland
during a weekend. She
dismissed the efforts of the Centre in trying to find a tutor for her. As she
put it “all they had
to do was sign a piece of paper” in order to
authorise the Department of Education, Employment and Training
to pay for a tutor for her.
Also in cross-examination she was shown materials, Exhibits R1 and R2, and
agreed that they were the ones she had received. These
set out the methodology
for completing the assignment, including steps to be taken, and the guidelines
and present it. An article dealing with a
similar experiment was also attached.
4. EVIDENCE FOR THE RESPONDENTS
Ms Claire Graham
Ms Claire Graham in her evidence told the Commission that at the relevant
time she was a lecturer at the Gippsland Campus of the University
coordinator of the course in Introduction to Psychology, which was part of the
psychology program.
She first described the program in which the complainant had been enrolled.
At the time there were about 200 distant education students.
At the first
weekend school, students attended for a three hour lecture. This introduced
them to the course and how it functioned.
Subsequently, two weekend schools
were held involving six hours of classes. These included how to go about
laboratory assignments,
how to collect data, how to refer to literature, what to
do with the data, and how to write the report. In the particular year,
students in Ms Penrith’s course were given an assignment involving
collecting information from their homes. This was
to investigate data about
memory and about how it might differ between males and females. A questionnaire
was distributed. Other
staff, not Ms Graham, conducted these weekend
Students were provided with a document, entitled a Practical Guide, which
explained to students the foundation by which psychologists
explore behaviour,
the kind of information available, how to collect that information and how to
analyse it using statistics. It
included a sample report.
According to Ms Graham, the complainant had contacted her prior to the course
commencing. She had wanted to find out more about the
course. A meeting
between them lasted about an hour and a half. In it Ms Graham talked about the
materials and that the course included
new Australian materials that were to be
introduced the following year. She also discussed difficulties about completing
assignments.
This conversation took place in her office in probably February.
She did not remember having any other meeting with the complainant
Ms Graham remembered saying in the general conversation she had with Ms
Penrith at the beginning of the course that there was little
Aboriginal material
in it. She had said this in a general philosophical context. She did not recall
saying “up to two years
ago we had always believed psychology was
The assignments in the Introduction to Psychology course took several forms.
One assignment required students to assess a journal
article to follow its
logic. The second, the laboratory assignment, was about memory and the
differences between male and female
memories. A specific hypothesis would be
developed. This was in the introduction section. It was followed by a method
The third section was concerned with results. Ms Graham marked the
complainant’s first assignment, the review paper. Ms
Penrith had
understood the task that was involved but did not stick to the topic. She
brought in other matters concerned with her
own cultural issues.
Ms Graham explained the functions of the survey questionnaires that are the
crux of this complaint. It comprised one page, printed
on both sides. A journal
article by Mary Crawford and others was also circulated with it.
Sometime after the first weekend school, Ms Graham said she received a phone
call from Ms Penrith saying she was having difficulties
completing the
assignment because of the way the questions were framed. These, for her,
contravened cultural issues (women’s
and men’s business) and it
would not have been appropriate for her to have asked men some of these
questions. Ms Graham told
the complainant that given the methodology problems,
she could avoid filling out the male part. Instead of five men and five women
respondents, ten women could fill out all the questions.
Ms Graham anticipated that the omission of male respondents would create
difficulties in relation to completing the section based
on differences between
male and female responses. This would be an added burden. She had explained to
Ms Penrith that if she experienced
difficulties, staff members were available by
phone to assist her.
When questioned by the Commission, Ms Graham said she was not aware of any
literature that discussed how data could be collected in
a way that took into
account cultural differences.
The main object of the course was to introduce students to the scientific
method and to what psychology was about. Students studied
human behaviour and
memory. The assignments were directed to measuring and analysing such
Ms Marlene Drysdale
Ms Marlene Drysdale, the Director of Aboriginal Studies at the University,
Gippsland Campus, told the Commission that in 1994 the
University had made
extensive inquiries to see if a tutor could be found for the complainant. The
latter was encountering difficulties
with her course. Assistance was under the
Aboriginal Studies Tutorial Support Scheme funded by DEET. Ms Drysdale had
herself met
with the complainant. She had come in to talk with her about the
particular difficulties that she was having with a psychology assignment.
Drysdale had several meetings with Ms Graham about the matter. The main
difficulty about obtaining a tutor was because Ms Penrith
lived in Melbourne.
It was not possible to get anyone in Gippsland to assist her there. Further, no
one was available through the
University’s main campus. It had not been
possible to get a tutor through advertising through the Commonwealth Employment
Scheme. The possibility of a former student from Gippsland had been pursued, but
the student could not help with tutoring Ms Penrith.
The Centre had not been
able to find anyone.
5 FINDINGS OF FACTS.
Based on the evidence I have made the following
5.1 Entry to the course
The complainant enrolled in the Introduction to Psychology course at the
Gippsland campus of the University. This was part of her
studies towards the
degree of Bachelor of Arts with a Psychology major. The coordinator of the
course was Ms Graham. The course
was essentially a correspondence course with
some requirements to attend residential weekend classes at the campus.
5.2 The nature of the assignment
As part of her course the complainant was required to complete an assignment.
This was sent to her by correspondence. It took the
form of a statistical
survey of shopping practices. It was designed to illustrate whether there were
differences between male and
female memory. The documents comprising the
exercise included the relevant questionnaire and other guidelines, explanations
text materials to assist the student to complete it. The relevant materials
are Exhibits R1 and R2.
5.3 The complainant's difficulties in undertaking the assignment
The complainant gave the questionnaire to her mother who had it filled out
largely by Aboriginal acquaintances. When she came to
process the responses,
the complainant had difficulties in doing so. These difficulties were at two
different levels.
First, she was able to identify from the nature of individual responses
whether the respondent was an Aboriginal male or female.
Whilst it was not
apparent to me from the complainant's evidence just what the immediate problem
was (whether for cultural reasons
it was inappropriate for her as an Aboriginal
woman to disclose information provided by respondents of a particular gender, or
any identification of the sex of the respondent would cause invalid
results) I find that an accommodation was reached between the
complainant and Ms
Graham that the survey could be based on responses by members of one sex or the
other. There is some confusion
on the evidence whether only males or females
were to be chosen and I make no specific findings in this regard.
The second problem that the complainant raised concerning her inability to
complete the assignment successfully is more difficult
to articulate in precise
terms and is, correspondingly, a matter about which I have great difficulty in
making relevant factual findings.
Again, somewhat ambiguously, the problem
appears to have been put forward in alternative ways. In general terms, the
complainant
asserts she was unable to process the material gathered from the
questionnaire responses because they did not fit within the
“framework”
or "format" of "mainstream" (which I take to mean
traditional) psychology. This was because the latter was "white" and unable to
accommodate Aboriginal responses. These were historically and culturally
conditioned so as to be different from those of white or
(Anglo-European) persons. The complainant expressed this problem in several
different ways. One focussed
on the inherent nature of the responses
the background of the people supplying the answers. She claimed that the
answers were incapable of being meaningfully fitted
into the process laid down
for the assignment and that the answers simply did not make sense.
Alternatively, the complainant appears to claim that because she was aware,
personally, of the Aboriginal content of the responses,
she simply did not know
how to deal with them and requested assistance.
Finally, the complainant claimed that the psychology course (and psychology
as a discipline) was
inherently racist
because it did not take into
account the different psychological responses of Aboriginal persons. However,
when asked to identify
examples or instances of such white assumptions or
practices, the complainant could not do so. The argument of the complainant
inherent racial bias in psychology raises a more universal claim
which, having regard to my original ruling (see above), goes beyond
the scope of
this inquiry.
What is evident is that because of the difficulties she experienced in
successfully completing the assignment she obtained a poor
result in regard to
it and that in turn contributed to her failing the unit.
5.4 Specific findings based on the evidence.
In relation to this aspect of the complaint and having regard to the
difficulties referred to above, I make the following findings.
I find that
the complainant did experience difficulties in attempting to process the
single-gendered Aboriginal responses into conclusions and
in the format required
by the assignment. This flowed from what she subjectively perceived as either
non-conforming biases inherent
in the responses due to cultural conditioning or,
as she saw it, the nature of the psychology course she was undertaking.
On the other hand it is not clear to me why, even though she was aware of
factors in the responses that enabled her to identify the
sex of respondents or
nuances in the questions that might have indicated an unconscious bias or
insensitivity towards Aboriginal
persons, those matters necessarily disabled her
from completing the assignment in its own terms. Having regard to the
questionnaire,
article and information comprising the exercise, it seems to me
it was capable of being completed in its own terms and according
methodology specified. For that matter, it is not apparent to me why, given the
fact that using Aboriginal respondents complicated
the enterprise, she could not
have used some or all non-Aboriginal respondents. That might have been less
convenient and would not
have addressed her concerns about what she perceived to
be racist assumptions inherent in orthodox psychology, but she would have
in a position where she could probably have completed the assignment. She may
consider that such a concession would have involved
a compromising of her
principles. In that event, she could have continued to voice her objections and
protests about the nature of
“white psychology” but have passed the
unit in its given terms.
I raise that possibility because on one view open to me, to succeed in this
matter the complainant must satisfy me that not only was
she treated differently
from other members of her course on the ground of her race but, causally, that
such different treatment resulted
in her failing the Introduction to Psychology
course. As I assess the evidence, I am satisfied that the complainant’s
was in large measure due to the way she subjectively approached the
assignment.
I further find that initially the complainant sought assistance from a person
who had previously taught her in another context. Later
she contacted Ms Graham
and acquainted her with the fact that she (the complainant) was experiencing
difficulties completing the
assignment. There are differences in the accounts
relating to this discussion, and specifically, whether the complainant spoke to
Ms Graham by phone or visited her at the Gippsland campus. Whether it was
one or the other is immaterial. I find that Ms Graham
in the first instance
consented to the complainant modifying the assignment by confining the analysis
to single-sex responses. This
of itself possibly made it more difficult to
complete the assignment (as acknowledged by Ms Graham). It is also clear
that, as it happened, this was not sufficient to meet the difficulties the
complainant was having in adequately formulating an analysis
of the data for the
purposes of her assignment.
At that stage, the University, principally through the agency of the Koori
Centre and in particular, Ms Drysdale, did take steps to
try and find someone
with the appropriate background and experience to assist the complainant in
overcoming the problems she was
facing with the assignment. I find that the
University, through the Centre, did make genuine and repeated efforts to find
person but that due to the scarcity of such persons, their location, the
location of the campus and that of the complainant (including
her situation
requiring her to travel several hours to Gippsland), in the end the efforts of
the Centre were unsuccessful. If, therefore,
one of the elements of the
complaint is that the first respondent or its officers and servants
discriminated against the complainant
on the grounds of her race by reason of
failing to find someone to assist her to complete the assignment, I can find no
concluding that they did not make genuine reasonable attempts to
provide her with a special tutor
I find that, on the evidence, because
of practical difficulties, there was no such person available within reasonable
While I accept the complainant experienced the difficulties of the kind she
has alleged, I am not able to make any satisfactory finding
as to the reasons
why these subjective difficulties actually prevented her from completing the
assignment. The exercise as I understand
it was principally directed to
developing an understanding and a methodology for undertaking statistical
psychology analysis. Whether
the results, in her view, were accurate or not, or
whether they reflected the true nature of the questionnaire, it has not been
that a correspondence with reality was a necessary condition for
completing and passing the assignment which was primarily concerned
methodology.
Further, whether confining the responses to males/females made it inherently
impossible to complete the task has not been explained
or proven to my
satisfaction. I can make no relevant finding in that regard.
DISCUSSION OF ABOVE FINDINGS IN TERMS OF THE LEGAL ISSUES
Section 9(1)
of the Act.
I turn to the first claim of discrimination arising from the complaint:
namely that the respondents treated the complainant differently
favourably because she was not provided with appropriate assistance to cope with
the difficulties she was experiencing with
regard to the assignments.
To come within the terms of
of the Act the complainant must satisfy me
that the respondents treated her in a way that was different from how they
treated students
of non-Aboriginal background. In that regard I accept the view
of Sackville J in
Australian Medical Council
at 683 that the relevant distinction can be drawn between persons of one
race and those not of that race. The complainant must establish
that she was
treated in a way that involved a distinction or restriction not imposed on other
students. In addressing that issue
I agree with the respondents’
submission that whatever the grievances the complainant may subjectively have
felt, the issue
must be determined objectively on the evidence.
If the complainant can satisfy me, at the threshold, that she was treated in
a way that was relevantly different from other students,
in terms of how she was
required to undertake the psychology assignment, she must then, for purposes of
of the Act go on to satisfy me that the relevant distinction was one
“based on race”.
In approaching the question of whether there was a relevantly different
treatment of the complainant, I view the matter as one of
substance not form.
Obviously the concessions made by Ms Graham as to the way the assignment could
be completed meant the complainant
was permitted to attempt the assignment in a
different form from other students. The appropriate issue as I see it, however,
whether or not the modifications that were made were directed to overcoming
problems she was experiencing and hence to put her on
an equal footing with the
other students in the course.
Given my findings on the evidence, I must hold that the complainant fails at
the threshold. While the complainant may strongly hold
the opposite view,
rather than being disadvantaged in any way by the way the respondent University
and its staff treated her, I am
satisfied that Ms Graham and subsequently Ms
Drysdale in fact took steps to help the complainant to meet the particular
difficulties
that she was encountering in completing the assignment. Those
difficulties, it must be conceded, presented a real barrier to the
complainant
completing the assignment in so far as she subjectively held views that caused
her to see problems in the way Aboriginal
interviewees responded to the
questionnaire. Looking at the matter in terms of causation, the fact that she
was not able to complete
the assignment in the way it had been prescribed should
not be attributed to the respondents. It would have been possible, in my
notwithstanding the difficulties that she encountered, to have completed it.
She has not satisfied me that even with the difficulties
she faced because of
her subjective perceptions concerning the responses she had recorded, she was
unable to do so. The assignment
was essentially an exercise in how to process
information in accordance with a particular methodology. Accordingly, she was
required to do anything relevantly different from what was required from
non-Aboriginal students in her course. In the light of
my findings, there is no
basis on which I can find that the complainant was treated less fairly than a
person of a different race
for the purposes of
section 9(1)
of the Act.
Further, the respondents should not, in my view, be held responsible for the
fact that no tutor could be found with the appropriate
experience to assist the
complainant to complete the assignment. That failure cannot sustain on the
evidence a claim that, for instance,
Ms Graham or Ms Drysdale made less of an
effort to assist the complainant than would be the case if she were not an
Aboriginal person.
The attempts made by Ms Drysdale were entirely reasonable in
my view, given the extremely limited number of people available to
tuition. It was unfortunate for the complainant, as it happened, that it proved
impossible to find such a person. In the
light of the impossibility of finding
a suitable and available tutor, I am not prepared to find that the inability to
do so on the
part of the respondent University or its employees should lead to a
conclusion that it had, thereby, brought about the situation
complainant failed the unit in psychology. There is absolutely no evidence to
suggest that the efforts of the University
and its officers to find a tutor were
pursued with any less endeavour than was the case with other non-Aboriginal
students. The
requirement to pass the assignment was imposed on all students
irrespective of their background.
As to any suggestion that the University staff in any way displayed
“racist” attitudes towards the complainant in their
treatment of
her, I should make it categorically clear that I find no basis for such
allegations at all. While the complainant may
not think so, I am, as indicated
in the findings above, of the view that they made sympathetic and genuine
attempts to resolve her
difficulties.
Nor am I satisfied that the complainant can make out an alternative claim
that the respondents failed to attach sufficient importance
to the differences
that might inherently exist between what the complainant calls “Aboriginal
psychology” and the formal
study of psychology as it was pursued at the
Gippsland Campus (assuming that such a distinction actually exists).
I should first say, however, that I am not persuaded by the
respondents’ submission that because the difference might be said
merely “formal”, requiring the complainant to undertake the
assignment could not amount to an action that relevantly
impaired or nullified
the right of the complainant to receive an education. In the first place I do
not consider the dichotomy between
form and substance as particularly
illuminating in the context of the requirement to complete an educational
assignment. The way
in which instruction and assessment is carried out could
materially affect a student’s results. If a cultural inhibition prevents
that student from completing an assignment, a failure on the part of the
instructors to address the difficulties, if they flowed
from the racial or
ethnic background of the student, could well, in my opinion, amount to action
denying or impairing the student’s
right to be treated on an equal footing
in terms of the enjoyment to the right of education. As mentioned above,
however, I have
found that the respondents in this instance did take appropriate
steps to respond to the complainant’s dilemma, even if their
proved unsuccessful.
Since the complainant cannot establish a foothold for her claim that she was
in fact treated in a way differently from non-Aboriginal
students in her course,
it is unnecessary for me to address the more complicated issue of whether, if
she was treated differently,
that different treatment involved a distinction or
restriction “based on race”. The complainant has failed to satisfy
me that there is a foundation on which it could be held that the respondents
acted or failed to act in a way that contravened
of the Act.
Section 9(1A)
of the Act.
I therefore turn to consider whether the complainant can sustain her
complaint on the basis of a breach of
of the Act. Essentially this
would amount to an allegation of what has come to be called
“indirect” discrimination.
Implicit in the complainant’s allegations, as I understand them, is a
claim that there is something of a systemic bias in the
way that a particular
psychology unit was being taught at the Gippsland Campus and that this bias
affected the respondents’
capacity to treat an Aboriginal student like the
complainant fairly. In other words the very nature of the assignment itself
the complainant being able to successfully comply with the criteria
under which it was to be assessed. That is, the course itself
assignment in particular was structured in a way that because of the inherent
bias of the contents of the course and the
way it was delivered meant that she
could not satisfy the requirements to pass the assignment, and this in turn led
to her failing
the course. The argument would then proceed that, for the
purposes of paragraph (a) of subsection (1A) of
of the Act there was imposed
upon her a term or condition that she would have to complete the assignment
subject to a disability
not shared by non-Aboriginal students, and the
requirement to do so was not reasonable in the circumstances of her case. It
further require me to find, in accordance with paragraph (b) of that
sub-section, that the complainant could not comply with that
Pausing at this stage, I must take into account the fact that, so far as the
evidence is concerned, the complainant has not satisfied
me that she was unable
to complete the assignment because of any inherent bias arising from the nature
of the assignment nor from
any racist attitudes held on the part of her
instructors. It has not been shown that, notwithstanding the steps that Ms
Graham took
to modify the nature of the assignment to accommodate the
difficulties the complainant was experiencing, the complainant was nevertheless
unable to comply with the criteria for completion. On the contrary, the
affirmative steps taken by Ms Graham allowing statistical
adjustments to be made
should have sufficiently modified the assignment to have enabled the complainant
to fulfill the criteria and
pass the assignment. Special allowances were made
for the possibility of any peculiar impact upon an Aboriginal student. Those
allowances were directed towards accommodating differences in the way that
Aboriginal respondents to the survey may have answered
the questionnaire.
Regarding whether the respondents were in breach of
of the Act I
therefore hold that the complainant has not established that she was unable to
comply with the requirement to complete
and pass the lab assignment. Nor am I
satisfied that that term or requirement was not reasonable, given the
modifications and concessions
made by Ms Graham. I am not, therefore, required
to make any further findings as to whether the matter set forth in paragraphs
and (c) of that provision were satisfied. I would add, however, that
although the complainant has established that she did not comply
with the term
or requirement for her to pass the assignment, she has not satisfied me that she
could not comply with it. I would
also comment that she would have had great
difficulty in satisfying me that the requirement that she complete the
assignment could
have had the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the
enjoyment of her right to education.
The complaint has not been made out under
section 9(1A)
of the Act.
7. CONCLUSION
In the light of the above
reasons, I declare that the complainant has been unable to satisfy me that any
conduct of the respondents
amounted to a contravention of either subsection (1)
or subsection (1A) of
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
therefore dismiss the complaint.
I certify that this and the preceding nineteen
pages is a true
copy of the Reasons for
Decision of Peter Johnston,
Hearing Commissioner.
Hearing Solicitor:
Date: 31 October, 2000
RTF format (92.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format