Gagandeep (Skye) Kaur v G8 Education Trading AS Jellybeans Childcare [2025] FWC 3396 (12 November 2025)
[2025] FWC 3396
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Application for a dispute about requests for flexible work
arrangements
Gagandeep (Skye) Kaur
G8 Education
Trading AS Jellybeans Childcare
(C2025/4889)
COMMISSIONER SCHNEIDER
PERTH, 12 NOVEMBER 2025
Application to deal with a dispute about the right to request for flexible
working arrangements –
section 65A
and reasonable business grounds
considered – application dismissed
Introduction
May 2025, Mrs Gagandeep (Skye) Kaur (Mrs Kaur or the Applicant) made an
application to the Fair Work Commission (the Commission)
section 65B
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) (the Act) seeking to resolve a dispute
regarding flexible working arrangements with G8 Education Trading as Jellybeans
(the Respondent).
Respondent objects to the application on the grounds that it has reasonable
business grounds to reject the requested arrangement.
The parties were unable to
resolve the matter at conciliation, so the matter was listed for a hearing on 30
July 2025. Ms Kaur provided
witness evidence in support of her
application.
Kuar is a full-time diploma qualified employee at one of the Respondent’s
childcare centres.
late 2024, the Respondent conducted a statewide review to ensure safety and
regulatory compliance within its operations.
this review, it was decided the Respondent would implement a rotational roster
to meet minimum legal requirements regarding
staffing minimums to ensure 50%
diploma qualified staff on site during operating hours. The standard span of
hours under the relevant
Modern Award is 6:00am to 6:30pm.
part of this review, Mrs Kaur was identified as one of two staff members who had
a schedule with fixed finish times ranging from
3:00pm to 3:30pm. Mrs Kaur
submits this has been her working arrangement since she commenced her employment
in 2023, as the result
of an agreement with management at the time.
result of the review, the Respondent transitioned its full-time diploma
qualified staff to rotating rosters to assist in ensuring
its compliance with
the relevant regulations.
Respondent’s efforts to transition Mrs Kaur to the rotating roster,
especially as it relates to afternoon work, has resulted
Applicant’s request for flexible working arrangements and the subsequent
lodgment of this dispute.
Submissions
party provided a significant volume of material in support of their respective
Kaur is seeking a flexible working arrangement that would mean her rostered
hours of work with the Respondent would commence at
7:00am or 7:30am and end at
3:00pm or 3:30pm.
Kaur submits that she is seeking this flexible working arrangement as she has
school-age children who require care and assistance
with after-school
activities, homework, and school commute. Mrs Kaur submits that her family does
not believe it safe for the children
to be unattended after school or for them
to use public transport to commute home after school.
Kaur submits that when she commenced her employment with the Respondent, in
2023, she advised her then manager of her availability
responsibilities.
Respondent submits that, consistent with
section 65A(3)
of the Act, it has
reasonable business grounds to refuse the request of Mrs Kaur for the following
Child Safety:
Qualified team members must be present during opening and closing shifts to
ensure operational consistency and compliance.
Requirements/Compliance: The legal minimum requirement to maintain 50% diploma
qualified staff members across the span of opening
Team equity and
operational fairness: Multiple team members have expressed interest in similar
early finish times due to various family
or personal commitments. To ensure
fairness and avoid preferential treatment, a rotating roster system has been
implemented.
Operational
constraints: The nature of the Respondent’s service requires consistent
staff coverage throughout the day. Allowing
multiple early finishes would
compromise our ability to meet regulatory and care standards.
Respondent submits that it has engaged with Mrs Kaur in relation to her flexible
working arrangements request and that it has
provided three different roster
options to Mrs Kaur in an attempt to balance her flexible working arrangement
request and the reasonable
business operational requirements.
offered rosters are outlined below:
7am – 3.30pm
9.30am – 6pm
7.30am – 4pm
9am – 5.30pm
8am – 4.30 pm
9am – 5.30pm
Respondent submits that, despite attempts and discussions to explore alternative
arrangements that take into account the Applicant’s
personal childcare
requirements, the Applicant has not agreed with any of its proposals to date nor
has she made proposals in consideration
of the operational
requirements.
Respondent submits that the change in Mrs Kaur’s hours of work was
required after the operational review conducted in late
2024 which resulted in
the rosters requiring adjustment to ensure that there are always at least 50%
diploma qualified staff on site.
Respondent submits that there is no evidence or written agreement supporting the
position that any previous roster with Mrs Kaur
was agreed to by the business.
Respondent submits that as a full-time permanent employee who is diploma
qualified the business requires Mrs Kaur to work the
span of hours as
contemplated by the Award.
Consideration
of the Act, outlines the reasonable business ground in which an employer
can refuse the flexible working arrangement request of the
(5) Without limiting what are reasonable business grounds for the
purposes of paragraph (3)(d) and subsection (4), reasonable
grounds for refusing a request include the following:
(a) that the new working arrangements
requested would be too costly for the employer;
(b) that there is no capacity to change the working arrangements
of other employees to accommodate the new working arrangements
(c) that it would be impractical to change the working
arrangements of other employees, or recruit new employees, to
accommodate
the new working arrangements requested;
(d) that the new working arrangements requested would be likely to
result in a significant loss in efficiency or productivity;
(e) that the new working arrangements requested would be likely to
have a significant negative impact on customer service.
reviewed the submissions and evidence of the parties, I have determined that
there are reasonable business grounds for the
Respondent to deny the request of
Mrs Kaur. My reasons are as follows.
find that the reasons provided by the Respondent as listed below are consistent
with the requirements in
of the Act.
Compliance with
legal minimums and regulations;
Team equity and
fairness; and
Operational
restraints.
the Respondent has correctly pointed out, if Mrs Kaur was granted this flexible
working arrangement, it would require the Respondent
to adjust other
employees’ rosters to ensure that there is always 50% diploma coverage on
site. It is apparent that, in its
efforts to propose various options of a
rotating roster, this is how the Respondent has been seeking to accommodate
flexibility for
Mrs Kaur. However, the options put forward by the Respondent
have been rejected and it appears the Respondent has no further capacity
alter the rosters of others in order to accommodate the somewhat restrictive
roster pursued by Mrs Kaur.
its offers of compromise failing, it is not unreasonable to conclude that
accommodations consistent with Mrs Kaur’s request
would likely have an
increased cost impact to the Respondent. The result of which would be the need
of additional staff (in addition
to the already regularly rostered staff whose
schedules the Respondent has already been considering in its attempts at
compromise),
assumedly obtained at added cost or operational inconvenience,
required to cover shift times that Mrs Kaur would not be required
Further, the purpose of the Respondent’s rostering requirements has been
noted, being compliance with relevant regulations
to ensure minimum staffing
levels and child safety.
Respondent submitted that the roster sought by Mrs Kaur would interest several
of its staff. I note that the Respondent did not
lead evidence to support this
claim. However, I consider that this argument is reasonable and logical as these
hours of work would
generally be favourable to employees of the Respondent with
family and childcare commitments. I accept that this could result in
tension and
other workplace issues, arising from equity and fairness. This is especially so
in the circumstances where the accommodation
of such preferable roster could be
at the inconvenience of others.
find that reasonable business grounds exist for denying the flexible working
arrangement consistent with
section 65A(5)
of the Act.
application is therefore dismissed. An Order to that effect has been
COMMISSIONER
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government
RTF format (534 KB)
Signed PDF/A format