'AYL' and Department of Defence (Freedom of information) [2025] AICmr 164 (12 September 2025)
‘AYL’ and Department of Defence (Freedom of information)
[2025] AICmr 164
(12 September 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of
Rocelle Ago, General
Manager, Freedom of Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian
Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Department of Defence
Decision date
Freedom of Information — Searches ―
Respondent no longer maintains documents cannot be found or do not exist
Freedom of Information Act 1982
s 55K of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(the FOI Act), I set aside
the internal review decision of the Department of Defence (the Department) of 19
April 2024. In considering
Department no longer maintains documents cannot be found or do not exist,
substitute my decision that further documents falling within scope of the
request have been found and do exist.
30 days of this decision, the Department must provide a response to the
applicant in accordance with s 26 of the FOI Act in
relation to the further
documents it has identified via its further searches and advise whether it has
fully implemented my
decision sets aside and substitutes the internal review decision of the
Department in circumstances where the Department no longer
maintains that
further documents cannot be found or do not exist.
Reasons for decision
December 2023 the applicant applied to the Department for access to documents
relating to a position being made excess with a voluntary
redundancy.
Department originally identified 5 documents within the scope of the
applicant’s request, but after conducting further searches
internal review process it identified 193 documents which it released in
applicant contests whether the Department has taken all reasonable steps to
identify documents within the scope of the request
and that further documents
cannot be found or do not exist (s
the course of the IC review, the Department notified the Office of the
Australian Information Commissioner (the OAIC) that
it had undertaken additional
assist with the timely resolution of this IC review, this matter has proceeded
to a decision under s 55K of the FOI Act.
the Department no longer maintains that documents cannot be found or do not
exist, I set aside the Department’s decision
and substitute my decision
that documents falling within scope of the request have been found and do exist.
Rocelle Ago
General Manager, Freedom of Information Case
Delegate of the Australian Information Commissioner for the
purposes of
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Whether reasonable steps taken to find documents
24A of the FOI Act requires that an agency take ‘all reasonable
steps’ to find a requested document before refusing
access to it on the
basis that it cannot be found or does not exist.
There are two elements that must be established before an agency or minister
can refuse a request for access to a document under s
the agency or
minister must have taken all reasonable steps to find the document, and
the agency or
minister is satisfied that the document cannot be found or does not
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
Accessing your information
If you would like access to the information that we hold about you, please
FOIDR@oaic.gov.au
information is available on the
information
page on our website.
On the question of the
processing deadlines that now apply, see
Fletcher and Prime Minister of
The applicant does not seek
review of the deletions applied to the documents identified by the Department,
so those have not been
considered further in this IC review.
RTF format (22 MB)
Signed PDF/A format