URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/FCA/1986/365.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Re Michael Patrick Jess v RT Scott; JG Kidd; L Carmichael; G Campbell; RA Bruggy; W Martin; E Lipscombe; F Maurice; DA Beer; WR Arscott; F Mcgowan; RB Hawkes; G Harrison; RM Adamson; H Malcolm; P Johnson; JF Halfpenny; J O'Nei [1986] FCA 365 (4 November 1986)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Re: MICHAEL PATRICK JESS
And: R.T. SCOTT; J.G. KIDD; L. CARMICHAEL; G. CAMPBELL; R.A. BRUGGY; W.
MARTIN; E. LIPSCOMBE; F. MAURICE; D.A. BEER; W.R. ARSCOTT; F. McGOWAN; R.B.
HAWKES; G. HARRISON; R.M. ADAMSON; H. MALCOLM; P. JOHNSON; J.F. HALFPENNY; J.
O'NEILL; R. POINTER; M. TUMBERS; F. BASTOW; A.J. MARKS; B.R. BURNS; J.A.
VAUGHAN; M.K. HILL; J. WOODS and AMALGAMATED METALS FOUNDRY & SHIPWRIGHTS'
No. NSW I23 of 1986
Federal Court Practice & Procedure
IN THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
NEW SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
INDUSTRIAL DIVISION
Lockhart J.
Sheppard J.
Burchett J.
Federal Court Practice & Procedure - Federal Court Rules - Extension of time
for filing notice of appeal to Full Court - Effect
of solicitor's error -
Meaning in Order 52 Rule 15(2) of "the Court or a Judge for special reasons
may at any time give leave to
file and serve a notice of appeal" - Width of
Court's discretion.
Federal Court Rules Order 52, Rule 15(2)
Gatti v. Shoosmith
(1939) 1 Ch. 841
Salter Rex & Co. v. Ghosh
(1971) 2 Q.B. 597
Regina v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Mehta
1 W.L.R. 1087
Palata Investments Ltd v. Burt & Sinfield Ltd
(1985) 2 All E.R. 517
Hughes v. National Trustees Executors & Agency Co. of Australasia Ltd.
[1978] VicRp 27
(1978) V.R. 257
Outboard Marine Australia Pty Ltd v. Byrnes
(1974) 1 N.S.W.L.R. 27
Stollznow v. Calvert
(1980) 2 N.S.W.L.R. 749
Witten v. Lombard Australia Ltd (1968) 88 W.N.(Pt 1)(NSW) 405
Morris v. Public Transport Commission, unreported, Moffitt P., Glass and
Mahoney JJA., 28/5/84
Avery v. No. 2 Public Service Appeal Board
(1973) 2 N.Z.L.R. 86
Ratnam v. Cumarasamy
(1964) 3 All E.R. 933
Martin v. The Nominal Defendant
(1954) 74 W.N.(NSW) 121
Re Coles and Ravenshear
(1907) 1 K.B. 1
Re Wolcott and Davis, unreported, Muirhead J., 14/12/84
Upon the condition that the respondents' costs of the motion are paid by the
solicitor for the applicant time for filing and service
of a notice of appeal
be extended until 14 August 1986 and that the filing and service of a notice
of appeal which took place on
that date be taken to have been a sufficient
compliance with this order.
NOTE: Settlement and entry of orders is dealt with by Order 36
of the Federal Court Rules.
On 23 July 1986 Wilcox J. delivered judgment dismissing two proceedings
brought by the applicant and ordering him to pay to the
respondents their
costs of one of the proceedings. The applicant's solicitor received, in due
time, instructions to file and serve
a Notice of Appeal to a Full Court of
this Court. Because of a misunderstanding on the part of the applicant's
solicitor as to the
date of delivery of judgment, the Notice of Appeal was
filed and served on the day after the last day limited for the filing of a
Notice of Appeal under the Rules. Objection having been taken, the applicant
lodged the application the subject of these reasons,
in which he sought an
extension of time pursuant to Order 52 Rule 15(2) of the Rules of the Court.
At the hearing of the application,
we made an order under that sub-rule,
reserving our reasons, which we now deliver.
2. Sub-rule (1) of Rule 15 provides for the appeal period of 21 days, and for
its extension upon application made by motion upon
notice filed within the
period of 21 days. Sub-rule (2) then provides as follows:
"Notwithstanding anything in the preceding
sub-rule, the Court or a Judge for special
reasons may at any time give leave to file
and serve a notice of appeal."
3. Although the sub-rule refers to the giving of leave to file and serve a
Notice of Appeal, sub-rule (5) provides for the application
to be made "in or
substantially in the form numbered 54A in the First Schedule", and that form
seeks, not a grant of leave to file
and serve a Notice of Appeal out of time,
but "an extension of time in which to file and serve a Notice of Appeal". It
to be noted that, while sub-rule (2) refers to "special reasons",
sub-rule (6) is in the following terms:
"An application shall be accompanied by an
affidavit showing -
(a) the nature of the case;
(b) the questions involved; and
(c) the reason why leave should be given."
(Emphasis added.)
Also, Rules 15 and 15A contemplate that an application may be sufficiently
straightforward to be dealt with upon the presentation
of a case and argument
to the Court in writing.
4. In the matter under consideration, there was no challenge to the
explanation by the applicant's solicitor of his mistake as to
the date of
delivery of judgment. He was not present in Court when judgment was
delivered, and for some part of the relevant period
was engaged upon another
court case in a country town. No prejudice is suggested, the respondents'
solicitor having been under the
mistaken impression that the applicant had 28
days, not 21, in which to appeal. The case raises questions of some general
importance,
and there is no suggestion that the appeal is sought to be
maintained mala fide or upon slight or foolish grounds. The solicitor
applicant, accepting as he did with frankness the responsibility for the error
which occurred, offered to submit to a condition
of the giving of leave under
Rule 15(2) that he pay personally the respondents' costs of this application.
5. The respondents' opposition to the application was based substantially
upon an argument that the words "for special reasons" in
Rule 15(2) should be
given a stringent interpretation. It was urged there was nothing sufficiently
special about the grounds of
the application.
6. Although counsel for the respondents referred to a number of cases dealing
with other rules of court, more or less differently
worded, concerning the
relaxation of appeal times, there appears to be little authority upon the
Federal Court Rule in question.
In Bishop v. R
[1982] FCA 33
(1982) 40 ALR 40
, a Full Court
of this Court dealt with an application to extend the time for service of a
Notice of Appeal which had been filed within
time. The majority of the Court
(Bowen C.J. and Deane J.) expressed an inclination to agree with the view of
the Judge at first instance,
Fox J., that Order 52 Rule 15 was not applicable
to such a situation, which was to be dealt with under Order 3 Rule 3. Davies
directly held that Order 52 Rule 15(2) was not applicable. The decision of
the Court turned upon the special circumstances of a
Crown appeal against
sentence, and upon the absence of any acceptable explanation of the Crown's
failure to serve the Notice of Appeal
within time. However at p.44 Davies J.,
referring to sub-rule (2) of Rule 15, said:
"The terms of that sub-rule set out a
principle which has long been established in
Since the cases establish, as we shall show, that leave to appeal out of time
is to be determined by the Court's view of the demands
of justice in
accordance with a broad judicial discretion, and not simply upon the
application of any verbal formula, this dictum
does not support the
respondents' argument.
7. But the respondents placed principal reliance upon the decision of
Muirhead J. in Re Wolcott and Davis (unreported, 14 December
1984). In that
case, leave having been sought and obtained to bring an appeal against an
interlocutory decision, the applicants
had then failed to file a Notice of
Appeal within the time permitted by the order granting leave. Muirhead J.
dismissed the applicants'
application for an extension of time, which had been
grounded substantially on the basis that the failure to file the Notice of
within the requisite period was the result of their own solicitor's
ignorance and his belief that, where leave to appeal had been
granted, no
Notice of Appeal was required. Muirhead J. expressed the view:
"It could seldom be said that the failure of a
solicitor to institute an appeal in time,
caused by ignorance or negligence rather than
by fortuitous circumstances, such as sickness
or accident, constituted special reasons."
8. In Re Coles and Ravenshear
(1907) 1 KB 1
the Court of Appeal dealt with an
application to extend time for appeal, the time having been allowed to expire
because a solicitor
had accepted an erroneous opinion of counsel that time
would run until a particular date. The Court refused the application, which
was brought under a rule in the following terms:
"No appeal to the Court of Appeal (in certain
matters) shall, except by special leave of
the Court of Appeal, be brought after the
expiration of fourteen days."
Collins M.R. and Cozens-Hardy L.J. each said binding authority compelled the
view that a mistake made by a solicitor was an insufficient
ground under a
rule expressed in those terms. But each would have granted an extension if
the matter had been free from authority.
Collins M.R. at p.4 said:
"I confess that, if the case were free from
authority, and I felt myself at liberty to
follow my own judgment in the matter, I
should unhesitatingly allow the time to be
extended. Although I agree that a Court
cannot conduct its business without a code of
procedure, I think that the relation of rules
of practice to the work of justice is
intended to be that of handmaid rather than
mistress, and the Court ought not to be so
far bound and tied by rules, which are after
all only intended as general rules of
procedure, as to be compelled to do what will
cause injustice in the particular case."
Later, at p.5, he said:
"Therefore, where there has been a perfectly
bona fide mistake, and no damage has thereby
been done to the opposite party which cannot
be sufficiently compensated by costs, I
should, if the matter were at large, be of
opinion that special leave to appeal should
be granted."
Both Collins M.R. and Cozens-Hardy L.J. referred to the changing currents of
decision in applications seeking dispensation from the
strict consequences of
the Rules. Farwell L.J., on the other hand, agreed in the conclusion of the
Court without sharing the regrets
of the other Judges. Promptly after this
decision, in Re a Debtor (1910) 55 SJ 48, the Court of Appeal rejected an
application for
an extension of time in a case where a Notice of Appeal had
been served within time, but entry of the appeal, and deposit of a necessary
security, had not been effected within time owing to the appellant's solicitor
having been unaware of the requirements of a recent
decision. The note in the
Solicitors Journal is curt:
"The Court (Cozens-Hardy M.R. and Fletcher
Moulton and Farwell LJJ.) dismissed the
application, holding that a mistake made as
to the law by the legal advisers of the
appellants did not constitute such special
circumstances as to entitle them to an
extension of time."
9. Those decisions are consistent with the attitude taken in the earlier
Victorian Full Court decision Fitzgerald v. The Trustees
Executors and Agency
Company Limited
[1892] VicLawRp 102
(1892) 18 VLR 521
where the Court accepted, in a judgment
delivered by Higinbotham C.J., that a misapprehension appeared to have existed
in the legal
profession as to which of two rules, nominating different appeal
times, was applicable to a particular type of proceeding, but held
extension of time would not be granted without "special reasons or grounds for
complying with the application"; in the circumstances,
the Court plainly did
not regard the consequences of a misapprehension as to the applicable law as
constituting such grounds.
10. There has, however, been a considerable shift of judicial opinion, since
the turn of the century, in favour of the approach preferred
by Collins M.R.
and Cozens-Hardy L.J. in Re Coles and Ravenshear. In Stanton v. Laws (1934)
WN(Eng.) 130 a Divisional Court distinguished
Re Coles and Ravenshear on the
ground that the applicant's error (he instructed the filing of an appeal at
5PM on the last day for
appeal) was not an error as to the meaning and effect
of the Rule but as to the practice in the office of the Court] Humphreys J.
(with whom Macnaghten J. agreed) is noted as saying "that ordinarily
applications to extend the time of appealing were regarded as
matters for the
unfettered discretion of the Court on the ground that in each case the
decision of the Court must be based mainly
on the circumstances peculiar to
that particular case." That was, of course, only a few years before the
decision in Evans v. Bartlam
(1937) AC 473
, in which the House of Lords
emphasised the width of the jurisdiction to excuse default in the analogous
case of a defendant seeking
to have a default judgment set aside and to be let
in to defend. In another analogous area of the law, the area of applications
for extension of a time fixed by statute for the bringing of a particular
proceeding, the modern view is that "a failure by a solicitor
to take the
proper steps could itself be regarded as establishing sufficient cause for an
extension of time": Martin v. The Nominal
(1954) 74 WN(NSW) 121
125, per Walsh J. (See also Hall v. Nominal Defendant
[1966] HCA 36
(1966) 117 CLR 423
433; Wedesweiller v. Cole
[1983] FCA 94
(1983) 47 ALR 528
at 532; Hunter Valley Developments
Pty Ltd v. Minister for Home Affairs and Environment
[1984] FCA 176
(1984) 3 FCR 344.)
11. In Gatti v. Shoosmith
(1939) 1 Ch 841
, the Court of Appeal again
considered the effect of a solicitor's mistake upon an application for a grant
of leave to appeal after
the time for appeal had expired. The Court
emphasised that Re Coles and Ravenshear was decided under a rule which dealt
grant of special leave. Under a rule which did not require a grant
of special leave, Greene M.R. at 844 referred to "the alteration
in the rule
as restoring to (the Court) that freedom of discretion, the loss of which had
been so much regretted." At 845 he cited
an unreported decision of the Court
of Appeal, given in 1923, in which Scrutton and Atkin LJJ. had said "that the
'vested interest'
argument no longer carried the same weight as formerly and
that the time for appealing was now constantly extended in cases where
years ago it would not have been." Greene M.R. added:
"On consideration of the whole matter, in my
opinion under the rule as it now stands, the
fact that the omission to appeal in due time
was due to a mistake on the part of a legal
adviser, may be a sufficient cause to justify
the Court in exercising its discretion. I
say 'may be,' because it is not to be thought
that it will necessarily be exercised in
every set of facts. Under the law as it was
conceived to be before the amendment, such a
mistake was considered to be in no
circumstances a sufficient ground. What I
venture to think the proper rule which this
Court must follow is: that there is nothing
in the nature of such a mistake to exclude it
from being a proper ground for allowing the
appeal to be effective though out of time;
and whether the matter shall be so treated
must depend upon the facts of each individual
case. There may be facts in a case which
would make it unjust to allow the appellant
to succeed upon that argument.
The discretion of the Court being, as I
conceive it, a perfectly free one, the only
question is whether, upon the facts of this
particular case, that discretion should be
exercised."
Since that decision, the course of authority in England seems to have been
uniform. In Salter Rex & Co. v. Ghosh
(1971) 2 QB 597
at 601 Lord Denning
"So Dr. Ghosh is out of time. His counsel
admitted that it was his, counsel's, mistake,
and asked us to extend the time. The
difference between two weeks and four weeks
is not much. If Dr. Ghosh had any merits
which were worthy of consideration, we would
certainly extend the time. We never like a
litigant to suffer by the mistake of his
In Regina v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Mehta
the Court of Appeal (Lord Denning M.R., Browne and Geoffrey Lane
LJJ.) considered the effect of Rule 11(4) of the Immigration Appeals
(Procedure) Rules 1972 which made provision for an appeal out of time in the
following terms:
"... the appellate authority shall not be
required to dismiss the appeal but may allow
it to proceed if the authority is of the
opinion that, by reason of special
circumstances, it is just and right so to
Lord Denning, stating the reasons of the Court, said at 1091:
"One of the special circumstances here was the
fact that the omission was the mistake of
Miss Mehta's solicitors. It was said that
the mistake of her solicitors could not
amount to 'special circumstances' within rule
11. I do not agree. In applying rule 11, I
should have thought that the appellate
authority might well adopt the practice which
we adopt in this Court of Appeal here. We
are often asked to extend the time of giving
notice of appeal. We never let a party
suffer because his solicitors make a mistake
and are a day or two late in giving notice of
appeal. We always treat it as a ground for
extending the time: see Gatti v. Shoosmith
(1939) Ch 841.
One other point. The tribunal said that they
must come to a consideration on the
preliminary point without regard to the
substance or merits of the appellant's
appeal. That also is too strict a view.
Here again I think the appellate authority
might well follow the practice in this court.
We often like to know the outline of the
case. If it appears to be a case which
is strong on the merits and which ought to be
heard, in fairness to the parties, we may
think it is proper that the case should be
allowed to proceed, and we extend the time
acccordingly. If it appears to be a flimsy
case and weak on the merits, we may not
extend the time. We never go into much
detail on the merits, but we do like to know
something about the case before deciding
whether or not to extend the time.
In short, the rule gives the tribunal a
discretion to do what is just and right. It
should be liberally interpreted by them so as
not to let an appellant suffer unfairly.
This seems to me to be a case where the
tribunal have erred in point of law and it is
a case for certiorari to issue. ...
I think the tribunal did take too strict and
indeed an erroneous view of the wording of
12. Ex parte Mehta is of particular interest for present purposes because of
the presence in the rule there considered of the words
"by reason of special
circumstances", which correspond to the words in Rule 15(2) "for special
reasons", and indeed might be thought,
if anything, to pose a somewhat more
stringent requirement.
13. In Palata Investments Ltd v. Burt & Sinfield Ltd
(1985) 2 All ER 517
Court of Appeal was concerned with yet another variation upon the theme. A
practice direction had been issued in respect of
appeals to the Court of
Appeal (see
(1982) 3 All E.R. 376
at 379) which included the following:
"In view of the importance of parties knowing
whether a judgment is final or is still
subject to possible appeal, it will only be
in exceptional cases that such leave will be
An appeal had been lodged three days out of time by reason of the overlooking
by counsel and solicitor of an alteration of the time
permitted for appeal.
Ackner L.J., delivering the judgment of the Court, said at 521:
"We wish to emphasise that the discretion
which fell to be exercised is unfettered, and
should be exercised flexibly with regard to
the facts of the particular case. No doubt
in some cases it may be material to have
regard to the merits of the appeal...
The whole of this matter, it seems to me,
depends on whether or not we can properly
look on the delay in this case as being an
exceptional one. In my judgment I would so
classify it. I have already referred to the
shortness of the period involved: three
days. I have already referred to the fact
that the plaintiffs' solicitors knew that
there was in all likelihood to be an appeal,
so that there was no question of their
proceeding on the false assumption that they
had achieved finality for their client. I
have referred to the fact that the solicitors
asked specifically of counsel for a statement
of the length of time for serving the notice
and that he gave them a clear statement that
it was six weeks. There is the additional
point that, not content with that, they
checked and it was only the mischance that
the new edition of The Supreme Court Practice
arrived a few weeks later that stopped them
appreciating that counsel was in error.
There is no question of any prejudice arising
to the plaintiffs in the circumstances which
I have described, and in that situation there
was in my judgment absolutely no need to go
into the complex and time consuming question
whether or not there was a good arguable case
on the appeal."
14. In the context of a statutory power, based upon the existence of "special
circumstances", to grant administration otherwise
than to the applicant
executor, Ewbank J. in In Re Clore Deceased
(1982) Fam. 113
at 117 said:
"Speaking for myself, since this is a section
giving discretion to the court, I would not
impose any limitation on the words 'special
circumstances.' I would say that the words
'special circumstances' are not necessarily
limited to circumstances in connection with
the estate itself or its administration, but
could extend to any other circumstances which
the court thinks are relevant, which lead the
court to think that it is necessary, or
expedient, to pass over the executors."
On appeal, the Court of Appeal ((1982) 1 Ch. 456 at 476), in a joint judgment,
contented itself with saying:
"We agree with the judge that there were
special circumstances. There are no grounds
for interfering with his decision."
15. Each of the last three cases gives a very different effect to a provision
containing the word "special" or the word "exceptional"
from that given by
Chamberlain J. in Reid v. Cloosterman (No.
1) (1971) SASR 295
(a case relied
on by the respondents) to a provision for extension of time for appeal for
"some special reason not arising from the
fault of the proposed appellant".
But in that case there was no discussion of relevant authorities, and the
decision is distinguishable
having regard to the very particular context in
which the words "some special reason" were there required to be construed.
16. The modern practice in the Supreme Court of Victoria, in relation to
applications for extension of time in which to appeal, is
set out in the
judgment of McInerney J. in Hughes v. National Trustees Executors & Agency Co.
of Australasia Ltd.
[1978] VicRp 27
(1978) VR 257.
At 262-3 McInerney J. said:
"The object of the rule is to give the Court a
discretion to extend the time with the view
to the avoidance of an injustice...
One object of fixing times under the rules is
to achieve a time table for the conduct of
litigation in order to achieve finality of
judicial determinations. A successful
litigant has an interest in knowing that a
claim against him has been determined and
that he is no longer 'at risk' ...
Higinbotham, J., referred to the interest of
litigants in achieving finality of
determination when he said, in Youngman v.
Melbourne Storage Co. Ltd.
(1885) 7 A.L.T. 53
'When the time has been allowed to
elapse that gives the defendant a
vested interest in the judgment,
and this vested interest ought not
to be disturbed unless there is
some good reason for disturbing
The phrase 'good reason' imports, I think, a
consideration of whether justice as between
the parties is best served by granting or
refusing the extension sought...."
17. While this passage, as a whole, evinces an approach similar to that of
the English Court of Appeal, it places some emphasis
on the "vested interest"
argument, supported by an authority from the last century. Gatti v. Shoosmith
shows that that argument
was, as early as 1923, relegated by Scrutton and
Atkin LJJ. to a lesser place, among the relevant considerations, than had
been accorded to it.
18. In Hughes' Case at p.263, McInerney J. distinguished the situation which
arises under a rule referring to "special leave", which
he thought would
require "something special in the circumstances e.g. that the case involves an
important question of law...". Of
course, the phrase "special circumstances"
may have a particularly stringent connotation when used with reference to an
application
for special leave, but even in an application for special leave a
broader view has been taken by the Court of Appeal of New Zealand
(see below).
19. In the Supreme Court of New South Wales, the joint judgment of Reynolds,
Hutley and Bowen JJA. in Outboard Marine Australia Pty
Ltd v. Byrnes
at 30 includes the following:
"We appreciate that the Rules of Court,
particularly those relating to time, should
never be allowed to be an instrument of
tyranny. They do, however, have purposes,
one of which is that the parties may know
where they stand and regulate their affairs
accordingly. It is also appreciated that
where genuine issues ought to be litigated,
if such can be done with fairness to all
concerned, it is appropriate to take a benign
view of applications to extend time."
The general approach of that Court to cases where a solicitor's default is put
forward as the explanation for serious delays is also
expounded in Stollznow
(1980) 2 NSWLR 749
, in which particular reliance is placed upon the
view of Walsh J., expressed in Martin's Case (supra) and also in Witten v.
Australia Ltd. (1968) 88 WN(Pt 1)(NSW) 405 at 412, that the Court's
discretion should not be trammelled by set rules, but should
be exercised
wherever sufficient cause is shown upon an examination of the circumstances of
the particular case. This approach was
confirmed in Morris v. Public
Transport Commission (unreported, Moffitt P, Glass and Mahoney JJA, 28 May
1984), where time was extended,
in unusual circumstances, six years after a
Notice of Appeal had been inadvertently filed one day outside the prescribed
Moffitt P. (with whom Glass JA. agreed) held the Notice of Appeal was
irregular, but not a nullity. He said that if the irregularity
perceived shortly after it had occurred:
"(I)t is inconceivable that the error would
not have been adjusted by an order extending
time. ... The modern practice is directed
to avoiding technicality and instead seeks to
look to the actual prejudice arising from
departures from procedural rules. ... In
the end it is a question of what is just
between the parties. The negligent delay by
a plaintiff's solicitor may operate against a
plaintiff, but the blamelessness of a
plaintiff personally for delay has to be
weighed with such negligence and other
relevant facts."
20. In New Zealand, even a rule that "except... by special leave of the Court
of Appeal, no appeal... shall be brought after the
expiration of three months"
has not prevented Gatti v. Shoosmith being accepted as the governing
authority: Avery v. No. 2 Public
Service Appeal Board
(1973) 2 NZLR 86
In Avery's Case at 92, Richmond J., delivering the leading judgment of the
Court of Appeal constituted by Turner P., McCarthy
J. and himself, said:
"Everything is left to the discretion of the
Court on the wide basis that leave may be
granted in such cases as the justice of the
case may require. In order to determine the
justice of any particular case the Court
should I think have regard to the whole
history of the matter, including the conduct
of the parties, the nature of the litigation
and the need of the applicant on the one hand
for leave to be granted together with the
effect which the granting of leave would have
on other persons involved."
21. It is useful to consider the meaning and application of Rule 15(2)
against a background of an understanding of how other courts
have applied
corresponding rules. But in the end, this Court must construe and apply the
terms of its own rule. The question is
what that rule means, and how it is to
be applied to the circumstances of the case.
22. It is clear that the rule reflects the same general structure exemplified
by the various decisions we have discussed - the provision
of a time for
lodgment of an appeal, but the provision also of a discretion to permit an
appeal out of time where it is shown that
the circumstances warrant the
exercise of that discretion. As Lord Guest, speaking for the Privy Council,
put it in Ratnam v. Cumarasamy
(1964) 3 All ER 933
"The rules of court must, prima facie, be
obeyed, and, in order to justify a court in
extending the time during which some step in
procedure requires to be taken, there must be
some material on which the court can exercise
its discretion. If the law were otherwise, a
party in breach would have an unqualified
right to an extension of time which would
defeat the purpose of the rules which is to
provide a time table for the conduct of
litigation."
What is needed to justify an extension of time is indicated in Rule 15(2) by
the words "for special reasons". It is that there be
shown a special reason
why the appeal should be permitted to proceed, though filed after the expiry
of twenty-one days. In that
context, the expression "special reasons" is
intended to distinguish the case from the usual course according to which the
twenty-one days. But it may be so distinguished (not necessarily
will, for the rule gives a discretion) wherever the Court sees
a ground which
does justify departure from the general rule in the particular case. Such a
ground is a special reason because it
takes the case out of the ordinary. We
do not think the use of the expression "for special reasons" implies something
narrower than
23. The proposition cannot be accepted that rule 15(2) was intended to
constrict the broad measure of justice for the individual
case which the Court
could award upon the principle of Gatti v. Shoosmith. No return was
contemplated to the old law by which the
discretion of the Court to waive the
rules was itself fettered by further rules. We agree with the dictum of
Davies J. cited earlier
in these reasons, and we think the construction of the
rule we have adopted is in line with the decisions in Ex parte Mehta, the
Palata Investments Case and Avery's Case.
24. It should not be overlooked that Rule 15(2) enables leave to be given "at
any time"; the "special reasons" relevant to such a
power cannot but describe
an elastic test, suitable for application across a range of situations, from
an oversight of a day to a
neglect persisted in during a prolonged period. It
would require something very persuasive indeed to justify a grant of leave
for example, a year; equally, it may be said, something much less
significant might justify leave where a party is a few days late.
reasons" must be understood in a sense capable of accommodating both types of
situation. It is an expression describing
a flexible discretionary power, but
one requiring a case to be made upon grounds sufficient to justify a
departure, in the particular
circumstances, from the ordinary rule prescribing
a period within which an appeal must be filed and served.
25. As Walsh J. emphasised, a discretion to relax the requirement of general
rules should not itself become entangled in a web of
rules spun out of the
Court's discretionary decisions. The tendency in some of the decisions we
have discussed to regard a particular
factor considered previously, in the
light of other circumstances, as requiring the same effect to be given to it
in the different
situation before a court on a later occasion is a temptation
which a court should resist. Decisions are not authorities upon the
upon principles; the facts must be regarded as unique to the particular case.
26. In the circumstances of the present case, which have been outlined at the
commencement of these reasons, we formed the view that
there were plainly
special reasons which justified the making of the order sought. In our
discretion, we made it subject to the
condition, which the applicant's
solicitor offered to accept, that the respondents' costs of the application be
borne by the applicant's
solicitor personally.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter