Bolloway Community Services Aboriginal Corporation v Eurobodalla Shire Council [2000] HREOCA 37 (13 September 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION ACT 1975
BOLLOWAY COMMUNITY SERVICES ABORIGINAL CORPORATION
First Complainant
LESLIE SIMON
Second Complainant
WARREN CARROLL
Third Complainant
NEWTON CARRIAGE
Fourth Complainant
EUROBODALLA SHIRE COUNCIL
First Respondent
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR DECISION OF COMMISSIONER GRAEME INNES
ON A PRELIMINARY ISSUE
Date of Decision: 13 September 2000
Legal representatives: No submissions from the
first and third complainants.
Anthony Britt of Counsel for the second and fourth complainants.
Fiona Inverarity instructed by Dunhill Madden Butler for the first
respondent.
Wilf Reid for himself.
1. INTRODUCTION
On 14 September 1999 I published my reasons for decision on a number of
preliminary issues in relation to this matter. My findings
were as follows:
the complaint is constituted by a letter dated 12 October 1995 (set out in full
below) and the two incidents which are described
in that letter involving Mr
the complainants are the Bolloway Community Services Aboriginal Corporation and
Messrs Simon, Carroll and Carriage.
the respondents are the Eurobodalla Shire Council (“the Council”)
and Mr Reid.
However I also expressed the view that I was prepared
to hear further submissions from the parties as to whether or not the Council
was in fact a proper respondent in this matter. This issue arose out of the
following findings of fact made by me.
The letter of 12 October 1995 is as follows:
“12 October 1995
Bolloway Community Services Aboriginal Corporation
Mr Chris Vardon
Eurobodalla Shire Council
Re: Role of Councillors
We draw your attention to some circumstances that have occurred during the
recent application for a change of use for the Kelly's
Rd Bingi property (know
to us as the cultural revival centre). These incident occurred whilst BCSAC had
an application before council.
I have defined the following incidents for your
information.
two (2) members of the BCSAC (Mr Warren Carroll, Mr Newton Carriage) were
walking north along Orient St Bateman's Bay and were
approached in a vehicle (a
beige Gemini) by Councillor Wilf Reid. Councillor Reid threw an aerial
photograph of his property Burra
Creek and said words to the effect of "you can
have that for 40000 a year for ten (10) years, and you can go up there and do
corroborees
and whatever else you do. People won't see you and they won't worry
prior to this, Councillor Reid approached Mr Les Simon (chairperson of BCSAC) at
Moruya whilst Mr Simon was in the company of
Councillor Gough, Mr Warren
Carroll, Mr Graham White and Mr David Plunkett (Ian Russell Toyota). Messrs
Gough, Carroll and Plunkett
moved away from the conversation between Mr Simon
and Cr Reid. Mr Simon asked Mr Reid "what is all the fuss about?" Cr Reid
words to the effect of "they don't want youse (sic) out there chose
another location. Youse will stop all the fuss if you go somewhere
else. Youse
can go up the river and do what youse like, youse will be out of everybody's
The two (2) incidents above are somewhat demeaning to the Koori
people in this community and no doubt would be offensive to any member
today's society if people were confronted with this abhorrent conduct. Further
these underhanded actions infer that Cr Reid was
using Bolloway's predicament to
further his own interests and this indicates a level of misrepresentation by an
elected public official.
We are calling upon you as the mayor to address these complaints accordingly
as we believe that this councillor has acted unprofessionally,
discourteously
and further more has failed to disclose his interest to the shire council prior
to allegedly representing the ratepayers
of this shire as a DA lodged by BCSAC
and addressed by council on the 26th September 1995.
In concluding we wish to inform you that this matter is being further
investigated by Bolloway's legal representative for possible
civil action.
Yours sincerely,
Mr Warren John Carroll
(signature)
Mr Leslie Keith Simon
(signature)
Mr Newton Carriage
(signature)
cc: The NSW Ombudsman
Mr Ernest Paige - Minister for Local
Mr Colin Markham - Parliamentary Adviser on Aboriginal Affairs
Michael Dodson - Human Rights Commissioner and ATSIC Commission for Social
Mr Jim Snow - Federal Member for Eden-Monaro
Mr Robert Tickner -
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs
Illawarra Mercury Sydney Morning Herald and
the Southern Star Newspapers”
The letter describes two alleged incidents involving conversations with Mr
Reid and the second, third and fourth complainants. In
my reasons dated 14
September 1999 I found that Mr Reid, through being named and having his actions
described, is clearly a respondent.
I found that the Mayor of the Council and
other members of the Council were not alleged to have participated in these
conversations.
Whilst the letter was addressed to the Mayor in his role of head
of the Council, I found that the Mayor and other members of the
Council could
not be respondents as individuals because they are not named or referred to and
that there was no interpretation of
the letter from which I could deduce that
any of their behaviour is alleged to be discriminatory. I found that the only
other possible
respondent is the Council if it could be established by the
complainant that Mr Reid was acting as an agent or employee of the Council
pursuant to
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
Section 18A
provides as follows:
18A Vicarious Liability
(1) Subject to subsection (2), if:
(a) an employee or agent of a person does an act in connection with his or
her duties as an employee or agent; and
(b) the act would be unlawful under
this Part if it were done by that person;
this Act applies in relation to that person as if that person had also done
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to an act done by an employee or agent of
a person if it is established that the person took all
reasonable steps to
prevent the employee or agent from doing the act.
I also indicated in my decision dated 14 September 1999 that I found some
cogency in the argument by the Council that there is no
agency relation between
Mr Reid and the Council on the basis of the case of
Scherwin v City of Sale
(1994) EOC 92-601.
I also stated that it seemed difficult for the
complainants to demonstrate that Mr Reid, as a councillor, could be an employee
the Council in the normal sense. However, I indicated to the parties that as
there was no direct evidence before me about these issues
I would be prepared to
receive further written submissions on the question of the Council as a
respondent. I also indicated that
of the RDA also requires that the act
be done in connection with a person’s duties as an employee or agent, the
complainants
would also need to demonstrate that this was the case with regard
to Mr Reid.
On 11 October 1999 I conducted a telephone directions conference with the
parties. I made directions for the parties to file and serve
any submissions and
affidavit evidence on which they intended to rely in relation to the question of
the Council’s further
involvement in this matter.
On 11 November 1999 the Council through its legal representatives filed a
written submission and an affidavit sworn by James Francis
Levy, the General
Manager of Council. On 25 November 1999 Mr Reid provided written submissions. On
28 January 2000 Mr Simon and Mr
Carriage, through their legal representative,
filed written submissions. There were no submissions received from the first
complainant
nor the third complainant. However, I am satisfied that there is
sufficient material before me to make a decision about this issue.
2. SUBMISSIONS MADE BY THE PARTIES
2.1 Submissions by the Council
The following is a summary of the submissions provided by the first
respondent on 11 November 1999 as well as a summary of the affidavit
James Francis Levy.
2.1.1 Written submissions
The first respondent submitted as follows:
all material times the only relationship which Councillor Reid held in
connection with the Council was as a councillor.
councillor is not an employee of a Council. A councillor is an elected
representative whose tenure is determined by council elections.
Councillors
acquire no employment rights. Councillors receive an annual fee in accordance
Local Government Act 1993
(NSW) (“LGA”)
which is neither wages nor for the provision of services. They are distinguished
from employees under
of the LGA.
Councillors
are not agents of the Council by reason of their office in relation to acts of
discrimination committed by them:
Schwerin v City of Sale and Anor
EOC 92-601.
council is a statutory body. It can perform only those functions which it is
empowered to perform pursuant to the LGA and in the
manner prescribed by the
LGA. A council may only delegate those functions the delegation of which is
authorised by the LGA.
Accordingly
the only manner in which councillors can be provided with delegated authority to
act as agents of a council in any particular
way is for certain specified
purposes when acting in committee
(sections 355
Section 377(1)
of the LGA prohibits the delegation of functions with development
applications.
follows that by reason of the provisions of the LGA Councillor Reid could not
have at any relevant time acted as agent of the Council.
The only evidence
available was that he was not delegated to be an agent of the Council.
opinion of the Council may only be expressed by resolution of the Council itself
and not the comment of any particular councillor:
Delta Properties Pty Ltd v
Brisbane City Council
[1955] HCA 51
(1955) 95 CLR 11.
Reid was neither an employee nor an agent of the Council and was not and could
not have been authorised by the Council
in a manner which could give rise to
liability on behalf of the Council pursuant to s.18A of the RDA or
2.1.2 Affidavit of James Francis Levy
sworn affidavit, Mr Levy states that he was appointed to the position of General
Manager of the Council on 1 January 1997.
Prior to that time he held the
position of Assistant General Manager at the Council for ten years. Prior to
that appointment he held
the position of Assistant Deputy Town Clerk at Albury
City Council and states that he has worked in local government continuously
since 1965 and has a thorough knowledge of the functioning of a Council and the
relevant provisions of the LGA.
states that Councillor Reid was elected as a councillor on 14 September 1991 and
that he has held a position of councillor
continuously to the present date. Mr
Levy confirmed that Councillor Reid’s only function in relation to the
Council has been
as a councillor and at no stage has he held any position as an
employee nor has he ever provided any services or other functions
refers to the legislation which he states regulates and defines the role and
functions of a councillor under the LGA. He states
that councillors are the
elected representatives who comprise the governing body of the Council
LGA). He refers to
of the LGA which refers to the role of members of
the governing body as follows:
“232 What is the role of a
councillor?
(1) The role of a councillor is, as a member of the governing body of the
to direct and
control the affairs of the council in accordance with this Act
to participate
in the optimum allocation of the council's resources for the benefit of the
to play a key
role in the creation and review of the council's policies and objectives and
criteria relating to the exercise of the
council's regulatory functions
to review the
performance of the council and its delivery of services, and the management
plans and revenue policies of the council.”
role of a councillor as an elected person is defined in
“(2) The role of a councillor is, as an elected
to represent the
interests of the residents and ratepayers
leadership and guidance to the community
to facilitate
communication between the community and the council.”
states that a councillor is not an employee of the Council. Councillors receive
an annual fee which is not wages nor associated
with performance of services
of the LGA). They are distinguished from employees in relation to the
exercise of Council functions
of the LGA). They are elected
representatives whose tenure is determined by Council elections. They acquire no
rights to continuity
of service or any other statutory entitlement which would
be available to an employee such as protection from unfair dismissal, long
service leave or annual leave.
states that as a statutory body a council may only delegate the performance of
its statutory functions to others (such as
employees and councillors) where it
is so permitted by the LGA. A council’s functions may only be delegated
pursuant to
sections 355
of the LGA.
states that a council may not delegate the review of a determination of an
application for approval, the power to authorise the
use of force to enter
premises, some key functions, for example the making of a rate or charge or the
voting of expenditure in some
administrative functions, for example
classification, purchase or sale of public land or adoption of the management
(section 377(1)
of the LGA).
states that the limitation on a council to act only in accordance with the LGA
expressly prevents a councillor from holding
any form of agency capacity in
relation to a council other than as part of a committee properly delegated.
states that “for the avoidance of doubt, I confirm that at no stage has
the Council attempted or resolved to grant Councillor
Reid any authority to act
on its behalf or on behalf of any committee in relation to any matters connected
with this complaint. Rather
to the contrary on 28 September 1999 the Council at
its ordinary meeting passed a resolution in the following terms:
“That this council advise its legal representatives to inform
the Commissioner that at no time was Councillor Reid empowered
to speak or act
on behalf of this Council in relation to the Bolloway incident”.
also makes reference in his affidavit to the Council’s statutory function
in relation to development applications and
in particular the development
application made by the first complainant which was rejected by the Council on
26 September 1995. In
relation to this issue it should be noted that in my
written reasons for decision dated 14 September 1999 I held, for reasons set
in detail in that decision, that the letter dated 12 October 1995 makes no
complaint about the Council’s decision on 26
September 1995 to refuse the
development application. Accordingly any matters surrounding the consideration
of the development application
by the Council are not part of the complaint
referred to me by the Race Discrimination
Commissioner.
2.2 Submissions by Mr Reid
Mr Reid provided his submissions to the Commission on 25 November 1999.
Whilst these are detailed written submissions, they do not,
in my view, deal
with the issue currently before me, that is, whether or not the Council should
be a respondent to this matter. Rather
the submissions filed by Mr Reid relate
to the factual circumstances surrounding the complaint made in the letter dated
1995 and are accordingly of limited assistance to me in deciding this
preliminary issue.
2.3 Submissions by Mr Simon and Mr Carriage
Written submissions were filed on behalf of Mr Simon and Mr Carriage on 28
January 2000. The submissions state as follows:
conceded that Mr Reid is not an employee of the Council and that the Council
will only be a proper respondent if Mr Reid is
an “agent” of the
term agent is not defined in the RDA and that since the RDA is remedial in
nature it should be construed beneficially (
Bull v Attorney General for
[1913] HCA 60
(1913) 17 CLR 370).
narrow interpretation should not be given to the term “agent” but
the term should cover all those persons who act on
behalf of another and that
such a broad interpretation is consistent with
of the RDA.
section 232
of the LGA, which sets out the role of a councillor, is
that a councillor is both a member of the governing body but in addition
charged to provide leadership and guidance to the community on behalf of a
council and to act on behalf of both the community
and a council in the role of
a “communication facilitator” as envisaged by
section 232(2).
councillor, when acting in accordance with
subsection 232(2)
, is an agent of a
council since the councillor is acting for and on
behalf of the council and such
a delegation of authority to a
councillor is specifically authorised by this
subsection. Further,
the functions of a council, subject to chapter twelve of
may be exercised by a member of the council
(section 355(a)
LGA). It is submitted that the actions of Councillor Reid were actions taken by
him for and on behalf of the Council in accordance
decision in
Schwerin v City of Sale and Anor
is distinguishable from the
facts in this case since in that matter it was alleged that councillors were
agents of a council simply
on the basis of their “office” and that
in accordance with
section 5(1)
Local Government Act
(Vic) they were representatives of residents and rate payers. It is
submitted that this is not the proposition which is advanced by
the complainants
in this case. Councillors in NSW have additional roles as envisaged under
section 232(2)
of the LGA and there is no similar section in the Victorian Act.
complainants were entitled to make certain assumptions on the basis of their
discussions with Councillor Reid that at the time
he had the implied, usual or
ostensible authority of the Council to treat with the complainants (
Riley and Anor
(1995) EOC 92-748).
Reid was an agent and this gives rise to liability on behalf of the Council
pursuant to section 18A of the RDA.
3. FINDINGS
I am grateful to the parties for their clear and concise submissions. My
findings on this preliminary issue are as follows.
3.1 Is a councillor an “employee” of a council under the
I accept the submissions of the Council that a councillor is not an employee
of a council under the
Local Government Act 1993
(NSW). This was, in my
view, properly conceded by Counsel for Mr Simon and Mr Carriage. A councillor is
an elected representative
whose tenure is determined by council elections.
Councillors acquire no employment rights. Councillors receive an annual fee in
of the LGA which is neither wages nor for the provision of
services. They are distinguished from employees under
of the LGA.
For these reasons I conclude that Mr Reid was not an employee of the Council
at the time of the alleged incidents described in the
letter dated 12 October
3.2 Is a Councillor an “agent” of a council under the
I am also of the view that Mr Reid was not acting as an agent of the Council
at the time of the alleged incidents described in the
letter dated 12 October
1995. I accept the submissions of the Council that it is a statutory body and
can perform only those functions
which it is empowered to perform pursuant to
the LGA and in a manner prescribed by the LGA. In addition, the Council may only
those functions the delegation of which is authorised by the LGA, for
example, pursuant to
section 355
(how a council exercises its functions) and
sections 377
(the delegation functions) of the LGA.
The sworn evidence of Mr Levy is that at no time did the Council attempt or
resolve to grant to Mr Reid any authority to act on its
behalf or on behalf of
any committee in relation to any matters connected with this complaint. There
was no evidence led by the complainants
to contradict the evidence of Mr
I have also had regard to the decision of Mandie J. in
City of Sale
which both parties have referred me to. Mandie J. states (at
page 77,222) as follows:
“It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the relevant
councillors were agents of the Council simply by virtue of their
office and not
by reason of any special facts. I can find no reasonable basis for this
submission. Reliance was placed upon
Local Government Act 1989
which says that a council consists of its councillors who are the
representatives of residents or ratepayers but this section does
not appear to
me to support the proposition advanced.”
Council for the second and fourth complainants submitted that
is distinguishable from the present case because the Victorian
Government Act
referred to in that case does not contain the additional roles
that councillors have in NSW under
(2) of the LGA. Whilst I accept that
councillors in NSW may have certain stated roles that their counter parts in
Victoria do not
have, they do not, in my view, create the relationship of agency
between the Council in this case and Councillor Reid as contended
by the second
and fourth complainants.
find that that the Eurobodalla Shire Council is not a respondent to this
complaint. The only respondent to the complaint is Mr Wilf
I direct that the matter be set down for a telephone directions conference at
the convenience of the parties within 14 days from the
date of publication of
this decision in order to set the matter down for hearing of the substantive
Dated in Sydney this 13th day of September 2000
______________________________
Graeme Innes
Inquiry Commissioner
RTF format (74.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format