PFJH and Secretary, Department of Social Services (Social security second review) [2025] ARTA 2368 (10 November 2025)
PFJH and Secretary, Department of Social Services (Social security second
review) [2025] ARTA 2368 (10 November 2025)
Respondent:
Secretary, Department of Social Services
Tribunal Number:
Senior Member T Hamilton-Noy (second review)
The Tribunal sets aside the decision under review and
substitutes its decision that:
(i) There is a debt to the Commonwealth for overpayment of newstart allowance in
the period 13 August 2012 to 30 May 2014 and the
debt is to be recalculated in
accordance with the comments of the Tribunal in paragraphs 32 and 33 of this
Statement of Reasons;
(ii) Interest charges are to be imposed for the periods 21 February 2020 to 1
December 2020 and 14 May 2021 to 28 March 2025 and
the quantum of the interest
charges are to be recalculated by the Respondent for these periods and are debts
due to the Commonwealth;
(iii) The debts are recoverable by the Commonwealth.
Statement made on 10 November 2025 at 11:57am
Names used in all published decisions are pseudonyms. Any references
appearing in square brackets indicate that information has been
removed from
this decision and replaced with generic information so as not to identify
involved individuals as required by
subsections 201(1A)
(1B) of the
Security (Administration) Act 1999
Newstart allowance debt – automatic cancellation due to noncompliance
with notice – interest charges – no sole administrative
– debt cannot be waived or written off
Legislation
Social Security Act 1991
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Re Anderson and Secretary, Department of Families and Community Services
[2002] AATA 495
(2002) 69 ALD 494
Re Callaghan and Secretary, Department of Social Security
[1996] AATA 413
Re Ward and Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services
[2000] AATA 212
Sekhon v Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services
(2003) 132 FCR 126
Wall and Secretary, Department of Education, Employment and Workplace
[2010] AATA 740
Statement of
decision relates to the raising and recovery of a social security debt from the
Applicant was granted newstart allowance from 13 August 2012. Between 13 August
2012 and 30 May 2014, he was paid at the single
rate of payment.
the lodgement of a separate claim by the Applicant’s wife, on 7 May 2019 a
delegate of the Respondent decided to raise
and recover a newstart allowance
debt totalling $26,184.78 for the period 13 August 2012 to 30 May 2014. This
was on the basis that
the Applicant was partnered in this period and the rate he
had been paid did not take into account his partner’s earnings.
amount of the debt was amended on 10 May 2019 to $25,413.91.
debt was internally reviewed and on 20 February 2020 an authorised review
officer found there was a debt in the amount of $22,878.41
that was legally
recoverable by the Commonwealth.
Applicant then sought a review by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (the AAT).
On 13 May 2021, the AAT at first review affirmed
the decision under review.
Applicant sought a second review of the decision by this Tribunal on 29 March
2025 and on 4 August 2025, the Tribunal decided
that no extension of time was
required for the Applicant to make a second review application.
Issues and evidence before the Tribunal
hearing of this matter was held on 7 October 2025. The Applicant and his wife
both gave evidence at the hearing on affirmation.
The Applicant, his wife and a
representative for the Respondent all participated in the hearing by phone.
the time of the hearing, the Tribunal and the parties had before them:
(i) Bundle of “T” documents (that had been before the parties at
first review, numbered 1 to 434);
(ii) Supplementary documents T1 to T12;
(iii) Copy of the first review decision and copy of the Applicant’s
application for second review of the decision;
(iv) Submissions provided by the Applicant on 12 August 2025, 8 September 2025,
15 September 2025 and 16 September 2025;
(v) Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions prepared by the Respondent, dated
29 September 2025.
the hearing, the Respondent provided further submissions to the Tribunal
(Supplementary Submissions dated 24 October 2025)
and the Applicant provided a
response to the additional submissions on 26 October 2025.
issues before the Tribunal in this matter are whether the Applicant owes a debt
to the Commonwealth for overpayment of newstart
allowance between 13 August 2012
and 30 May 2014; whether there are interest charges to be imposed in respect of
the debt; and whether
any debt is recoverable by the Commonwealth.
Is there a debt due to the Commonwealth?
the time the Applicant was receiving newstart allowance, between 2012 and 2014,
subsection 4(2)
Social Security Act 1991
Security Act
) stated in relevant part that, subject to subsection (3), a person
was a “member of a couple” for the purposes of the
legislation if
they were legally married to another person and were not living separately and
apart from the other person on a permanent
or indefinite basis.
Social Security Act
provided that, in forming an opinion about the
relationship between two people, the Secretary was to have regard to all the
circumstances
of the relationship including, in particular: the financial
aspects of the relationship, the nature of the household, the social
the relationship, any sexual relationship between the people and the nature of
the people’s commitment to each other.
Applicant did not dispute that he was a member of a couple for social security
purposes in the period from August 2012 to May
2014. The Applicant and his wife
both gave evidence at the hearing that they had been married on 14 February 2011
and the Tribunal
accepted from this evidence that the Applicant was married at
the time he claimed newstart allowance. The Applicant did not dispute
and his wife shared accommodation at the time he claimed newstart allowance and
that they have subsequently had a child together
and remain in a relationship.
He did not dispute that he and his wife should have been considered to be
members of a couple, for
social security purposes, in the period under review.
The Tribunal found that the Applicant was legally married to his wife and
not living separately and apart from his wife on a permanent or indefinite basis
in the period from August 2012 to May 2014.
He was a “member of a
couple” for the purposes of the legislation in the period under review.
the time the Applicant claimed newstart allowance,
section 1068
Security Act
provided the Rate Calculator for working out a person’s
fortnightly rate of payment. The Rate Calculator provided for a different
maximum basic rate depending on whether a person was partnered or was not a
member of a couple, with a higher rate payable to a person
who was not a member
of a couple. The person’s partner’s income was, further, relevant
to determining the effect of
ordinary income on the maximum payment rate under
the Rate Calculator.
Applicant’s wife was employed during the period under review and the
Respondent has acknowledged that the debt calculations
undertaken by the
authorised review officer were based on the difference between the single and
partnered rates of payment in addition
to income earned, derived or received by
the Applicant’s wife, based on her income tax returns. The Respondent has
acknowledged
this approach as impermissible and contrary to the requirement in
point 1068-G7A of the
Social Security Act
, which requires ordinary income to be
taken into account in the fortnight in which it is first earned, derived or
Tribunal accepted that the Respondent sought further information about the
Applicant’s wife’s earnings from her employer
and that this was
ultimately unsuccessful, on the basis that the employer no longer held any
records for the period from August 2012
to May 2014.
Respondent called the Applicant’s wife to give evidence at the Tribunal
hearing, who gave evidence by telephone on affirmation.
When asked about her
employment in 2012, the Applicant’s wife gave evidence that she may have
been part-time or full-time
with her employer at that time; she doesn’t
remember, as she has worked part-time and full-time for the employer and it has
varied over time. She claimed to be unable to remember what hours she tended to
work when she was full-time or to remember if there
were particular days worked
when she was part-time.
Applicant’s wife was asked about her earnings and gave evidence of having
been paid on a monthly basis. When asked what
day of the week she is paid
presently, she stated she doesn’t remember and it changes every month.
When asked what date she
is paid, she stated she doesn’t remember and it
changes every month. She then stated it is sometimes the 13
sometimes the 12
. When asked if it is generally the
of each month she is paid, she stated she
can’t say that and can’t remember the date she is paid every month.
she doesn’t remember the timing of her pay changing. As to any
contract she had when she started her employment in June 2012,
she stated she
assumes she had one but doesn’t have a copy of it.
taken to her 2012/13 income tax return, the Applicant’s wife agreed it
reflected she had earned $41,123 and that $5,609
in tax had been withheld. When
asked whether $34,514 was reflective of her take home pay, equating to $2,876
per month net income,
she stated she doesn’t remember.
taken to her 2013/14 income tax return, the Applicant’s wife stated she
doesn’t remember whether the gross earnings
of $50,765 with $8,804 in tax
being withheld, was accurate. In response to an observation that she would have
had $3,496 net income
per month, she stated she doesn’t remember and
worked different hours.
Tribunal accepts that, at the time it has proceeded to make a decision in this
matter, it does not have evidence of the Applicant’s
fortnightly gross earnings before it and, given the passage of time and the
employer no longer having such records,
it is unlikely to be able to obtain this
information through any means.
considering whether there is an overpayment in this matter that is a debt due to
the Commonwealth, the Respondent has urged the
Tribunal to find that the
Respondent’s newstart allowance should have been cancelled during the debt
period through the operation
Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999
(Cth) (the Social Security Administration Act).
This provision provides that:
(a) a person who is receiving a social
security payment is given a notice under
requiring the person to give the Department a statement or a number of
statements; and
(b) the notice relates to the payment of the social security
payment in respect of a period or a number of periods specified in
the notice;
(c) the person does not comply with the notice so far as it
relates to a particular period;
then, subject to
the social security payment is cancelled, by force of this section, on the first
day in that period.
(2) If the Secretary is satisfied that,
in the special circumstances of the case, it is appropriate to do so, the
Secretary may
determine in writing that
does not apply to the person on and from a day specified in the
determination.
(3) The day specified under
may be before or after the making of the determination.
95 references subsection 68(2) of the Social Security Administration Act, which
states that:
(2) The Secretary may give a person to whom
a notice that requires the person to do any or all of the following:
(a) inform the Department if:
(i) a specified event or change of
circumstances occurs; or
(ii) the person becomes aware that a specified event or change of
circumstances is likely to occur;
(b) give the Department one or more statements about a matter
that might affect the payment to the person of the social security
(c) give the Department one or more statements about a matter
that might affect the operation, or prospective operation, of Part
relation to the person.
Respondent provided written submissions to the Tribunal regarding a notice sent
to the Applicant on 5 October 2012.
This notice had attached a Reporting Statement that required the Applicant to
report for the period 6 October 2012 to 19 October
2012. The Reporting
Statement required the Applicant to report details of any work he had
undertaken, any self-employment income
earned and asked the Applicant: Are you
married or living in a registered or de facto relationship with someone of the
opposite or
same-sex (includes temporarily living away from a partner to improve
study/job prospects)?”. If yes: “Your partner
will need to
complete and attach a Partner Details form (Mod P)”.
Applicant submits that the Respondent reported online on 19 October 2012. The
record of reporting captured by Centrelink was
as follows:
Allowance. Information was obtained via Internet.
Document created by [number] on 19 OCT 2012.
Customer reported on the WEB for the period 06-19 October 2012
No income reported for Customer
Customer answered no to: Do you have any changes to declare to Centrelink
that you have not already told us about?
Activity tested/Participation requirements customer successfully reported via
the WEB and payment was stimulated. Customer answered
YES to the following
question: Have you undertaken the required number of job search activities as
set out in your Employment Pathway
Plan this reporting period?
Respondent submits that the Applicant did not comply with the notice, which
resulted in automatic cancellation of his payment
by operation of section 95 of
the Social Security Administration Act and that his newstart allowance was
cancelled on 6 October 2012,
being the first day of the period specified in the
Applicant did not respond specifically to the Respondent’s submissions
the Social Security
Administration Act. His position at the hearing was that he doesn’t
recall receiving notices from Centrelink
and he advised Centrelink about his
relationship. His written submissions reiterate his position that he believes
the debt before
the Tribunal is a “Robodebt” and should not stand.
regard to the documents before it, the Tribunal finds that the notice dated 5
October 2012 was a notice sent pursuant to subsection
68(2) of the Social
Security Administration Act, as it required the Applicant to give to the
Department one or more statements about
matters that might affect the
Applicant’s social security payment.
notice dated 5 October 2012 related to the payment of a social security payment
in respect of a period commencing on 6 October
2012 and ending on 19 October
2012. The Tribunal finds that the Respondent did not comply with the notice, on
the basis that he
did not advise he was married in response to a specific
question put to him in the Reporting Statement.
these circumstances, the Applicant’s newstart allowance is cancelled by
force of the section, on the first day in the period,
subject to subsection
95(2). This subsection provides that if the Secretary is satisfied that, in the
special circumstances of the
case, it is appropriate to do so, the Secretary may
determine in writing that subsection (1) does not apply to the person.
Applicant has not submitted that any such circumstances apply and did not raise
any evidence at the hearing that suggests that
there are special circumstances
would make it appropriate not to apply section 95 of the Social Security
Administration Act.
Tribunal finds that section 95 of the Social Security Administration Act applies
in respect of the letter dated 5 October 2012
and that the Applicant’s
newstart allowance was cancelled as of 6 October 2012. He did not have any
entitlement to newstart
allowance after that date and the Tribunal is satisfied
that there was an overpayment to the Applicant for the period 6 October 2012
30 May 2014 that is to be recalculated by the Respondent.
respect of the period 13 August 2012 to 5 October 2012, there is no evidence
before the Tribunal that would make it appropriate
to calculate any overpayment
based on the Applicant’s wife’s earnings in this period. The use of
an averaged amount
of the Applicant’s wife’s annual earnings is
impermissible. The Applicant was paid at the single rate of payment in
period and should have been paid at the partnered rate of payment. Any
overpayment for this period is to be recalculated by
consideration of the
difference between the single and partnered rates of payment.
quantum of the debt will need to be determined by the above calculations. The
Tribunal notes that the Applicant was warned at
hearing that his debt may
increase and elected to proceed with his application. The Tribunal finds that
any recalculated debt is
a debt due to the Commonwealth under
section 1223
Social Security Act
Imposition of interest charges
Social Security Act
provides that where a debt due to the
Commonwealth under social security law has not been wholly paid, the Secretary
must give a
notice with specified details of the debt. Any outstanding amount
is due and payable 28 days after the date of the notice.
Applicant was sent a notice dated 7 May 2019, being an “Account
Payable” notice, advising that he had an amount due
of $26,184.78, due on
5 June 2019. The letter noted that the debt was for the period 13 August 2012
to 30 May 2014, provided payment
methods and a phone number of queries, and
stated that:
We have reassessed your Newstart Allowance. You were
paid more than you were entitled to and you need to pay the money back.
Why you owe money
As you were a member of a couple on 14 FEB 2011 you were only entitled to
payment of Newstart Allowance from 13 AUG 2012 to 30 MAY
2014 at the partnered
rate. As you did not declare this prior to your partner’s paid parental
leave claim and did not lodge
your partner’s income and asset we cannot
determine the partner rate. You have, therefore, been overpaid $26,184.78. We
required to recover this amount.
Important Information
To avoid being charged interest on this debt, you need to do one of the
following by the due date:
pay the amount
due in full
continue making
payments under an existing payment arrangement, or
enter into a
payment arrangement and then make payments under that
arrangement.
The interest charge may be applied to the total amount
of your outstanding Centrelink debt. Interest will compound daily until a
payment is made under an acceptable payment arrangement.
Tribunal finds that the notice specified the date on which it was issued, the
reason the debt was incurred, the period to which
the debt related, the
outstanding amount of the debt at the date of the notice, the day on which the
amount was due and payable,
the effect of
sections 1229A
circumstances in which interest charges would be imposed), the options available
for repayment and contact details for inquiries.
The notice met the
requirements in
section 1229
Social Security Act
a notice has been issued under
section 1229
and the amount remains unpaid at the
end of the due day, and at the end of that day there is no arrangement in
section 1229A
Social Security Act
provides that the person is
liable to pay, by way of penalty, an interest charge worked out under
, for each day in the period described in
subsection 1229A(2).
asked about letters he had received about payment arrangements for a debt, the
Applicant gave evidence that he doesn’t
recall receiving the letters in
question. He stated he doesn’t believe he entered into a payment
arrangement, he didn’t
recall receiving a letter in 2019 or in 2020, and
doesn’t recall being advised he would be charged an interest rate. In
submissions provided to the Tribunal, the Applicant asserted that the
debt dates back nearly 14 years and that “continuing
to accrue interest
and enforce the debt – without lawful recalculation or reassessment
– is unreasonable, disproportionate,
and procedurally unfair”. The
Tribunal found from the evidence before it that the Applicant did not respond to
sent to him and did not enter into a payment arrangement.
submissions provided to the Tribunal after the hearing, the Respondent set out
interest charges it submits accrued between 3 January
2020 and 14 October 2025,
being periods the Respondent submitted the debt was recoverable.
Social Security Act
provides an exemption from a requirement to pay
interest charges where a person has been in receipt of a specified payment. The
Tribunal found that the Applicant was not receiving any of the specified
payments in the relevant period.
Social Security Act
provides that an exemption from interest
charges where a reasonable excuse is established. This subsection states that:
(2) The Secretary may make a determination under this
section in circumstances that include (but are not
the Secretary being satisfied that the
a reasonable excuse for:
(a) failing to enter into an arrangement under section
pay the outstanding amount of the debt; or
(b) having entered an arrangement, failing to make a payment in
accordance with that arrangement.
Tribunal accepted the submissions of the Respondent that the Applicant had
demonstrated a reasonable excuse for failing to enter
into a payment arrangement
from 15 May 2019, as he had sought an authorised review officer review on this
date, until 20 February
2020 when the authorised review officer’s decision
Applicant was sent a further notice on 21 February 2020, headed “Your
payment arrangement” and noting the amount due
and that he did not have a
current payment arrangement in place. There is no evidence before the Tribunal
that the Applicant responded
to this notice and the Tribunal finds accordingly.
Applicant applied to the AAT for a review of the decision on 2 December 2020 and
the Tribunal considered that, from that date
until the AAT decision was made on
13 May 2021, the Applicant had a reasonable excuse for failing to enter into a
payment arrangement.
Tribunal accepted the Respondent’s submissions that the Applicant had
sought second review of the first review decision
on 29 March 2025 (by way of an
extension of time application) and that he had a reasonable excuse for failing
to enter into a payment
arrangement from that date.
Applicant has not provided any reasonable explanation for failing to enter into
a payment arrangement for the period 21 February
2020 to 1 December 2020 or 14
May 2021 to 28 March 2025. While he has repeatedly expressed to the Tribunal
his concern about the
debt having been calculated by a “Robodebt”
method, he did not pursue avenues to have the decision reviewed during these
periods and did not otherwise offer any explanation to the Tribunal for failing
to respond to notices that had been sent to him about
the amount owing.
Tribunal finds that interest charges are to be imposed for periods from 21
February 2020 to 1 December 2020, and from 14 May 2021
to 28 March 2025, and
that the quantum of the interest charges are to be recalculated by the
Respondent, based on the quantum of
the debt recalculated by the Respondent
arising from this decision.
Social Security Act
provides that an interest charge under
section 1229A
for a day is a debt due to the Commonwealth by the person. Any
recalculated interest charges are also a debt due to the Commonwealth.
Can the debts be waived due to administrative error?
Social Security Act
provides that the Secretary must waive the
right to recover the proportion of a debt that is attributable solely to an
administrative
error by Centrelink if a debtor received in good faith the
payment or payments that gave rise to that proportion of the debt.
the Tribunal to be satisfied the debt is due to sole administrative error, it
must be satisfied that no other event contributed
to, or caused, the debt. In
Sekhon v Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services
(2003) 132 FCR 126
, Selway stated (at [35])
The ordinary or
usual interpretation of the phrase “attributable solely to” is that
it refers to the single or sole cause
of the relevant act or event. The word
“attributable” means “capable of being attributed”. It
an objective assessment of causation. The words “a debt
attributable solely to an administrative error” can be paraphrased
meaning that the only cause that objectively can be ascribed to the relevant
debt is an administrative error...
re Ward and Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services
, the AAT observed (at [47])
This means that
the Secretary’s duty to waive does not extend to those debts which are
attributable to errors or other factors
which are independent of the
Commonwealth’s administrative error. It makes no difference that those
other errors or factors
are minor. If those other errors or factors follow as a
result of the Commonwealth’s administrative error (i.e. they are
to the Commonwealth’s error), then it may be that the debt is
attributable solely to the Commonwealth’s administrative
Applicant submits that any debt in this matter is due to administrative error by
Centrelink. He submitted to the Tribunal at
the hearing that he advised he was
living with his girlfriend on 13 August 2012, that this is confusion about the
wording used and
that Centrelink could have suspended or cancelled his payment
but continued to pay him. The Applicant submitted that he had made
Centrelink on three separate instances his circumstances and that the debt was
raised five years later through an illegal
contrast, the Respondent submits that there is no sole administrative error and,
if the Tribunal were to find otherwise, the Applicant
did not receive any of the
payments in good faith.
considering the submissions made by each of the parties in respect of
, the Tribunal had particular regard to the following pieces of evidence.
The Applicant’s contact with Centrelink on 13 August
Respondent’s documents reflect the Applicant as having made contact with
Centrelink on 13 August 2012 and the record of
this contact, made by Centrelink,
Customer contacted CC TOOWOOMBA on 13 AUG 2012 regarding
General Enquiry for Customer Contact Details. Information was obtained via
Phone Call. Document created by T04 on 13 AUG 2012.
During conversation cus stated that he was living with his girl friend, whom
is working. Cus stated that he will not provide details
of her earnings.
asked about this record of contact at the hearing, the Applicant stated that he
did not concede this was an accurate record of
any discussion, he did not
remember the phone call and he has no reason to believe it is accurate. He
agreed he was married as of
that date, but did not agree he had provided
incorrect information to Centrelink (in describing himself as having a
girlfriend rather
than a wife) and asserted that this is “common
wording” and common language. When asked if he appreciated the
differences
between a girlfriend and a wife, he responded by stating that
different people talk in different ways and he refers to her as his
partner, his
room mate, his girl and this is “common language”. He stated that
he told Centrelink he was living with
someone but doesn’t remember the
wording he used.
The Applicant’s contact with Centrelink
on 21 August 2012
Respondent’s documents reflect that the Applicant contacted Centrelink on
21 August 2012 and that the entry also reflected
the earlier contact of 13
August. The entry reads as follows:
ANNOTATE BY CA ON 13 AUG
during conversation cus stated that he was living with his girl friend. Cus
stated that he will not provide ptr earnings.
ANNOTATE BY SHN577 ON 21 AUG 2012
he was living with [wife’s name and date of birth].
Customer advised that
she is in country on temporary visa and that she works part-time.
Customer [presentation, not relevant to the issues before the Tribunal]...
stated that what she earns has nothing to do with him or
us and when asked for
further information, would not give it but kept asking what it had to do with
his claim and with anything and
then phone cut out. No further action.
taken to this record of entry at the hearing, the Applicant did not agree that
the entry accurately recorded the contact he had
with Centrelink. When asked
what part of the entry was inaccurate, the Applicant stated that he
doesn’t remember the words
he stated but this is Centrelink’s notes
and he doesn’t remember the conversation.
Letter sent to
the Applicant by Centrelink on 13 September 2012
Tribunal notes that it is unfortunate that the claim form for newstart
allowance, submitted by the Applicant in 2012, is no longer
available for the
purposes of these proceedings. Following lodgement of the claim, the Applicant
was sent a notice by the Respondent,
dated 13 September 2012, which was
contained in the documents provided to the Tribunal. The contents of the letter
appear to reflect
the contents of the newstart allowance claim form, on the
basis that they provide information relevant to the claim and note towards
end that: “The claim form for Newstart Allowance has been read by me/to me
and the information I have given in this claim
form is complete and
correct.” The contents of the letter also reflects the Applicant as
having advised his relationship status
was “single”.
taken to this information during the hearing, the Applicant stated he did not
concede this was an accurate record of information
he had provided to Centrelink
for his claim. He did not otherwise provide an explanation of how or why the
information reflected
in the letter may be incorrect.
of 19 September 2012 and 25 September 2012
Applicant contacted Centrelink on 19 September 2012 and the record of this
Customer contacted JCN VIRTUAL on 19 SEP 2012 regarding
General Enquiry, Claim, for Newstart Allowance. Information was obtained
Phone Call....
Customer advised to attend CSC on (25/09/12 to lodge CDF and provide the
following documents for verification:
5. MOD P required as CUS indicated Partner to call centre
Customer has been advised that payments may be suspended/cancelled if they do
not attend and supply partner details
ANNOTATE BY LVH ON 25 SEP 2012
cust said that the person with whom he lives is his room mate and they have
independent lives. no mod p issued.
taken to this record, the Applicant stated he did not concede the record was
accurate. When asked whether the record reflects
him providing false
information to Centrelink he responded by stating he did not concede that.
Letter dated 19 October 2012
Applicant was sent correspondence by Centrelink dated 19 October 2012, headed
“Your Newstart Allowance”, which set
out the Applicant’s
payments from 6 October 2012 onwards. The letter noted, under the heading
“What Is Income”,
that: “If you have a partner, that
person’s income may affect your payment”.
asked whether he remembered receiving such notices, the Applicant stated that he
doesn’t recall receiving any notices from
Centrelink, even generally.
When asked whether he would have read such notices if they were received, the
Applicant responded that
he doesn’t recall. When asked if the notice had
been sent to the correct address, the Applicant stated he doesn’t remember
the exact dates he lived there.
contents of the notice were discussed with the Applicant at the hearing and the
Applicant was asked if, had he read the notice,
he would have become aware that
a person’s income affected their payment. The Applicant responded by
stating he doesn’t
notice of 19 October 2012 was accompanied by a reporting statement for the
period 20 October 2012 to 2 November 2012. The reporting
statement noted that
it “is an information notice given under social security law”. When
asked to clarify his evidence
that he had no recollection of receiving reporting
statements, the Applicant responded by stating he doesn’t remember. When
asked whether he remembered lodging reports online, he stated he doesn’t
remember how he would lodge them.
Applicant was taken to Question 3 in the reporting statement, which contained
the question: “Are you married or living in
a registered or de facto
relationship with someone of the opposite or same-sex (includes temporarily
living away from a partner to
improve study/job prospects)?”. The
Applicant responded by stating that in 2013 Centrelink was notified he was
living with
someone and Centrelink had the duty to look into it. He has acted
in good faith and told Centrelink he was living with someone.
applicant was asked whether, because of question 3 in the form he was aware he
needed to tell Centrelink if he was married. He
responded by stating he did in
2012 and 2013. When asked the question again, he then stated that Centrelink
had known in 2013 and
continued to pay him for another nine to 10 months. When
asked again, he stated yes he was aware; he had to tell Centrelink if he
living with someone but doesn’t remember the exact wording of it. The
Applicant was asked, if he had read the reporting
statement he would have been
aware he had to tell Centrelink. He responded by stating that he doesn’t
have any recollection
of the forms sent to him.
Letter dated 24
October 2012
24 October 2012, the Applicant was sent a notice by Centrelink headed
“Suspension of your Newstart Allowance”. He
stated he did not
recollect receiving the letter. The letter included the following information:
When to Contact Us
You must tell us within 14 days about events or changes in circumstances
affecting your payment. If you get a Reporting Statement
(Application for
Payment), report your earnings or changes in circumstances on your reporting
What you must tell us
- you marry; are
in or commence a registered or de facto relationship (either opposite or
same-sex); reconcile with a former partner
or start living with someone as their
taken to the letter, the Applicant stated he doesn’t remember receiving
it. When asked whether he was aware that income
earned by his wife might affect
his level of newstart allowance, he stated no, he doesn’t know how
Centrelink calculates income.
Applicant submits that the debt is due to administrative error by Centrelink on
the basis that he had not concealed anything and
had told Centrelink he was
living with someone. He referred in his written submissions to the contact he
had made with Centrelink
on 13 September 2013. The record of this contact is
Customer contacted PST MOORABBIN on 13 SEP 2013 regarding
General Enquiry for Newstart Allowance. Information was obtained via Phone
Call. Document created by [customer service officer reference] on 13 SEP
Cus adv PST during CCA that he is currently living with his partner.
CUS states that he has been living with her for the past 12 months and
recently went to China with her to visit her parents. When
asked how he funded
his trip, he stated his partner paid for the ticket and everything while in
China was free. Cus adv his partner
is not on a payment and is working part time
and studying. MOD P has been sent.
corresponding letter indicates that a “Mod P” form and a reply paid
envelope were sent to the Applicant. The Respondent
submits that the Applicant
did not return the form to Centrelink and the Applicant did not assert otherwise
at the Tribunal hearing.
Findings about sole administrative
noted above, the contents of the Applicant’s claim for newstart allowance
were reflected back to him in a notice dated 13
September 2012, including that
he had stated he was single. There is no evidence that the Applicant contacted
Centrelink to advise
the information contained in the notice was incorrect and
the Tribunal finds accordingly.
Applicant subsequently represented to Centrelink that he had a girlfriend (13
August 2012), that he was living with someone but
it was nothing to do with
Centrelink (21 August 2012) and that he had a partner (19 September 2012),
although in a follow up appointment
to this indication, that she was his
roommate (25 September 2012). He advised Centrelink on 13 September 2013 that
he had been living
with a partner for 12 months, although the Tribunal noted
that he had been residing with his wife since at least February 2011 by
the Applicant did not respond to the notice sent by Centrelink on 13 September
2012, containing incorrect details about his
relationship status, and given his
representation to Centrelink at various points that he had a girlfriend and his
stated refusal
to engage with Centrelink around his wife’s income, the
Tribunal finds that the debt has not been caused by sole administrative
Rather, it was caused by the Applicant’s incorrect representation about
his relationship to Centrelink. The debts
(being the recalculated newstart
allowance debt and associated interest charges) cannot be waived under
subsection 1237A(1)
Social Security Act
Does special
circumstances waiver apply?
Social Security Act
provides for discretionary waiver
(a) the debt did not result wholly or partly from
the debtor or another
(i) making a false statement or a false representation; or
(ii) failing or omitting to comply with a provision of this Act,
the Administration Act or the 1947 Act; and
(b) there are special circumstances (other than financial
hardship alone) that make it desirable to waive; and
(c) it is more appropriate to waive than to write off the debt or
part of the debt.
interpretation of “knowingly” within the context of social security
debts has been considered extensively by the
Re Callaghan and Secretary, Department of Social Security
[1996] AATA 413
(1996) 45 ALD
, the AAT stated (at [48]-[49]):
There is nothing in s 1237AAD
which suggests that the word ‘knowingly’ should be given any meaning
other than that a person
has actual knowledge, rather than constructive
knowledge, that he or she is making a false statement or representation or that
or she is failing or omitting to comply with a provision of the Act. The
actual knowledge is to be ascertained by reference to the
statements of the
person as to his or her actual state of knowledge at the time and to events
surrounding the false statement or
the act or omission.
In this case, the emphasis of Mr and Mrs Callaghan’s evidence was more
upon their belief that the one department paid them than
upon their state of
mind in complying with their obligations under the Act. Mr Callaghan has
acknowledged that he had received notices
under section 727 of the Act and that
he had read at least one of them. I am satisfied both on the material in the T
documents and
on his oral evidence that he received more than one of them and
that he read the first one. One the basis of the notices themselves
satisfied that they clearly set out his obligation to advise the department
should his income, or that of Mrs Callaghan, change.
I am also satisfied from
the notice that it quite clearly stated that income included Austudy benefits.
Taking into account Mr
Callaghan’s knowledge of the notice and of his
having read at least one of them, I find that he knew that he had an obligation
to advise of a change in Mrs Callaghan’s income. Therefore, when he
failed to advise of the change he knowingly omitted to
comply with a provision
of the SS Act.
Re Anderson and Secretary, Department of Families and Community Services
[2002] AATA 495
(2002) 69 ALD 494
, the AAT stated (at [27]) that:
...it is open for
the Tribunal to infer that the applicant has actual knowledge of his obligations
under the Act where there are opportunities
for that knowledge to be gained and
where there are no obstacles to him acquiring that knowledge. In this case, the
applicant has
had the opportunity to gain an understanding of his obligations
under the Act through the provision of advice letters to him from
respondent. The tribunal is not aware of any obstacles that would prevent Mr
Anderson from understanding those letters and gaining
that knowledge.
Wall and Secretary, Department of Education, Employment and Workplace
[2010] AATA 740
the AAT stated that:
Taylor’s Central Garages (Exeter) Ltd v Roper
[1951] WN 383
at 385, Devlin
J considered the meaning of “knowledge” and found that actual
knowledge can be inferred from the evidence
and the nature of the acts done.
Further, in RCA Corporation v Custom Cleared Sales Pty Ltd
(1979) 19 ALR 123
126, the Court of Appeal in the Supreme Court of New South Wales said:
“In inferring knowledge, a court is entitled to approach the matter
in two stages; where opportunities for knowledge on the
part of the particular
person are proved and there is nothing to indicate that there are obstacles to
the particular person acquiring
the relevant knowledge, there is some evidence
from which the court can conclude that such a person has the knowledge.
this conclusion may be easily overturned by a denial on his part of the
knowledge which the court accepts, or by a demonstration
that he is properly
excused from giving evidence of his actual knowledge.”
Following the decision in RCA Corporation, it is open to the Tribunal to
infer that a person had actual knowledge of their obligations
under the Act
where there were opportunities for them to gain that knowledge and where there
were no obstacles to them acquiring
the knowledge. In the present case, the
respondent sent letters to the Applicant notifying him of his obligations under
Tribunal is satisfied from the information sent to the Applicant in the notice
dated 13 September 2012 that, in the claim for
newstart allowance, the Applicant
had declared himself to be single. The Tribunal finds that the Applicant
represented himself to
Centrelink as single, in the year after he had been
married to his wife, and that this was a false statement.
Tribunal finds that the Applicant represented himself as having a girlfriend to
Centrelink on 13 August 2012, at the same time
stating he was refusing to
provide details of her earnings. The Tribunal considered that the Applicant
understated the nature of
his relationship with his wife during the conversation
on 13 August 2012. The Tribunal finds that there was a false representation
made to Centrelink on 13 August 2012.
Tribunal finds that, after advising Centrelink that he was partnered on 19
September 2012 and being advised he was required to
complete a “Mod
P” form, the Applicant made further contact with Centrelink on 25
September 2012, at which time he described
his wife as his “room
mate”. The Tribunal finds that this was an understatement of the
relationship between the Applicant
and his wife. The Tribunal finds that there
was a false statement made to Centrelink on 25 September 2012.
Tribunal finds that on 13 September 2013, the Applicant described to Centrelink
that he had a partner with whom he had been living
for 12 months. The Applicant
had, at that time, been married and living with his wife for over two and a half
years. The Tribunal
finds that the Applicant misrepresented the length of his
relationship to Centrelink on 13 September 2013.
Tribunal finds that the Applicant was aware that his relationship with his wife
had an impact on his payments, as evidenced by
his refusal to provide details of
her income and an understatement of their relationship at the point he was
required to complete
a “Mod P” form about their relationship. The
Tribunal finds that the false statements and false representations made
Applicant, as set out above, were made knowingly. In these circumstances, the
debt is unable to be waived under
section 1237AAD
Social Security Act
The associated interest charges, arising from the newstart allowance debt, are
also unable to be waived.
Can the debt and interest charges be
written off for a period of time?
Social Security Act
allows for write off of a debt for a period
of time where:
(a) the debt is irrecoverable at law;
(b) the debtor has no capacity to repay the debt; or
(c) the debtor's whereabouts are unknown after all reasonable
efforts have been made to locate the debtor; or
(d) it is not cost effective for the Commonwealth to take action
to recover the debt.
Tribunal finds that the debt is recoverable at law, the Applicant’s
whereabouts are known and it is cost effective for the
Commonwealth to take
action to recover the debt.
to whether the Applicant has capacity to repay the debt, the Applicant declined
to provide the Tribunal any information about his
circumstances at the hearing,
although referred at several points in his evidence to running a business. He
also referred to having
a home with a mortgage. The Tribunal inferred from
these comments that the Applicant currently has a source of income from which
is assisting to support his family. Given this, the Tribunal was not persuaded
that the Applicant would face financial hardship
if required to make repayments
towards the debt if required to do so at a modest, reasonable rate of repayment.
Tribunal finds that the legislative requirements for write off of the debts are
not met in this case.
other provisions in
Social Security Act
apply to the
Applicant’s circumstances and, for this reason, the recalculated debt and
interest charges are to be recovered
Commonwealth.
The Tribunal sets aside the decision under review and substitutes its
decision that:
(i) There is a debt to the Commonwealth for overpayment of newstart allowance in
the period 13 August 2012 to 30 May 2014 and the
debt is to be recalculated in
accordance with the comments of the Tribunal in paragraphs 32 and 33 of this
Statement of Reasons;
(ii) Interest charges are to be imposed for the periods 21 February 2020 to 1
December 2020 and 14 May 2021 to 28 March 2025 and
the quantum of the interest
charges are to be recalculated by the Respondent for these periods and are debts
due to the Commonwealth;
(iii) The debts are recoverable by the Commonwealth.
Date of hearing:
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Self-Represented
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Mr M Sherman of counsel
Instructing solicitors:
Ms T Coping (Sparke
Mr L Manalili (Services Australia)
Respondent’s Statement of
Facts Issues and Contentions (SFIC) at paragraph 5.5.
The Tribunal noted that oral
submissions made at the hearing referred to a letter dated 19 October 2012. As
the written submissions
regarding the letter of 12 October 2012 were reiterated
in the Respondent’s subsequent submissions, the Tribunal first considered
the letter of 12 October 2012 and its impact on the Applicant’s newstart
allowance payments.
Referred to in
Respondent’s SFIC at page 24.
Referred to in
Respondent’s SFIC at page 24.
cited in Respondent’s SFIC at pages 28-29.
RTF format (13 MB)
Signed PDF/A format