'AYP' and Department of Home Affairs (Freedom of information) [2025] AICmr 171 (24 September 2025)
‘AYP’ and Department of Home Affairs (Freedom of
information)
[2025] AICmr 171
(24 September 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of
Rocelle Ago,
General Manager Freedom of Information Case Management
Delegate of the
Australian Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Department of Home Affairs
Decision date
Freedom of Information — Whether disclosure would have an adverse
effect on the proper and efficient conduct of the operations
of an agency
— Whether contrary to public interest to release conditionally exempt
documents — (CTH)
Freedom of Information Act 1982
s 55K of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(the FOI Act), I affirm the
internal review decision of the Department of Home Affairs (the Department) of
15 October 2021, as varied
on 31 July 2025.
decision discusses the application of s 47E(d) of the FOI Act to documents
provided to the Office of the Migration Agents Registration
Authority (OMARA) in
response to a complaint that was made by the applicant. It is primarily of
interest to the parties in relation
to the specific documents sought.
Reasons for decision
Scope of IC review
applicant had made a complaint to the OMARA in relation to the conduct of two
individuals who were registered migration agents.
Following the outcome of the
complaint, the applicant applied to the Department for access to a copy of the
complaint file.
17 August 2021, the Department identified 73 documents relevant to the
applicant’s request, but refused access to all of
the documents in full on
the basis they were exempt under the business information exemption (s 47G) of
the FOI Act.
14 September 2021, the applicant sought an internal review of the
Department’s decision.
15 October 2021, the Department undertook further searches and identified three
additional documents
relevant to the applicant’s request. The Department decided to grant
access to 41 documents in full and refused access
to 33 documents in
. In making its decision, the
Department relied on s 47G of the FOI Act. The Department also decided that two
documents that it previously
found to be exempt were irrelevant to the
applicant’s request (s 22).
7 December 2021, the applicant sought Information Commissioner review (IC
review) of the Department’s internal review decision.
31 July 2025, the Department identified four additional documents relevant to
the applicant’s request. The Department made
a revised decision under s
55G of the FOI Act and granted the applicant access to a further 15 documents in
full. The Department
refused access to the remaining 22 documents in full and
relied on the certain operations of agencies (s 47E(d)) exemption of the
to errors in its schedule of documents attached to its revised decision dated 31
July 2025, the Department re-issued its revised
decision to the applicant on 26
August 2025 with the errors purportedly corrected.
5 September 2025, the Department identified further errors in its revised
decision dated 31 July 2025 and clarified that it had
withheld access to 17
in full (the documents at
issue) and that five documents
irrelevant to the applicant’s request. The Department further confirmed
that the applicant was provided access to the
remaining documents in
applicant confirmed that they were seeking review of the documents that the
Department withheld under s 47E(d) of the FOI Act.
Accordingly,
the issue to be decided in this IC review is whether the documents that the
Department maintains are conditionally exempt
under s 47E(d) of the FOI Act are
conditionally exempt under that provision, and if so, whether giving the
applicant access to the
conditionally exempt material at this time would, on
balance, be contrary to the public interest (s 11A(5)).
an IC review of an access refusal decision, the agency bears the onus of
establishing that its decision is justified or that I
should give a decision
adverse to the applicant.
making my decision, I have had regard to the following:
Department’s decisions of 17 August 2021, 15 October 2021 and 31 July 2025
and reasons for those decisions
the documents at
the Guidelines
issued by the Australian Information Commissioner under s 93A of the FOI
to which agencies must have
regard in performing a function or exercising a power under the FOI
parties’ submissions.
Certain operations of agencies exemption (s
Department contends that the documents at issue are conditionally exempt in full
under s 47E(d) of the FOI Act.
document will be conditionally exempt if its disclosure would, or could
reasonably be expected to, have a substantial adverse effect
on the proper and
efficient conduct of the operations of an agency (s 47E(d)).
Department explained that the documents contain information provided to the
OMARA from the individual who was the subject of the
applicant’s complaint
regarding the handling of their visa application. In particular, the Department
states that this information
comprises statements and business documents
pertaining to their involvement in the matter.
Department contends that candour is essential in enquiry or investigation
processes conducted by regulatory bodies such as the
OMARA, and that registered
migration agents who are the subject of complaints would likely be reluctant to
provide the OMARA with
full and frank information or all relevant evidence in
relation to a complaint if they are aware that the information they provide
be disclosed, especially if it is to the person who is the source of the
Department further submits that disclosure of the documents would likely reduce
the quality and completeness of information that
the OMARA is able to receive in
future investigations.
response to the Department’s contentions, the applicant referred to
paragraph [6.115] of the FOI Guidelines, which states:
The predicted effect must bear on the agency’s ‘proper and
efficient’ operations, that is, the agency is undertaking
its operations
in an expected manner. Where disclosure of the documents reveals unlawful
activities or inefficiencies, this element
of the conditional exemption will not
be met and the conditional exemption will not apply. This is for reasons
including the irrelevant
factors that must not be taken into account in deciding
whether access to the document would, on balance, be contrary to the public
applicant further submits that the OMARA is a body empowered to investigate the
behaviours of migration agents to ensure that
they meet the standards required
Migration Act 1958
(the Migration Act) and the Code of Conduct
Migration Agents Regulations 1998
. The applicant submits that
registered migration agents are required to co-operate with the OMARA once an
investigation has commenced,
and that there is no basis for the
Department’s claim that disclosure of the documents would have the
potential to create reluctance
on the part of individuals to participate in the
OMARA’s investigations in the future.
Additionally,
the applicant contends that the documents ought to be disclosed as the OMARA is
not prohibited from disclosing or publishing
information about complaints
Whether disclosure would have a substantial adverse effect on
the operations of an agency
Relevantly,
s 316(1)(c) of the Migration Act
stipulates that one of the functions of
the OMARA is to investigate complaints in relation to the provision of
immigration assistance
by registered migration agents. Accordingly, I am
satisfied that investigating the conduct of registered migration agents is an
of the OMARA.
documents that the Department withheld under s 47E(d) comprises information that
was provided to the OMARA by the individual who
was the subject of the
applicant’s complaint. It is apparent that this information was provided
in response to a request for
information from the OMARA as part of their
preliminary inquiries and investigations.
have considered the parties submissions together with the documents. In
referencing paragraph [6.115] of the FOI Guidelines, the
applicant essentially
contends that disclosure of the documents would reveal unlawful activities or
inefficiencies, and on this basis,
the exemption in s 47E(d) cannot apply. While
I accept that disclosure of the documents would provide transparency in relation
the OMARA’s investigation into the applicant’s complaint, based
on my consideration of the documents, I do not accept
that disclosure of the
documents would have the effect that the applicant claims. In my view, it is not
apparent from the face of
the documents that their disclosure would reveal any
unlawful activities or inefficiencies.
accept the applicant’s contention that registered migration agents are
obligated to co-operate with the OMARA once an investigation
has commenced, and
that the OMARA possesses coercive powers under the Migration Act
require the production of specific information and documents. However, in
obtaining information relevant to its investigations,
it is apparent that the
OMARA is not confined to the exercise of statutory compulsion powers, but also
relies on the voluntary provision
of information and documents by parties to the
complaint. Having regard to this context, it is therefore relevant to consider
disclosure of the documents would have the effect of reducing the
quality and completeness of the information that the OMARA receives.
regard to the nature of the documents, I accept the Department’s
contention that part of the OMARA’s investigative
process involves the
collection of relevant information from parties who are the subject of the
complaint or investigation. If information
of this kind were disclosed more
broadly, it could reasonably be expected to discourage those individuals from
providing relevant
information to the OMARA as part of their investigations by
causing them to be less forthcoming when participating in the investigative
process, particularly if they are aware that the information they provide to the
OMARA may be disclosed to the complainant or the
public more broadly.
having regard to the OMARA’s investigative and complaint handling
functions, I consider that disclosure of the documents
could reasonably be
expected to adversely affect the OMARA’s current processes by reducing the
quality and volume of information
that the OMARA receives voluntarily from
parties who are the subject of complaints or investigations, and this would lead
to a greater
reliance on the exercise of its compulsive powers. I am satisfied
that this would have a substantial adverse effect on the OMARA's
carrying out investigations efficiently and effectively in the future.
similar approach was taken by Freedom of Information Commissioner Pirani in
‘ANX’ and Commonwealth Ombudsman (Freedom of information)
[2024] AICmr 204
(‘ANX’), where it was found that disclosure of
a report from the Commonwealth Ombudsman’s own motion investigation
the use of restrictive practices would likely result in the Ombudsman having to
resort more often to its compulsive powers and
that this would undermine the
Ombudsman’s capacity to investigate public maladministration in an
efficient and effective manner.
In making this finding, Commissioner Pirani
accepted the Ombudsman’s submission that although it has compulsive powers
to compel information, reliance solely on such powers would limit its
ability to gather information and cause delay, which ultimately
undermines the
effectiveness of its investigations.
respect to the applicant’s contention that the OMARA is not prohibited
from disclosing or publishing information about
its complaint handling, I do not
consider that this is relevant to the question of whether disclosure of the
documents would have
a substantial adverse effect on the OMARA’s
operations. The fact that the OMARA is not prohibited from disclosing material
relating to its investigations does not preclude such a disclosure from
adversely affecting the OMARA’s ability to undertake
its investigations
effectively.
Finding (s 47E(d))
the reasons set out above, I am satisfied that disclosure of the documents at
issue could reasonably be expected to have a substantial
adverse effect on the
OMARA’s operations. I therefore find that the documents are conditionally
exempt under s 47E(d) of the
Whether access would be contrary to the public interest (s
found the documents to be conditionally exempt under s 47E(d) of the FOI Act, I
am required to consider whether it would be
contrary to the public interest to
give the applicant access to conditionally exempt material at this time. The
requirements of the
public interest test are set out at Annexure A. I have
considered the relevant mandatory factors listed in s 11B(3) of the FOI Act.
have not considered the irrelevant factors as set out in s 11B(4) of the FOI
In considering the public
interest, I have had regard to the parties’ submissions.
applicant submits that disclosure of the documents would restore public
confidence in the OMARA by ensuring transparency in relation
to the manner in
which the OMARA carries out its investigations into complaints pertaining to the
conduct of registered migration
agents. Additionally, the applicant contends
that they were personally affected by the conduct of the individual who was the
of their complaint to the OMARA, and disclosure of the documents at
issue would provide the applicant with information that concerns
them and their
Department accepted that disclosure of the documents would promote the scrutiny
and accountability of the OMARA’s investigative
processes. However, the
Department explained that the subject matter of the documents is limited to
information shared in an enquiry
process for an individual complaint against an
individual migration agent. On this basis, the Department contends that any
accountability
resulting from disclosure would be limited to that particular
case rather than providing a broader insight into the OMARA’s
investigative processes.
regard to the parties’ submissions, I accept that disclosure of the
documents would promote the objects of the FOI Act
and that it would allow the
applicant access to information that concerns them. I also accept that
disclosure would provide some
transparency in relation to the OMARA’s
investigative processes. On this basis, I give moderate weight to these
respect to the factors against disclosure, the Department explained that there
is a strong public interest in safeguarding the
OMARA’s capacity to fully
investigate complaints against migration agents, which relies on its ability to
obtain complete information
from parties in investigations and to share
information on a confidential basis.
Department also submits that disclosure of the documents could reasonably be
expected to:
prejudice the
capacity of the OMARA to obtain confidential information, and to obtain similar
information in the future
interests of the individual who was the subject of the applicant’s
complaint, and
compromise the
right to privacy of the individual who was the subject of the applicant’s
have considered the parties’ submissions together with the documents and I
accept that the factors against disclosure identified
by the Department are
relevant in this case. I also consider that significant weight should be given
to the factors against disclosure.
In particular, I accept that there is a
strong public interest in ensuring that the OMARA has the capacity to undertake
its investigations
effectively and that disclosure of the documents in this case
could reasonably be expected to result in parties to a complaint being
reluctant to co-operate with the OMARA’s investigations. This would
prejudice the OMARA’s ability to obtain similar
information in its future
investigations.
Relevantly,
‘ACQ’ and Australian Federal Police (Freedom of information)
[2022] AICmr 79
(‘ACQ’), former Freedom of Information
Commissioner Hardiman considered the public interest in the disclosure of
information
pertaining of an individual who had participated in and was the
subject of an investigation conducted by the Australian Federal Police.
Commissioner Hardiman explained:
... Obtaining information and evidence voluntarily generally requires an
assurance of confidentiality because of the nature of the
matters investigated
and the obvious need to encourage individuals to disclose what is known to them
even though it may be critical
of, and/or damaging to, another individual or
individuals. If disclosure were to remove that confidentiality and so have the
of discouraging individuals from participating in the investigation
process, it would significantly reduce the AFP’s ability
to undertake
future investigations...
Commissioner
Hardiman also considered the privacy interests of the individual who
participated in and was the subject of the investigation
... Based on my consideration of the nature of the information contained in the
documents, it is apparent that the AFP’s contention
concerns the
likely prejudice to the right to privacy of the individuals appearing in the
documents as a result of its disclosure.
It also follows that such a prejudice
could reasonably be expected to harm the interests of those individuals.
I also consider that significant weight should be given to the adverse effect
that disclosure would have on the privacy of the third
party individuals who
participated in the investigation and particularly the individual who was, in
effect at least, the subject
investigation.
with Commissioner Hardiman’s reasoning in ‘ACQ’, I also
consider that disclosure of the documents would
harm the privacy interests of
the individual who was the subject of the applicant’s complaint. In
particular, I consider that,
in circumstances where the allegations made by the
applicant against the individual have not been substantiated, significant weight
ought to be given to this factor against disclosure.
balance, I consider that the public interest factors against disclosure outweigh
the factors favouring disclosure in this case.
Finding (s 11A(5))
the reasons set out above, I find that disclosure of the documents at issue
would be contrary to the public interest at this time.
General Manager, Freedom of Information Case
Delegate of the Australian Information Commissioner for the
purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Relevant provisions of the FOI Act, FOI Guidelines, and
Section 11A(4) of the FOI
Act states the agency or Minister is not required by this Act to give
the person access to the document
at a particular time if, at that
time, the document is an exempt document.
Certain operations of agencies exemption (s 47E(d))
Section 47E(d) of the FOI Act states
a document is conditionally exempt if its disclosure under
this Act would, or could reasonably
be expected to have a substantial adverse
effect on the proper and efficient conduct of the operations of
As discussed in the FOI
and in IC review
a document is
conditionally exempt under s 47E(d) if its disclosure would, or could reasonably
be expected to, have a substantial
adverse effect on the proper and efficient
conduct of the operations of an agency.
With respect to the term ‘substantial adverse effect’, the FOI
Guidelines also explain:
The term ‘substantial adverse effect’ broadly means ‘an
adverse effect which is sufficiently serious or significant
to cause concern to
a properly concerned reasonable person’. The word
‘substantial’, in the context of substantial
loss or damage, has
been interpreted as including ‘loss or damage that is, in the
circumstances, real or of substance and not
insubstantial or nominal’.
A decision maker should clearly describe the expected effect and its impact on
the usual operations or activity of the agency in
the statement of reasons under
s 26 to show their deliberations in determining the extent of the expected
effect. It may sometimes
be necessary to use general terms to avoid making the
statement of reasons itself an ‘exempt document’ (s
Further, in
Re James and Others and Australian National
, Deputy President Hall explained:
As a matter of ordinary English, I think that the expression “the conduct
of the operations of an agency” is capable
of extending to the way in
which an agency discharges or performs any of its functions.
Public interest test
Section 11A(5)of the FOI Act states the agency
or Minister must give the person access to the document if it is
conditionally exempt
at a particular time unless (in the circumstances)
access to the document at that time would, on balance, be contrary to the public
Section 11B(3) of the FOI Act sets out a non-exhaustive list of public
interest factors favouring disclosure for consideration, those
factors being
where disclosure of the document would do any of the following:
(a) promote the objects of the FOI Act
(b) inform debate on a matter of public importance
(c) promote effective oversight of public expenditure
(d) allow a person access to their personal information.
Section 11B(4) of the FOI Act also lists the following irrelevant factors
that must not be taken into consideration when deciding
whether access would, on
balance, be contrary to the public interest:
(a) access to the document could result in embarrassment to the Commonwealth
Government, or cause a loss of confidence in the Commonwealth
(b) access to the document could result in any person misinterpreting or
misunderstanding the document
(c) the author of the document was (or is) of high seniority in the agency to
which the request for access to the document was made
(d) access to the document could result in confusion or unnecessary
In addition to the factors set out at s 11B(3) of the FOI Act, the FOI
Guidelines set out a further non-exhaustive list of public
interest factors in
favour of disclosure, as well as public interest factors against
disclosure.
The FOI Guidelines explain:
To conclude that, on balance, disclosure of a document would be contrary to
the public interest is to conclude that the benefit to
the public resulting from
disclosure is outweighed by the benefit to the public of withholding the
information. The decision maker
must analyse, in each case, where on balance the
public interest lies based on the particular facts at the time the decision is
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
The Department’s internal
review decision had advised that it had identified two additional documents
relevant to the request.
However, during the IC review, the Department advised
that this was erroneous and that it had in fact identified three additional
documents relevant to the request.
The Department’s internal
review decision had advised that it had refused access to 35 documents in full.
However, during the
IC review, the Department advised that this was erroneous
and that it had refused access to 33 documents in full.
Documents 32, 34, 37, 41,
54-56, 61-68, 71 and 75.
Documents 57-60 and 70.
Documents 1-31, 33, 35, 36,
38-40, 42-53, 69, 72-74, and 76-78.
FOI Act s 55D(1).
Sections 11A and 47E(d) as set
out in Annexure A.
See, Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner
, Guidelines issued by the Australian Information
Commissioner under
Information Act 1982
(FOI Guidelines).
Set out in Annexure A.
Section 47E(d) of the FOI
Act may be relied upon to exempt information which could undermine an
agency’s capacity to obtain
confidential information:
Wilson AM and
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (Freedom of Information)
[2023] AATA 458
Listed in Annexure A.
At [90] and [95].
at [6.90] – [6.92], and [6.112] – [6.118] and
the cases referenced there.
Williams and Department of Defence (Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 26
Refugee Advice & Casework Service
and Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 16
Christis Tombazos and Australian
Research Council (Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 14
‘ACF’ and Australian
Public Service Commission (Freedom of information)
[2022] AICmr 73
Rex Patrick and Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet (No. 2) (Freedom of information)
[2022] AICmr 66
'ZA' and Department of Veterans
Affairs (Freedom of information)
[2021] AICmr 83
Australian Society for Kangaroos
and Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation trading as AgriFutures
Australia (Freedom
of information)
[2019] AICmr 31
‘PR’ and Comcare
(Freedom of information)
[2019] AICmr 2.
FOI Guidelines
[6.18] – [6.19] (footnotes omitted).
At page 699.
FOI Guidelines at [6.229]
FOI Guidelines at [6.238]
(footnote omitted).
RTF format (22.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format