1411755 [2015] RRTA 325 (2 June 2015)
[2015] RRTA 325
(2 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Roger Fordham
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the
direction that the applicant satisfies s.36(2)(a) of the Migration Act.
Statement made on 02 June 2015 at 2:30pm
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to section 431(2)
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration to refuse to grant the applicant
a Protection visa under s.65 of
Migration Act 1958
applicant who claims to be a citizen of Sri Lanka, applied for the visa [in]
July 2012 and the delegate refused to grant the visa
[in] September 2012.
matter was heard and decided by a Tribunal Member differently constituted on 2
April 2013. That Member affirmed the decision of
the delegate and, subsequently
the matter was appealed. Following the court appeals the Full Federal Court ,
[in] June 2014, ordered
that this matter be reconsidered.
Accordingly, the matter was constituted to me.
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 3 December 2014 to give evidence
and present arguments. The Tribunal also received oral
evidence from a relative
of the applicant who is a resident of Australia. The Tribunal hearing was
conducted with the assistance
of an interpreter in the Tamil (Sri Lankan) and
English languages.
applicant was represented in relation to the review by his registered migration
agent. The representative attended the Tribunal
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
criteria for a protection visa are set out in s.36 of the Act and Schedule 2 to
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). An applicant for the visa must
meet one of the alternative criteria in s.36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c). That is,
the applicant is either a person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the ‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other
‘complementary protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same
family unit as such a person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same
36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant
for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the Minister is
satisfied Australia has protection obligations under the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status
of Refugees as amended by the 1967 Protocol relating to
the Status of Refugees (together, the Refugees Convention, or the
Convention).
is a party to the Refugees Convention and generally speaking, has protection
obligations in respect of people who are refugees
as defined in Article 1 of the
Convention. Article 1A(2) relevantly defines a refugee as any person
owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group
or political opinion, is
outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is
unwilling to avail himself
of the protection of that country; or who, not having
a nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence,
unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to
a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s.36(2)(a), he or she may
nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant of
a protection visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the
being removed from Australia to a receiving country, there is a real
risk that he or she will suffer significant harm: s.36(2)(aa)
complementary protection criterion’).
accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the Act, the
Tribunal is required to take account of policy guidelines
prepared by the
Department of Immigration –PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian - Complementary
Protection Guidelines and PAM3 Refugee
and humanitarian - Refugee Law Guidelines
– and any country information assessment prepared by the Department of
Foreign Affairs
and Trade expressly for protection status determination
purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the decision under
consideration.
issue in this case is the applicant, a Sri Lankan national of Tamil ethnicity
comes from an area of Sri Lanka where a Tamil separatist
group has control in a
conflict with the state which lasted for thirty years.
applicant is a young male from Batticaloa in the East of Sri Lanka. The
applicant was approached by the group, the LTTE and was
kidnapped and tortured
by his Tamil separatist captors. He escaped but became of interest to the
Criminal Investigation Department
(CID) and went into hiding.
attempted to escape in 2009 but, the boat he was on was intercepted by the Sri
Lankan Navy. He was taken by the authorities and
interrogated and charged both
as an LTTE supporter and an illegal departee.
matter was taken to court and he was found not guilty of LTTE support but guilty
on the second count of attempted illegal departure
and was required to report
in 2011 he was accused of lying and feared he could be killed or falsely charged
of illegal possession of arms.
the assistance of his father he departed Sri Lanka illegally [in] March
The issues in this matter are firstly, the credibility of the case. Secondly,
since the conflict came to an end in May 2009 whether
or not he faces adverse
consequences at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities currently or in the
reasonably foreseeable future.
whether or not the consequences, if adverse, are of serious harm of a level
described in s.91R(2) of the Migration Act and
for a Convention reason.
an entry interview the applicant provided an account consistent with that he
later provided in a statutory declaration.
He provided a copy of a letter dated [in] May 2012 and purportedly written by [a
named person]. That letter advises that he was taken
captive by a group, the
Tamil Makkal Viduthalai Pulikal, TMVP in 2008 and that he made a report to the
Human Rights Commission Batticaloa.
It also advises that he fled in 2012 out of
copy of that Human Rights Report, dated [in] February 2009 is held at folios 27
and 28 of the departmental file.
document purporting to be a court order detaining the applicant on charges of
aiding and abetting the LTTE and detaining him for
ninety days is held at folios
29 to 31 of the departmental file.
also provided a copy of a passport issued [in] 2010 in his name.
with his application the applicant provided a statutory declaration of his
claims, dated 29
that declaration he advised that he is a Tamil ethnic married male of Sri Lankan
nationality and Christian by faith.
claimed he was called by a group, the TMVP in 2007 who were, at that time, in
league with the LTTE. It was their policy to recruit
one member from each Tamil
family in the area he lived in.
he was not married at that time they targeted him because his brother was
married. They forcibly took him to a detention centre
where he was threatened
that if he did not cooperate that they would cause harm to his family.
he continued to refuse they stripped him and beat him until he was unconscious.
still bound he managed to escape when the chain holding him broke. He got
clothing from a house nearby and fled to his home.
He heard shots being fired
and believed he would be shot if he did not escape.
this the CID came to his house several times but he managed to hide from them on
each occasion. He claimed that he believed
the TMVP had reported him to the
one occasion the TMVP captured his father but, his father did not “give
2007 and 2009 he remained in hiding but, he realised that he could not continue
to live in that way so, in 2009 when he heard
there was a boat leaving he
decided to leave and his father made the necessary arrangements with a smuggler
for him to do that.
took a small boat and was told that they would then by put on a larger vessel to
sail overseas. However, after ten days when that
boat did not arrive he believed
that he had been cheated and, the Sri Lanka Navy also found them at sea.
to his claims they were arrested and handed over to the CID when they reached
shore. He said that the local media also photographed
the return.
together with the others was interrogated and he was accused of supporting the
LTTE. After being verbally abused they were moved
to [a town] and he and the
other were photographed and had files opened on them. He was slapped when he
didn’t answer questions.
was then transferred to a detention camp called [Camp 1] where he and the others
were processed. They were stripped, searched and
he was put into a room with
over 130 other detainees.
together with a hundred others, were accused of links with the LTTE and listed
for court appearances.
in the detention centre he was distressed and verbally abused by the CID. He was
again questioned about involvement or support
for the LTTE and was slapped when
he denied there was any. He was coerced and told if he admitted it he would only
be imprisoned
for 3 years.
was also tortured for about two hours and his leg was cut with a knife. He heard
sounds in the detention centre which he believed
were other prisoners being
interrogated and tortured.
a period of one and a half months he was transferred to another centre in
[Location 2] where he found that others in his group
who had been detained, but
not suspected of LTTE links were still being held.
court date was rescheduled several times but finally the matter went to court in
May 2010 and the applicant was tried on two issues;
his alleged association with
the LTTE and his attempt to leave Sri Lanka irregularly.
was found not guilty of association with the LTTE but was fined 20,000 rupees
for his attempted illegal departure from the country.
he had been released, a CID [officer] informed him that he was required to
report to the CID every week on Sunday. He was also
told that he would have to
work for this officer and get information about the LTTE for the CID. He was
told he would be paid 20,000
rupees for that work. He was told to give them any
information he had collected when he reported each Sunday.
did this until 2011 when, after having no information to give, he was accused of
lying to the CID. He was threatened that unless
he complied they would kill him
or falsely accuse him of dealing in weapons.
this incident he claimed he went into hiding. He hid at a Parish church in
Batticaloa and sometimes in relatives’
be found if he stayed in any one place too long.
March 2012 his father contacted him and told him that he would have to leave Sri
Lanka as he was known to the Sri Lankan Navy,
the TMVP and the CID and it would
only be a matter of time before the CID or TMVP would capture him again.
father assisted him to make the necessary arrangements to leave Sri Lanka.
this was his second attempt to leave the country he believed that he would face
serious consequences if he was caught. He said
that he would prefer to take his
own life in that case.
March 2012 he departed from Sri Lanka.
claimed to fear that he would be killed or otherwise seriously harmed if he
returned to Sri Lanka.
claimed that he feared that harm would be at the hands of the CID, TMVP, the
Navy or the Sri Lankan authorities.
claimed that he believed the harm would be for reasons of his Tamil race, his
imputed political opinion and his attempted illegal
departure. He also feared
he would be targeted as a failed asylum seeker and for departing from Sri Lanka
illegally again.
Submissions
to the delegate
10 August 2012 the applicant’s adviser sent a submission in which it was
put that the delegate should consider any chance
of harm for reasons of the
applicant’s Tamil ethnicity; his imputed anti-government and pro-LTTE
political opinion; his illegal
departure from Sri Lanka; and his lack of any
original passport or travel documentation; and his application for protection in
submission, at folios161 to 175 contains a wide range of independent material
concerning treatment of Tamil returnees, military
presence identity
documentation and record keeping.
regard to relocation it was submitted that, because of the nature of return, the
ability to trace and the harm coming from the
authorities that the applicant
would be unable to avoid the harm he fears through any internal flight
alternative.
delegate’s decision
delegate interviewed the applicant and, after consideration found that the
applicant had not suffered the harm he had claimed
at the hands of the TMVP or
that he had faced the adverse attention of the TMPV or CID as he claimed.
was accepted that he had attempted to leave the country illegally in 2009 as he
has claimed.
was also accepted that he had been accused of LTTE affiliation but was found not
guilty by a court. Further, that it was plausible
that he had been required to
report to the CID regularly as he claimed. However, it was not accepted that he
had been required to
provide information about the LTTE.
was also accepted that the applicant may face further scrutiny upon arrival in
Sri Lanka due to his previous attempted illegal
departure but it was not
accepted that it would be for any reason other than a previous illegal departure
attempt. Similarly, it
was considered that his failure to report to the CID was
a prosecutory matter and not Convention based.
the delegate accepted that the applicant is a Tamil person he found that the
claimed harm was more for reasons of his political
opinion and membership of a
particular social group than his race.
delegate found that the applicant did not face a real chance of serious harm for
reasons of his membership of a particular social
group of “failed asylum
seekers”, “failed asylum seekers who have already come to the
adverse attention of the
Sri Lankan authorities.” Or “wealthy Tamil
businessmen in Sri Lanka”.
the applicant had already been cleared of association with the LTTE by a court
the delegate found that he would not be imputed
with a political opinion of LTTE
the same reasons he had found the applicant did not face a real chance of
serious harm for any Convention ground, he also found
that there was no real
risk of significant harm under the terms of the Complementary Protection
obligations.
First Tribunal Decision
Tribunal member this matter was first constituted to heard evidence from the
applicant on 12 November 2012.
evidence and the findings of the Tribunal are held at folios 215 to 232 of the
departmental file.
have had regard to the evidence provided at that hearing and note that it is
consistent with the claims previously made in the entry
interview, to the
department and to the Tribunal differently constituted.
submissions
applicant’s adviser provided further submissions to this Tribunal on 26
November 2011.
submissions restate the applicant’s case as he first described it but also
advise that the TMVP head is currently in the
Sri Lankan government and that
this poses a serious risk to the applicant if he returns to Sri Lanka.
submission also provides a range of independent materials including UNHCR
assessment of risk groups, information concerning the
treatment of political
prisoners and Human Rights reports concerning treatment of suspected LTTE
supporters.
further provides information on the screening of returnees to Sri Lanka.
Tribunal hearing was initially attended by the applicant and his adviser.
However, as a consequence of questions in regard to
locations of family members
it was discovered that the applicant had [a relative] who had driven him to the
hearing and was in a
waiting area. I chose to call that person as a witness and,
on finding that he had visited Sri Lanka in recent times swore him in
evidence from him.
applicant stated at the hearing that his fears on return were that, as a
recidivist illegal departee suspicions of his links to
the LTTE would be
heightened.
pointed out that, in 2009 he had been detained as a consequence of being caught
trying to leave and had faced charges of supporting
had resulted in five to six months detention ion [Camp 1] prison and the severe
conditions there before he was released as a
consequence of a court decision.
He described his situation in the prison as being one where he was seriously
mistreated with beatings
and left in harsh conditions where he was left naked
and as a form of torture was beaten with shoes and had his nipples squeezed
he was later moved to [Location 2] prison he was in the same cells as criminals.
He appeared before the court on a number of
occasions before the situation was
said that no one appeared for him in the court and the matter was dealt with
quite quickly. He said that there was no evidence
to support the charge that he
had been involved with or associated with the LTTE although the CID had wanted
him to admit his involvement
with the group.
said that after the matter was resolved with him being found not guilty of
association with the LTTE he was still required to report
asked what he could provide to the CID he said that because he was aware of some
of the circumstances surrounding the TMVP they
believed he could provide that
information.
claimed that the TMVP had been closely associated with the LTTE up until 2008
when it had divided into two separate divisions and
went to the Sri Lankan
government side.
then gave an account of the TMVP’s attempt to recruit him and that was
consistent with what he had previously provided.
said that, after his release from [Location 2] prison he was required to report
to the CID every Sunday. He added that he had been
required to pay a fine of
20,000 rupees on his release.
asked if anyone in his family was associated with or had given support to the
LTTE and he said that they weren’t.
went on to say that he had continued to report to the CID as he was required to
for about one and a half years.
as a consequence of a fear of being “disappeared” as had been the
case of a number of young men in his area and
that fact that he had not been
able to provide any useful information to the CID when they demanded it to a
point of threatening
him, he decided to stop reporting and went into hiding. He
described that period and where he had hidden in the same way he had described
it to the department and the other Tribunal member.
I informed him that I would be taking the adverse material put to him by the
delegate and the previous Tribunal into account.
asked if there was any person in Australia either as a family member or a close
friend and he said that he had [a relative]. I asked
if that [relative] had
direct knowledge of the situation he had experienced in Sri Lanka and he replied
that his [relative] had been
in Australia for a number of years.
asked if that [relative] had visited while he was still in Sri Lanka and he said
that he had. I then found that the [relative] had
come with him to the Tribunal
but had not sought to be either a witness or a support person.
said that I wished to speak to his [relative] and had him brought into the
hearing room.
I had told the [relative] that I wished to ask a number of questions of him and
he agreed I had him sworn in. I asked the [relative]
how long he had been in
Australia and what his status was. He replied that he had come to Australia
twenty four years previously
and had been sponsored by his wife’s
asked if he knew anything of the applicant’s situation first hand. He said
that his family had told him about the situation
the applicant had claimed in
2007 when the TMVP had tried to recruit him. He said that he had also heard
that his father had been
captured for a time but was later released.
asked if he had visited Sri Lanka in recent times and he said that he had been
there in 2010.
asked if he had experienced any difficulties when he entered the country. He
said that his details and location to visit were checked
by the CID and the
process took about an hour. After that he was able to travel.
asked if he had visited [the applicant], the applicant while he was there and if
so where he had visited him.
said that he had visited [the applicant] but, it was not at home as he was not
secure in being in that area at the time and was
hiding from the authorities.
said that, after this he had returned to Australia.
returned to the applicant to talk about the situation leading to his departure
from Sri Lanka and, again, he provided evidence in
the same manner as he had
previously and consistent with that evidence.
Information
Country Information Report-Sri Lanka 16 February 2015
Starting in 1983, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE) began a military campaign with the main aim of establishing a separate
Tamil state, Tamil Eelam, in the north and east. A serious civil conflict,
broken only by a ceasefire from 2002 until 2006, lasted
until May 2009, when the
Government announced its military victory over the LTTE and complete territorial
control over Sri Lanka.
Over the course of the conflict hundreds of
thousands of people were displaced and tens of thousands of people were
...The security situation in the north and east has greatly improved since
the end of the military conflict. With the cessation of
fighting, the
humanitarian situation in these areas has also improved. The end of the
conflict has allowed reconstruction to occur,
including the repair of the main
highway, railway and ports linking northern Sri Lanka to the rest of the
country. In turn, this
has helped to reduce the cost of transport and of basic
goods in northern Sri Lanka.
Military and security forces maintain a significant presence in the Northern
Province, including Mannar, Vavuniya, Kilinochchi, Mullaitivu
Districts. According to the Government of Sri Lanka, the number of
personnel has been reduced by approximately 30 per
cent since the end
of the conflict but there may be up to 70,000 Sri Lankan Defence Force
troops and up to 15,000 civilian police
still stationed in the north.
Within days of assuming office, the new government led by President Sirisena
appointed two retired senior civil servants as Governors
in the Northern and
Eastern provinces, with a view to initiating measures to strengthen civilian
administration...
... The Sri Lankan
Constitution
provides that ‘no citizen shall
be discriminated against on the grounds of race, religion, language,
caste, sex, political
opinion, place of birth or any such grounds’.
However, ethnicity is highly politicised in
Sri Lanka and tends to be bound together with issues of language
religion. These three issues are defining features of day-to-day life in
Sri Lanka. Most Sri Lankans tend to live alongside members
own ethnic groups. However, major urban areas are more integrated, where ethnic
groups live in close proximity to each
other. Colombo is highly
integrated–with roughly equal populations of Sinhalese, Tamils and
Muslims. This high level of integration
is due in part to internal relocation by
Tamils and Muslims from other parts of the country during the conflict but also
to the economic
opportunities available in Colombo. Because the north and east
were isolated from the rest of the country for almost 30 years as
a result of
the conflict, these areas tend to be less well integrated. Relatively few
Sinhalese or Muslims who left these areas during
the conflict have
returned...
... Since independence in 1948, Sri Lanka has experienced tensions
between the majority Sinhalese and the minority Tamil populations.
have traditionally perceived that Tamils received preferential treatment under
British rule. The growing dominance of Sinhala
nationalist politics contributed
to the implementation of a series of policy changes during the 1970s designed to
assist Sinhalese,
particularly in the areas of education and employment. This
meant that many Tamils faced barriers to education and employment, creating
sense of discrimination among the Tamil community that was a primary driver of
the conflict. Partly as a result of the conflict,
successive Sri Lankan
governments have made some efforts to address these ethnic and linguistic
tensions through constitutional,
legal and policy changes.
In practice, Tamil speakers who speak no other language can face
difficulties, including in the Tamil-majority Northern Province.
For example,
Tamils can sometimes have difficulty communicating with the police, military and
other Government authorities. DFAT
assesses that these practical difficulties
are not due to official discrimination as such, but are the result of a lack of
language teachers, the disruption to civilian life caused by the
conflict and the legacy of previous discriminatory language policies.
Monitoring, harassment, arrest and detention
Many Tamils, particularly in the north and east,
expressed a fear of monitoring, harassment, arrest and detention by security
under the Rajapaksa government. For example, during the civil conflict,
more Tamils were detained under emergency regulations and
the PTA than any other
ethnic group. This was largely due to LTTE members and supporters almost all
being Tamil. However, there were
also likely instances of discrimination in the
application of these laws with LTTE support at times imputed on the basis of
(see also October 2014 Thematic Report on People with Links to
the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam). There are no published statistics
numbers or ethnicity of those arrested under the PTA. However, DFAT assesses
that there are currently fewer individuals detained
under the PTA than there
were during the conflict. The new Sirisena government has reportedly asked for a
list of all detainees held
under the PTA for review, and has said it is willing
to work with the International Committee of the Red Cross in providing greater
access to detainees and establishing a comprehensive database on detainees.
A number of those intending to leave Sri Lanka and travel to Australia
by irregular means surveyed by the Australian National University’s
Development Policy Centre, cited persecution and torture as reasons for leaving.
This included 37 per cent who said they wanted to
leave Sri Lanka
because of ‘persecution in Sri Lanka’ and 36 per cent who
cited ‘torture in Sri Lanka’. DFAT
assesses that these fears
are significant ‘push factors’ for external migration.
However, the cessation of the forced registration of Tamils suggests the
trend of monitoring and harassment of Tamils in day-to-day
life has generally
eased since the end of the conflict. According to the United Nations’ High
Commissioner for Refugees’
(UNHCR) eligibility guidelines released in July
2010, due to the improved human rights and security situation there was
longer a need for group based protection mechanisms or for the
presumption of eligibility for Sri Lankans of Tamil ethnicity originating
from the north of the country’. ..
... There are currently no banned political parties in Sri Lanka.
Political parties are generally free to operate, subject to legal
restrictions.
This applies both to high-profile elected representatives and office holders and
low-profile party members, supporters
and volunteers, including people putting
up fliers or handing out leaflets. There is no evidence to suggest this differs
representatives of Sinhalese, Tamil, Muslim or other parties.
However, a number of organisations remain banned in Sri Lanka. The LTTE
was first designated as a proscribed organisation in Sri Lanka
in 1998. The
proscription was lifted in 2002, but re-imposed since 2009. These organisations
and individuals may be subject to legal
constraints on their activities in
Sri Lanka (see also the October 2014 Thematic Report on People with Links
to the Liberation Tigers
of Tamil Eelam).
In addition, under the
Prevention of Terrorism Act
(PTA), certain
actions by political parties or groups can be restricted. According to the PTA,
any person who “causes or intends
to cause commission of acts of violence
or religious, racial or communal disharmony...” can be sentenced to a
maximum of five
years imprisonment.
Amnesty International Report
Locked Away 2012 advised:
CID headquarters in Colombo, a place mentioned by several witnesses, has long
notorious for torture. As one detainee arrested in the north described
“This move to Colombo this was the worst...this was the worst...this
was total torture....there they had an electric chair...I
can’t think
inquiry....4th Floor hard inquiry with torture....if
you go to 6th Floor
torture... you don’t come back.”36 Torture was also described In TID
detention both in Colombo and
at the TID detention centre at Boosa. A handful of
TID officers have been identified as perpetrators of torture, not only,
apparently,
to extract intelligence or punish non-cooperation, as posited by
former detainees, but also to increase pressure on families to extract
One of the officers named by a
former detainee interviewed by Amnesty International in January 2012 also
appears in UN Special Rapporteur on Torture Manfred Nowak’s
report on his
October 2007 visit to Sri Lanka.
UK Country of Origin Report 2012 advises:
The current categories of
persons at real risk of persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka,
whether in detention or otherwise,
‘(a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to the
integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,
or are perceived to
have a significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the
Diaspora and/or a renewal of
hostilities within Sri Lanka.
‘(b) Journalists (whether in print or other media) or human rights
activists, who, in either case, have criticised the Sri Lankan
government, in
particular its human rights record, or who are associated with publications
critical of the Sri Lankan government.
‘(c) Individuals who have given evidence to the Lessons Learned and
Reconciliation Commission implicating the Sri Lankan security
forces, armed
forces or the Sri Lankan authorities in alleged war crimes. Among those who may
have witnessed war crimes during the
conflict, particularly in the No-Fire Zones
in May 2009, only those who have already identified themselves by giving such
would be known to the Sri Lankan authorities and therefore only they
are at real risk of adverse attention or persecution on return
as potential or
actual war crimes witnesses. (d) A person whose name appears on a computerised
“stop” list accessible
at the airport, comprising a
list of those against whom there is an extant court order or arrest warrant.
is broadly consistent with UNHCR information which advises:
considers that individuals with these profiles – though this
list is not exhaustive – may be, and in some cases are likely to be in
need of international refugee
protection, depending on the individual circumstances of their case.
(i) persons suspected of certain links with the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam (LTTE);
(ii) certain opposition politicians and political activists;
(iii) certain journalists and other media professionals;
(iv) certain human rights activists;
(v) certain witnesses of human rights violations and victims of human rights
seeking justice;
(vi) women in certain circumstances;
(vii) children in certain circumstances; and
(viii) lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) individuals
in certain circumstances.
failed asylum seekers that report advises:
In 2011, a total of 1,728
refugees returned to Sri Lanka through the facilitated voluntary repatriation
programme from India, which
is supported by the Governments of India and Sri
Lanka and facilitated by UNHCR. This was a decline compared to the previous
when some 2,054 individuals returned. A commercial ferry service from
Tamil Nadu to Colombo raised additional interest involuntary
repatriation in
late 2011, but the ferry was later discontinued due to commercial disputes.
Also in 2011, a handful of refugees returned voluntarily with UNHCR
assistance from other countries of asylum, specifically Malaysia,
Georgia and
St. Lucia. In addition, some 634 refugees, who returned on their own, registered
with UNHCR field offices in 2011.
The interest of Sri Lankan refugees in voluntarily repatriating continued to
decline in 2012, with fewer than 1300 individuals returning
to the country
through UNHCR’s facilitated return program from January to mid December
2012. As in prior years, most refugee
returnees came from India, but a small
number returned from Malaysia, Hong Kong and Cambodia. In addition, the number
of spontaneous
refugee returnees who approached UNHCR in field locations has
reduced by half compared to 2011.
Vavuniya is the district with the highest number of refugee returns, followed
by Trincomalee. In April 2012, four refugee returnees
were amongst Tamils
arrested in the context of a security operation in Trincomalee, but they were
released after a few days.
All returnees under the UNHCR facilitated voluntary repatriation programme
undergo a questioning session by Immigration Officials
for one to two hours upon
arrival, followed by security interviews by the State Intelligence Service
(SIS), which can take from 30
minutes to five hours. UNHCR is not permitted to
remain in the interview room during this process, but waits for the returnees
the room. Individuals have been allowed to proceed from the security
interviews to their destinations.
UNHCR provides return and reintegration assistance, including support with
onward transportation from the airport to home areas, a
reintegration grant, and
on-going protection monitoring post-return.
UNHCR post-return monitoring data indicate that in 2011, upon arrival in the
village of destination, 75% of the refugee returnees
were contacted at their
“registration”. 26% of these
returnees were again visited at home
for subsequent interviews, with a handful receiving a number of additional
visits by the police
or military.16
In addition, IOM runs in a number of countries an “assisted voluntary
return” (AVR) programme primarily intended for stranded
migrants, which
has been accessed by some Sri Lankan former asylum-seekers whose cases had been
rejected in last instance, as well
as by some who had abandoned their asylum
claims. In 2011, 179 Sri Lankans reportedly returned under the AVR programme,
substantially
less than the 389 Sri Lankans returning with IOM support in
Some sources have reported recent cases of former Sri Lankan (in particular
Tamil) asylum-seekers who were allegedly detained and
ill-treated or tortured
after having been forcibly returned to Sri Lanka upon rejection of their asylum
claims or who voluntarily
returned to Sri Lanka. There is no systematic
monitoring after arrival in Sri Lanka of the treatment of Sri Lankans who were
advice of July 2013 and March 2015 is as follows:
3.1 Sri Lankans
are able to re-enter the country on temporary travel documents if they do not
have their passport. However, Sri Lankan
citizens exiting Sri Lanka can only do
so with a passport and visa (if required) and are not able to depart on a
temporary travel
document. If a returnee has committed an offence under Sri
Lankan law, they will be investigated and prosecuted for the offence.
assesses that Sri Lankans returnees are treated along standard procedures
applying to all Sri Lankans, regardless of their
ethnicity and religion. DFAT
has not observed any difference in the way Tamil returnees are treated in
comparison to Sinhala or Muslim
arrival in Sri Lanka, authorised officers check passport/travel document and
visa information against the Department of Immigration
and Emigration (DoIE)
immigration database. Under Sri Lanka’s
Immigrants and Emigrants
), it is an offence to depart other than via an
official port of entry/exit (such as a seaport or airport) and without a
A returnee suspected of involvement in the organisation of irregular
migration of people from Sri Lanka can also be charged with
an offence under
Section 45C of the
for organising or attempting to organise
for another person to leave in contravention of the
empowers authorised officers to detain and examine any person
arriving in or leaving Sri Lanka and to require the production of any
by such a person.
the following reasons, the Tribunal has concluded that the matter should be
remitted for reconsideration.
of Reference
applicant has consistently claimed to come from Sri Lanka and that he is a
citizen in that country.
the process he has used the Tamil language as the language media to present his
has provided a number of pieces of documentation to support his claim to be Sri
Lankan and that material incudes a Sri Lankan passport.
has demonstrated a sound knowledge and awareness of the current and recent
history of Sri Lanka, together with a sound geography
of the country.
the evidence before me I am satisfied that the applicant is a national of Sri
Lanka and that he does not have a right to enter
or reside in any other
being the case, I find the country of reference in this matter is Sri Lanka.
Claims and Findings of Fact
applicant has been consistent in his claims from his entry interview through to
the second hearing of the Tribunal.
itself this does not, without more establish that the claims are credible but it
does lead me to find that the core is factual.
applicant claimed to have been kidnapped and abused in an attempt to recruit him
into the TMPV or LTTE as it was the practice
to have one son from each family. I
accept this to be the case but, taking into account his claim to have the chain
break and to
have been able to avoid detection for the next two years I find
this claim has been exaggerated. I do, however, accept as plausible
attempts were made to have him enlist. This is consistent with the evidence
cited by the delegate in his decision.
accept that the applicant did attempt to escape Sri Lanka in 2009 and that he
was detained by the Navy. Again this is consistent
with independent material in
the delegate’s decision.
note that the conflict did not come to an end until May 2009. The
applicant’s departure coming at the time it did and, him
coming from a
strong LTTE area would raise concerns in the minds of the authorities as is
expressed in the independent material below
Congress First Session Committee on Foreign
Relations report:
Basic problems still exist. Access to the IDP
camps generally has been heavily restricted and monitored. Tamil and Muslim
leaders, journalists, and various NGOs, as well as the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), had been denied entry into
the IDP centers
and, as a result, there was no free flow of credible information coming from the
camps. The Goverment has begun to
ease some of these restrictions. People are
still unable to locate their relatives, and some potential host families have
been dissuaded
by intrusive government screening procedures. There was no legal
basis for the Goverment detention of Tamils in the camps, according
to Minister
of Justice Malinda Moragoda. The IDPs' relief that the war was over is tempered
by disappointment with the continued
security checks and government control over
their lives...
... the Goverment still fears LTTE sleeper cells, both in Sri Lanka and
abroad, and screened all Tamils in government-run camps for
potential links to
terrorism. ``Guilty until proven innocent'' remains the basis for operations,
and the recent discovery of massive
caches of weapons in the north of the
country, the former base of the Tigers, only deepens the
Goverment's suspicions. Still, there are fewer checkpoints in the country and
people do feel a greater sense of freedom of movement,
even in parts of the
It will take time for the country to transition to a post-conflict phase.
Sinhalese and Tamils remain politically very far apart
with few moderate
political leaders emerging to bridge the gap.
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CPRT-111SPRT53866/html/CPRT-111SPRT53866.htm
This being the case, I accept that when he was taken by the Navy, as a young
Tamil male from Batticaloa there was enough concern
for the authorities to hold
him on suspicion of being associated with the LTTE.
read the Human Rights reports provided by the applicant’s advisers and the
material cited in this decision I accept that
his time in detention in [Camp 1]
and [Location 2] was one in which he did face treatment which was at a high
level of harm.
accept that he did appear in court and was acquitted of the charge of being
associated with the LTTE.
also accept that, as a precaution and concerns of potential LTTE support the
applicant was monitored through a system of regular
am of the view that he has exaggerated his claims.
independent material before me is such that if, as he has claimed he was of such
concern to the TMVP in 2007 he would not have
been able to escape in the manner
he claimed he did and to remain in the same area for the next two years.
I find it implausible that he would have only been required to continue to
report to the CID after 2009 if they believed
he did have information or
intelligence of the TMVP.
independent material from a wide range of sources advises that the CID had the
power to detain him and their practices were brutal
in extracting the
information they wanted. This independent material which has been researched and
substantiated is such that I prefer
it to the applicant’s unsubstantiated
despite my concerns in regard to his claims I accept the following:
find as fact:
Applicant is a Tamil from the Eastern region of Sri Lanka.
was approached as a potential recruit into the LTTE/TMVP.
TMPV ceased to support the LTTE and in 2008 split into two groups, The Karuna
and the TMPV, which supports the government paramilitary
groups in the Eastern
Province of Sri Lanka.
1] is a centre for the detention of a range of people including those with
suspected links to the LTTE. It is noted for its
torture of suspects.
applicant made an attempt to leave Sri Lanka illegally in 2009 and was caught by
the Sri Lankan Navy and handed over to the Sri
Lankan authorities.
applicant was detained in [Camp 1] for one and a half months in 2009.
report was lodged to the Human Rights Commission in Batticaloa concerning the
applicant’s detention. ( I accept the document
he provided in that regard
as genuine)
applicant did appear in court on charges of LTTE support but was acquitted and
required to report to the CID on a regular basis.
( I accept the document he
provided in that regard as genuine)
late 2011 the applicant ceased to report to the CID
including young Tamil males do not face serious harm unless they are suspected
of LTTE links or other issues such as Human
Rights reporting or support,
journalism reporting on Human Rights abuses.
departure is an act proscribed by law and carries penalties which are imposed on
all who have breached the laws under the
Emigration Act of Sri
Consideration
of the applicant’s claims cumulatively
discussed above I accept as fact that the applicant is a young Tamil male from
Batticaloa in the Eastern region of Sri Lanka and
that this area was largely
under the control of the LTTE during the thirty year Conflict.
did attempt to leave the country illegally in 2009 and came to the attention of
the Sri Lankan authorities, was then detained and
sent to court for his failed
attempt to leave the country illegally and also as a suspected supporter of the
was found not guilty but was put on reporting conditions to the CID which I
accept was, in part, to monitor him in relation to
any LTTE links he may
I do not accept that he was required to provide information to the CID I accept
that he failed to report from the end of 2011
to March 2012 and would, therefore
have come to their negative attention.
accept that he had previously been held in [Camp 1] detention centre and later
in [Location 2] jail when he had been found to have
attempted to leave Sri Lanka
he returned or was forcibly returned to Sri Lanka I take the DFAT advice into
account that he would be stopped at the airport and
checked by three different
authorities and that his previous attempt to leave irregularly in 2009 would be
revealed. I further find
that his previous charges of suspected LTTE links
would also be discovered and his failure to report after late 2011.
I accept the independent material to the effect that the situation has improved
significantly I also give weight to the assessment
of groups at risk by the
UNHCR which is the body with a mandate for asylum seekers (refugees)
This being the case, I cannot dismiss as remote or insubstantial that the
applicant faces a real chance of serious harm.
find, based on the independent material before me that harm may be in the form
of loss of liberty; significant physical harassment
of the person or significant
physical ill-treatment of the person. This being the case the gravitas is that
considered in s.91R(2)
of the Act and, is serious harm.
I have found that the applicant was previously suspected of links with the LTTE
based on his race, his location and his age
and gender I find this amounts to an
imputed political opinion.
I have found that there is a greater chance of this being the case now that he
has departed for a second time and that he has failed
to continue to report then
there is a real chance that his political opinion will be regarded as being more
serious and will be the
essential and significant reason for any harm he
have not considered his access to state protection or relocation since it is the
state or organs of the state which would be responsible
for the harm and, since
he would be stopped, checked and discovered at the airport on arrival then
relocation is not possible in
considered as a whole I find the applicant meets the criteria of s.36(2)(a)
the reasons given above, the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant is a
person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the
Refugees Convention. Therefore the applicant satisfies the criterion set out in
s.36(2)(a).
Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the direction that the
applicant satisfies s.36(2)(a) of the Migration Act.
Roger Fordham
RTF format (219 KB)
Signed PDF/A format