Yugunga-Nya Native Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Complete Prospecting Pty Ltd and Another [2025] NNTTA 23 (25 August 2025)
NATIONAL NATIVE TITLE TRIBUNAL
Yugunga-Nya Native Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Complete
Prospecting Pty Ltd and Another
[2025] NNTTA 23
(25 August 2025)
Application No:
WO2023/0893; WO2023/0894; WO2023/0895; WO2023/1001; WO2023/1002;
WO2024/0486; WO2024/0487; WO2024/0488
IN THE MATTER of the
Native Title Act 1993
IN THE MATTER of an inquiry into expedited procedure objection
applications
Yugunga-Nya Native Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC (WCD2021/008)
(native title party)
Complete Prospecting Pty Ltd
(grantee party)
State of Western Australia
(Government party)
DETERMINATION THAT THE ACTS ARE ACTS ATTRACTING THE EXPEDITED
Ms Nerida Cooley
Catchwords:
Native title – future acts – proposed grant of prospecting
licences – expedited procedure objection applications
– whether acts
are likely to interfere with the carrying on of community and social activities
– whether acts are likely
to interfere with areas or sites of particular
significance – acts are acts attracting the expedited procedure
Legislation:
Title Act 1993
Cheinmora v Striker Resources NL and Others; Dann v State of Western
Australia and Others
(1996) 142 ALR 21
Smith v Western Australia and Another
(2001) 108 FCR 442
Smith v Western
Yindjibarndi Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v FMG Pilbara Pty Ltd and
Yindjibarndi
Yugunga-Nya Native Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Kelro Pty Ltd
and Another
Representative of the native title party:
Anja Gambie-Becker, Yugunga-Nya Native Title Aboriginal Corporation
Representative of the grantee party:
Matthew Stratfold, Complete Prospecting Pty Ltd
Representatives of the Government party:
Domhnall McCloskey, State Solicitor’s Office; Paola O’Neill,
Department of Mines, Petroleum and Exploration
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Prospecting
Pty Ltd has applied for the grant of eight prospecting
listed in Annexure A, located in the mid-west of Western
Yugunga-Nya
Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC holds non-exclusive native title in trust for
the Yugunga-Nya People in relation to the
whole or part of each licence area.
of Western Australia considers the grant of each licence to be an
act attracting the expedited procedure as defined in
(Cth), meaning it may proceed to grant without
first requiring Complete Prospecting, Yugunga-Nya and the State to negotiate in
faith in accordance with
s 31(1)(b).
[4] Yugunga-Nya
objects to the application of the expedited procedure in each case. The
objection applications lodged in 2023 were
originally before Member Kelly but
because all eight matters share similar facts and involve largely identical
evidence, it is convenient
for me to deal with them together.
[5] Yugunga-Nya
presses two bases for its objections. Firstly, it contends that the grant of
each licence is likely to directly interfere
with community and social
activities undertaken by Yugunga-Nya People. Secondly, it says each grant is
likely to interfere with areas
or sites of particular significance to the
Yugunga-Nya People, with the evidence focussing on the area around Mt Yagahong,
sacred site.
[6] Complete
Prospecting, generally supported by the State, says interference of either kind
is not likely, primarily because the
licences are located outside the area where
community and social activities are undertaken and all are some distance from
any registered
Aboriginal sites.
[7] To determine
whether the expedited procedure applies, I must undertake a predictive
assessment by considering the likely consequences
from the grant of each licence
in the sense of a real, not remote, chance: see overview of approach in
Yindjibarndi v FMG
satisfied these matters can be adequately determined without a hearing:
Native Title Act
. For the reasons outlined below, I am not satisfied that
direct interference with community or social activities is likely, nor am
satisfied that the grant of any of the licences is likely to interfere with any
areas or sites of particular significance to the
Yugunga-Nya People. I have
therefore determined that the grant of each licence is an act attracting the
expedited procedure.
What are the issues?
[9] There are
two key issues in this matter.
[10] The first
is whether the grant of any of the licences is likely to interfere directly with
the carrying on of the Yugunga-Nya
People’s community or social
activities:
Native Title Act
. This involves a consideration of
both the extent of community and social activities undertaken and whether the
grant of each licence
is likely to cause direct interference with those
activities. Trivial impacts are outside the scope of interference contemplated
by the section:
Smith v Western Australia
[11] The second
issue is whether the grant of any of the licences is likely to interfere with
areas or sites of particular significance
to the Yugunga-Nya People:
Native Title Act
. For that to be the case, I must be satisfied there are
such areas or sites in or near the relevant licence area and that the grant
likely to interfere with those areas or sites in accordance with Yugunga-Nya
traditions.
[12] Despite the
terms of its objections, Yugunga-Nya does not contend that the grant of any of
the licences is likely to involve
major disturbance to any land or waters in
accordance with
so it is not necessary for me to consider that
Is the grant of each licence likely to directly interfere with
the Yugunga-Nya People’s community or social activities?
[13] Relying
on the evidence of Ms Davina Lane, a Yugunga-Nya common law holder, Yugunga-Nya
argues that the licence areas are used
by over a quarter of the Yugunga-Nya
People with such frequency, duration, intensity and freedom of access that
interference within
the meaning of
[14] Yugunga-Nya
relied on the same evidence in
where I discussed Ms Lane’s
evidence at [12]–[22]. Her evidence relates to an area hand drawn in blue
on the maps attached
to her statement. I described the area as loosely
triangular in shape with Meekatharra, where Ms Lane says her family lives,
at or about the northernmost point of the westerly side of the triangle.
I was satisfied from Ms Lane’s evidence that a sizeable
Yugunga-Nya People frequently conduct community and social activities in the
hand drawn blue triangular area.
reference to the Tribunal’s online mapping tool, Native Title Vision, the
northerly side of the triangle seems to follow
the path of Meekatharra-Sandstone
Road from Meekatharra in a south-easterly direction towards Mt Yagahong. From
the State’s
mapping and Native Title Vision, it appears that all eight of
the licences in issue in this case are located outside the hand drawn
is a point also made by Complete Prospecting. Two are located a considerable
distance to the north and one far to the
south. Only five of the licences are in
the vicinity of the area and all of those are located just on the other side of
Meekatharra-Sandstone
Road, as clearly shown on the State’s mapping.
v Western Australia
at [26], the Federal Court of Australia explained that
direct interference involves an evaluative judgment that the act, in this
each licence, “is likely to be a proximate cause of the apprehended
interference”.
[17] None of
Yugunga-Nya’s contentions specifically address the licences in issue or
explain how Ms Lane’s evidence purportedly
relates to the locations of the
licences. Given their location in relation to the hand drawn area, I am not
satisfied the grant of
any of the licences is likely to interfere with community
or social activities undertaken in that area.
Is the grant of
each licence likely to interfere with areas or sites of particular significance
to the Yugunga-Nya People, in accordance
with their traditions?
area or site of particular significance for
is one of special, or more
than ordinary, significance to the native title holders in accordance with their
traditions:
at page 35. Such an area or site must also be known
and be able to be located, and the nature of its significance explained:
Yindjibarndi v FMG
[19] Yugunga-Nya
contends that the licences are within an area of particular significance which
is the “spiritual centre”
of Yugunga-Nya Country. While it does not
expand on that contention, it again relies on evidence submitted in
, being statements by common law holders, Mr Leonard (Jeff) Barnard
and Mr Andrew Gentle Snr, which focus on the importance of Mt
Yagahong/Yagahong
Hill and surrounds. As was the case in
, some of the evidence is
subject to non-disclosure directions.
discussed in
at [39], there are two registered Aboriginal sites
related to Mt Yagahong, called Mt Yagahong and Yakong. There is also a
surrounding
lodged, but not registered, site called Yagahong Hill.
[21] As shown in
Annexure A, each licence is, according to Native Title Vision, located some
distance from the Yakong registered site.
Complete Prospecting says the closest
any of the licences is to a registered site is 3.5 kilometres, but it does not
say to which
licence or site this refers. The State also raises the distance of
the licences from Mt Yagahong and points out that Yugunga-Nya
explained how the evidence, which was originally prepared for different matters,
relates to the licences.
[22] The area
identified by Mr Barnard is hand drawn in blue on a map annexed to his statement
and roughly circular in shape. It is
at least 50 kilometres in diameter centring
on the registered and lodged sites as shown on the map. Mr Gentle Snr’s
does not include a map but he refers to the area all around Yagahong
[23] None of the
licences are shown on Mr Barnard’s map with the blue circle. Again, from
the State’s materials and Native
Title Vision, only the five licences
close to Meekatharra-Sandstone Road appear to be located within the blue circle
but it is clear
that none overlap the registered sites or the lodged site.
decision in
included detailed consideration, not just of the
evidence of Mr Barnard and Mr Gentle Snr, but also of previous Tribunal
regarding Mt Yagahong, its surrounds and the registered and
lodged sites related to it: see
at [36]–[57].
relevant points from
can be summarised as follows:
(a) Mt Yagahong is highly sacred and of central importance to the Yugunga-Nya
People and is an area or site of particular significance
to the Yugunga-Nya
People within the meaning of
(b) as acknowledged in previous Tribunal decisions, there is evidence which
indicates that particular significance extends to an
area or areas around the
base of Mt Yagahong, but the extent and basis of particular significance of any
such area or areas is not
(c) there is no evidence to support a finding that any area of particular
significance beyond Mt Yagahong itself would extend to
the area mentioned
by Mr Gentle Snr or the area of the blue circle discussed in
Mr Barnard’s statement, which is larger again.
discussed in
at [58], the evidence does not support a finding of
particular significance in relation to either the whole of the area within the
blue circle shown on the map annexed to Mr Barnard’s statement or the area
described by Mr Gentle Snr.
[27] Accordingly,
on the evidence before me there is no area or site of particular significance to
Yugunga-Nya in or relevantly proximate
to any of the licences. It is therefore
not necessary for me to further consider the question of likely
interference.
Determination
determine that the grant of prospecting licences P 51/3310, P 51/3311, P
51/3312, P 51/3286, P 51/3287, P 20/2515, P 51/3399
and P 51/3400 are acts
attracting the expedited procedure.
Ms Nerida Cooley
Objection number
Licence number
Licence location
Distance from Yakong registered site (approx.)
WO2023/0893
20.4 km SE’ly of Meekatharra
WO2023/0894
21.5 km SE’ly of Meekatharra
WO2023/0895
18.1 km SE’ly of Meekatharra
WO2023/1001
24.4 km SE’ly of Meekatharra
WO2023/1002
27 km SE’ly of Meekatharra
WO2024/0486
52 km E’ly of Cue
WO2024/0487
37.6 km SE’ly of Peak Hill
WO2024/0488
39.5 km SE’ly of Peak Hill
RTF format (273 KB)
Signed PDF/A format