Australian Hotels Association [2024] FWCD 1057 (11 November 2024)
[2024] FWCD 1057
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
—Alteration of other rules of organisation
Australian Hotels
Association
(R2024/159)
PATRICK COYLE
ADELAIDE, 11 NOVEMBER 2024
Alteration of other rules of organisation.
On 22 October 2024 the South Australian Branch of the Australian
Hotels Association (the Branch) lodged with the Fair Work Commission
Commission) a notice and declaration setting out particulars of alterations to
the rules of the South Australian Branch. Further
information in support of the
alterations was provided on 23 October 2024 and 25 October 2024.
The Branch seeks certification of the alterations under
section 159
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
On the information contained in the notice and declaration, I am
satisfied the alterations have been made under the rules of the organisation.
The particulars set out alterations to Branch Rules 17 and 51.
Alterations to Branch Council
The Branch Council is the Committee of Management of the Branch,
which consists of 28 representatives elected by and from financial
nineteen districts and two
Under the current rules, the Package Liquor Stores Division and
Accommodation Hotels Division collectively form one electorate and
representative.
The alterations to Subrule 17(b) allow each of the two divisions to
separately elect its own representative to the Branch Council.
As such, the
number of representatives in the Branch Council is increased from 28 to 29.
An organisation has the right to mould its internal structures as it
sees fit, provided it complies with the requirements of the
legislation.
relevant requirement of the Act is that rules must not impose conditions,
obligations or restrictions that are, having regard to
Parliament’s
intentions and the objects of the Act, oppressive, unreasonable or
considering whether conditions imposed on members are oppressive, unreasonable
or unjust, regard must be had, among other things,
to the democratic functioning
and control of the
organisation.
I note that the two divisions cover members in two distinct areas.
The Accommodation Hotels Division
covers members of the
Australian Hotels Association in this State, having bedrooms available to the
The Package
Liquor Stores Division covers members who hold, or who will transition to, a
packaged liquor sales licence in respect
of their licensed premises and who
conduct a retail liquor
In my view, the alterations provide the opportunity for the division
members to be properly represented in the governing body of the
Branch. At the
same time, expanding the size of Branch Council by one would not alter the fact
that most representatives are still
from the districts. The current level of
representation is not materially changed. Therefore, I am satisfied that the
proposed alterations
do not impose oppressive, unreasonable or unjust
conditions, obligations or restrictions.
Following the changes to Subrule 17(b), the office of the current
division representative is abolished. The current division representative
elected in 2023,
they have a term of three
There is a rebuttable presumption that a rule alteration cannot
retrospectively change a term of office once an election has taken
Joske J stated in
“In any event, in my view there is a prima facie principle
of construction that unless it appears expressly or by implication
in rules as
amended that they are intended in their amended form to apply to past matters or
events, including matters commenced
before but not completed at the time of the
amendment, the amendments do not apply to the past or uncompleted
However, this presumption can be rebutted where:
• there is an express or implied intention to apply the alteration to
current terms of office;
• the rule does not have harsh effects or interfere with vested interests
I note that the abolition of the office of the shared division
representative is an inevitable consequence of assigning each division
representative of their own. The effect of the amendment is that two officers
will be elected from the membership of the two respective
divisions, replacing
the office of the incumbent elected in 2023 from the same membership. The
alternative proposition, which cannot
be accepted, would result in those
divisions being overrepresented on the Branch Council.
I further note that the incumbent division representative voted in
favour of the alterations in the Branch Council meeting. This indicates
support for the abolition of their office and suggests that the alteration does
not have harsh effects or interfere with vested
interests or accrued rights.
Therefore, I am satisfied that the decision was bona fide and the
presumption against retrospective operation is rebutted.
The Branch confirmed that the upcoming election will commence in
February 2025.
the new offices will be filled at the upcoming election, I am satisfied that the
alterations are not contrary to section 143(1)(a)
of the Act.
Minor alterations
Alterations have been made to Subrules 17(c) and 17(d) to correct
grammar and rule references. They are minor and uncontroversial.
National Accommodation Division representative
Currently, the Accommodation Hotels Division Councillor is the
ex-officio National Accommodation Division (NAD)
representative.
This is inconsistent with National Rule 52, which requires that the NAD
representative from each State to be elected following National
Rule 16. When
there is an inconsistency between any of the provisions of the NAD rules and the
rules of a Branch, the NAD rules shall
prevail to the extent of the
inconsistency.
The alterations to Subrules 51(b) and 51(c) have been made to
rectify this inconsistency. The Accommodation Hotels Division Councillor
longer be the ex-officio NAD representative, and the NAD representative will be
separately elected as per National Rule 52.
For the sake of completeness, the elections for the NAD Board will
commence soon after 1 January
In my opinion, the alterations comply with and are not contrary to
the Act, the
Fair Work Act 2009
, modern awards and enterprise agreements,
are not otherwise contrary to law and were made under the rules of the
organisation. I
certify accordingly under
subsection 159(1)
of the Act.
DELEGATE OF THE GENERAL MANAGER
[1985] FCA 132
(1985) 7 FCR 457
142(1)(c) of the Act provides that rules:
must not impose on applicants for membership, or members, of the
organisation, conditions, obligations or restrictions that, having
Parliament’s intention in enacting this Act (see
objects of this Act and the
Fair Work Act
, are oppressive, unreasonable or
Subsection 5(3)
of the Act sets out the following standards for registered organisations:
(a) ensure that employer and employee organisations registered under this Act
are representative of and accountable to their members,
and are able to operate
effectively; and
(b) encourage members to participate in the affairs of
organisations to which they belong; and
(c) encourage the efficient
management of organisations and high standards of accountability of
organisations to their members; and
(d) provide for the democratic
functioning and control of organisations; and
(e) facilitate the registration
of a diverse range of employer and employee organisations
Subrule 51(a).
Subrule 52(a).
See E2022/201.
The Branch’s past election reports can be found on our website
Hotels Association (AHA) - Find a registered organisation - Fair Work Commission
(fwc.gov.au)
Subrule 17(d).
Blayney and Others
(1966) 8 FLR 292
; Spicer CJ, Joske J, Eggleston JJ.
Ibid per Joske
Re Federated Liquor and Allied Industries Employees Union of Australia
(1987) 17 FLR 120; 18 IR 350 per Gray J at 353.
Branch’s correspondence dated 23 October 2024.
Subrule 51(b).
See E2023/197.
The AHA’s past election reports can be found on our website
Hotels Association (AHA) - Find a registered organisation - Fair Work Commission
(fwc.gov.au)
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (495 KB)
Signed PDF/A format