Leslie Dobbie v Linfox Australia Pty Ltd - re Termination of employment [2009] AIRC 965; (22 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
- Application for relief re (Harsh, Unjust or Unreasonable) termination of employment
Mr Leslie Dobbie
Linfox Australia Pty Ltd
(U2009/3341)
COMMISSIONER CRIBB
MELBOURNE, 22 DECEMBER 2009
Termination of employment.
This matter is an application by Mr Leslie Dobbie (the applicant), pursuant to
section 643(1)(a)
and (b) of the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(the act), alleging that the termination of his employment by Linfox Australia Pty Ltd (the respondent) was harsh unjust or unreasonable.
The application was subject to conciliation on 12 May 2009, but the matter was not settled. The applicant elected to proceed to
arbitration to have determined whether the termination of his employment was harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
The applicant was represented by Mr D Prior, solicitor and the respondent by Mr D Jones, Workplace Relations Manager for the respondent.
Oral evidence was given by the applicant. For the respondent, Mr J Chenoweth, Client Services Consultant from Adecco and Mr G Ackland,
Site Manager, Kmart Retail from the respondent, gave evidence.
The facts of the matter were generally agreed between the parties except for a couple of exceptions. The pertinent facts are:
• The applicant commenced employment with the respondent on 16 December 1982 as a driver.
• On 17 October 2002, the applicant was promoted to the position of shift manager.
• On 11 February 2009, Mr Chenoweth telephoned the applicant regarding Adecco’s services.
• On 13 February 2009, Mr Chenoweth and the applicant met. During this meeting, the applicant said that he needed a driver
for leave coverage.
• On 16 February 2009, Mr Haberkorn (an agency driver) was engaged for the day by the applicant from Adecco. The applicant
did not check the Agency Drivers List.
• On 19 March 2009, Mr Haberkorn was engaged again for two days. The applicant only checked the Adecco tab of the Agency Drivers
List. Mr Haberkorn was involved in an accident on 19 March 2009.
• On 20 March 2009, Mr Haberkorn reported to the applicant that he had scratched the trailer the previous day.
• The applicant did not check the damage to the trailer until Monday 23 March 2009.
• The applicant then reported the damage to his supervisor, Mr Ackland, immediately.
• There was a meeting between Mr Ackland and the applicant on Tuesday 24 March 2009 and the applicant was stood down with pay.
• A further meeting was held on Friday 30 March 2009 between Mr Ackland, Mr Conroy, the applicant and Mr Van den Berg. At the
end of the meeting, the applicant was advised that he had made some serious breaches of the company’s policies and that further
investigations would take place.
• A meeting was held on 31 March 2009 and the applicant’s employment was terminated, effective immediately. He was given
the option of resigning, which he took up.
The applicant gave oral evidence and submitted a witness statement.
It was the applicant's evidence that:
• He did not recall engaging an agency driver (Mr Sharpe) on 3 December 2008. The applicant had a feeling
“I was on a course…..”
• On 11 February 2009, Mr Chenoweth, Client Services Consultant with Adecco, telephoned regarding the services that Adecco had
to offer. The applicant had told Mr Chenoweth that he was looking for a driver.
• Mr Chenoweth and the applicant met on 13 February 2009. During the meeting, the applicant told Mr Chenoweth that he was looking
for a driver to fill in for an employee who was going on leave. Mr Chenoweth had called back later that day and said that he had
a driver named Thomas Haberkorn but he could not remembering Mr Chenoweth talking about Mr Haberkorn’s employment history.
The applicant did not recall saying that Mr Haberkorn would be ok because he would have requested a driver who was on the books,
in-cab assessed and with a Coles induction card.
• He stated that he had engaged Mr Haberkorn on 16 February 2009. It was acknowledged that Mr Haberkorn had been deemed to
be not suitable for use by Linfox as per the Agency Driver List.
• He said that he had not checked the Agency Driver List because he had specified to the Agency what Linfox’s requirements
were regarding the driver being in-cab assessed, on Linfox’s books and having an induction card for the site.
• The applicant stated: “
That was where my mistake was. I took the word of the agency that he was
• On 16 March 2009, he spoke to Mr Chenoweth from Adecco and requested a driver who had an HC licence, a combination licence,
must be on the Linfox books, in-cab assessed and have a Cole's induction card.
• Mr Chenoweth called back and said “
I have a driver. He is all good to go.
” By this, the applicant understood that the driver (Mr Haberkorn) was appropriate for Linfox.
• During cross examination, the applicant confirmed that he had requested a driver who had been in-cab assessed and had a Cole's
induction card. He rejected the proposition that he had not checked Mr Haberkorn against the Agency Driver List as he had worked
for him before.
• The applicant said that he had made a mistake by not complying completely with Linfox's policy of checking the latest Driver
Agency List. He had checked the Adecco list only and not all of the other lists. Mr Haberkorn’s name was not on the Adecco
He said that he had expected Adecco to know their drivers’ qualifications.
However, it was acknowledged that it had been his responsibility to validate Mr Haberkorn's credentials. He denied that his blaming
of Mr Chenoweth was a cover-up.
• It was acknowledged that his submissions regarding his checking or otherwise of the Agency Driver List had changed. In his
witness statement, he had said that he had not checked the list. However, his oral evidence was that he had checked the list, but
only the Adecco part.
• Mr Haberkorn reported to the applicant at 6.00 a.m. on Friday 20 March 2009 that he had scratched the trailer. The applicant
did not check the trailer that day, which was a mistake on his part. He should have checked it more promptly.
He said that the trailer had already left for the day with a load and so he was not able to investigate it then. Also, it was recalled
that this driver had not notified him of any new damage.
• The applicant went to check the trailer on Monday 23 March 2009. He recalled that, as he was walking towards the trailer,
he thought that the driver of the trailer had told him that the trailer had a scratch on the left-hand side.
It was the applicant's evidence that it was a gouge, not a scratch. He immediately advised his supervisor, Mr Ackland, of the damage
to the trailer.
• There was a meeting with Mr Ackland on Tuesday 24 March 2009. He told Mr Ackland the truth and admitted that he had made
a mistake in not fully checking the Agency Driver List and not reporting the incident earlier.
He was stood down with pay until 29 March 2009 for not reporting the damaged trailer and not checking the Agency Driver List.
• He said that he was not aware that Mr Haberkorn was not an appropriate driver for Linfox.
It was recalled that at some point, Mr Ackland had asked him whether he knew that Mr Haberkorn was not on the Linfox list.
He said that he had been unaware that Mr Haberkorn was not suitable for use until told so by Mr Ackland.
• There was a meeting on Monday 30 March 2009 between Mr Ackland, Mr Conroy, Mr Van den berg and the applicant during which
what had happened was discussed.
He did not recall being invited to have a representative at the meeting. He was told that he had made some serious breaches of
• A further meeting was held the next day, Tuesday 31 March 2009, during which the applicant was dismissed. The applicant was
given the option of resigning which he chose.
• It was not disputed that he was aware of Vision Zero and the requirement to report any incident immediately.
• The applicant’s explanation for what had happened was that, in his area, the company had only started using permanent
drivers six months previously. He had gone:
“back to the old - because I had it in my head where you just picked up the phone and you rang up an agency and asked for a
driver which we used to do with fruit and vege before I went to Kmart. I think that was just still ratified in my head at the time
and then I just didn't check on the Adecco one - I only checked the Adecco one. I didn't go to the rest of them for some reason.”
• He also acknowledged the importance of the integrity of the equipment that is used for the other public road users.
• He is seeking reinstatement - he had spent 27 years of his life at Linfox and had made a mistake - which should be allowed
- without being dismissed. He did not believe that his relationship with Linfox had been soured. He had no ill feelings towards
Mr Ackland.
• He is currently working as a truck driver which is heavy manual work. He is being paid half of what he was earning at Linfox
and is the sole income earner in his family. It took him five weeks to get employment after he was dismissed.
• He did not recall being given a written warning in 2001 for not having had 10 hour break between shifts.
• There had been no complaints regarding his performance as shift manager.
• He recalled a motor vehicle accident in October 2000 but not that he was verbally counselled regarding it.
• He had no relationship with Mr Chenoweth and nothing to gain by employing Mr Haberkorn.
Mr Chenoweth
Mr Chenoweth gave evidence that he first spoke to the applicant, who was looking for a driver, on 11 February 2009. It was stated
that, on 13 February 2009, Mr Chenoweth had then met with Mr Haberkorn who showed him his Coles induction card. Mr Haberkorn had
told him that he had worked for another agency previously.
Also on 13 February 2009, Mr Chenoweth met with the applicant and outlined Adecco’s services. The applicant had said that
he was looking for a driver for leave replacement. It was recalled by Mr Chenoweth that he had rung the applicant in the afternoon
and told him that Mr Haberkorn was available, that he was Coles inducted and that he had history with another agency and that casuals
often work with a number of agencies.
It was stated that the applicant had said that it would be right.
It was stated by Mr Chenoweth that the applicant had said that the driver must be in-cab assessed and on the Linfox books on 11 February
2009 and again on 13 February 2009.
Mr Chenoweth stated that it was the site manager’s responsibility to ensure that drivers are duly qualified rather than Adecco’s.
It was Adecco’s role to supply the name but then it was Linfox’s responsibility to check.
It was indicated that Mr Haberkorn’s engagement by Linfox for a second time on 19 March 2009 was a “re-book”.
Therefore, the conversation between the applicant and himself, when the request for Mr Haberkorn was made, was very quick as he had
worked for the company before.
It was recounted that he had rung the applicant and confirmed that Mr Haberkorn had been booked and that he was “
all good to go
” because he had worked there before.
Mr Chenoweth gave evidence that that he had an ongoing relationship with Linfox prior to his first contact with the applicant on
11 February 2009. Approximately 25% of his time was spent on Linfox. However, prior to 11 February 2009, he had not had any contact
with the applicant’s site. He looked after the respondent in the south-east and had become the central contact point for applications
from drivers or forklift drivers etc. He had also been out “
drumming up business
” with Linfox.
It was Mr Ackland’s evidence that the applicant was the site supervisor of Kmart Braeside and therefore accountable for that
During cross examination there was discussion about the title of the applicant’s position – whether it was site supervisor
or shift manager. It was indicated by Mr Ackland that his title was possibly shift manager but that, as he looked after the site
by himself, he was referred to, internally, as a site supervisor.
It was described by Mr Ackland as to how he had located Mr Haberkorn’s name on the Agency Drivers List and that it had taken
two minutes to do so. Mr Ackland said that drivers changed agencies so it was also necessary to check the other agencies.
Mr Ackland could not explain as to why the applicant had taken the word of the agency about Mr Haberkorn. He said that the process
was clear – if drivers are not on the list, they are not to be used. He also stated that the policy did not include relying
on the word of the agency. He thought that, perhaps, the applicant had been taking a short cut that day.
On being told of the damage to the trailer, Mr Ackland stated that the process was for the applicant to get the trailer to the workshop
as soon as possible to check for structural damage.
In terms of the meeting held on 30 March 2009, Mr Ackland recalled that the outcomes of his discussion with the applicant regarding
what had occurred were discussed. He had written down what the applicant had said and then shown it to him before he had emailed
it to Mr Van den Berg. It was recalled that the applicant had not challenged the contents of the email because it had captured what
he had told Mr Ackland.
It was recounted by Mr Ackland that the decision making process was a recommendation by himself to his Manager, Mr Conroy, that the
applicant’s employment be terminated. He had then had a discussion with Mr Conroy and Mr Van den Berg and there was also a
discussion with the applicant. It was stated that it had been Mr Dixon, President of Retail, who had made the ultimate decision
to terminate the applicant’s employment based on the material that had been sent to him. Mr Ackland said that all of the managers
involved were aware of the applicant’s length of service.
Mr Ackland confirmed that, at the meeting on Tuesday 31 March 2009, the applicant had asked as to whether there were options other
than dismissal. He was given the option to resign, which he took up. The applicant was also given five weeks’ pay, a statement
of service, offered a referee of his choice and given a guarantee that only that person would make any comments to a potential employer
It was Mr Ackland’s view that the applicant’s dismissal was valid because of the things that he had failed to do eg.
Assess the damage to the trailer and get it to the workshop. Mr Ackland stated that the applicant had continued to use the agency
driver and the damaged trailer. He said “That's the reason why we believe that he failed in his duties.”
In addition, it was recalled that, as the investigation progressed “
the worse it got
It wasn’t just one incident here, it was a continuation of incidents and poor decisions
”. It was said that it was not only the decisions he did make but those also that he did not make eg contacting the driver
who had the damaged trailer.
The applicant was described by Mr Ackland as an “
old fashioned type of bloke
” who had struggled with the changes in technology “
being from the old school
”. It was stated that the applicant was provided with training support and that he also undertook a two day course regarding
the new systems. Mr Ackland said that he had gone on the course as well and had set up a lot of the applicant’s “
stuff for him
” to get him through the process. He indicated that the “
” preferred telephone contact rather than computers.
Mr Ackland indicated that he had contacted all of the agencies Linfox used regarding Mr Haberkorn and ascertained whether he was
an employee and if so, when. It had been found that the applicant had been the only Linfox employee to have used Mr Haberkorn since
October 2007.
It was recounted that a search of the agency drivers used at Braeside was undertaken and the name of Greg Sharpe also came up.
Mr Ackland said that there had not been a search of other shift managers in this regard.
It was stated by Mr Ackland that the “
” for obtaining agency drivers was replaced three years prior to the applicant’s dismissal. He confirmed that the previous
system involved simply calling an agency and requesting a driver. Mr Ackland indicated that agency drivers had been used since 2002.
Mr Ackland said clearly that the applicant did not have anything to gain by employing Mr Haberkorn. He felt that the applicant had
told him the truth when they both first talked. It was stated that his story did not change prior to his dismissal.
SUBMISSIONS
On behalf of the applicant, Mr Prior highlighted the fact that the applicant had been employed for 27 years with the respondent.
He said that the applicant had made mistakes which he had admitted, both to the company and in court. It was argued that the termination
of the applicant’s employment was disproportionate to his conduct. Mr Prior also contended that the respondent had not established
that the company’s policies and procedures overrode the legislative requirement that a dismissal not be harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
He put that a final warning would have been sufficient.
Mr Prior submitted that the applicant was seeking reinstatement. He had mitigated his loss and found alternative employment but,
given his age, it was hard on his body. The applicant had enjoyed working for Linfox and had worked his way up from a driver’s
position. He had accepted what had happened with reasonable good grace and had not burnt his bridges in terms of reinstatement.
It was acknowledged that reinstatement was not often awarded but it was argued that this was a case where the applicant deserved
to be reinstated. Reinstatement was sought with lost remuneration paid from the date of the dismissal.
With respect to Mr Chenoweth’s evidence, it was indicated that there had been acknowledgement that the applicant had set out
the needs regarding a driver. In terms of Mr Ackland’s evidence, Mr Prior argued that Mr Ackland knew that the applicant had
issues with technology. Secondly, it was stated that Mr Ackland did not have a problem with the applicant. Therefore, reinstatement
would be possible.
The Commission was referred to a number of authorities regarding when the termination was disproportionate to the conduct. If it
was found that there was a valid reason, the Commission was urged to consider “other matters” as relevant – namely,
the applicant’s age, length of service and the relative lack of issues regarding his work/conduct over that period.
Finally, the change in the written submissions on behalf of the applicant occurred because the submission had been prepared by Mr
Prior’s office. He stressed that the applicant’s evidence in court and what he had told Mr Ackland were consistent ie.
he had only checked the Adecco tab on the Agency Drivers List.
It was submitted that the termination of the applicant’s employment was not harsh, unjust or unreasonable. The reason for
the applicant’s dismissal was his failure to follow company procedure regarding the Agency Driver List and his failure to notify
management once he became aware of an incident.
The respondent, it was stated, takes its duty of care to its employees and other road users very seriously. Therefore, strict application
and adherence of the company’s policies is required. In addition, occupational health and safety is a very serious matter
for the company. Employees understand the Vision Zero campaign which includes a zero tolerance approach to unsafe behaviour and
practices. The Agency Drivers List and the incident reporting processes were said to be important in achieving Vision Zero. It
was also recounted that the Chairman of Linfox had stated unequivocably that working safely is a condition of employment.
It was recounted that, after investigating the breaches of procedure, the respondent had concluded that the applicant’s behaviour
constituted serious misconduct that had endangered the safety of other employees and the general public and could have endangered
the reputation, viability and profitability of the respondent. If the applicant was successful in his application, it was argued
that the integrity of the respondent’s procedures would be put at risk because managers would no longer be as committed to
Vision Zero.
The respondent indicated that it did not take the termination of the applicant lightly. It was said that it had been decided that
alternative disciplinary action, in this matter, was inappropriate as it would undermine the integrity of the company’s compliance
procedures. It was said that normally, employees who did not report incidents would be given a first and final warning. However,
in the applicant’s case, it was contended that, in addition, he had used unsuitable drivers on four occasions.
Further, it was contended that the applicant’s refusal to follow a lawful direction regarding the Agency Drivers List and the
incident report process amounted to repudiation of his contract of employment thereby making the termination of his employment inevitable.
It was stated that the applicant’s position had been made worse by his dishonesty regarding the reason he engaged Mr Haberkorn.
Mr Jones said that “Given the deception of the applicant, the respondent cannot even believe anything the applicant says”.
Further, it was indicated that the applicant was the only Linfox employee to engage Mr Haberkorn since he was deemed not suitable
for use in October 2007.
The respondent stated that the applicant was given the option to resign, an opportunity to respond and be heard regarding the allegations
and was afforded substantive and procedural fairness.
With respect to the oral evidence, Mr Chenoweth’s evidence was highlighted where he said that it was the sole responsibility
of the site supervisor to determine the accreditation of agency drivers. That was the purpose of the weekly Agency Drivers List.
It was also recounted that a complaint had been made by a member of the public regarding Mr Haberkorn’s driving on 19 March
2009. The complainant said that the driver (Mr Haberkorn) had pulled straight into traffic from the emergency lane which had caused
four cars in front to brake suddenly as well as those behind. It was said that this was illustrative of the “
potential catastrophic nature of the applicant’s actions in engaging Thomas Haberkorn as a driver who was deemed ‘not
suitable for use’ by Linfox
The Commission was referred to authorities regarding employees complying with reasonable directions. It was said that the applicant
had failed to do so when he had not reported the incident nor checked the Agency Drivers List and his employment was therefore terminated.
The respondent contended that the actions of the applicant constituted serious misconduct warranting termination.
It was submitted that reinstatement was not an option for the company as it no longer had trust in the applicant. Mr Jones said
that because of the serious nature of the applicant’s actions, the employment relationship had broken down.
CONCLUSIONS
In determining whether the termination of the applicant’s employment was harsh, unjust or unreasonable, the Commission is required
to consider the factors set out in
of the Act. These factors are:
“(a) whether there was a valid reason for the termination related to the employee’s capacity or conduct (including its
effect on the safety and welfare of other employees); and
(b) whether the employee was notified of that reason; and
(c) whether the employee was given an opportunity to respond to any reason related to the capacity or conduct of the employee; and
(d) if the termination related to unsatisfactory performance by the employee - whether the employee had been warned about that unsatisfactory
performance before the termination; and
(e) the degree to which the size of the employer's undertaking, establishment or service would be likely to impact on the procedures
followed in effecting the termination; and
(f) the degree to which the absence of dedicated human resource management specialists or expertise in the undertaking, establishment
or service would be likely to impact on the procedures followed in effecting the termination; and
(g) any other matters that the Commission considers relevant.”
I will now turn to consider each of the above factors.
Was there a valid reason? -
s. 652(3)(a)
The applicant’s employment was terminated (but he was allowed to resign) on 31 March 2009 for failing to follow the procedure
regarding the use of agency drivers and for failing to notify management immediately he became aware of an incident. It was the
applicant’s evidence that he had not consulted the Agency Drivers List on the first occasion Mr Haberkorn had been engaged
(16 February 2009). He said that he had stipulated to Mr Chenoweth, on 11 February 2009 and 13 February 2009 that the driver must
be on the Linfox books, in-cab assessed and have a Cole’s induction card. When Mr Haberkorn was re-engaged on 19 March 2009,
the applicant said that he had checked the Adecco tab of the Agency Drivers List only but could not find Mr Haberkorn’s name.
It was the respondent’s position that the applicant had breached the company’s policies and procedures by not checking
the Agency Drivers List at all when Mr Haberkorn was first engaged and then only partly (the Adecco tab only) on the second engagement
of Mr Haberkorn. The respondent had further alleged that the applicant, in December 2008, had hired Mr Sharpe through an agency,
who was also a driver “
not suitable for use
” by Linfox. It was the applicant’s evidence that he did not recall employing Mr Sharpe and thought he may have been
on a course at the time.
Secondly, the applicant admitted that he had not reported the damage to the trailer to Mr Ackland as soon as he was advised of it
by Mr Haberkorn. He said that Mr Haberkorn had told him it was a scratch, that the trailer had already gone out again at the time
he was advised of the scratch and that none of the subsequent drivers who had used the trailer had reported the damage to him.
The respondent contended that the applicant should have advised Mr Ackland as soon as he had been notified by Mr Haberkorn that there
had been an incident. Not to have done so had put at risk the safety of other employees and the general public and had endangered
the reputation, viability and profitability of the company.
By the end of the witness evidence, there was little factual conflict between the parties about the incidents which led to the termination
of the applicant’s employment. It was common ground that the applicant had been honest with the company during the interviews.
The applicant had admitted to not checking the Agency Driver List on the first occasion he had engaged Mr Haberkorn and to only
checking the Adecco tab of the list the second time he engaged him. The applicant had also been truthful about when Mr Haberkorn
had told him about the “
” to the trailer and when he had investigated it and told Mr Ackland.
The applicant’s evidence and that of Mr Chenoweth’s were consistent, in the main, regarding the applicant stipulating
on 11 February 2009 and 13 February 2009, the requirements that the driver be on the Linfox books, in-cab assessed and have a Coles
induction card. However, it was the applicant’s evidence that, when he had booked a driver in March 2009, he had stipulated
that the driver had to be on the Linfox books, in-cab assessed and hold a Coles induction card. Mr Chenoweth did not recall the
applicant saying that and said that, as it was a re-booking of Mr Haberkorn, the conversation had been quick.
It was alleged by the respondent that the applicant had also engaged a driver, in December 2008, that was “
not suitable for use
” by Linfox. Having heard the applicant’s evidence, I am inclined to accept that he did not recall engaging Mr Sharpe
as it was most likely that he had been away on a course at the time.
I have considered carefully all of the material before me and I find that there was a valid reason for the termination of the applicant’s
employment. In not fully following the company’s policies and procedures regarding the use of agency drivers and the reporting
of incidents, the applicant potentially put at risk the safety of other employees and the general public.
Was the applicant notified of the reason –
s. 652(3)(b)
The applicant was told of the reasons for his dismissal during the meeting on 31 March 2009 and was given the option of resigning.
This he took so, therefore, there is not a letter from the respondent setting out the reasons for the dismissal. The incidents
that led to the termination of the applicant’s employment were discussed during the meeting between the applicant and Mr Ackland
on 24 March 2009. These matters were again discussed at a meeting on 30 March 2009 which also included Mr Conroy and Mr Van den
Berg. At the end of the meeting the applicant was advised that he had made some serious breaches of the company’s policies
which required further investigation.
On this basis, I am satisfied that the applicant was notified of the reasons for the termination of his employment.
Was the applicant given an opportunity to respond? -
s. 652(3)(c)
During the interview with Mr Ackland on 24 March 2009, the applicant was asked for his version of events. This had been written
down and shown to the applicant and then put into an email and sent to Mr Van den Berg. The email was then discussed at the meeting
on 30 March 2009.
On the basis of the material before me, I am satisfied that the applicant was given an opportunity to respond.
Had the applicant been warned of unsatisfactory performance? -
s. 652(3)(d)
As the applicant’s employment was terminated for breach of the company’s policies and procedures, this section is not
Size of the employer's undertaking –
There was no specific material before the Commission regarding this aspect of the matter.
Absence of dedicated human resource management specialists -
s. 652(3)(f)
On the basis of the material before me, it is apparent that the respondent has dedicated human resource management specialists and
that they were involved in the disciplinary process.
Any other matters? -
s. 652(3)(g)
It was the applicant’s submission that the Commission should take into account the applicant’s age (54), his length of
service and his relatively unblemished record.
I have considered all of the matters submitted by the applicant and consider them relevant in this matter.
Was the termination harsh unjust or unreasonable?
I have considered all of the factors set out in
to (e) of the Act and have balanced all of the factors in the context of a
“fair go all round”
to both the employer and employee concerned
I find, on balance, that the termination of the applicant’s employment was harsh in all of the circumstances, in that the termination
was disproportionate to the applicant’s conduct. In reaching this conclusion, I have taken account of, on the one hand, the
finding that there was a valid reason for the termination of the applicant’s employment. On the other hand, I have had regard
to the applicant’s age, his 27 years service with the respondent including approximately eight years as shift manager and his
relatively unblemished record with the company (a warning in 2000 and 2002). It is accepted that the applicant made a mistake in
not checking the Agency Driver List on the first occasion and then only the Adecco tab of the Agency Driver List on the second occasion.
It is noted that, during his conversations with Mr Chenoweth on 11 February 2009 and 13 February 2009, it was common ground that
the applicant had specified that the driver be suitable for Linfox, have been in-cab assessed and have a Coles induction card.
If it has been determined that the termination of an employee's employment was harsh, unjust or unreasonable the Commission may,
if it considers it appropriate, order a remedy of reinstatement or an amount in lieu of reinstatement. Prior to determining whether
a remedy is appropriate, the Commission is required to consider a number of factors.
These are set out in
of the Act as follows:
“(2) The Commission must not make an order under subsection (1) unless the Commission is satisfied, having regard to all the
circumstances of the case including:
(a) the effect of the order on the viability of the employer’s undertaking, establishment or service; and
(b) the length of the employee’s service with the employer; and
(c) the remuneration that the employee would have received, or would have been likely to receive, if the employee’s employment
had not been terminated; and
(d) the efforts of the employee (if any) to mitigate the loss suffered by the employee as a result of the termination; and
(e) any other matter that the Commission considers relevant;
that the remedy or would it is appropriate."
I will now consider these factors in turn.
The effect of the order on the viability of the employer’s undertaking –
s.654(2)(a)
There was no material before me that any order made by the Commission would affect the viability of the Respondent.
The length of the employee's service –
s. 654(2)(b)
The applicant's service was 27 years.
The remuneration the employee would have received/likely to receive but for the termination –
From the evidence before me, it appears that the applicant expected to be working for the respondent until his retirement at age
65. It was Mr Ackland’s evidence that the applicant was “of the old school” and that he had had difficulty with
the changes to the computer systems. Notwithstanding this, it is likely that the applicant would have continued with the respondent
for at least one year.
Efforts to mitigate the loss –
s. 654(2)(d)
It was the applicant’s evidence that he had mitigated his loss and had found alternative employment as a truck driver at a
lower rate of pay.
Any other matters –
s. 654(2)(e)
There are no other matters which the Commission considers relevant.
Having considered all of the factors set out in
, it is, in my view, appropriate to order a remedy
Appropriate remedy
The Act provides for the remedy of reinstatement as its primary remedy (s.654(3)). If the Commission thinks that reinstatement is
inappropriate, an amount in lieu of reinstatement may be ordered if it is appropriate in all of the circumstances of the case (s.654(7)).
In this matter, the applicant is strongly seeking reinstatement together with compensation for lost remuneration. It was stated
that the applicant had loved working for the company and that he had not destroyed any relationships during the disciplinary process
and the ultimate termination of his employment. Other reasons in support of his reinstatement were his age and that, although he
had obtained employment as a truck driver, it was hard work at his age.
The respondent is equally opposed to reinstatement on the basis that the company has lost its trust in the applicant and that the
employment relationship has broken down.
In all of the circumstances of this matter, it is my view that reinstatement is inappropriate. The applicant was in a responsible
position with the respondent and one of trust. As this trust has been broken, it would not be a tenable situation for the applicant
to be returned to his position.
If the Commission considers that reinstatement is inappropriate, the Commission may make an order for an amount in lieu of reinstatement.
Such an order may only be made if the Commission considers it appropriate in all of the circumstances of the case and after consideration
of the factors set out in s.654(8) of the Act.
“(8) Subject to subsections (9), (10), (11) and (12), in determining an amount for the purposes of an order under subsection
(7), the Commission must have regard to all the circumstances of the case including:
(a) the effect of the order on the viability of the employer’s undertaking, establishment or service; and
(b) the length of the employee’s service with the employer; and
(c) the remuneration that the employee would have received, or would have been likely to receive, if the employee’s employment
had not been terminated; and
(d) the efforts of the employee (if any) to mitigate the loss suffered by the employee as a result of the termination; and
(e) any misconduct of the employee that contributed to the employer’s decision to terminate the employee’s employment;
(f) any other matter that the Commission considers relevant.”
All of the factors set out in s.654(8) of the Act, with the exception of (e) and (f) have been considered in paragraphs 68 - 71 above,
from the perspective of consideration of whether or not to award an appropriate remedy.
I will have regard to these considerations in determining the appropriate remedy. I will now consider s.654(8)(e) and (f).
Contributory misconduct – s.654(8)(e)
The applicant’s employment was terminated due to his failure to comply with the company’s policies and procedures regarding
the use of Agency drivers and incident reporting. Accordingly, it can be said that it was misconduct by the applicant which contributed
to the decision to terminate the applicant’s employment.
Any other matters – s.654(8)(f)
There are no other matters which the Commission considers relevant.
Calculations
Calculation of an appropriate remedy has been considered by the Full Bench in
Sprigg v Pauls Licensed Festival
Supermarket
Re: Moore Paragon Australia Ltd.
I will first consider an appropriate amount in lieu of reinstatement applying the
principles.
The first step, as outlined in
is to estimate the remuneration the employee would have received or have been likely to receive if his/her employment had not been
terminated. As indicated in paragraph 70 above, it is my view that it is likely that the applicant's employment would have continued
for at least one year. Based on the information provided by the respondent, this amounts to a provisional calculation of $75,253.00.
Included in the calculation are the shift and vehicle allowances.
Remuneration since the date of termination is deducted from the provisional calculation. In this matter, there is a deduction for
the notice paid of five weeks’ pay which amounts to $7,235.86. This includes shift and vehicle allowances. In addition, the
applicant found alternative employment commencing 4 May to 21 July 2009 (casual) and then in a full time capacity from 22 July 2009.
Therefore, in terms of remuneration received, this amounts to $7,235.86 (notice), employment from 4 May 2009 to 21 July 2009 - $9,699.96.
Since 22 July 2009, the applicant has been earning $1160.25 gross per week.
It is assumed that the applicant has continued in the full time employment. Therefore, from 22 July 2009 until the date of the
hearing (3 August 2009), the applicant would have earned eight (Monday to Friday) working days at $1160.25 per week = 1 3/5 of $1160.25
= $1856.40. Accordingly, the total deductions regarding remuneration earned are $18,792.22.
The third step in
involves consideration of the amount to also be deducted for contingencies. Applying the principles set out in the Full Bench decision
Appeal by Enhance Systems P/L against decision of Cribb C of 4 September 2001 [
, Williams SDP, Acton SDP, Gay C, 31 October 2001 [
], there should be no deduction for contingencies from the date of termination (31 March 2009) until the Commission hearing (3 August
2009), as the economic effect of the termination is known. As the expected employment period was one year a deduction for contingencies
to the date of this decision would be reasonable. Accordingly, a 15% contingency will be deducted for the period from 4 August 2009
until 12 December 2009 will be made. This results in a deduction of $4,341.51.
Given the finding above, there will be a deduction for contributory misconduct by the employee of $5,788.68 (four weeks’ pay).
Accordingly, the provisional calculation of one years’ remuneration ($75,253.00) will have deducted from it:
• Payment of notice - $7,235.86
• Monies earned (from 4 May 2009 to 21 July 2009) - $9,699.96
• Monies earned (from 22 July 2009 to 3 August 2009) - $1,856.40
• Monies assumed to have been earned (from 4 August 2009 to 17 December 2009) - $18,792.22
• Contingencies - $4,341.51
• Contributory misconduct - $5,788.68
Total Deductions
- $47,714.63
This would result in a provision calculation of $27,538.37.
The legislative maximum, as provided for in s.654(11), would be the total amount of remuneration received by the employee in the
preceding six months ($37,626.50). As the provisional amount is below the legislative ceiling, no adjustment is required in this
Therefore, in all of the circumstances of this case, I have decided that an appropriate amount in lieu of reinstatement is $27,538.37.
Taxation, as required by law, will be applied to this amount. Accordingly, the respondent is ordered to pay to the applicant the
amount of $27,538.37 within 30 days of this decision. The order to this effect is contained in
COMMISSIONER
Transcript PN 218, 247 and 297
Ibid PN 158-168
Ibid PN 177-180
Ibid PN 194-211
Ibid PN 38 and Exhibit A2 at paragraph 3
Ibid PN 40-41
Ibid PN 42-47
Ibid PN 234
Ibid PN 276-277
Ibid PN 369-373
Ibid PN 53-57 and 476
Ibid PN267, 278, 314-315
Ibid PN 350-356
Ibid PN 66-67
Ibid PN 70-71, 401
Ibid PN 60-62
Ibid PN 368
Ibid PN 509
Ibid PN 74, 403
Ibid PN 404-406
Ibid PN 77-82, 407
Ibid PN 436
Ibid PN 465
Ibid PN 472
Ibid PN 85-86, 101-103
Ibid PN 89-100
Ibid PN 144-147 and Exhibit R2
Ibid PN 104-107
Ibid PN 125-137 and Exhibit R1
Ibid PN 577-579
Ibid PN 583-585
Ibid PN 580-581, 611-614, 643-645
Ibid PN 585-586, 590
Ibid PN 645
Ibid PN 589, 631-632
Ibid PN 627-628
Ibid PN 668-670
Ibid PN 724-730
Ibid PN 681-682
Ibid PN 683-686
Ibid PN 691-693
Ibid PN 743-771
Ibid PN 698-702
Ibid PN 703
Ibid PN 703, 774-779
Ibid PN 781-800
Ibid PN 704-707, 731-738
Ibid PN 741
Ibid PN 803-809
Ibid PN 819-841
Ibid PN 976-979
Ibid PN 980-983 and Exhibit A1 at paragraph 15
Transcript PN 984-985
Ibid PN 826
Exhibit R11 at paragraph 47 and Transcript PN 536, 994, 1002
Exhibit R11 at paragraph 51-56, Transcript PN 537-541, 992-993, 1013
Exhibit R11 at paragraph 57-59, Transcript PN 542, 1002
Transcript PN 994
Ibid PN 543, 1002
Ibid PN 544
Exhibit R11 at paragraph 68
Ibid at paragraph 70 and Transcript PN 546
Transcript PN 991
Exhibit R11 at paragraph 61
Ibid at paragraph 62-65 and Transcript PN 999-1001
Transcript PN 1003
Print R0235
Email from the respondent dated 10 August 2009
Letter from applicant’s solicitor, dated 5 August 2009
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR991927>
No downloadable files available