Wu v Cohen (No 2) [2000] HREOCA 41 (10 October 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION ACT 1992
Matter: H 99/43
Complainant
First Respondent
EXPRESS EMBROIDERY PTY LTD
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR DECISION OF INQUIRY COMMISSIONER
KATHLEEN MCEVOY ON RELIEF
Date of Decision: 10 October 2000
Dates of Hearing: 5 and 6 October 2000
Location of Hearing: Melbourne
Appearances: Mr Champion of Counsel, instructed by Maurice Blackburn and
Co, solicitors for the complainant.
Mr McDermott of Counsel, instructed by Lewenberg & Lewenberg,
solicitors for the respondents.
1. INTRODUCTION
On 12 September 2000 I handed down my reasons for
decision in relation to complaints made by
Ms Eva Wu, the complainant,
and the Textile Clothing and Footwear Union of Australia (“the
Union”) against Mr Eli Cohen,
the first respondent, and Express Embroidery
Pty Ltd, the second respondent (“Express Embroidery”), in which the
complainant
alleged breaches of the
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
(“SDA”), and the
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(“DDA”). I dismissed the complaint made pursuant to the SDA on the
basis that it was not substantiated, but was
satisfied the complaints pursuant
to the DDA were made out, and that both respondents had engaged in unlawful
conduct in relation
to Ms Wu contrary to
section 15(2)(d)
of the DDA, that is,
subjecting Ms Wu to detriment on the ground of her disability. I found the
Union was not properly a complainant
in relation to the DDA complaint.
I also made a finding on the basis of the evidence then before me that Ms Wu
had suffered distress and humiliation as a consequence
of the respondents’
unlawful conduct, and that it was appropriate that the respondents pay to her
damages by way of compensation
in relation to this humiliation and injury to
I identified four different acts of discrimination contrary to the DDA:
circumstances of Ms Wu’s return to work in June 1994, when she was removed
from her usual (pre-injury) job, and required
to work on a different shift and
on heavier machines;
circumstances of her proposed return to work after her second injury where it
was initially proposed she work a two hour shift
from 11 pm to 1 am;
circumstances of her actual return to work from 5 October 1994, when she was
isolated and subjected to excessive and inappropriate
supervision; and
incident on 6 February 1995, when she and Mr Cohen were engaged in a workplace
altercation, and Mr Cohen kicked her. Ms Wu did
not return to work with the
second respondent after this incident.
However, it had been agreed
at the inquiry into the substantive aspects of these complaints that, if the
complaints were found to
be substantiated, there would be a separate inquiry to
determine the quantum of compensation payable to Ms Wu. That hearing was
conducted in Melbourne on 5 and 6 October 2000.
At that inquiry the complainant continued to be legally represented, for
which leave had already been given (although Ms Wu was represented
different counsel). It was agreed that evidence-in-chief would be led by
affidavit, with witnesses subject to cross-examination
and re-examination. An
affidavit was sworn by Ms Wu and provided prior to the inquiry, and medical
reports were provided by Dr Albert
Kaplan and Dr Stanley Chau, psychiatrists, as
witnesses for the complainant. Dr Nathan Serry, also a psychiatrist, was the
only witness
for the respondents.
2. RELIEF SOUGHT
Prior to this inquiry, the complainant advised
through her solicitors that she sought the following determinations from this
Commission:
(1) A declaration pursuant to section 103(1)(iv) of the DDA that the
respondents pay to the complainant compensation:
relation to humiliation and injury to feelings;
(ii) in respect to medical expenses;
(iii) in relation to lost income;
(a) for lost opportunities to earn overtime in the period June 1994 to 6
February 1995;
(b) lost income in the period 6 February 1995 to August
(2) A declaration that the respondents pay the
complainant’s legal costs;
(3) That the respondents be jointly and severally liable for amounts to be
(4) That pursuant to section 105 of the DDA the Commission recommend to the
Attorney General that assistance be given to the complainant
in respect to legal
expenses incurred in relation to the inquiry.
At the inquiry, Mr
Champion, counsel for the complainant, indicated that there was no separate
application for medical expenses, as
the only medical expenses incurred related
to the costs associated with this inquiry. He also indicated that the legal
far incurred had been paid for by the Union, and that no application
would be made or sought on behalf of the Union in relation to
section 105 of the
Mr Champion presented evidence and submissions in support of these
applications.
3. THE LEGISLATION
Section 103 of the DDA empowers the Commission, where
it is satisfied a complaint has been substantiated, to make a declaration that
the respondent pay the complainant damages.
103 Determination or other decision of the Commission
(1) After holding an inquiry, the Commission may:
(b) if it finds the complaint substantiated - so find and make a determination
which, if appropriate, may include any one or more
(iv) a declaration that the respondent should pay to the complainant damages by
way of compensation for any loss or damage suffered
because of the conduct of
the respondent; ...”
Such a declaration is not of course binding or conclusive
between the parties (see section 103(2) of the DDA).
Section 105 enables the Commission to recommend to the Attorney-General that
assistance be given to a person who has made a complaint
for expenses incurred
by them in relation to the inquiry. This provision however refers to a
recommendation of the Commission, rather
than of the Inquiry Commissioner, so I
do not make such a recommendation in this determination. If Ms Wu wishes to
seek such assistance,
then she may make application to the Commission for such
assistance to be recommended to the Attorney-General.
4. EVIDENCE
4.1 The complainant’s
At this inquiry, Ms Wu gave further evidence, both
in affidavit form and in person. She had already given evidence at the earlier
inquiry into the substantive aspects of her complaints, and some of this
evidence was also revisited. Ms Wu also relied on the evidence
given at the
earlier inquiry by her treating doctor from 6 February 1995, Dr Chiang, and
called two other witnesses, Doctors Kaplan
4.1.1 The evidence of Ms Wu
At this inquiry, Ms Wu gave
sworn evidence without an interpreter.
In her affidavit evidence, Ms Wu referred to the distress she felt concerning
the events at Express Embroidery. She stated that she
was “shocked and
distressed” at the events of 6 February 1995, and angry and frightened.
She was referred to a psychiatrist
following a medical consultation with Dr
Chiang on the same day, and was diagnosed with depression and was prescribed
medication.
She continued to suffer depression and stress, although she stopped
taking the medication as she did not like the side effects.
Ms Wu then sought
assistance from traditional Chinese medication but found this to be of little
assistance either. She felt unmotivated,
had lost her confidence, and could not
concentrate. She felt she was no longer a happy person, and still felt
preoccupied by these
She also felt the events affected her hopes, plans and relationships with her
family in China. She felt she could not face them with
her lack of success, and
delayed making arrangements to bring her husband and son to join her in
Australia. In July 1997 she and
her husband divorced, and in 1998 her son
joined her in Australia.
In May 1995 Ms Wu commenced a TAFE course, English for Health Professionals,
with the purpose of working towards obtaining medical
registration in Australia.
This was a full time 12 week course, and Ms Wu completed it successfully. In
September 1995 she sat an
occupational English test, and passed two of the four
sections of the test. She successfully completed this in March 1996. In April
1996 Ms Wu commenced a Multiple Choice Bridging Course in preparation for the
Australian Medical Council’s Multiple Choice
Examination, which she
attempted in October 1996 but was unsuccessful. She resat in April 1997 and
passed. Ms Wu obtained employment
in July 1997 with restricted medical
registration and in October 1998 and March 1999 she completed other examinations
which enabled
her to obtain full registration as a medical practitioner in
September 1999.
Ms Wu also provided information concerning her income and general pattern of
work for the respondents during her employment at Express
Embroidery. This
included significant and regular overtime, although she asserted she had not
been offered any overtime from the
time of her first injury in May 1994 until
the time she left on 6 February 1995.
Ms Wu said she had no source of income from the time she left Express
Embroidery in February 1995 until she obtained medical employment
in July 1997.
She received a back dated payment to cover the period 7 February to 26 July 1995
in settlement of an action she had
brought against the respondents in another
forum. From that time she was in receipt of sickness benefits from
Centrelink.
She told the inquiry that she had decided after the kicking incident on 6
February 1995 that she would not return to Express Embroidery
“too risky to work in that environment”, and that she had not looked
for another job, as she felt she was not
ready to do so “physically and
mentally”. However, her general practitioner, Dr Liu, had at the end of
1994 suggested
to her she pursue registration as a medical practitioner, and she
decided to do this.
Ms Wu also told the inquiry she had come to Australia to start a better life,
in particular for her son. She had wanted to escape
a political system which
she saw as oppressive and which had been particularly oppressive for her mother
who had been imprisoned.
However, she had not come as political refugee, and had
undertaken intensive English lessons for the first year, as required by her
conditions. She had decided in April or May 1995 to pursue her medical
registration, having previously understood this was
not feasible. She had taken
out Australian citizenship in 1997.
Ms Wu agreed she would not have been able to qualify for medical registration
if she had not been able to take time to study, both
medicine and English. She
agreed she would not have had this time, and therefore opportunity, if she had
been employed on a full
time basis. She is now working as medical officer and
her salary for 1998-99 was $29,548.00, and for 1999-2000 (including fringe
benefits tax) was $55,651.00 (indicated on group certificates which were made
exhibits in the inquiry).
Ms Wu agreed that when she returned to work in June 1994 she was on
restricted duties for two weeks (therefore with no overtime),
and then after
another two weeks she was again injured and off work until 5 October 1994. She
was then part time and on restricted
duties, and when she returned to full time
hours she was still on restricted duties, and this was still the case on 6
February 1995.
She also agreed there were a number of other factors which contributed to her
feelings of unhappiness, and perhaps depression. These
included: poor health in
1995; continuing pain from her back, which also restricted her activities, and
for which she had ongoing
physiotherapy; separation from her family, which had
caused anxiety and depression, until the reunification with her son in July
1998; the divorce from her husband and the delay in bringing her son to
Australia; and the frustrations which she presently faces
in what seems to her a
stalling in her medical career, as she has been unable to obtain entry into a
specialisation program which
would enable membership of a College.
Ms Wu said she was unhappy with her present work, which she described as
“clerical”, and said she was disappointed and
had no ambitions
anymore. She said she no longer engaged in sport or other activity, and had no
energy or interest in doing anything.
She said she used to be a strong and
confident person, but no longer was.
4.1.2 The evidence of Dr Kaplan
Dr Kaplan, a psychiatrist,
examined Ms Wu in both November 1995 and September 2000. He provided reports to
the inquiry in relation
to both these consultations.
In November 1995, Dr Kaplan considered Ms Wu would have been unable to work
in the previous months after the 6 February incident 1995,
although he expressed
the view that at that stage, that is, November 1995, she would have been capable
of commencing sympathetic
rehabilitative employment.
Dr Kaplan diagnosed Ms Wu as suffering from an adjustment disorder with
anxiety and depression. His conclusion in September 2000
was as follows:
“In my opinion the discriminatory conduct of Express Embroidery and Mr
Cohen as proven was a significant and probably the major
factor in contributing
to Dr Wu’s psychiatric condition at the time of my initial examination of
her and in the period following
that examination. This discriminatory conduct
is probably still a contributing factor albeit a minor one. The major factor
contributing
to her psychiatric condition at this time is probably her inability
to develop a satisfactory medical career despite having gained
an Australian
medical qualification. Her chronic pain is probably also contributing to her
psychiatric condition.”
Dr Kaplan considered Ms Wu was made more vulnerable to future stressors by
the trauma of the events at Express Embroidery. He agreed
also that she was a
vulnerable person to some degree prior to those events by way of the stresses
which she had already encountered,
including her background in China and her
life (and that of her family) in the Cultural Revolution, the setting aside of
her successful
medical career in China, and her immigration to Australia and her
separation from her family. However, he emphasised that Ms Wu
confident and optimistic woman, looking forward to a better life, when she came
to Australia and that this was no longer
the case. He believed that for Ms Wu
to have successfully pursued her studies from 1995 to 1999, her condition must
have improved
to some extent in that time, but she still presented with the
condition in September 2000. He believed the exacerbation of the condition
more recent times was because of her present work disappointments.
4.1.3 The evidence of Doctor Chau
Dr Chau examined Ms Wu in February 1995 on a referral from Dr Chiang who had
been consulted by Ms Wu on the day of the kicking incident.
He had later
examined Ms Wu in January 1996. He provided reports in relation to each
examination.
On his first examination of Ms Wu, Dr Chau diagnosed depression and
prescribed amitryptylene which is an antidepressant. Dr Chau explained
also prescribed for pain relief and sleeping difficulties, both of which had
been complained of to him by Ms Wu. He did
not arrange any follow up
appointments. He saw Ms Wu’s condition as one where regular appointments
were unlikely to assist
as it was not likely to show any improvement on a short
term basis. He recalled Ms Wu as “very miserable” as she recounted
the events relating to Mr Cohen.
Dr Chau said he considered Ms Wu has a collective impairment of 15% on the
Australian Medical Association (“AMA”) Guide
when he saw her again
in January 1996. He agreed this was an impairment at the bottom end of the
scale, and indicated it meant she
had diminished ability, although she could
manage day to day tasks, but probably could not cope with work other than on a
and light basis. He had seen little advancement in her condition in
the intervening 12 months and said he had expected little.
Dr Chau was surprised at Ms Wu’s intensive studies which had commenced
in May 1995 and indicated he would have thought this
difficult for a person with
that condition, especially as Ms Wu’s mental stamina was reduced. He
expressed the view Ms Wu
“must have been very determined, very hard
Dr Chau considered that if there had been a dramatic improvement in the
quality of Ms Wu’s life since 1996, this should have
had an equally great
impact on her self esteem. He agreed study would also have imposed stress on Ms
Wu, and that other factors
in her life, such as her isolation and separation
from her family, as well as her back pain, would have affected her level of
depression.
He considered that disappointment in professional development could
also exacerbate depression.
4.2 The respondents’ evidence
The respondents called Dr Nathan Serry, a consultant psychiatrist, who
provided a report and gave sworn evidence at the inquiry.
Dr Serry examined Ms Wu in September 2000, and diagnosed depression,
indicating she was suffering from an adjustment disorder with
anxiety and major
depression as well as a chronic pain condition. In considering Dr Chau’s
determination that Ms Wu should
be ascribed a 15% rating in the AMA tables, Dr
Serry suggested 5% of this should be seen as primarily and directly attributable
the events in question.
Dr Serry indicated he believed Ms Wu did not have any formal psychiatric
condition prior to her employment at Express Embroidery,
and that any
vulnerability did not amount to a pre-existing condition. However, he was
satisfied she did now have a formally diagnosed
psychiatric condition. Dr Serry
believed there were a number of factors relevant to the development of this
condition. These included
her “demotion” in her job, the kicking
incident, isolation in the store room and the regime of strict supervision.
Dr Serry was of the view that the condition had developed “in the
context of stressful experiences of her work at Express Embroidery”.
described Ms Wu as an impressive person, but who was now, because of her
depression “functioning below optimum”,
and that her current
psychiatric symptoms were having a significant impact on her life.
5. SUBMISSIONS
5.1 The complainant’s submissions
Mr Champion submitted the following:
The primary
principle governing compensation is to be found in the expression of Lockhart J
Hall & Ors v A & A Sheiban & Ors
[1989] FCA 72
(1989) EOC 92-250
“Generally speaking, the correct way to
approach the assessment of damages in cases under [the
Sex Discrimination Act
is to compare the position in which the complainant might have expected to be if
the discriminatory conduct had not occurred with
the situation in which he or
she was placed by reason of the conduct of the respondent”.
submitted this was not different from the principles expressed by
French J in the same case, and that the same principles were equally
to such considerations of compensation under the DDA.
In relation to
Ms Wu’s psychiatric injury, and humiliation and injury to feelings, Mr
Champion submitted the evidence was clear
in establishing this. Ms Wu developed
depression immediately after the incident of 6 February 1995, which was
permanent and persistent,
and still continues. She had not suffered from this
(or any psychiatric disorder) prior to the proven discriminatory events. The
discriminatory acts caused the depression, although there may have been
pre-existing vulnerabilities. He submitted that all the
medical evidence,
including that of the respondents, placed the events at Express Embroidery at
the centre of the depressive disorder.
The respondents
have to take Ms Wu as they find her, applying the “egg shell skull”
principle of tort analysis to discrimination
law. He referred to the
consideration of Wilcox J in
in support of this, and referred the
Commission also to decisions of the Victorian Equal Opportunity Board in
Fares v Box Hill College of TAFE
(1992) EOC 92-391
78,785, Windeyer J in
Purkess v Crittendon
[1965] HCA 34
(1965) 114 CLR 164
Box Hill College of TAFE v Fares
(Supreme Court of Victoria,
28 August 1992, unreported,
per Smith J). Mr Champion submitted Ms Wu
may well have been vulnerable by reason of her particular circumstances, but the
respondents
had to take her as they found her in relation to the consequences of
their unlawful acts.
He submitted
that it was not possible, and artificial, to attempt to separate out the
elements of the causes of Ms Wu’s condition.
All that was necessary was to
demonstrate the causal link to the discriminatory behaviour. Without the
discriminatory events, the
psychiatric condition was likely not to have
occurred. There was none prior to 6 February 1995 and was one immediately after
events of that day.
Mr Champion
directed my attention to various other awards of damages for injury to feelings
and loss of amenity by this Commission.
He submitted that Ms Wu’s
condition should not be trivialised, as it was enduring and limiting. All the
medical evidence
agreed that there remained an impact on her amenity of life and
capacity to work.
In relation to
economic loss, the respondents should not be beneficiaries of Ms Wu’s
determination and hard work in working
during the period of her illness to
obtain medical registration and thereby better her circumstances.
Ms Wu could not
“double dip” in relation to payments made by WorkCover (which took
her payments of (non-overtime) wages
to 26 July 1995) and sickness benefits,
which she received until she obtained medical employment. However, I should not
take payment
of sickness benefits into account as there were statutory
provisions which covered such aspects of awards of compensation. He referred
Bennett & Anor v Everitt & Anor
(1988) EOC 92-244
per Einfield
J at 77,284 in support of this submission.
Ms Wu had not
received expected overtime since the time of her first injury and this should be
reflected in the loss of income for
which she claimed compensation.
economic loss ended in July 1997 when she obtained her next employment. However,
Mr Champion conceded there was a weakening
of the causal connection as the
events causing the loss became more remote over time. He indicated the
complainant sought compensation
for economic loss up to 31 March 1996 when she
commenced her medical studies in earnest.
Economic loss
for the period 7 February 1995 to 31 March 1996 was estimated by Mr Champion to
be in the order of $20,362.07, including
lost overtime, but excluding WorkCover
payments in that period of $6,150.31. This calculation was based on Ms
Wu’s average
salary in 1993 and 1994.
In relation to
legal costs, Mr Champion submitted I should not be bound by the determination of
Heerey J in
Australian Medical Council v Wilson
(1996) 68 FCR 46
66. He submitted I should take into account the protracted nature of the matter
(12 days, in addition to 2 days for this
aspect of the inquiry) and the largely
unmeritorious nature of Mr Cohen’s response.
The respondents
should be jointly and severally liable in relation to any damages payable by way
of compensation.
5.2 The respondents’ submissions
Mr McDermott for the respondents made the following submissions:
In relation to
the application for costs, I should make no such award consistent with the view
expressed by the Federal Court in
Australian Medical Council v Wilson.
Mr McDermott submitted there had been no award of costs in the Commission under
any of the legislation in relation to which it conducted
inquiries since the
decision in
No costs could
be awarded in relation to costs incurred by the Union, as I had already found it
was not properly a respondent to the
matter now before the inquiry. The claim
under the SDA had been dismissed and the Union is not a complainant to the DDA
Although the
hearing had been protracted the responsibility was not only on the respondents,
and this too was reflected in my earlier
reasons in relation to the substance of
the matter.
In relation to
the governing principles for the awarding of compensation, French J made a
different analysis of this in
Hall v Sheiban
He suggested the
principles were not to be found in a tortious analysis, but in the words of the
The respondents
were not to be responsible for the circumstances encountered by Ms Wu after her
employment with Express Embroidery,
and her complex circumstances compounded the
“egg shell skull” issue in this case.
Ms Wu has been
fully compensated for loss of earnings up to 26 July 1995.
own evidence, supported by Dr Kaplan, was that she had no intention of going
1995. Nor did she look for work
after that date.
Ms Wu had some
duty to mitigate her economic loss but did not do so. The respondents had no
control over this. The furthest the
respondents’ liability for Ms
Wu’s economic loss could be extended is to November 1995, when Dr
Kaplan’s evidence
was that she was able to recommence work, although she
had not been capable of work prior to then.
Ms Wu focused
all her energy and time from May 1995 on study in order to obtain medical
registration. In May 1995 she commenced full
time English studies for this
purpose, and her studies continued until she obtained provisional registration
and employment in 1997.
Ms Wu made a
deliberate investment of time in her studies. She would not have been able to
undertake the requisite study if she had
remained employed with the respondents.
She had conceded this in her evidence. Her present and projected income from
her employment
is the fruition of this investment.
The respondents
were not liable for any economic loss on this basis.
Nor was there
any liability for loss of expected overtime. Ms Wu had not undertaken any
overtime work from May 1994 because of her
back injury, and there was no
evidence there was any available for her in this period. Nor had there been any
cross-examination
of Mr Cohen on this matter.
Ms Wu had been
diagnosed with depression, but there were numerous other acknowledged factors
which affected her circumstances and
contributed to her depression and general
unhappiness. These included: her mother’s circumstances, her family
separation,
her divorce, her chronic pain, the diminution of physical activity
and the stalling of her medical career.
There is no
evidence Ms Wu’s difficulties in her medical career are related to her
impairment.
All the evidence
suggests that Ms Wu’s present medical condition is at the lower end of the
scale, and is now largely a result
of her disappointment at her present
circumstances.
The findings of
discrimination have been made by reference to
of the DDA, and the
other non-discriminatory reasons of Mr Cohen should be a relevant factor in
determining the quantum of damages
Mr McDermott
submitted I should make no award for economic loss or for costs, and should
consider an award in the range of $4,000.00
to $7,000.00, taking into account
other similar matters decided by this Commission.
I should take
into account the payments Ms Wu had received in respect of WorkCover and
sickness benefits should I make any award for
6. DETERMINATION
6.1 General considerations
accept the complainant’s submission that the general considerations I
should take into account in determining an appropriate
award of damages by way
of compensation in a case such as this
are those set out in the judgment
of Wilcox J in
Hall & Ors v Sheiban & Ors
[1989] FCA 72
(1989) EOC 92-250.
is important that any award ought not be minimal, as that may tend to trivialise
the circumstances of the complainant, and in
particular the unlawfulness of the
respondents’ acts that have led to the complainant’s loss. That is,
it is important
to give effect to the policy of the DDA.
However, in this case, there are to my mind two other significant matters
that need to be balanced in determining an appropriate award.
The first is that
Ms Wu suffered undoubted hurt and humiliation as a result of Mr Cohen’s
unlawful acts, but she has also
has suffered a diagnosed medical impairment of a
serious and ongoing nature as a consequence. The second is that although Mr
acted in contravention of the DDA, and in many respects (leading to that
finding) quite reprehensibly, my determination relied on
of the DDA.
I was satisfied Mr Cohen discriminated against Ms Wu
among other reasons
because of her disability. That is, some
of Mr Cohen’s
motivation for his treatment of Ms Wu was not for reasons proscribed by the Act,
but other factors. These included
her Union activities (which is not one of the
prohibited areas in the DDA), the threat which I am satisfied she made to him,
his general irritation at WorkCover claims.
of the DDA provides
that if one of the reasons for the unfavourable treatment, even if it is not the
dominating reason, is the complainant’s
disability, that is sufficient to
render the act unlawful under the DDA. I have made no finding as to whether Ms
Wu’s disability
was a dominating reason, as there is no need to do so
, but I was satisfied that the existence of a range of
reasons, rather than the unlawful discrimination being the sole reason, is
factor I should keep in mind in considering an appropriate award.
I have accepted Ms Wu’s evidence (given at the earlier hearing into her
complaint) that she suffered humiliation, distress and
hurt feelings in respect
of each episode of discrimination by Mr Cohen. On the basis of the evidence I
have heard in this hearing,
I also accept that Ms Wu also developed the formally
diagnosed psychiatric condition of adjustment disorder with anxiety and major
depression as a consequence of the discrimination. This was diagnosed by Dr
Chau shortly after the events of 6 February 1995. Ms
Wu was referred to Dr Chau
by Dr Chaing on 6 February 1995 because of his concern at the level of distress
and disturbance with which
she presented when Ms Wu consulted with him on the
same day. All the medical evidence is in agreement that Ms Wu developed this
condition as a consequence of an accumulation of the discriminatory acts of the
respondents and the consequential stressful circumstances
of the workplace,
culminating with the events of 6 February 1995.
I am satisfied that this condition had a significant impact on Ms Wu’s
capacity to work, and on her generally amenity of life.
I am satisfied she was
unable to work at least to about the end of 1995 (Dr Kaplan’s evidence),
and that she suffered loss
of energy, anxiety and loss of interest in her usual
activities, which affected her health and social relationships, and loss of
motivation. I am also satisfied that this condition still persists, although it
is clear there are other and different stressors
in her life now, and the causal
relationship between the events of her employment at Express Embroidery and her
psychiatric condition
has become very stretched.
I am satisfied Ms Wu was subject to various stressors which made her somewhat
vulnerable to the stress to which she was subjected
at Express Embroidery. These
included her decision to come to Australia, leaving her husband, son and family
in China, the change
in status and career prospects in Australia, the heritage
of political and personal oppression she had encountered in China as part
Cultural Revolution, and beyond, the ongoing separation from her family, and
from May 1995, her back pain. The medical evidence
is that it is likely all
these factors predisposed her, or made her more vulnerable, to the effects of Mr
Cohen’s discriminatory
After she left Express Embroidery, Ms Wu has also faced other issues which
exacerbated her psychiatric condition, and which in themselves
may have been
sufficient to cause depression. These included the stress of intensive and
uncertain studies, the chronic back pain
which still continues, the continuing
separation from her family and eventual divorce from her husband, the
reunification with her
son and the resumption of parenting, the drop in income
as she depended on sickness benefits, and the more recent and continuing
disappointment in the direction and advancement of her medical career. I am
satisfied all these factors have had, and continue to
have, an impact on Ms
Wu’s amenity of life and her capacity to recover from her psychiatric
condition, but these are factors
beyond the respondents’
responsibility.
6.2 General Damages
Under this head the complainant claimed compensation in relation to both the
psychiatric condition consequential on the discriminatory
acts of the
respondents, and for loss of amenity, that is, the hurt feelings, distress and
humiliation as a consequence of the discrimination.
I accept the submission of the complainant that the respondents must take the
complainant as they found her, that is, the application
of the “egg shell
skull” principle to a consideration of damages under the DDA. This is
consistent with the approach
of Lockhart and Wilcox JJ in
Hall v Sheiban,
and in my view is not inconsistent with the view expressed in that case by
French J. I am of the view it is consistent with both
the words and policy of
the legislation that the perpetrator of unlawful discrimination should accept
the real consequences of his
or her discriminatory acts. In this case, the
victim, Ms Wu, has suffered a psychiatric condition, as well as significant
and general hurt and humiliation. She has, I accept, gone from being
an optimistic, highly motivated and energetic woman, to one
who is generally
depressed, unmotivated and unhappy, with feelings of worthlessness, and a sense
of the lack of value of the quite
extraordinary journey on which she embarked
when she left China for Australia which, to all intents and purposes, to an
appears to have been most successful.
In respect of the immediate and proximate effect of the discriminatory acts
on Ms Wu, the fact that there were other stressors making
her vulnerable to the
discrimination does not therefore enable the respondents to avoid liability for
those effects of their unlawful
I am not, however, satisfied that the respondents bear responsibility for the
exacerbation or continuation of Ms Wu’s unhappiness
and psychiatric
condition as a consequence of some of the new stressors to which she has been
subject since she left the respondents’
employ. These included the
divorce, parenting issues and her disappointments in her medical career. I am
not satisfied (and nor
was it pressed in argument) that the respondents are
liable for any increase in vulnerability Ms Wu has as a consequence of the
at Express Embroidery. The evidence before me is that her present
circumstances are largely a consequence of her disappointment
direction of her medical career.
In determining an amount of damages appropriate to compensate Ms Wu in
respect of these consequences of the discrimination, I have
taken note of other
awards of compensation by this Commission. I have also borne in mind other
issues: that there were additional
motivations for Mr Cohen’s behaviour;
the persistence, seriousness and extent of Ms Wu’s condition; her capacity
application in pursuing her medical career, as well as the disappointments
she has faced in relation to it; and that the continuation
of the condition
seems to depend now on other factors, in particular her present work
limitations. However, I have also taken into
account as additional to the
psychiatric condition, Ms Wu’s real hurt and sense of humiliation at the
acts of discrimination,
as well as the lasting medical impact on her. In
addition, I consider it relevant that I have made findings of four separate acts
of unlawful discrimination over a nine month period.
Taking all these matters into account, I am of the view an amount of
$12,000.00 is an appropriate amount to compensate Ms Wu in respect
medical condition and her feelings of hurt and humiliation consequential on the
respondents’ unlawful acts.
6.3 Economic Loss
I have given careful consideration to
the submissions made in respect of this claim.
I accept that Ms Wu did suffer some economic loss as a consequence of the
discrimination culminating in the events of 6 February 1995.
It is the case
that she decided she would not return to work for the respondents, but I am
satisfied this was because of the discrimination,
not because she had at that
time made a decision about pursuing medical registration instead of continuing
to work. It is also the
case that from May 1995 she was engaged in more or less
full time study, with the ultimate intention of obtaining medical registration
and capacity to practice. However, I accept she was not capable of work at
least until about December 1995 (the medical evidence
supports this) even though
she was capable of reasonably intensive study.
At the same time, I accept the respondents’ submission that Ms Wu made
a choice about her activities, and chose to make an investment
pursuing study, which has led to her present work as a medical practitioner. It
is my view that, in relation to a claim
for economic loss, there is some
obligation on Ms Wu to mitigate her economic loss by seeking remunerative
employment. In my view
Ms Wu did this by this investment of time in her study.
However, she was incapable of so doing (in a way equivalent to paid work)
direct consequence of the discrimination in
that it provided Ms Wu with an
“opportunity” to study, when because of her illness she was not
capable of working. I
am of the view Ms Wu was likely to have chosen to pursue
the medical registration and the study it entailed, but at a time of her
choosing, and probably not in circumstances of stress and without an income at
all, other than sickness benefits.
I am satisfied that but for the discrimination, Ms Wu would have been earning
an income from February 1995. I am of the view that
from about the end of that
year, when she was capable of returning to some employment (though not to
Express Embroidery), Ms Wu had
an obligation to act to mitigate her economic
loss by seeking other employment. She did so, in a sense, by pursuing full time
I also accept the respondents’ submission that there is no evidence
before me that Ms Wu has a legitimate claim for loss of
overtime. She had no
overtime from May 1994 (when she suffered her first injury) and there was only a
two week period (in June 1994)
when she was on unrestricted duties and would
have been available for overtime. There is no evidence as to why she did not
any overtime in that period.
In setting an appropriate amount of damages to compensate Ms Wu for the
economic loss for which I am satisfied the respondents are
liable, I have
proceeded on the basis of the figures provided by the complainant as to her
income in previous years, but without
including any amount for overtime. I am
satisfied Ms Wu should receive some compensation from 26 July 1995 (the date to
which WorkCover
payments were made) to December 1995 (the date from which Dr
Kaplan was of the view she was able to resume sympathetic rehabilitative
employment).
Taking all these factors into account, it is my view a figure of $5,000.00 to
recognise Ms Wu’s economic loss in this period
is appropriate. A more
precise figure is not capable of calculation, in my view, given the nature of
her employment, nor appropriate,
given that she was already engaged in study at
In making this determination, I have taken the WorkCover payment into
account, but not the sickness benefits received by Ms Wu. It
is my view this
issue is to be dealt with according to any processes Centrelink may put into
place pursuant to the
Social Security Act 1991
(Cth), should this be
necessary under that legislation.
The complainant made an application for costs.
Legal and related expenses are not specifically provided for in the DDA. In
addition, I am of the view that
section 103(1)(iv)
of the DDA does not extend to
legal costs incurred by a complainant (
AMC V Wilson,
per Heery J at 66,
in relation to analogous provisions of the
Racial Discrimination Act
I am satisfied similar considerations apply in relation to the
DDA. Accordingly, I make no award for costs.
6.5 Conclusion
Pursuant to section 103(1)(b)(iv) of the
DDA, I declare the respondents, Mr Cohen and Express Embroidery Pty Ltd, shall
and severally liable to pay to the complainant, Ms Wu, the following
amounts of damages as compensation for loss as a consequence
of their unlawful
(a) the sum of $12,000.00 for injury to feelings, hurt and humiliation,
including the psychiatric condition she suffered as a consequence
unlawful discrimination; and
(b) the sum of $5,000.00 for economic loss incurred as a consequence of the
unlawful discrimination.
I declare the respondents to be jointly
and severally liable for these amounts, and are to make payment to Ms Wu within
the date of this decision.
I certify that this and the preceding twenty (20) pages is a true copy of
the Reasons for Decision of Ms Kathleen McEvoy, Inquiry
Commissioner.
Hearing Solicitor:
Date:10 October 2000
RTF format (114 KB)
Signed PDF/A format