Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union - re s.576H - Commission may vary modern awards - application to vary the Clerks - Private Sector Award 2010 [2009] AIRCFB 982 (24 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Commission may vary modern awards
Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
(AM2009/22)
NSW Taxi Council
(AM2009/106)
CLERKS—PRIVATE SECTOR AWARD 2010
JUSTICE GIUDICE, PRESIDENT
VICE PRESIDENT LAWLER
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT ACTON
COMMISSIONER SMITH
MELBOURNE, 24 DECEMBER 2009
This decision concerns two applications. First, it deals with an application by
the Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union (ASU) to vary the
Private Sector Award 2010
(the modern award)
by removing the reference to “call centre employees” from the title of cl.27–Overtime rates and penalties (other
than shiftworkers and call centre employees); deleting cl.29–Call centre overtime and penalty arrangements and subsequently
renumbering the following clauses.
Secondly, there is an application by the NSW Taxi Council to vary the part-time and shift work provisions to specifically deal with
issues concerning employees in New South Wales engaged in call centres by Taxi networks.
As the applications both deal with issues concerning call centre employees we have decided to determine them together. Both applications
refer to specific provisions in the modern award dealing with call centre employees inserted in Stage 2 of the award modernisation
process in accordance with our decision of 3 April 2009.
In our decision of 3 April 2009 we said the following:
Parties to the existing
Contract Call Centre Industry Award 2003
(CCC Award 2003) supported the making of a separate award for contract call centres in preference to establishing call centre flexibilities
within the Clerks Modern Award. In our view there should not be disparate safety net provisions for call centres. Flexibilities which
reflect the needs of the industry while enhancing competitiveness and employment growth prospects should be generally available.
We will make a CCC Modern Award based on the CCC Award 2003 – amended to reflect the Commission’s standard approach to
certain modern award provisions. We will also make amendments to the Clerks Modern Award to reflect appropriate call centre flexibilities.”
Our rationale in coming to this decision was to create a level playing field for call centres. Some contract call centres are covered
by an existing contract call centres award. Others are covered by common rule clerical awards. Call centres conducted by the operator
of a business are generally covered by common rule clerical awards. Some businesses which conduct a call centre as part of their
main operations also provide call centre services on a contract basis. For example in the proceedings before us Kidney Health Australia
“There are a growing number of organizations that outsource their services to use their ‘spare capacity’. This allows
better use of resources, especially technical resources, so greater efficiencies can be maintained. For smaller centres this can
make them more competitive and allow them to continue to operate.
Kidney Health Australia is a typical example having set up a separate operating arm to deal with outsource work to supplement income
to the normal charity fundraising.
It is vital for the ongoing viability of such organizations there is no difference between an ‘in house’ centre and one
that mixes both in house and outsourcing
. To do so would place different conditions on staff working side by side and some staff will switch between functions which means
their terms of employment under any EBA would be extremely complex. The viability of such organizations – nearly always small
and often found in the not for profit area – would be significantly affected.”
Other submissions opposed any group of employers being at a competitive disadvantage compared to contract call centre operators and
referred the increasing international competition for call centre work.
In considering whether to make a separate call centre award we adopted the view that call centres should not be subject to a different
set of safety net provisions depending on whether the employer was performing the work under contract to a client or the client was
conducting the call centre itself, or a combination of the two. We considered that the more recent consideration of specific call
centre provisions in the
Contract Call Centres Award 2010
(CCC Modern Award) was an appropriate basis for a uniform safety net, especially when regard is had to the recent development of cal
centres themselves.
The application by the ASU now before us is expressly made on the basis that the call centre specific provisions are inconsistent
with the variation made to the award modernisation request (consolidated request) by the Minister of Employment and Workplace Relations
(the Minister) on 26 August 2009.
Paragraph 52 of the consolidated request provides:
“Hours of work and penalty provisions – work that involves receiving calls, using call centre technology and entering
and retrieving data
52. Where a modern award applies to employees primarily performing the work of receiving calls, using call centre technology and entering
and retrieving data, the Commission should establish working hours and penalty rates arrangements that are substantially based upon
those that presently apply to those employees within the industry in which they work.”
The ASU submitted that it is clear from the Full Bench decision of 3 April 2009
and its statement of 10 September 2009
that the call centre provisions are not based on those currently applying in the industry.
Submissions opposing the application were filed by the NSW Taxi Council, Australian Federation of Employers and Industry (AFEI), Australian
Business Industrial (ABI) and Australian Industry Group (AiGroup).
The NSW Taxi Council submitted that granting the application would lead to an increase in costs associated with the operation of call
centres. It submitted that the current modern award call centre provisions substantially reflect the terms of an existing applicable
Notional Agreement Preserving State Award (NAPSA) and allows Taxi Networks to respond to the unique demands placed on their call
centres which operate on a 24 hours, seven days per week basis, 365 days of the year.
AFEI submitted that the consolidated request was not intended to include the modern award as it is an occupational award and the language
contained in the consolidated request specifically refers to industry awards.
ABI also submitted that the call centre specific provisions contained in the modern award are derived from the telephone canvasser
provisions contained in the NAPSA derived from the
Clerical and Administrative Employees (State) Award
in New South Wales. The AiGroup submission focuses on the contract call centre industry.
The ASU takes issue with each of the propositions advanced by the employers.
It is clear that the call centre provisions contained in the modern award originated from the CCC Modern Award. They were inserted
for the reasons outlined above.
The consolidated request requires the Commission to adopt provisions relating to call centre employees based on those that have applied
in the industry in which they are employed. As such it requires a particular outcome. The outcome now required to be achieved is
terms and conditions for call centre employees consistent with those applying to such employees in the industry in which they are
Because it is an occupational award, employees covered by the modern award are employed in a very large number of different industries.
In general terms, however, clerical employees in the industries covered by the award are employed under existing clerical occupational
awards and NAPSAs. Hence it is generally true that the current common rule clerical awards and NAPSAs reflect the terms and conditions
for such employees.
The terms of the modern award which do not apply to call centres arise from and supersede the current common rule clerical awards
and NAPSAs. Therefore we believe that the outcome required to be achieved by the consolidated request is to delete the specific call
centre provisions and provide that the terms of the award applying to other employees will also apply to call centre employees.
We consider that, for the reasons given, we are required by the terms of the consolidated request to grant the application of the
The application by the NSW Taxi Council seeks two sets of variations. The first is to amend the part-time provisions of the award
to address the principles encompassed in changes made to the consolidated request. The concerns expressed relate to the extent of
flexibility required to deal with unpredictable peaks and troughs in demand in the taxi industry. More specifically the variations
are directed at the extent to which agreed hours may be varied by notice and by agreement and the payments for additional hours in
such circumstances. The ASU submits that the terms of the modern award are generally in line with the overwhelming majority of awards
and NAPSAs that apply to the taxi industry.
We consider that the 26 August 2009 variation to the consolidated request require us to ensure that the provisions in the modern award
do not operate to discourage employers from offering additional hours to part-time employees. In our statement of 25 September 2009
we addressed these matters and the relevant change to the consolidated request. In that statement we indicated that we had paid regard
to those changes in formulating the terms of the
Restaurant Industry Award 2010
and some other Stage 4 awards. The provisions were not modified as a result of the consultation process for Stage 4 awards. We will
modify the part-time clause of this award in line with those provisions.
The second aspect of the NSW Taxi Council application seeks to resolve a perceived “definitional conflict” between the
specific call centre provisions and the general shift work provisions of the award. The NSW Taxi Council submits that the interaction
between the provisions is uncertain and should be remedied by excluding call centre employees form the shift work provisions.
The ASU opposes the application and relies on its application to delete the call centre provisions.
In its reply of 9 December 2009 the NSW Taxi Council raised extensive new material. Included in the new material was a schedule of
costings comparing the costs between the NSW Taxi NAPSA
, cl.28 shift work and cl.29 call centres of the modern award. In seven examples the shift work provisions in cl.28 are the most costly.
In five examples the call centre provisions in cl.29 are the most costly. The New South Wales NAPSA is not always the least costly
of the three sets of provisions. In three of the examples cl.28 is less costly than the New South Wales NAPSA.
In view of our decision above to delete the specific call centre provisions of the award as required by the changes to the Minister’s
consolidated request, the interaction between cll.28 and 29 disappears. We are mindful of the award based cost increases in many
areas arising from the adoption of a single national set of provisions. Our adoption of specific call centre flexibilities was intended
to apply terms which suited the needs of call centres. We have considered the general differences in clerical safety net provisions
in balancing the various objectives of award modernisation. The transitional provisions are also intended to moderate the impact
of changes to the safety net. We therefore dismiss the second part of the NSW Taxi Council application.
BY THE COMMISSION:
[2000] AIRCFB 345
[2009] AIRCFB 345
at para 162.
[2009] AIRCFB 345
[2009] AIRCFB 835
[2009] AIRCFB 865
Clerical and Administrative Employees, Hire Car and Taxis (State) Award
(NSW) (AN120131).
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR992112>
No downloadable files available