Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation [2024] FWCD 1068 (18 December 2024)
[2024] FWCD 1068
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
—Alteration of other rules of organisation
Nursing and Midwifery Federation
(R2024/146)
CHRIS ENRIGHT
MELBOURNE, 18 DECEMBER 2024
Alteration of other rules of organisation.
On 3 October 2024 the Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation
(the ANMF) lodged with the Fair Work Commission (the Commission)
a notice and
declaration setting out particulars of alterations to its rules. Submissions and
other material in support of the alterations
were also lodged on 25 November
The ANMF seeks certification of the alterations under
section 159
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
On the information contained in the notice and declaration, I am
satisfied the alterations have been made under the rules of the organisation.
The particulars set out alterations to Rules 65A, 65B,
, 85A, 85B and
. The particulars also set out new
Taken together, the alterations operate as two packages. The first is
concerned with the composition and election of the ANMF’s
Nursing and Midwifery Federation QNMU Branch’s (QNMU Branch) Branch
Council. The second is concerned with the composition
and election of the
ANMF’s Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation New South Wales
Branch’s (NSW Branch) Branch Council.
In both the QNMU Branch and the NSW Branch the Branch Council is the
branch’s committee of
management.
to the control and direction of the Federal Council each ANMF branch is
responsible for its own
government.
The alterations pertaining to the QNMU Branch:
• abolish the office of Branch Assistant Secretary. Currently the Branch
Assistant Secretary is a voting member of the Branch
• in lieu of the office of Branch Assistant Secretary create new offices
of Branch Assistant Secretary
Assistant Secretary
(Midwifery).
current Branch Assistant Secretary and the proposed Assistant Secretary
Assistant Secretary (Midwifery) are/will be voting members of the QNMF
Branch’s Branch
of the two new offices are similar to those of the existing
any member attached to the QNMF Branch may be elected to the office of Branch
Assistant Secretary.
Under the proposed alterations one of the two new Branch Assistant Secretary
offices will be elected from members who are registered
will be elected from members who are registered as a
words, the relevant rule changes are intended to ensure both nursing and midwife
members are guaranteed a Branch Assistant
Secretary office. The financial
members of the ANMF attached to its QNMF Branch constitute the electorate for
the two new
• further increase the size of the Branch Council by creating two new
offices: the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander North
Queensland Branch
Council Office
the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander South Queensland Branch Council
offices will be filled by members who identify as Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people.
The electorates for the two offices are members who identify as Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people and reside, respectively,
above or below, the
• extend to the newly created offices provisions that generally restrict a
person’s right to nominate for multiple
• put in place transitional arrangements which operate between the day the
alterations are certified and the next scheduled
elections in the QNMF Branch.
The current Branch Assistant Secretary office is not abolished until the end of
its current term.
The current holder of that office continues to do so until the declaration of
the next scheduled elections in
they hold office, they continue to perform their duties under the rules as they
currently stand.
The three new offices do not commence until the 2025
In other words the size of the Branch Council of the QNMF Branch will
increase by three, following the next scheduled elections. Two
of those offices
will be filled by members who identify as Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people. In addition, both the nursing
and midwifery cohorts will be guaranteed a
senior office and a voice on the Branch
The alterations pertaining to the NSW Branch:
• increase the size of the Branch Council by creating two new offices: the
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander Nurse
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander Midwife
Councillor.
of those offices will be
“provide to the Returning Officer... documentation evidencing
Aboriginality.”
The proposed rules go on to set out forms of documentation that is considered
appropriate.
addition, as their names suggest, the new offices are reserved for a nurse and a
respectively.
electorate for the two new offices are the financial members of the ANMF
attached to its NSW
• extend to the newly created offices provisions that restrict a
person’s right to nominate for certain other
• put in place a transitional provision dealing with the duration of the
inaugural terms of
no transitional provision dealing with when the new offices commence. As a
consequence elections for the two new offices
would be required to be held as
soon as practicable after the alterations are
In other words, the size of the Branch Council of the NSW Branch
will increase by two if the alterations are certified. Those offices
filled by members who identify as Aboriginal people.
With one exception—which is dealt with below—the
substance of the proposed alterations is routine. Rules such as those
by the ANMF can be found in the rulebooks of various registered organisations
and are generally considered uncontroversial.
It is therefore unnecessary to
further discuss them, beyond certifying my opinion about the matters contained
s.159(1)(a)
& (b) of the Act. I do so below.
Reservation of offices on the basis of race
The proposed alterations requiring further discussion are those that
create the offices of:
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander North Queensland Branch Council Office (QNMF
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander South Queensland Branch Council Office (QNMF
Aboriginal or
Torres Strait Islander Nurse Councillor (NSW Branch); and
Aboriginal or
Torres Strait Islander Midwife Councillor (NSW Branch).
Alterations to the
organisation registered under Act do not take
Commission’s General
that the alterations, in their opinion:
comply with, and
are not contrary to the Act, the
Fair Work Act 2009
(FW Act), modern
awards and enterprise agreements; and
• are not otherwise contrary to
The proposed alterations reserve an office—or
offices—for members who share a common attribute: race.
Re: The Association of Professional Engineers, Scientists and
) the Commission’s General Manager considered
alterations which created an office which was reserved for members who share a
common attribute. The office was styled “Diversity National Assembly
Member”. The office was reserved for a female financial
APESMA’s National Assembly is charged with directing the union’s
policy and governing, managing and conducting
As the General Manager noted, three questions arose in the
circumstances.
First, do the alterations impose on members of the organisation
conditions, obligations or restrictions that are oppressive, unreasonable
unjust when regard is had to Parliament’s intention in enacting the Act
and the FW Act? If the alterations do, they are
contrary to s142(1)(c) of the
Act. They could not be certified.
Secondly, are the alterations contrary to s.142(1)(d) of the Act?
Section 142(1)(d) provides that the rules of an organisation:
“must not discriminate between... or members of the
organisation on the basis of race... [or]
If they are contrary to s.142(1)(d), they cannot be certified.
Finally, do the alterations contravene Commonwealth
anti-discrimination legislation? If the alterations do, they are contrary to law
within the meaning of section 159(1)(c) of the Act. They could not be
In a later decision, the General Manager applied the conclusions
Re: Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining
and Energy Union, The Maritime Union of Australia
) the General Manager was dealing with alterations which created
two new offices in the CFMEU’s MUA Division:
Assistant National Secretary –Woman; and
Assistant National Secretary - Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander.
The General Manager concluded:
“[23] I adopt and rely on my reasons in
in the present matter. It is not necessary to recite those reasons here.
However, the following conclusions are apposite:
in connection
with s.142(1)(c): By reserving an office for a woman and an Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander financial member the
alteration imposed conditions,
obligations or restrictions on members of the organisation. Those conditions or
restrictions were
imposed to encourage women and Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people to nominate for office, thereby increasing the level
participation—particularly Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and
female member participation—in the organisation’s
affairs. The
alteration was also intended to ensure that the organisation was representative
of its female and Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander members. Finally, the
alteration was intended to increase the diversity of persons on bodies which
have policy determination
and/or management functions. In each instance the
alteration was consistent with and not contrary to Parliament’s intentions
in enacting the Act. Consequently, the conditions, obligations or restrictions
were not oppressive, unreasonable or unjust contrary
to s.142(1)(c).
• in connection with s.142(1)(d): The Act provides little guidance as to
what constitutes discrimination contrary to s.142(1)(d).
Adopting the approach
taken by Gaudron J in
Street v Queensland Bar
Association
the General Manager concluded that the different treatment at issue was not
sufficient to render the rule discriminatory. The differential
treatment was
relevant and appropriate to the object to be attained.
in terms of
being contrary to law: The alteration was not otherwise contrary to law. In
particular, it did not contravene the
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
(SDA) because it constituted a special measure taken “for the purpose of
achieving substantive equality” in accordance
with that Act.
[24] It is apt to make three further observations.
[25] First, in relation to s.142(1)(c) of the Act I note the following
comments of Justice Ryan in
Pillar v Building Workers Industrial Union of
“In my view, the reservation of places on a committee of management for
particular categories of members does not, of itself,
infringe, or discourage
the democratic control of a committee of management. That is particularly true,
where, as here, all members
of the body are entitled to vote to fill the office
for which there is a restricted candidature. Of course, there may be extreme
cases where the number of offices for which candidature is restricted is out of
all proportion to the numbers of persons entitled
to the benefit of the
restriction, or where a significant section of the membership is precluded from
candidature altogether...”
’s discussion and conclusions about s.142(1)(c)
also apply—on the face of it—to rule alterations which create an
office reserved for an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander person. Justice
Ryan’s comments in
are also—on the face of
it—relevant.
[28] Given the language of s.142(1)(d) of Act, the approach taken by Gaudron
Street v Queensland Bar Association
would also apply when deciding
whether a rule alteration discriminates against a member of a registered
organisation on the basis
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) (RDA) renders
unlawful any act involving a distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference
based on race.
of the RDA does not apply to special
alterations associated with the creation of the office of Divisional Assistant
National Secretary – Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander are not
contrary to law per s.159(1)(b) of the Act, if they are a special measure for
the purposes of the
[30] Finally, it should not be presumed that rule alterations which introduce
an affirmative action provision(s) will be certified
as a matter of course. Nor,
in seeking certification of an alteration, is it enough to point to the
inclusion of similar provisions
in the rules another organisation, or another of
the applicant organisation’s branches/divisions. Regard must be had to the
contemporary circumstances of the organisation, branch or division whose rule
alterations fall for consideration. As the Full Court
of the Federal Court
pointed out in
McLeish v Faure and
“What may be a valid rule in one organization does not of necessity
mean that such rule would be valid for another. Such validity
may depend on
different circumstances and conditions which may vary not only from organization
to organization but within the same
organization at different
I agree with the General Manager’s analysis and conclusions in
. I adopt the findings set out above in this
On 21 November 2024 the ANMF was invited to lodge written
submissions about whether the alterations complied with and were not contrary
the Act and whether they were otherwise contrary to law.
The ANMF lodged written submissions about those matters on 25
November 2024. In reaching my conclusion I have had regard to all the
lodged by the ANMF. It is not necessary to recite all the material placed before
me, but relevant extracts will be reproduced.
In relation to s.142(1)(d) of the Act the ANMF submitted, in
Section 142(1)(d)
Fair Work (Registered
Organisations) Act 2009
(RO Act) stipulates that the rules of a registered
organisation must not discriminate between applicants or members because of,
other things, race.
5. The ANMF submits that the creation of the First Nations Offices is
necessary to advance the equality of First Nations members of
They continued:
“8. The QNMU and New South Wales (NSW) Branches of the
ANMF have historically had low levels of representation amongst First
membership even though those members face high rates of discrimination.
Currently between the two branch councils there is
only one person who
identifies as Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander.
9. According to the latest Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
(Ahpra) figures, 2.1% of nurses and midwives in NSW and
Queensland identify as
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander. However, in the NSW Branch only 1.37%
of members identify as Aboriginal
and/or Torres Strait Islander. In the QNMU
Branch that figure is 1.7%. Creating the First Nations Offices will go some way
to redressing
this imbalance and encourage more First Nations nurses and
midwives to join the ANMF and encourage such members to participate in
organisation to which they belong, fulfilling parliaments objectives
12. The introduction of the First Nations Offices creates meaningful
acknowledgement of Indigenous people as leaders within the ANMF
and aims to
advance First Nations people within the union, which is both the industrial
professional voice of nurses and midwives. It is a means for First
Nations members to take part in the decision-making processes
and governance of
the NSW and QNMU Branches by way of an elected office.
14. This affirmative action of the NSW and QNMU branches to introduce the new
First Nations Offices seeks to benefit First Nation
members and secure the
advancement of First Nations members of the NSW and QNMU branches of the
15. The creation of the First Nations Offices would foster greater awareness
for First Nations issues within the ANMF and nursing
and midwifery industries
more broadly. The creation of these offices is clearly in line with the
principles spelled out in cases
such as APESMA and
In relation to s.142(1)(c) of the Act, the ANMF referred to Ryan
J’s judgment in
The ANMF then submitted:
“17. The purpose of creating First Nations offices is to
enhance their participation in the activities of the ANMF, ensure the
organisation reflects its First Nations membership, and promote greater
diversity within the Branch Council. This aligns with, and
does not contradict,
Parliament's objectives in enacting the RO Act, particularly as outlined in
subsections 5(3)(a), (b), and (d).
The changes to the ANMF Rules do not impose
the conditions, obligations, or restrictions prohibited by subsection
18. The proposed First Nations offices are newly established, introduced in
addition to the existing elected offices for the NSW and
QNMU branches. The
creation of these additional offices will not cause any detriment or unfairness
to the broader ANMF membership
or the identified branches. All current elected
offices within the ANMF will remain unchanged and continue to be accessible to
eligible members.
19... These measures were implemented to encourage Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander members to nominate for office. It will therefore
enhance their
participation in the organisation’s affairs and ensure the ANMF reflects
its First Nations membership.
21. The inclusion of First Nations individuals in ANMF leadership addresses
the predominance of non-Indigenous representation within
the nursing and
midwifery sectors, fostering greater member engagement in ANMF activities.
22. The alterations aim to increase diversity within bodies responsible for
policy-making, decision-making and management functions
of the NSW and QNMU
Branches. These changes align with Parliament’s intentions in enacting the
RO Act and are neither oppressive,
unreasonable, nor unjust, thus not breaching
s.142(1)(c) of the
Turning to the question of whether the alterations were otherwise
contrary to law, particularly anti-discrimination law the ANMF submitted:
“26. The ANMF believes the creation of the First Nations
Offices are special measures under RDA. Part II of the RDA renders
unlawful any
act involving a distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on race.
However, this part of the RDA does
not apply to special measures. The rule
alterations associated with the creation of the First Nations Offices do not
contravene s.159(1)(b)
of the RO Act, if they are a special measure for the
purposes of the RDA.
27. The inclusion of these four First Nations Offices reflects the ANMF's
dedication to promoting equality for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander
members and advancing First Nations people, in alignment with section 8 of the
Pressing for certification of the alterations, the ANMF submitted in
conclusion:
“43. Parliament’s intention in enacting the RO Act,
among other things, was to “enhance the relations within workplaces
between federal system employers and federal system employees and to reduce the
adverse effects of industrial disputation.”
The recognition and progress
of First Nations people in a union and professional organisation such as the
ANMF supports this objective.
44. Individuals who identify as First Nations are often marginalised in the
nursing and midwifery industries. Ensuring that First
Nations voices are
represented in leadership roles within the union emphasises their perspectives
on workplace issues and provides
unique opportunities to enhance workplace
45. The inclusion of First Nations people in union leadership positions
challenges the traditional underrepresentation of diverse
voices in the nursing
and midwifery industries and encourages broader participation in the affairs of
the ANMF. This approach to
diversifying employee representation reaffirms the
wording of s5(3)(b) of the Act and furthers Parliament's intention in enacting
I accept these submissions. They are persuasive.
The material provided by the ANMF suggests the current rules do not
provide an effective pathway to the governing bodies of the QNMF
Branches for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island people. As a consequence
matters of particular importance and concern to
Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander members may not be coming before the relevant Branch Councils for
deliberation and action.
The alterations encourage Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Island people to nominate for office. Member participation—particularly
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander member participation—in the affairs
of the QNMF and NSW Branches will be enhanced as
The alterations are designed to increase the diversity of
representation on bodies which have policy determination and/or management
functions. Doing so means the two branches will be more representative of its
members as a whole. The MUA Division’s capacity
to operate effectively is
likely to be enhanced as a result.
I also agree with the ANMF’s submission that
“alterations [which] aim to increase diversity within bodies responsible
for policy-making, decision-making and management functions of the NSW and QNMU
Branches... align[s] with Parliament’s intentions
in enacting the RO
In addition, the alterations are consistent with Justice
Ryan’s comments in Pillar
The alterations are consistent with and not contrary to
Parliament’s intentions in enacting the Act. The alterations impose
conditions, obligations or restrictions on members. However, they do not do so
in a way that is contrary to s.142(1)(c) of the Act.
Turning to section 142(1)(d) of the Act, the treatment that flows
from the alterations is, in the circumstances, relevant and appropriate
object to be attained. The alterations are not contrary to s.142(1)(d) of the
I accept the ANMF’s submissions about the interaction between
the alterations and the RDA. The alterations are special measures
purposes of that Act. The alterations are not contrary to law.
Finally, having regard to the extract from
McLeish v Faure and
set out in paragraph [22] above nothing before me suggests the
circumstances and conditions facing the AMNF’s QNMU and NSW Branches
so different from those faced by the MUA Division that a rule found to be valid
for the MUA Division would be an invalid rule
for either ANMF branch.
No other matter arises for consideration under the Act, the FW Act,
modern awards or enterprise agreements. Nor are the alterations
contrary to law.
In my opinion, the alterations comply with and are not contrary to
the Act, the FW Act, modern awards and enterprise agreements, are
not otherwise
contrary to law and were made under the rules of the organisation. I certify
accordingly under subsection 159(1) of
DELEGATE OF THE GENERAL MANAGER
See Rule 67.1. I
note that there is also a Branch Executive, which may exercise most of the
powers of the Branch Council –
see Rule 78.
See Rule 65.2.1
and annual return AR2024/53.
See proposed Rule
65A.6.1(d).
See proposed Rule
65A.6.1(e).
See proposed Rule
65A.6.1(d).
See Rule 65.2.1
proposed Rules 65A.6.1(d) & (e).
See Rule 182.1
and proposed Rule 82.3.
So long as they
have been a financial member of the ANMF for at least two years immediately
prior to the date of nomination and they
are attached to the QNMF Branch –
see Rule 84.2.
See proposed
Rule 84A.2.3 and 98A.9.
See proposed
Rule 84A.2.4 and 98A.9. The qualifications for office associated with
financiality and being attached to the QNMF branch
are unchanged for both new
offices – see proposed Rule 84A.2.
See proposed
Rule 65A.1.5(g).
See proposed
Rule 65A.1.5(h).
See proposed
Rules 84A.2.5 & 84A.2.6.
See proposed
Rules 65A.1.3 & 65A.1.4.
See proposed
Rule 84A.7.
See proposed
Rules 93.3.
See proposed
See proposed
See proposed
Rules 65A.1.1 and 77.1.2.
See proposed
Rule 65B.2.2.
See proposed
Rule 65B.2.3.
attached to the NNSW Branch and have been continuously financial members for at
least one year at the time of nomination
– see Rule 84B.2.
See proposed
Rule 84B.8.
See proposed
Rules 84B.6 & 84B.7.
See proposed
Rule 84B.9.
See proposed
See ss. 159(3)
and 149(3) and 144(1)(a) of the Act.
Other than an
alteration to a registered organisation’s name or eligibility rules
– see s.158 of the Act.
See section
159(3) of the Act’
Or the General
Manager’s Delegate – see s.343A of the Act.
See s159(1)(a)
and (b) of the Act. The decision maker must also be of the opinion that the
alterations were made under the rules
of the organisation: s.159(1)(c). I deal
with s159(1)(c) of the Act separately below.
; 10 November 2017 at paragraphs [20] – [44].
APESMA Rule
17. I note National Assembly’s powers are subject to decisions made in a
plebiscite of APESMA’s members
held in accordance with these Rules
142(1)(d) of the Act protects members of the organisation (and applicants for
membership) from discrimination a number of
other grounds. However, none of
those grounds are presently relevant.
; 6 September 2022.
[1989] HCA 53
(1989) 168 CLR
[1994] AILR
Particularly
in the case of the NSW Branch where all financial members will be entitled to
vote in the election or the relevant office
See s.9(1) of
s.8(1). Special measures are described in paragraph 4 of Article 1 of the
nternational Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination
that entered into force on 2 January 1969 as follows:
“Special measures taken for the sole purpose of securing adequate
advancement of certain racial or ethnic groups or individuals
requiring such
protection as may be necessary in order to ensure such groups or individuals
equal enjoyment or exercise of human
rights and fundamental freedoms shall not
be deemed racial discrimination, provided, however, that such measures do not,
as a consequence,
lead to the maintenance of separate rights for different
racial groups and that they shall not be continued after the objectives
which they were taken have been achieved.”
[1979] FCA 38
(1979) 40 FLR
; 6 September 2022 at paragraphs [23] – [25], [27] - [30]. Note
that the extract from
McLeish v Faure and Ors
which appears in paragraph
[30] can be found in
[1979] FCA 38
(1979) 40 FLR 462
submissions lodged the ANMF on 25 November 2024 at paragraphs 4 - 5.
paragraphs 8 - 9, 12, 14 – 15.
submissions lodged the ANMF on 25 November 2024 at paragraphs 17 – 19, 21
paragraphs 26 – 27.
paragraphs 43 – 45.
paragraph 22.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (636 KB)
Signed PDF/A format