1410477 [2015] RRTA 321 (22 May 2015)
[2015] RRTA 321
(22 May 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Shahyar Roushan
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the
applicants Protection visas.
Statement made on 22 May 2015 at
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to
section 431(2)
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration to refuse to grant the applicants
Protection (Class XA) visas
(protection visa) under
Migration Act 1958
applicants are husband, wife and their [child], who was born in Australia [in]
2009. They are citizens of India and followers
of the Sikh religion. The first
named applicant completed Form 866C, for applicants who wish to submit their own
claims for protection.
The second and third named applicants completed Form
866D, for members of the family unit who do not have their own claims to be
refugee but are included in the application. For convenience, the Tribunal will
refer to the first named applicant as ‘the
applicant’, to the second
named applicant as ‘the applicant wife’ and to their named applicant
as the ‘applicant
applicant arrived in Australia in August 2008 and applied to the Department of
Immigration (the department) for a protection visa
[in] September 2008 (first
application). The applicant attended an interview (the first interview) with the
department [in] November
2008 in connection with his first application. The
delegate did not find the applicant to be credible and decided to refuse to
the visas [in] December 2008.
applicant applied for a review of the delegate’s decision. He attended a
hearing on 10 March 2009 (the first hearing) and
a differently constituted
Tribunal (the first Tribunal) affirmed the delegate’s decision on 26 March
2009. The applicant’s
subsequent request for Ministerial Intervention was
not considered.
April 2011, the applicant [child] applied for a protection visa (the applicant
[child]’s application for a protection visa).
The applicant was
interviewed [in] August 2011 in relation to his [child]’s claims. The
delegate decided to refuse to grant
the visa [in] August 2011 and she applied to
the Tribunal, differently constituted, on 26 August 2011 for review of the
decision. The applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 12
January 2012 to give evidence and present arguments on behalf of his [child]
(the applicant [child]’s hearing). On 21 March 2012 the Tribunal affirmed
the delegate’s decision.
applicant applied to the department a second time for a protection visa [in]
January 2014 (second application). He attended a
departmental interview by
telephone [in] May 2014 (the second interview). The delegate did not find the
applicant’s claims
to be credible and refused the application [in] May
applicant applied for a review of the delegate’s decision to the presently
constituted Tribunal (the Tribunal) on 13 June
2014. The applicant appeared
before the Tribunal on 13 May 2015 to give evidence and present arguments. The
Tribunal hearing (the
second hearing) was conducted with the assistance of an
interpreter in the Punjabi and English languages.
Claims and Evidence
his first application for a protection visa the applicant claimed that he is a
district level leader of the Congress Party (INC).
He had a strong hold of
mainly young votes in his area. During the 2007 State elections, the opposition
BJP candidate, [Mr A] MLA,
ordered him to force his members to vote in his
favour. The applicant refused and [Mr A] threatened to kill him and his wife. He
reported the matter to higher authorities but they did not take any action. A
few days before the elections they kidnapped him and
his wife so that they could
not campaign in favour of the INC. He could not contact his party. They
threatened to kill him and his
wife in jail. They asked him to change his vote
in favour of the BJP candidate. He refused. They scared his party members when
was in jail and forcibly stopped INC members voting on election day which
resulted in the defeat of their candidate. If he had not
been kidnapped and
detained, the INC would have won the seat. They released him after the elections
and threatened him with physical
harm on a daily basis because he did not follow
their orders during the 2007 elections. He reported the threats to the INC but
were unable to take any action because they were not in power. He fears
that if he returns to India, the ruling party will harm him
by detaining him or
pressing false criminal charges against him. He also fears the opposition
harming his family. The local police
follow orders from [Mr A] who considers the
applicant his enemy.
his second application for a protection visa the applicant raised similar
claims, stating that he joined the INC in 2006 as his
father and grandfather
before him were members of the party. In early 2007, just before the State
elections, he became ‘[an
official]. The leader of the BJP asked him to
switch over and join forces with him, but the applicant refused. A week before
elections, the applicant and his wife were kidnapped. They were released
after the elections. The applicant wife was sexually assaulted
but the police
took no action against the culprits. He reported the matter to the central
government but no action was taken. The
applicant and his wife were constantly
threatened and attempts were made to kill them many times. They had no option
but to leave
the country. he claimed that they did not withdraw the case against
the BJP and if they go back to India they will be killed. They
will have no
protection from the police.
relevant, the applicant’s oral evidence at the first and the second
interviews; his oral evidence to the first and the
second Tribunals; and his
evidence in connection with his [child]’s protection visa application are
discussed below under reasons
and findings. The applicant wife did not provide
oral evidence to the department or the Tribunal at any
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
The Relevant Law
imposes a bar on a non-citizen making a further application for a protection
visa while in the migration zone in circumstances where
the non-citizen has made
an application for a protection visa which has been refused. The Full Federal
SZGIZ v MIAC
[2013] FCAFC 71
(2013) 212 FCR 235
has held at [38] that the
operation of
, as it stood at the time of this visa application, is
confined to the making of a further application for a protection visa which
duplicates an earlier unsuccessful application for a protection visa, in the
sense that both applications raise the same essential
criterion for the grant of
a protection visa. Applying the reasoning in
SZGIZ v MIAC
[2013] FCAFC 71
(2013) 212 FCR
, the Tribunal finds that it does not have power to consider the Refugee
Convention criterion in
, and has proceeded on the basis that it can
only consider the applicant’s claims under the Complementary Protection
s.36(2)(aa)
of the Act.
a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in
, he or she may
nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant of a protection visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect
of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection obligations because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing
that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the
applicant being removed from Australia to a receiving country, there is a
risk that he or she will suffer significant harm:
s.36(2)(aa)
complementary protection criterion’).
‘Significant
harm’ for these purposes is exhaustively defined in
person will suffer significant harm if he or she will be arbitrarily deprived of
their life; or the death penalty will be carried
out on the person; or the
person will be subjected to torture; or to cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment; or to degrading treatment
or punishment. ‘Cruel or inhuman
treatment or punishment’, ‘degrading treatment or punishment’,
and ‘torture’,
are further defined in
of the Act.
are certain circumstances in which there is taken not to be a real risk that an
applicant will suffer significant harm in a
country. These arise where it would
be reasonable for the applicant to relocate to an area of the country where
there would not be
a real risk that the applicant will suffer significant harm;
where the applicant could obtain, from an authority of the country,
such that there would not be a real risk that the applicant will suffer
significant harm; or where the real risk is one
faced by the population of the
country generally and is not faced by the applicant personally:
accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made under
of the Act, the
Tribunal is required to take account of policy guidelines prepared by the
Department of Immigration –PAM3 Refugee
and humanitarian - Complementary
Protection Guidelines and PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian - Refugee Law Guidelines
country information assessment prepared by the Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade expressly for protection status determination
purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the decision under
consideration.
Analysis, Reasons and Findings
Tribunal did not find the applicant to be a credible and truthful witness and
has concluded that the decision under review should
be affirmed. In reaching
this conclusion, the Tribunal has had regard to the significant inconsistencies
in his evidence throughout
the process, as well as other reasons detailed below.
The Elections
his first interview, the applicant stated that the 2007 [State 1] State
elections, for which he campaigned on behalf of the INC,
were held on 19
February 2007. When asked the name of the INC candidate in his district who was
standing opposite BJP’s [Mr
A] in the 2007 elections, and he stated it was
[Mr B]. When it was put to him that the INC candidate to oppose [Mr A] in the
elections was [Mr C] and not [Mr B], the applicant responded that there
were two candidates from the Congress party, and the other
went to join the
other party as he could join every party.
the applicant [child]’s hearing, giving evidence on his [child]’s
behalf, the applicant also stated that the 2007 [State
1] State elections took
place on 19 February 2007.
the second hearing, when asked who the INC candidate for his area in the 2007
State elections was, he said he worked for [Mr B]
but the candidate was [Mr C].
independent evidence before the Tribunal indicates that the polling day for the
2007 [State 1] State elections was on [date] February
2007, and the counting of
votes took place on [date] February
In addition,
the country information indicates that the INC candidate in the [District 2]
district or constituency was [Mr C], and
information provided by the applicant in his first interview and at his
[child]’s hearing, as well as the country information
in relation to the
INC candidate in the [District 2] district was put to him under
responded by stating that at the time of lodging his first application for a
protection visa he was in a rush and just lodged
an application. He just wrote
things down. He was depressed and did not know much about these things. The
situation was bad at that
time and his brain was not working properly and
whatever came to his mind he just said it. These explanations do not
satisfactorily
address the inaccuracies and shifts in the applicant’s
evidence. The applicant claims that he was [a senior official] of the
in [District 2] area and was campaigning in the area on behalf of the INC during
the 2007 election campaign. The Tribunal
does not find it credible that he would
not be able to correctly identify the actual date of the elections or name the
INC candidate
in [District 2] at his November 2008 interview, approximately 21
months after the 2007 elections. The applicant’s evidence
in relation to
the February 2007 elections casts doubt on his claims that he was involved in
political activities, including campaigning
for the INC during the 2007 State
elections, as claimed, and that he was threatened as a result by political
opponents from, or associated
with, the BJP.
Marriage, Kidnapping and Sexual Assault
his first protection visa application, the applicant claimed that during the
2007 State elections the opposition BJP candidate,
[Mr A] MLA, ordered him to
force his members to vote in his favour. The applicant refused and [Mr A]
threatened to kill him and his
wife. He reported the matter to higher
authorities but they did not take any action. A few days before the elections
they kidnapped
him and his wife to prevent them from campaigning in favour of
the INC. The applicant and his wife were released after the elections.
Information provided in the application form indicates that the applicant
married his wife [in] March 2007, approximately a month
after the elections were
held in [State 1] in February 2007.
his first interview, the applicant stated that he and his wife were kidnapped
one week before the elections and they were released
after the elections. As
noted above, at that interview, he stated that the elections had taken place on
19 February 2007.
the first hearing, the applicant stated that he and his wife were kidnapped a
week before the 2007 elections. He also claimed for
the first time that his wife
was sexually mistreated during the time they were kidnapped. He stated that he
was too embarrassed to
tell the department about this.
the applicant [child]’s hearing, the applicant stated that he and his wife
were kidnapped 3-4 days before the elections but
they were released from their
kidnapping the day immediately after the elections, placing their release [in]
February 2007 and one
day before the elections were actually held (see
his second application for a protection visa, the applicant claimed that one
week before the elections he and his wife were kidnapped,
but were released
after the elections. He stated that his wife was sexually assaulted, but the
police took no action against the
culprits. The applicant reiterated in the form
that he married his wife [in] March 2007.
the second interview, the applicant claimed that before the 2007 elections he
and some of his friends from the INC were kidnaped.
When it was put to him that
he had claimed in the second application for a protection visa that he and his
wife were kidnapped, he
said he had mentioned this at his first interview in
the second hearing, the applicant claimed that he could not recall when exactly
the 2007 State elections had been held. While he
repeated the claim that he and
his wife were kidnapped prior to the elections and released a day after the
elections, he did not
mention that his wife was sexually assaulted. He claimed,
instead, that the assailants had threatened to rape his wife. When it was
him that according to the information provided in his application form he was
married [in] March 2007, he stated for the first
time that he quietly married
his wife in January 2007 and that they registered the marriage [in] March 2007.
When it was put to him
that he had not previously mentioned this fact, he said
what he was telling the Tribunal ‘today’ was the truth.
information provided by the applicant in his first application for a protection
visa, his first interview, his first hearing,
his [child]’s hearing and
his second interview was put to him under
The applicant stated that he
did not wish to comment on or respond to the information. The inconsistencies,
shifts changes and fundamental
implausibilities in the applicant’s
evidence at various stages seriously undermine his credibility. The
applicant’s evidence
casts serious doubt on his claims that he was
politically active during the 2007 State elections; that he and his wife were
prior to the elections and released a day after the elections; that his
wife was sexually assaulted or mistreated and that he was
married quietly in
January 2007, but registered the marriage [in] March 2007.
After the Elections and Threats
the first interview, the applicant stated that, following the February 2007
elections, in April or May 2007, he lived in [Village
3], Punjab. He also used
to spend a week at a time at a relative's home in [City 4], [State 1] in July,
August and October in order
to avoid danger.
the first hearing the applicant stated that after the 2007 State elections he
still felt under threat from opponents and the family
made a decision that the
applicant and the applicant wife would leave their home village and go to
Punjab. The ongoing problems with
political opponents after the elections were a
major reason for moving to Punjab. They left for Punjab about 2-3 months after
elections and stayed at [Village 2], from about May 2007 until September
2007, when they returned to their home. They stayed at their
September 2007 until they departed India for Australia in August 2008. The
applicant said he returned to his home
village when he analysed that the
situation had improved. However, upon returning to his village in September
2007, he experienced
similar treatment as before, that is, he used to be stopped
by opponents who harassed him and used threatening language, and who
warned that
there was still time for him to join the BJP.
contrast, at the applicant [child]’s hearing, the applicant stated that in
the period after the elections until he left India
for Australia (a period of
father’s relatives,
because he felt uneasy or unsafe at his home. He said
they used to go back home but stay for just short periods of 2-4 days before
leaving again. He said they spent a total of only about 1.5-2 months at home in
this period. He stated he could not remember all
the places they went to, but
they were at the homes of his father’s relatives, and included Amritsar,
[Village 1], [City 4]
and [another location] and other places in his home State.
He said that the first time he left his home village was a few days after
elections when he felt that his ‘mental health’ was not good. The
applicant also sought to downplay the harassment
and the threats he claimed to
have received upon returning to his village and claimed that essentially he just
had his own fear that
political opponents might do something to him at any time.
the second hearing, the applicant stated that when he was having problems, he
stayed away from his house. Otherwise, he lived there
all the time. When asked
to clarify, he stated when he had problems he moved away for one or two months
on a few occasions. He then
returned to his village when the situation improved.
However, he stated that he could not remember when exactly he had moved away
from his home. When asked where he had moved to on these occasions, he said he
was moving to different cities and staying at relative’s
houses, mostly in
[City 4], [State 1] and Punjab.
information provided by the applicant in his first interview, his first hearing
and his [child]’s hearing was put to him
The applicant
stated that he did not have any comments in response to the information put to
him. The inconsistencies and changes
in the applicant’s evidence at
various stages cast serious doubts on the credibility of his evidence and the
truth of his claims
that he had spent any period of time away from home; that he
was threatened or harassed before, during or after the State elections
he and his wife had experienced ‘problems’.
Departing India
to a copy of the applicant’s passport, which he provided to the department
in connection with his second application
for a protection visa, the document
was issued [in] 2007. However, according to same application for a protection
visa, the applicant
did not depart India until August 2008. When asked at the
hearing, if as he claims his life was at risk, why he had not depart India
earlier opportunity, he stated that the were not able to make a decision in
relation to their lives. They could not decide
what to do because the situation
was so bad. At that time he was not able to sell or leave his property. The
Tribunal finds this
explanation unpersuasive. In the Tribunal’s view, if
the applicant genuinely feared harm from political opponents, or anyone
would not have waited as long as he did before departing the country.
all the reasons set out above, the Tribunal finds the applicant not to be a
credible, truthful and reliable witness. His evidence
shows a propensity to
manufacture, shift and tailor evidence in a manner which achieves his own
purpose. The Tribunal finds that
the applicant has fabricated and concocted his
evidence to achieve an immigration outcome.
Tribunal, therefore, does not accept that the applicant was a supporter or a
member of the INC. The Tribunal does not accept that
he was involved in any form
of political activity. More specifically, the Tribunal does not accept that he
was the [senior official]
of the INC youth in his village, that he was a
district level leader of the INC, that he was involved in campaigning or
for the INC, that he controlled a block of votes in his area or that
he worked for anyone associated with, let alone prominent in,
INC in his area.
The Tribunal does not accept that during the 2007 State elections the opposition
BJP candidate, [Mr A], ordered
him to force INC members to vote in [Mr
A]’s favour. The Tribunal does not accept that the BJP or anyone else
asked him to
change his vote during the State elections in favour of the BJP
candidate. The Tribunal does not accept that the applicant and his
threatened by [Mr A] or anyone else. The Tribunal does not accept that the
applicant and his wife were kidnapped before
the elections and that they were
released after the elections. The Tribunal does not accept that the applicant
wife was sexually
assaulted, molested or mistreated. The Tribunal does not
accept that she was threatened with rape. The Tribunal does not accept that
applicant and his wife were mistreated in any way. The Tribunal does not accept
that the INC had suffered an election loss in the
applicant's district because
the applicant had been kidnapped and detained. The Tribunal does not accept that
the applicant was threatened
with physical harm on a daily basis because he had
refused to follow BJP’s directions during the 2007 elections. The Tribunal
does not accept that the applicant and his wife were constantly threatened and
attempts were made to kill them. The Tribunal does
not accept that the applicant
and/or his wife had made complaints to the authorities or lodged cases against
the BJP or anyone else
in India. The Tribunal is not satisfied that if the
applicant were to return to India he would be harmed or subjected to false
regard to the findings above, the Tribunal does not accept that that there are
substantial grounds for believing that, as a
necessary and foreseeable
consequence of the applicant being removed from Australia to India, there is a
real risk that he will suffer
significant harm arising from his real or
perceived political opinion, his religion or any other factor arising from his
circumstances.
The Tribunal does not accept that there are substantial grounds
for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of
the applicant
being removed from Australia to India, there is a real risk that he will be
arbitrarily deprived of his life, that
the death penalty will be carried out on
him, that he will be subjected to torture, that he will be subjected to cruel or
treatment or punishment or that he will be subjected to degrading
treatment or punishment as defined. The Tribunal, therefore, does
that there are substantial grounds for believing that, as a necessary and
foreseeable consequence of the applicant being
removed from Australia to India,
there is a real risk that he will suffer significant harm as defined in
subsection 36(2A)
Migration Act
The Applicant Wife and the Applicant [Child]
applicant wife and the applicant [child] did not submit their own claims for
protection and the applicant wife did not provide
written or oral evidence to
the department or the Tribunal at any point. Nevertheless, as already noted, in
his evidence at various
stages, the applicant claimed on his wife’s behalf
that she had been kidnapped, sexually assaulted, mistreated and threated
physical harm and death. For the reasons provided above, the Tribunal has
rejected these claims.
the second hearing, the applicant also expressed concern for the safety of his
wife and child and stated that he did not want to
expose them to any form of
danger. He stated that he was concerned because there are lots of kidnappings
and killings in India. The
Tribunal has comprehensively rejected the
applicant’s claims. He provided no further meaningful reasons or
information as to
why he believed his wife and child would be killed or
Tribunal is not satisfied that there are substantial grounds for believing that,
as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of
the applicant wife and the
applicant [child] being removed from Australia to India, there is a real risk
that they will suffer significant
harm arising from the applicant’s real
or perceived political opinion or the applicant wife’s real or perceived
opinion. The Tribunal is not satisfied that there are substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence
applicant wife and the applicant [child] being removed from Australia to India,
there is a real risk that they will suffer
significant harm as a result of their
religion or any other factor arising from their circumstances or the
circumstances of the applicant.
The Tribunal does not accept that there are
substantial grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable
consequence of
the applicant wife and the applicant [child] being removed from
Australia to India, there is a real risk that they will be arbitrarily
of their lives; that the death penalty will be carried out on them, that they
will be subjected to torture, that they will
be subjected to cruel or inhuman
treatment or punishment or that they will be subjected to degrading treatment or
punishment as defined.
The Tribunal, therefore, does not accept that there are
substantial grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable
consequence
of the applicant wife and the applicant [child] being removed from
Australia to India, there is a real risk that they will suffer
significant harm
as defined in
subsection 36(2A)
Migration Act
the reasons given above the Tribunal is not satisfied that any of the applicants
is a person in respect of whom Australia has
protection obligations. The
applicants do not satisfy the criterion set out in paragraph 36(2)(aa) of the
Act for a protection visa.
It follows that they are also unable to satisfy the
criterion set out in
or (c). As they do not satisfy the criteria for
a protection visa, they cannot be granted the visa.
Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicants Protection visas.
Shahyar Roushan
Acting Deputy Principal Member
RTF format (177 KB)
Signed PDF/A format